
                               1 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

REACHING FOR THE GOOD LIFE IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHENON;  Philip Shenon is chief of the Bangkok bureau of The
New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4839 words


Lam Van lives the Vietnamese good life selling shiny new Dreams. Honda Dreams --
8.5-horsepower, $2,000 motorbikes manufactured in Thailand -- are the most
coveted status symbol on the streets of Saigon, the bustling, hustling
Vietnamese metropolis that almost no one calls by its still-official name, Ho
Chi Minh City.

"Everyone calls it Saigon," says Van, who owns a small motorbike shop. "We never
stopped calling it Saigon." Business has been so good that the 31-year-old
entrepreneur can afford to smoke black-market English-made John Player
cigarettes, wear a gold Longines watch and join his friends most nights at the
city's neon-flooded Superstar disco, where he rocks to bootleg recordings from
Guns 'n' Roses and Madonna, his "No. 1 favorite" recording star.

North Vietnamese troops overran Saigon in 1975, humiliating the United States
just as they had humiliated France two decades earlier. But if the North won the
Vietnam War, it is the South that is finally winning the peace. The old men who
run the Vietnamese Communist Party, most of them dour Northerners, still hold
tightly to power. But it is the freewheeling Southern spirit -- one that is
pro-Western and avidly capitalistic -- that is taking hold in the North and
South, city and countryside, and transforming a nation of 66 million people.

The city of Vinh, 600 miles north of Saigon, is the Vietnamese Dresden, leveled
by American B-52 bombers during the war and rebuilt by the East Germans in the
late 1970's. The city's nondescript five-story apartment buildings, representing
the worst of East Bloc architecture and construction, were a gift from the
regime of Erich Honecker.

Vinh is cursed by location (as one of the southernmost major cities in North
Vietnam, it was a natural target for American bombers) and by red gritty soil
and typhoons that make agriculture a perennial gamble. It is the capital of Nghe
Tinh, one of the poorest provinces of Vietnam and, perhaps because of its
endemic poverty, the birthplace of several of the nation's best-known
revolutionaries. Ho Chi Minh, the legendary North Vietnamese leader, was born
101 years ago in a thatch-roof hut a few miles northwest of Vinh. Even today,
running water and electricity are a dream to most farm families in the province,
and malaria has reached epidemic proportions.

Yet even in Vinh, a city that sacrificed as much as any to unify Vietnam as a
Communist state, the concept of free markets has begun to take root under the
five-year-old policy known as doi moi, or "renovation." It is the Vietnamese
version of perestroika.

"Renovation has been good for us, all of us," says Huang Thi Xuan, who runs a
pharmacy in the city's cacophonous market, a dingy, warehouselike building in
which vendors gather each morning at dawn to sell clothing, household goods and
food from long rows of stalls. Perched on a tall wooden stool in front of
shelves stocked with medicines -- everything from modern antibiotics to the
herbal tonics still preferred by many older customers -- Xuan says that before
doi moi there were only 3 pharmacies in the market; now, there are 20.

"There is much more selection for the customers," she says, offering a customer
a whiff of (noxious) deer antler powder, said by the Vietnamese to improve male
potency. "People have much more money. We still need more customers if we are to
prosper, but it is clear that our lives have improved."

Doi moi has encouraged the creation of private businesses, provided one of the
most liberal foreign investment codes in Asia, ended price controls on major
commodities and forced the devaluation of the Vietnamese currency, the dong, to
bring it closer to its black-market exchange rate. American dollars and gold can
now be traded legally. In its most recent annual report, the World Bank
described doi moi as "dramatic" and "far-reaching" and said the reforms had
created a "fast-growing but still small-scale private sector."

Unveiled by the Vietnamese Communist Party in 1986, doi moi was the brainchild
of then-Party Secretary Nguyen Van Linh, a Northerner who spent much of his
adult life as a Vietcong guerrilla leader in the South. Linh began experimenting
with free-market reforms while he was the party chief of Saigon in the early
1980's. Although his efforts in the South earned Linh the enmity of party
functionaries in Hanoi who believed that Vietnam should operate under a single
collective economic system (Linh was booted out of the Politburo for a time), he
was the architect of the boom that is now centered in Saigon.

When Linh stepped down last summer because of ill health, the post of Party
Secretary went to Prime Minister Do Muoi, 74, an affable Northerner and a
supporter of renovation. The more important news of the summer was that Vo Van
Kiet, a 68-year-old Southerner and one of Linh's closest allies, became Prime
Minister.

Vietnam today is not the unrelievedly grim and gray country of the mid-1980's,
but neither is it like Thailand or Taiwan or the other economic tigers of
Southeast Asia. Vietnam is still among the poorest nations on earth, in large
part because of the American trade embargo that has been in place since April
30, 1975, when the last American troops evacuated from Saigon. The embargo has
isolated the country economically, cutting Hanoi off from international
development aid -- specifically that of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund -- and keeping away billions of dollars in foreign investment. The
per capita income is estimated at $195 a year (53 cents a day). Malnutrition and
disease are widespread.

Vietnam's economic troubles have been worsened by the cutoff of more than $1
billion a year in aid from the former Soviet Union, long Vietnam's closest ally.
Although official figures are unreliable, the unemployment rate is believed to
be as high as 20 percent. In the first three quarters of 1991, inflation ran as
high as 7 percent a month, or nearly 125 percent a year.

Life for some has improved, but the suffering for large numbers of Vietnamese
continues. Last year, more than 20,000 left the country without official
sanction, many in rickety boats in search of a better life elsewhere. The exodus
appears to be ending, however, the result of an agreement between Vietnam and
the British authorities in Hong Kong (where the vast majority of the boat people
have landed), allowing the forcible repatriation of Vietnamese found to have
left for economic, not political, reasons. Other nations sheltering the refugees
are expected to seek similar agreements with Hanoi. In May, 165 boat people
arrived in Hong Kong each day; in all of November, there were 7.

The economic development of Vietnam is likely to receive a jump start soon from
an unexpected quarter, the United States. With Vietnam actively assisting in
ending the Cambodian civil war and in uncovering the fate of American soldiers
missing from the Vietnam War -- two of the conditions set by the Bush
Administration before it would restore normal diplomatic relations with Vietnam
-- Washington has opened talks with Hanoi. American officials are also saying
that the United States embargo could be lifted within several months.

Although a lifting of the embargo would be a great boost to the Vietnamese
economy, the arrival of American and other Western capitalists would still pose
a threat to Vietnam's leaders. They would be confronted anew with the question
that has long bedeviled Hanoi: Can Vietnam abandon Marxist economic theory
without loosening the tight social control that has always characterized Marxist
regimes?

Thai Airways flight 680 from Bangkok to Saigon is jammed, as it is almost every
day, with business people seeking to cash in on what may be the last great
opportunity in Southeast Asia.

George Brown, who was born Choi Chung 51 years ago in what is now South Korea
and who adopted a Western name after immigrating to Australia in the 1970's, is
returning to make a new life in Saigon.

"Vietnam is my second country," says Brown, who first lived in Saigon in the
1960's as a saxophonist in a Korean jazz group performing in clubs frequented by
American troops. "I like Vietnamese food. I like Vietnamese women." Brown left
Vietnam in 1974 for Sydney when it appeared that the war, and with it the
opportunity to find work, was winding down. He returned to Saigon for the first
time in 1988, just as Vietnam was beginning to welcome foreign investment, "and
I cried to see so much poverty" he recalls. "The buildings had crumbled.
Everything looked dead."

Last May, Brown returned again to Saigon, and he says, "this time, you could see
a change in the people's eyes. People had hope again." Brown says he is
convinced he will turn a large profit almost overnight from a Saigon restaurant
he intends to buy from its Vietnamese owners. "There is so much opportunity in
Saigon," he says, as the Thai jet makes its approach to Saigon over lush green
rice paddies on the outskirts of the city. "You want to do anything, you can do
it in Vietnam."

Through September of last year, the Vietnamese Government approved 98 foreign
investment projects in Vietnam worth $974 million, compared with 109 projects
worth $592 million in all of 1990. The figures do not include the many deals
made by foreign investors outside Government channels.

"I think for every dollar that comes in officially, there are two or three
others finding some other way into Saigon," says John Brinsden, who represents
Britain's Standard Chartered Bank in Saigon. "People are arriving in this city
each week with hundreds of thousands of dollars in their briefcases. And the
investors coming to Vietnam now are solid people, with a record in business."

Most days, the slow-moving immigration line at Tan Son Nhut International
Airport in Saigon is a stream of red, the color of the Japanese passports held
by dozens of pin-striped businessmen from Tokyo and Osaka. There are also
businessmen from Taiwan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia,
Australia and France.

Liberalized foreign investment laws aren't the only attraction. Vietnam has
abundant natural resources, especially oil, and it boasts a labor force that is
industrious, well educated and absurdly cheap. Young, college-educated
Vietnamese are often paid less than $50 a month.

Along the road from the airport into downtown Saigon, there are billboard
advertisements for foreign companies announcing their presence in the city:
Sony, JVC, Nissan, Ricoh, Ogilvy & Mather, Agfa. The ads also serve as a
reminder that nearly two-thirds of all foreign investment in Vietnam is going to
projects in the South, not only because of its less outdated infrastructure (the
result of 20 years of American military presence), but also because of the
perception that the Southerners, with their capitalist roots, are better
business people.

Last year, Japan replaced the Soviet Union as Vietnam's largest trading partner,
and the Japanese already buy 80 percent of Vietnam's crude-oil output. Japanese
firms have opened scores of trading offices in Saigon and, for the better part
of a decade, have been scouting out business and Government contacts. When the
American trade embargo is lifted, Japanese investment is expected to explode.
"It may soon be too late for American investors," says Ninh Van Mien, senior
manager of the Hanoi Electronic Corporation, which manufactures Japanese
JVC-brand television sets at a newly built factory in the Vietnamese capital.
"The Japanese have been in Vietnam for years, and it may be difficult for the
Americans to catch up unless they come to Vietnam soon. In Vietnam we have a
saying: the buffalo that is too slow to reach the watering hole must drink from
the muddy water."

Every foreigner eager to do business with the Vietnamese faces formidable
hurdles. There is the bloated bureaucracy that, foreign investors say, is among
the most maddening and sclerotic in the developing world. It can take up to six
months for a foreign investor to get approval to open a simple business office
in Saigon, longer still to hire Vietnamese employees through the Government
employment office and to obtain adequate electricity and telephones.

The transport infrastructure outside the nation's major cities is all but
nonexistent after decades of neglect (only about 10 percent of Vietnam's roads
are paved), and it is virtually impossible to arrange the quick movement of
goods or people around the country.

Because the American embargo bars the sale to Vietnam of commercial jetliners
built with American technology, the Vietnamese national airline -- Hang Khong
Vietnam, known among justifiably nervous foreign fliers as Hang On, Vietnam --
must make do with a fleet of Soviet planes so antiquated that even Soviet
diplomats are reluctant to fly in them. Some Western diplomats and relief
workers avoid Hang Khong entirely and add hours to the trip from Hanoi to Saigon
by flying via Bangkok, using the Thai airline.

Within Vietnam, air and rail tickets must be written out by hand. Computers and
word processors are a rarity, and foreign business people often complain of
writer's cramp from filling out countless Government forms and questionnaires.

Most infuriating about doing business in Vietnam, investors say, is the
ignorance of Government officials of basic business practices. Many bureaucrats
do not seem to understand the concept of contracts, says Peter Cappelluti, an
Australian who is the Saigon manager of Independent Seafoods, a West Australian
shrimp-farming and vegetable-processing firm that was an early investor in
Vietnam.

In 1989, Independent Seafoods had a contract with a Vietnamese coffee
distributor to purchase 750 tons of coffee for resale to an English buyer. "We
bought the coffee," Cappelluti recalls, "we signed contracts, we agreed to a
price, and when it came time to ship the coffee, it was gone. They had sold it
to someone else for a better price, and there was absolutely nothing we could do
about it."

Foreign investors and Vietnamese business people alike complain that they are
often caught in turf battles between the local and central governments, and
between different agencies within the central Government -- each offering a
different interpretation of Vietnamese laws and regulations, each seeking to
take its own cut of a lucrative investment contract.

Last fall, an official newspaper reported that corruption involving senior
officials had cost Vietnam more than $2 billion since 1989, and that more than
10,000 government and business officials -- including seven deputy ministers and
hundreds of company and factory managers -- had recently been disciplined for
corruption.

According to Do Duc Dinh of the World Economy Institute, a Hanoi think tank,
corruption is "a huge problem, and we have discovered and punished some of the
corrupt people, but there are many, many more." The clearest evidence of
corruption, he adds, is in the vast selection of foreign goods in stores in
Hanoi and Saigon. Government accounts say black-market merchandise is allowed in
by officials bribed to look the other way or who themselves moonlight as
smugglers. "Foreign cigarettes are banned for sale in Vietnam," says Dinh, "and
yet you buy them everywhere. The Government must try to control this."

In 1989, the Government created the State Committee for Cooperation and
Investment to encourage and to simplify the procedures for foreign investment.
Although the committee has some authority to cut through red tape for foreign
investors, Vietnamese officials concede that much more needs to be done.

"We're trying to make changes quickly," says Nguyen Mai, the committee's vice
chairman and one of the few Government officials in Hanoi who wears a
Western-style suit and tie to work every morning -- signs of his commitment, he
says, to Westerners who wish to invest in Vietnam. "Teaching our officials about
the principles of doi moi is like a foot race, and some of our officials are
learning to run much faster than the others."

Whether "the others" can be made to run faster depends a lot on how the
Communist leadership adapts itself to a rapidly changing world. Even as
Communism self-destructs elsewhere, the Communist Party of the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam retains largely unchallenged control over the Government and
economic policy, and its influence extends throughout the military and the
educational system. As of 1990, the party had about two million members, and
government bureaucrats at virtually all levels and in all parts of the country
must be members of the party or must have demonstrated unquestioning loyalty to
its policies.

To question the system is to risk imprisonment, or worse. The details may never
be known with certainty, but as told by diplomats who have heard the unofficial
accounts, a daring young Hanoi woman pedaled her bicycle slowly through the
streets of the Vietnamese capital one morning last spring. The bicycle turned
onto a street of grand ochre-colored French-built colonial villas, the homes of
some of the country's senior military leaders, and into the mailbox outside each
house she dropped a handbill calling for the overthrow of the Communist regime.
The "bicycle rider," as she has been dubbed in diplomatic circles, was caught by
the police and is said to be awaiting trial on charges of "hooliganism."

Although the Government tolerates some dissent from a handful of intellectuals,
dozens of others -- prominent academics, theologians and journalists -- have
been imprisoned. Scores of former officials of the old South Vietnamese regime
are believed to be held in hard-labor "re-education camps."

In November, a court in Saigon imposed a sentence of 20 years at hard labor on
Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, an endocrinologist who was Amnesty International's first
member in Vietnam, for "subversive activities against the people's power." He
was accused, in effect, of libeling the Communist Party.

Yet there may be reason to hope for improvement in the area of human rights -- a
result of Vietnam's desire to polish its image for the benefit of foreign
investors and potential aid donors. A week before Que's sentencing, Government
prosecutors dropped criminal charges against one of the nation's most popular
writers, Doung Thu Huong, who was arrested last spring for attempting to send
abroad writings critical of the Government. In a letter to friends that was
widely circulated in Hanoi last year, she wrote that the millions of Vietnamese
who gave their lives for the nation's independence "did not do so in order to
have a country like this."

Last month, Western diplomats in Hanoi reported that Vietnam would soon allow
investigators from the International Committee of the Red Cross to go into those
re-education camps where political prisoners have been held since the end of the
war, a significant human rights advance. There were also reports that scores of
inmates would soon be freed and allowed to immigrate to the West, apparently as
a concession to the United States.

The disintegration of the Soviet Union has horrified Vietnamese leaders, pushing
them to do what only a few years ago would have been unthinkable -- embrace
their traditional enemy, China. Last year, Hanoi announced it would restore full
diplomatic relations with Beijing after decades of hostility and sporadic
warfare. Some Vietnamese officials have even begun citing China as an example of
a nation that has successfully promoted free enterprise while holding on to a
hardline political stance. They see serious flaws in the Chinese model,
including rampant corruption and mounting public anger against Beijing's
septuagenarian leaders, but the Chinese economy is booming, its gross national
product up 6 percent in the first three quarters of 1991, an advance credited
entirely to the private sector.

Other Vietnamese Communists dismiss the Chinese model entirely (the 1989
democracy movement in China proved its dangers, they say) and are far more
interested in following the examples offered by affluent Asian neighbors like
Taiwan, South Korea and Singapore, which developed powerful economies under
authoritarian, albeit non-Communist, rule.

Some Western and Asian diplomats in Hanoi believe that because the Communist
Party led and won the battle to reunify the nation, the party retains a
legitimacy in Vietnam that it lacks elsewhere, and that it could hang on for
years. Others say change will come faster.

"I think there will be substantial political reform in Vietnam much sooner than
in China," says a senior European diplomat in Hanoi. "The Vietnamese have a
longer history of dealing with outsiders -- so much of their history has been
spent under occupation -- and they are instinctively less wary of change."

A comparison is being drawn to Vietnam's troubled neighbor Cambodia. The
Vietnamese-installed leaders of the former Cambodian Communist Party, now known
as the People's Party, have released hundreds of political prisoners, allowed
the formation of a limited multiparty system and removed virtually all controls
on the marketplace. Despite recent anti-Government riots in the streets of Phnom
Penh, the Cambodian capital, diplomats say the People's Party is likely to
continue to dominate the Government even if free, internationally supervised
elections are held next year under terms of the United Nations-sponsored peace
treaty.

Whatever path the Vietnamese decide to take, that decision will have to be made
in Hanoi. The capital is a storybook vision of Asia, its quiet streets lined
with tall, gently swaying tamarind trees that give it a slow-paced innocence
entirely missing from Saigon. The air is scented by the inviting aroma of the
noodle-and-beef soup called pho, sold from large steel pots at open-air street
stands, and by the yeasty smell of freshly baked baguettes, the great
contribution of France, Vietnam's former colonizer.

There is almost nothing to remind a visitor that Hanoi was for much of this
century a city at war -- nothing, that is, except for the charred wreckage of an
American F-111 fighter on display at the Vietnamese Army Museum and the air-raid
siren that blares across the city each day at noon as a reminder of the need for
Vietnamese vigilance. Hanoi is under the spell of the free-market reforms born
in the South, and the results can be seen everywhere in the city, although they
are displayed without Saigon's hard-edged glitz.

Only three years ago, stores in Hanoi were largely empty of the apparel and toys
and electronic goods that people wanted, and most of the state-run shops and
restaurants closed early, leaving the streets deserted after dark. Now the
city's street markets are bursting with goods. The newly opened, privately owned
restaurants compete with one another by staying open late into the evening, and
Hanoi's most popular bars and dance halls are those with Japanese-brand video
players to show the latest kung fu films smuggled in from Hong Kong.

Doi moi has also come to the northern countryside. The farmers of the Daton
agricultural cooperative, 10 miles from the capital, have filled in most of the
bomb craters left behind by American B-52's. For years, the farmers used the
craters as fishponds or as watering holes for livestock, but no more.

"The land is too valuable now," says Tran Van Hanh, the cooperative's
34-year-old vice chairman, sitting in a musty meeting room decorated with a
large, faded portrait of Ho Chi Minh. "We have filled in the craters so we can
use the land for growing crops and making money."

Daton's farmers and tens of millions of other Vietnamese farmers have been freed
under doi moi to pursue their version of prosperity. Before free-market farming
was widely introduced in the late 1980's, Vietnam experienced near famine after
a series of poor rice harvests. In major cities, frightened shoppers began
queueing up well before dawn to receive their quota of subsidized rice. Yet by
1989, with the reforms in place, the country could feed its people and have
enough left over to become the world's third-largest rice exporter.

Under doi moi, farmers have been provided with incentives to work their land
privately and to raise new crops and livestock. Quotas have been lifted on the
amount of the harvest that must be sent to the Government. Price controls on
rice and other crops have been removed. The size of the rice harvest at the
Daton cooperative has nearly doubled since the early 1980's; many farmers,
responding to the new incentives, now plant three crops a year instead of two
and tend the rice more carefully.

The Daton cooperative's chairman, Le Van Bui, a representative on Vietnam's
496-member National Assembly and a member of the Communist Party, has begun
raising silkworms and pigs, in addition to rice, and he says that many of his
neighbors have found themselves suddenly able to build new homes and to buy
motorbikes and other once-forbidden luxuries.

The cooperative's farmers no longer talk in terms of the amount of rice they
need to grow to feed their families. Instead, they discuss the number of pigs
that must be raised in order to buy a television set. (Three pigs raised to
slaughter equals one new television.)

"Because of doi moi, many farmers are growing rich," Bui says. "I do not think
we can go back to the old system. Now, I don't care if you want to call this
system Communism or capitalism, just so long as the people are getting rich."

Vietnam's new obsession with making money goes hand in hand with its obsession
for all things American. It is rare for an American visitor to encounter rancor,
even in the North, where virtually every family lost someone in the war.
Instead, there is a fascination among the Vietnamese about what the former enemy
is really like.

North Vietnamese television opened a recent Sunday evening broadcast with the
show "Learning English," followed by the television series "Highway to Heaven,"
dubbed in Vietnamese and starring the late Michael Landon, who has something of
a cult following in Vietnam.

At Hanoi University -- the university of choice both for the North's most gifted
students and the offspring of the nation's most powerful leaders -- a large sign
in the overgrown courtyard reads "Do as Uncle Ho Would Do." It is unlikely,
however, that Uncle Ho would have chosen the music heard in the hallway early
one morning from a Japanese-made tape player: "Hound Dog" by Elvis Presley, who
is almost as popular here as his Vietnamese counterpart, Elvis Phuong.

In one classroom, a group of fourth-year English students reading Arthur
Miller's "Death of a Salesman" struggle with the concept that American
capitalism might have contributed to Willy Loman's doom. They find the play
confusing and difficult to follow.

Asked to name their role models and favorite entertainers, the students respond
with Clark Gable, Elizabeth Taylor and Julia Roberts. "Pretty Woman," which
starred Roberts, was shown on Vietnamese television earlier this year. The
students say they get their news from Vietnamese-language shortwave broadcasts
by the Voice of America and the BBC. As to career plans, they would like to go
into business or journalism. No one mentions joining the Communist Party.

Their teacher, Peter B. Zinoman, a 26-year-old American from Washington who is a
doctoral candidate in Asian history at Cornell University, says he has trouble
believing that his students are telling an American visitor the full truth. "I
think they're saying what they think an American wants to hear," he says, noting
that membership in the Communist Party is still the route to power in Vietnam
"and they all want to be part of that."

Yet Zinoman, who has been in Vietnam for more than a year as a volunteer
teacher, says he has been struck by how the spirit of capitalism and the hunger
for prosperity born in the South has taken hold in Hanoi, and how these students
have been swept up in it.

For Zinoman's students, as it is for many Vietnamese, the long war against the
United States and the equally long animosity between the North and the South
belong to the past. In Saigon, the city that was forced to sacrifice even its
name to the memory of Ho Chi Minh, there is remarkably little bitterness
directed toward the man, even among those who lost parents or children in
battles with his armies from the North.

As he shines the chrome grill of one of the Honda Dreams at his motorbike shop,
Lam Van says that even though his beloved eldest brother died as a soldier
defending the Saigon regime, he harbors no bitterness.

"Why should I hate Ho?" he says. "It is time to forget hatred. We all want to
forget the war and to live better lives -- more happiness, money, more
motorbikes, too -- and we want the Americans to come back to help us to
accomplish that." He grins as he points to another of the Honda motorbikes
whizzing by outside his shop. Dreams, he says, are filling the streets of
Saigon.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover Photo: Capitalism on the move in Vinh, Vietnam, 600 miles north
of Ho Chi Minh City. (Photograph by Andrew Holbrooke/Black Star for The New York
Times.)

Photos: Left: Basking in capitalism. A "cyclo" driver takes a break in Saigon,
still officially called Ho Chi Minh City. Free enterprise has been encouraged in
Vietnam, and the cyclo drivers run their own taxi businesses.; Top: Cleaning up
outside Reunification Palace, the former South Vietnamese presidential
residence, in Saigon.; Bottom: A Saigon electronics store. Most foreign
investment goes to the South, because of the perception that Southerners, with
their capitalistic roots, are better business people. (pgs. 16-17); Left: Behind
this vegetable garden in Hanoi, a remnant of war:
an American B-52 shot down in 1972. Many craters left by fallen planes
have been used for growing crops.; Below: The new openness at a Saigon cafe
recalls the old openness before Communism.; Bottom: Salvaging a truck cab in
Vinh. Even in this depressed city, economic reform has taken hold. "There is
much more selection for the customers," says one of the city's 20 pharmacists.
(pgs. 18-19); Far left: A crippled beggar outside a watch-and-flag shop in
Hanoi. Despite the new free-market policy, Vietnam is still one of the poorest
countries in the world, with a per capita income of $195.; Above: A brick-making
cooperative just south of Hanoi. There is very little left to remind visitors
that Hanoi was a city at war for most of this century.; Bottom: A rumor that the
dong -- the Vietnamese unit of currency -- would plummet in value caused a run
on the gold market in Hanoi last month. (pgs. 20-21) (Photographs by Andrew
Holbrooke)

Map of Vietnam (pg. 30)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Companies Press U.S. on Vietnam

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


At a time when American competitiveness, or lack of it, in Asia is much debated,
corporations and business organizations in the United States are pressing for an
end to the trade and investment boycott of Vietnam, a country where American
companies say they believe they could do very well.

The quiet lobbying -- led by the petroleum, construction, telecommunications and
consulting industries -- is prompted by the perception that the Japanese have
been positioning themselves in Vietnam for decades and will grab many of the
contracts when Vietnam becomes integrated in world trade.

Japan and South Korea, apparently uncomfortable with an American-led embargo,
have begun moving in recent weeks toward greater participation in the Vietnamese
economy.

American products, introduced in South Vietnam in the 1960's and 1970's, are
highly prized by Hanoi -- and still functioning. An official of Caterpillar Far
East Commercial Ltd., the Asian subsidiary of Caterpillar Inc., based in Peoria,
Ill., told a Congressional committee recently that on a visit to Vietnam last
spring he saw working Caterpillar vehicles that had been delivered 20 years ago.

"The interest in Vietnam is substantial," said Virginia Foote, director of the
three-year-old United States Vietnam Trade Council, a private group that helps
American companies and individuals position themselves for the competition
expected in the Vietnmese economy when the embargo is finally lifted. The
council's chairman is William H. Sullivan, a former United States Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State for Vietnam, whom Hanoi approached for help in
1988.

Ms. Foote said at least 10 large corporations and about 300 smaller companies,
plus dozens of individual entrepreneurs, had joined the council, which gives
briefings every couple of months in Washington to keep Americans abreast of
trade laws as well as developments in Vietnam. The council is asking the
Treasury Department for a license to bring Vietnamese to the United States under
fellowships, or to allow Americans to teach courses in Vietnamese schools or
companies.

Nearly 17 years after the end of the Vietnam War, the United States not only
maintains a nearly total embargo against country-to-country dealings with
Vietnam but also opposes any assistance to Hanoi by international lending and
development organizations, in particular the World Bank, the Asian Development
Bank and the International Monetary Fund, where Vietnam is in arrears from past
borrowing.

Washington does not, however, object to the World Bank's conducting surveys or
giving advice in Vietnam in preparation for later development. On Dec. 17, the
State Department relaxed travel restrictions, allowing group tours to Vietnam to
be sold in the United States. Moreover, about $1 million in humanitarian
assistance goes to Vietnam annually through private organizations, and an
unknown amount of financial help is provided Vietnamese families by relatives in
the West.

But all applications for commercial trading licenses are routinely rejected,
Government officials say. Americans, unlike their competitors in Japan and
Europe, are not permitted to open offices in Vietnam. In Asia, American Chambers
of Commerce in Hong Kong, Bangkok and other cities have begun campaigns to lobby
Congress and the Administration for a change in this restrictive policy.

Hanoi Seeking Oil Bids

Hanoi, short of hard currency and suffering from the loss of Soviet aid, is
urgently seeking bids to explore and develop its oilfields in the South China
Sea and to begin constructing or reconstructing roads, power plants, airports,
ports and industrial buildings. Vietnam needs aircraft and wants to sell
textiles and agriculture products, including tropical fruit and processed
seafood.

Jerry Smith, a spokesman for Phillips Petroleum in Bartlesville, Okla.,
acknowledged that Phillips was among the oil companies interested in exploring
Vietnamese offshore fields "as soon as the embargo comes off."

David Dollar, the World Bank's Vietnam specialist, said the rebuilding of
Vietnam, extremely impoverished by half a century of wars, is likely to cost
roughly $500 million a year for five years. Mr. Dollar, speaking at the Asia
Society last month, said it was far from clear where Vietnam would secure the
money for these contracts.

Low Incomes, High Debt

The country has nearly 70 million people and one of the lowest per-capita
incomes in the world -- barely $200 a year -- and is $140 million in arrears to
the International Monetary Fund. Hanoi is also thought to have large foreign
debts in rubles to the former Soviet Union and in hard currencies to commercial
lenders in Japan. Hanoi and Tokyo are now negotiating a debt-repayment plan.

At the Commerce Department, several officials said that Americans's interest in
trading or investing in Vietnam is significant, despite the uncertainties. Among
those asking for help and information are war veterans who would like to go back
and help the country rebuild.

Change Not Expected Soon

State Department officials who deal with Vietnam say they are aware of the
concerns of American business, and they acknowledge that Vietnam, with a
well-educated labor force eager for jobs, holds a lot of potential. But the
general feeling in the Bush Administration, in Congress and in private research
organizations is that lifting the embargo and granting diplomatic recognition to
Vietnam are not likely to occur before this year's Presidential election.

Under the terms of a "road map" the American Government presented to the
Vietnamese last spring, Hanoi must help smooth the transition to democracy in
neighboring Cambodia and demonstrate that it is doing all it can to resolve at
least 82 possibly solvable cases involving the 2,267 Americans who are missing
in Indochina or whose remains have not been found.

In the State Department, even officials most predisposed to hastening the
recognition of Vietnam say that Hanoi is not extending as much cooperation as it
could, perhaps because Communist hard-liners continue to deal from a position of
mistrust and suspicion in issues involving Americans.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American products introduced in South Vietnam in the 1960's and
1970's are highly prized by the Vietnamese. This John Deere tractor in the
Mekong Delta doubled as the engine for a rice thresher. (Barbara Crossette/The
New York Times, 1988)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Again Haunts Politics

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Becker;  Elizabeth Becker is author of the forthcoming
"America's Vietnam War," a book for teen-agers.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In 1975, as the helicopters were preparing to lift off the American Embassy's
roof in Saigon, President Gerald R. Ford declared an end to the debate on
Vietnam.

"America can regain the sense of pride that existed before Vietnam," he said.
"But it cannot be achieved by refighting a war that is finished as far as
America is concerned." There would be no official post-mortems on the worst
defeat in our history, no attempt to find out what went wrong and who was
responsible.

Now, with the release of Gov. Bill Clinton's 1969 letter about his draft status,
the men ordered to fight are being held accountable their actions rather than
the leaders who sent them to Vietnam.

During the war, those young men reached a silent verdict: most eligible men, no
matter what their political convictions, actively avoided fighting in the war.

To decide that Governor Clinton is no longer Presidential material because he
avoided the draft and opposed the war is to admit that Americans feel guilty
about Vietnam, but are still unsure whom to blame.

As his letter attests, he took the war seriously. It is a confession,
alternating between high moral conviction and the raw ambitions of a politician.
He mentions how tortured he and his friends were about the war. This is not a
coward's note; it reflects angst.

As a candidate, Governor Clinton is stumbling over his Vietnam past. But, then,
the country as a whole still stumbles over Vietnam, unable to agree whether we
should have fought.

Until members of this generation started running for President, it did not seem
necessary for them to justify what they did during the war. Governor Clinton's
peers -- in business, government, journalism -- have not been subjected to a
Vietnam test.  The depth of the nation's misgivings about Vietnam is accurately
reflected by the lineup of candidates from that era: Vice President Dan Quayle,
Senator Bob Kerrey and Governor Clinton. They exemplify how most draft-age men,
through their actions or words, publicly doubted the wisdom of America's war.

Neither Mr. Quayle nor Mr. Clinton fought in Vietnam. Mr. Quayle says he
believed in the war -- but not enough, apparently, to go to Vietnam. He found
safety in the National Guard. Mr. Clinton says he opposed the war and, through
various maneuverings -- which have now opened like a wound -- was never called
by his draft board. Even though Mr. Kerrey fought, lost part of a leg and
returned home a decorated hero, he says Vietnam was a mistake.

How, then, shall we judge our candidates' actions during the war? Combat
service? Political support of the war? This implies that America believed that
Vietnam was a just cause and that families willingly sent their sons to battle.

The record of the period contradicts such thinking. Out of the 27 million
Americans eligible for the draft, 15 million won deferments like Governor
Clinton did. Another million took Vice President Quayle's path to the National
Guard or the reserves. Draft-dodgers fled to Canada. Less than two million
actually saw combat like Senator Kerrey.

In Vietnam, many servicemen saw no meaning, no point, to the war; to express
their alienation, they were absent without leave and used drugs at the highest
rates in the American military's recorded history. They invented "fragging" --
injuring their officers with hand grenades -- in order to avoid combat.

In 1971, the Armed Forces Journal, a monthly, said: "The morale, discipline and
battleworthiness of the U.S. armed forces are, with a few salient exceptions,
lower and worse than at any time in this century and possibly in the history of
the United States."

The military, at least, took the defeat in Vietnam seriously and conducted
wrenching post-mortems. The victory in the Persian Gulf war demonstrated that
the armed forces had learned the lessons of Vietnam.

America's political leadership has avoided any such soul-searching. If Vietnam
is going to become an unmarked yardstick for this generation of politicians,
then the leaders of both parties who waged the war should be held accountable
for their war records as well.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Long Run Down Vietnam's Memory Lane

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Feb.  15


Andy Anderson, a blunt, almost cantankerous Vietnam veteran who uses a
wheelchair because of a war injury, showed the radiance of a man returning home
today as he spoke of once again seeing the city that used to be Saigon.

"I haven't been here since Dec. 23, 1973, and when I went out through the
streets here this week, it was like I left last Friday and came back on Monday,"
said Anderson, who is from Long Beach, Calif., and who is here for the Ho Chi
Minh City International Marathon, the first major sports event to be held in
Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in 1975.

Anderson, 55 years old, lived in Saigon for two years while working as an
adviser to the Vietnamese navy. "I lived across the street from the presidential
palace," he said with excitement. "I fished these waters. I ate corned beef and
cabbage every Saturday in a place near here, and the city hasn't changed much."

70's Look, 90's Optimism

This sprawling, often elegant city, with discos with names like Satisfaction and
Queen Bee, may look much as it did in the 1970's, but the marathon, with 133
runners from 26 countries, represents a real change for a country that reopened
its doors to tourists only in 1987. Because of its stumbling economy, Vietnam is
eager to rejoin the international community -- to attract foreign investors and
foreign loans -- and this event is a way for Vietnam to show its new attitude.

The field is tiny compared with those for the marathons in New York or Boston,
where thousands take part. But for most Americans competing here, especially the
veterans, this was a race that for a variety of emotional reasons, they simply
could not miss.

"I grew up with the war in Vietnam -- it was a part of all our lives -- and I
wanted to be in this marathon because it was taking place in Vietnam," said Paul
Gallagher, an American stockbroker who now works in Hong Kong.

Jim Barker, a former United States Army intelligence officer who served in
Vietnam, said, "I came here for this marathon because I saw it as a chance for
reconciliation."

Barker, an elite runner from San Jose, Calif., said that Sunday's marathon
offered a chance "for a healing experience, a way to bridge differences, and
deal with the very intense emotional traumas we lived through here."

From the beginning, this promised to be a quirky, unlikely sporting event in a
country where running is a new sport. The sight of aging Americans, Australians
and Frenchmen running through the streets in the shimmering Saigon heat has left
many Vietnamese openly gawking and pointing.

'Very Happy Time'

"I saw some foreigners -- very old," said a middle-aged shopkeeper who was
selling souvenir T-shirts from a small sidewalk stall. "The foreigners were very
old, but still they run. They enjoy it. This is a very happy time for them and a
very happy time for us."

This marathon, a strange spectacle staged by Vietnamese Communists working with
American advisers and using capitalist money from foreign corporations, has old
enemies facing each other on a new battlefield: the race course. And most find
the combination a heady, happy one, though it is laced with sadness, a sense of
poignancy.

When Anderson and three other disabled American veterans went out on the street,
many older Vietnamese, survivors of the war, came up to greet them. Some shook
their hands, others introduced their sons and daughters.

Anderson and other American wheelchair athletes came to compete, and there were
able to do so in a preliminary "fun" event today. But the Vietnamese organizers
decided that because they were not prepared to field wheelchair athletes, only
runners would be included in Sunday's race. American veterans had donated three
racing chairs to Vietnam's sports ministry in hopes of persuading the Vietnamese
to allow the wheelchair athletes to compete.

'A Peaceful Moment'

A runner from San Mateo, Calif., Linda Shinazy, said she had been opposed to the
war and had protested it by writing letters on eye-catching red stationery, "to
anyone and everyone."

This little marathon, she said, "was a chance for me to celebrate peace."

"It's a small moment in history, a peaceful moment," she said.

While hundreds of Vietnamese took part in the short "fun" races, only 92 will
compete in the marathon, and only 8 of them have ever run a marathon before. The
course winds through the center of the city, to the gritty outskirts, and into
the green countryside before returning to Reunification Hall, the former
presidential palace.

Since the war ended, Vietnam has remained mired in poverty. One official here
admitted that while the Communists had "helped the masses" take part in more
sports, the people literally "don't have the food, enough calories" to have
large numbers of regular marathon runners.

"The few Vietnamese who were trying to train were running in running in rubber
thongs," said Bruce Aitken, the American financial consultant who first
suggested the marathon to the Vietnamese. He said that when Adidas, one of the
major sponsors of the marathon, donated 1,000 pairs of running shoes, the
Vietnamese, "who are really very competitive people," got very interested in
training.

To open the marathon weekend, there were speeches by Communist officials wearing
suits and ties and sunglasses. There were firecrackers, silky banners and dozens
of red balloons released into the clear blue sky. There was even a live rock
band and a special marathon song sung by Tran Tien, whom one Vietnamese
explained was "a very popular singer, known in all of Vietnam."

A top Vietnamese sports official said that his country hoped that by staging
events like the marathon, "We will someday be able to host something really big,
like the Olympics."

In fact, the official, Le Buu, head of the Ho Chi Minh Sports Authority, said
Vietnam planned to send a delegation to Barcelona, Spain, for the 1992 Olympic
Summer Games. And while he was vague about what Olympic events the Vietnamese
would compete in there, he said, "Definitely we will send a shooting team."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andy Anderson warming up for the Ho Chi Minh City International
Marathon, the first major sports event in Vietnam since 1975. He and other
disabled entrants only participated in the preliminary races (Reuters) (pg. 1);
Many Americans came to Vietnam for the International Marathon for a variety of
emotional reasons including the chance for reconciliation and healing.
Participants in one of the preliminary events, the 10-kilometer, raced past the
Hotel Continental in Ho Chi Minh City. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 18)

Map of marathon race course in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


To the Editor:

The theme of the Oliver Stone film "J.F.K." is that President John F. Kennedy
planned to withdraw from Vietnam and that to prevent this, the Central
Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and
possibly people close to Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson conspired to
assassinate him. Most of this is palpable nonsense, but as Kennedy's Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, the officer responsible for Vietnam,
I can testify that the first point is essentially true and correct.

On numerous occasions President Kennedy told me that he was determined not to
let Vietnam become an American war. He agreed to have Americans serve as
advisers, and he also authorized American pilots training Vietnamese to fly
T-28's to do the actual flying -- covertly -- in bombing missions inside South
Vietnam. But he refused every suggestion to send American combat forces.

Once, at that time, you reported in a small front-page box that some American
major general was visiting Vietnam. The President called me at home and in
decidedly purple language took me to task for letting an American general visit
Vietnam. "Remember Laos," he said on this and other occasions; the United
States, he said, must keep a low profile in Vietnam so we can negotiate its
neutralization as we had in Laos.

When he paused for breath, I pointed out that I had no authority to deny a
general permission to visit Vietnam -- in fact, I had not even known about the
trip. "Oh," said the President and slammed down the phone without even saying
goodbye. That afternoon a National Security Action Memorandum came out saying
that no officer of flag or general rank could visit Vietnam without the written
permission of the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs.

When Kennedy took office, Laos was the hot spot, and the departing President,
Dwight D. Eisenhower, warned Kennedy he might have to fight there. If so,
Eisenhower said, he would support the decision. Over the next few weeks Kennedy
made several hawkish public statements. But after the Bay of Pigs fiasco in
Cuba, he changed his attitude. He told several people, including Richard Nixon,
that since "the American people do not want to use troops to remove a Communist
regime only 90 miles away, how can I ask them to use troops to remove one 9,000
miles away?"

Shortly after the Bay of Pigs, President Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to
head the Geneva negotiations on Laos. Harriman was fond of saying that he got
the instructions for six months of negotiations in a five-minute telephone
conversation. "All these people want me to go for a military solution in Laos,"
Kennedy told Harriman, "but that is impossible. What I want you to do is find a
political solution."

When South Vietnam asked for more aid in 1961, Kennedy sent Gen. Maxwell D.
Taylor and Walt W. Rostow to Vietnam to investigate. They recommended not only
an increase in aid and advisers, but also 10,000 U.S. combat troops. Kennedy
approved of the aid and advisers but refused to send troops. According to
Roswell Gilpatric, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, even sending advisers was
done reluctantly.

President Kennedy is sometimes quoted as citing the so-called domino theory that
if South Vietnam fell, the rest of Southeast Asia would follow. But the quote is
taken out of context. It was in answer to a question not about troops or
fighting but about why Kennedy continued to send Vietnam economic and military
aid.

Arthur Schlesinger Jr., in his book "Robert Kennedy and His Times," documents
other episodes showing President Kennedy's determination not to let Vietnam
become an American war. One was when Gen. Douglas MacArthur told him it would be
foolish to fight again in Asia and that the problem should be solved at the
diplomatic table. Later General Taylor said that MacArthur's views made "a hell
of an impression on the President . . . so that whenever he'd get this military
advice from the Joint Chiefs or from me or anyone else, he'd say, 'Well, now,
you gentlemen, you go back and convince General MacArthur, then I'll be
convinced.' "

Referring to the recommendation that Taylor and Rostow made to send troops,
Taylor said: "The last thing he [Kennedy] wanted was to put in our ground
forces. . . . I don't recall anyone who was strongly against [the
recommendation], except one man and that was the President."

In a press conference in March 1962, Kennedy said that sending combat troops
would be "a basic change . . . which calls for a constitutional decision, [and]
of course I would go to the Congress."

In July 1962 Kennedy ordered Defense Secretary Robert McNamara to start planning
for the phased withdrawal of U.S. military personnel from Vietnam, but it was
not until May 1963 that the Pentagon produced a plan. Before his tragic death in
an airplane crash, John McNaughton, Assistant Secretary of Defense for
international affairs, said he understood President Kennedy wanted to close out
Vietnam by 1965, "whether it was in good shape or bad."

The historical record, in sum, is clear: President Kennedy was determined not to
let Vietnam become an American war -- that is, he was determined not to send
U.S. combat troops (as opposed to advisers) to fight in Vietnam nor to bomb
North Vietnam. This does not prove he would have withdrawn completely, including
the 16,500 advisers. However, the record is clear that he had laid the
groundwork for doing so. Shortly before his death, he took the first step by
ordering the first 1,000 advisers home.

ROGER HILSMAN
New York, Jan. 15, 1992

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Admits K.G.B. Interrogated American

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 997 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The Government of Vietnam has confirmed that it allowed at least one American
prisoner of war to be questioned by the K.G.B.

In a radio announcement in Hanoi on Monday and a statement today by Vietnam's
United Nations Mission in New York, the Vietnamese said the interrogation took
place in January 1973.

The Vietnamese announcement that an American prisoner was interrogated shortly
before prisoners were returned to the United States as part of the cease-fire
agreement was meant, in effect, to rebut the assertions made by a former K.G.B.
official who has said Americans were still being held by Vietnam as late as 1978
and were interrogated by the K.G.B.

The official, Gen. Oleg D. Kalugin, who says he was head of the K.G.B.'s
counterintelligence operations, testified today before the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. In his testimony, General Kalugin repeated
his assertions that the K.G.B. interviewed several Americans in Vietnam as late
as 1975-78, after the war had ended and all American prisoners were reported
released.

Recruiting Soviet Spies

General Kalugin, in more than three hours of testimony that was often vague on
detail, told the committee that the K.G.B.'s intent in meeting a few of "a
handful" of Americans held by Vietnam after the war was not primarily to gather
intelligence but to recruit spies for the Soviet Union from among the prisoners.
On the whole, the effort was a failure, he said.

He also said that the Soviet Army intelligence agency, known as the G.R.U., its
initials in Russian, was more interested than the K.G.B in gathering technical
information from American prisoners about advanced equipment and procedures.
Americans in Hanoi's possession might have been subject to G.R.U. interrogation,
General Kalugin said.

Vietnam's admission that it had turned over an American to Soviet interrogators
in 1973 came after an investigation requested by the United States M.I.A.-P.O.W.
liaison office in Hanoi, which was established last year.  The Bush
Administration and the Select Committee, under the chairmanship of Senator John
F. Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat, have also been pressing the Russian
Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin for information on reports that some
Americans might have been taken to the Soviet Union.

The Vietnamese statement indentified the prisoner interrogated in 1973 as Eugene
Andre Weaver, whom the Vietnamese say they captured on Jan. 31, 1968, in the
central Vietnamese city of Hue. At that time, Hue was the center of some of the
fiercest fighting of the 1968 Tet offensive.

Mr. Weaver might have been a C.I.A. agent that Hanoi had sought unsuccessfully
to exchange for one of its top intelligence chiefs held by the South Vietnamese
in 1972, people in the American intelligence community said.

Interrogation of Americans

The Vietnamese say that the Soviet Union wanted to meet Mr. Weaver because he
was "of Soviet origin." Hanoi says that after the first meeting, Mr. Weaver
declined to see Soviet officials a second time, and that no other Americans were
subsequently turned over.

The Vietnamese say that the Soviet interrogator in the Weaver case was Oleg
Nechiporenko, an agent working for General Kalugin. Mr. Nechiporenko said
earlier that he had interviewed an American in January 1973. But he has
challenged General Kalugin's assertions that Americans were interrogated after
that.

The United States and Vietnam signed a peace accord in January 1973. Vietnam has
always insisted that all American prisoners were returned to the United States
in March and April of that year.

Today, Vietnam seemed to be owning up to the interview reported by Mr.
Nechiporenko. It continues to brand General Kalugin's accusations that Americans
were interviewed as late as 1978 "fabrications with ill purpose."

Mr. Kalugin said that efforts to discredit him in Vietnam and from within the
K.G.B. derive from a desire among the remnants of the Soviet intelligence system
to protect Vietnam as Moscow's "last listening post in the Far East," following
the loss of cooperative arrangements with the former Communist regimes of
Eastern Europe. He said that it did not suprise him that Vietnam and hard-liners
in the K.G.B. would synchronize their stories.

Seized C.I.A. Agents

The details revealed by Hanoi about Mr. Weaver's case match those of a Central
Intelligence Agency description of one of two agents it admitted on Jan. 3 were
picked up in Vietnam and might have been questioned by Russians. The C.I.A. did
not name the men. But it said one had been captured in 1968 and released in
1973, after being interrogated in Hanoi "by an individual who may have been a
Soviet intelligence officer."

In that statement, moreover, the C.I.A. acknowledged that a second C.I.A.
officer had been seized in South Vietnam in April 1975, the month in which
Hanoi's army captured Saigon. The second agent, also not named, was released the
following October. The C.I.A. says that "Soviet officials may have been
supporting" his interrogation, "but none were directly involved." This case
could lend credence to General Kalugin's assertions.

Today a spokesman for the C.I.A. declined to comment on whether Mr. Weaver was
one of its agents, saying that longstanding policy dictates that the agency not
confirm or deny the idenity of an employee.

As the Select Committee proceeds with its investigations and hearings, it is
becoming evident that the P.O.W.-M.I.A. debate revolves around two sets of
Americans connected to the war.

On one hand, there are the publicly acknowledged cases of 2,267 servicemen still
listed as missing, or who are known to have died but whose bodies have not been
found. On the other hand, there are an unknown number of more shadowy American
figures, among them C.I.A. agents and people connected to the agency's airline,
Air America. There are also servicemen who were on secret missions after the
1973 withdrawal of American forces.


LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Oleg D. Kalugin, who says he was head of the K.G.B.'s
counterintelligence operations, before testifying yesterday before the Senate
Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

EX-SOVIETS RECEIVE LIST OF U.S. MISSING

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 3


The Bush Administration has given several former Soviet republics the names of
more than 50 Americans listed as missing in action from World War II and the
Korean and Vietnam Wars who might have been moved to the Soviet Union, officials
said today.

The names include those of Americans who fought in Asia in World War II, crew
members aboard warplanes that were downed near Soviet territory in the Korean
War and prisoners of war taken in Vietnam, the officials said.

The Defense Department has assembled about 50 names of Americans listed as
missing in action from World War II to before the Vietnam War, officials said.
In addition, the State Department has discussed with the former Soviet republics
the cases of several Americans listed as missing in action from the Vietnam War,
said an official who spoke on condition of anonymity and would not release the
list.

A spokesman for the State Department said leaders of Kazakhstan promised
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d last month that United States officials
would be allowed to visit Sary-Shagan, 150 miles northwest of Alma-Ata, the
Kazakh capital, to investigate a report that American prisoners had been taken
there from Vietnam.

Pursuing Reports

"We continue to work with Russian officials and officials of other republics
where it's appropriate to pursue any reports that we get, even ones that we
don't have real substantiation for," said the spokesman, Richard A. Boucher. He
did not specify which other republics had been notified.

State Department officials are also preparing to meet next week with Oleg D.
Kalugin, a former major general with the K.G.B. who says that at least three
Americans, two in the military and one from the Central Intelligence Agency,
were interrogated by Soviet intelligence officers in Vietnam in 1978.

In taking the unusual step of disputing Mr. Kalugin's contention, the agency
said two of its agents had been interrogated in Vietnam, but that one had been
released in 1973 and the other in 1975, when the Saigon Government fell to the
Communists and the country was unified.

The agency's reaction joined a growing body of official United States skepticism
to Mr. Kalugin's assertions that the Soviet Union had interrogated American
prisoners five years after the United States quit the Vietnam War in 1973.
Vietnam says it returned all American prisoners of war soon after a peace
agreement was signed in 1973.

Agent Released in 1973

The agency said one of its operatives was captured in South Vietnam in 1968,
questioned at several locations in the south and then moved to North Vietnam. He
remained in captivity in the northern capital, Hanoi, until he was released with
other American prisoners of war in 1973, the agency said.

"In at least one instance, the C.I.A. officer was questioned in Hanoi by an
individual who may have been a Soviet intelligence officer," the agency said.

Mr. Kalugin has identified the officer in charge of the interrogations as Oleg
Nechiporenko, who he has said was working in the Soviet Consulate in Mexico
City. Mr. Boucher said Mr. Kalugin had been cooperating with United States
officials to try to find Mr. Nechiporenko and set up a meeting with him.

A second intelligence officer was captured in South Vietnam in April 1975, the
agency said, taken to Hanoi and released in October of that year. During this
man's questioning by the Vietnamese, "there were some indications that Soviet
officials may have been supporting the interrogation, but none were directly
involved," the agency said in a statement.

A spokesman for the Defense Department, Bob Hall, said in December that
interviews with American prisoners who returned after the Vietnam War had turned
up no evidence of interrogation by Soviet agents.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAMESE TO GET FULBRIGHT AWARDS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 28


This year, for the first time since the end of the Vietnam War, Washington will
be offering scholarships for Vietnamese to study in the United States under the
46-year-old Fulbright fellowship program.

Fifteen scholarships have been set aside for 1992 and another 15 for 1993 as
part of the legislation that provides money for running the State Department and
the United States Information Agency. The agency, which has been allocated
$300,000 for the program, is now beginning the process of recruiting competitors
for the awards in a country with which Washington does not have diplomatic
relations.

Addie O'Connell, chief of academic exchange programs for the agency, said that
U.S.I.A. is about to begin discussions with the New York-based Institute for
International Education on how to locate and evaluate potential fellows, since
American testing programs are not available in Vietnam. Ms. O'Connell said the
agency hoped to have at least of few of the first Vietnamese Fulbright scholars
in American universities by the fall.

The Fulbright scholarship program, conceived and sponsored by Senator J. W.
Fulbright of Arkansas, came into being in 1946 as a means of using the sale of
war materiel to aquaint Americans with overseas cultures. The new program is
specifically limited to Vietnamese residents in Vietnam, and will not be open to
exiles.

Discussing Embargo

Under the legislation passed by Congress in October, it was decided that
preference would be given to Vietnamese "intending to pursue studies in
economics and commercial law."

Vietnam and the United States are still discussing steps to be taken by Hanoi
before Washington will lift a trade and investment embargo, 17 years after the
end of the war. This week, the Pentagon's new Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, Alan Ptak, is to meet Vietnamese leaders in
Hanoi to talk about resolving the cases of Americans still unaccounted for.

He will be accompanied by John Vessey, the retired army general who is a special
Presidential envoy to Vietnam, and Brig. Gen. Thomas Needham, the head of a
newly expanded office set up to coordinate all P.O.W.-M.I.A. efforts.

On Wednesday, a meeting will take place in Washington between Trinh Xuan Lang,
Hanoi's representative at the United Nations, and Deputy Assistant Secretary of
State Kenneth Quinn, who heads the American team in continuing talks with the
Vietnamese on normalizing relations between the two countries.

Ways of Training Sought

Hanoi has been looking for ways to train economists, business managers and
international lawyers in the West. American law firms are eager to establish
branches in Vietnam and have offered to assist the private United States-Vietnam
Trade Council in setting up legal training. The council hopes to set up its own
legal exchange.

The Fulbright program had been available to scholars in what was formerly South
Vietnam before the collapse of the country in 1975.

Students from unified Vietnam have been granted visas in increasing numbers for
individual programs in the United States over the last five years, according to
John McAuliff, director of the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project, a private
organization that has been helping Vietnamese scholars come to this country and
Americans go to Vietnam.

"These exchanges were done fairly quietly at first because there was a fear that
the overseas Vietnamese community would harass people from Vietnam," Mr.
McAuliff said. "But that seems to be a thing of the past. The numbers of
students coming increased dramatically in 1991."

The Vietnamese Fulbright scholarship program originated in the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, under the sponsorship of Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of
Massachusetts. Senator Kerry, a Vietnam veteran, is also chairman of the Senate
Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Will Expand Aid to Vietnam In Return for Help on the Missing

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 363 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 5


The United States pledged today to expand its humanitarian aid to Vietnam in
exchange for additional cooperation from Hanoi in resolving the fate of
Americans missing from the Vietnam War.

At the same time, the United States said it was still not prepared to lift a
17-year-old trade embargo that has crippled the Vietnamese economy and angered
American investors wanting to do business there.

The aid package was announced in Hanoi by Assistant Secretary of State Richard
H. Solomon, the highest-ranking American diplomat to visit Vietnam in six years.
Other diplomats said the aid package would provide Vietnam with at least $3
million a year in American assistance.

Mr. Solomon's trip to Vietnam came amid speculation, both in Washington and
Hanoi, that the Bush Administration would restore diplomatic relations with
Vietnam shortly after the Presidential election.

Cambodia Elections Cited

According to a dispatch from Reuters in Hanoi, Mr. Solomon ended that
speculation, saying at a news conference today that the Administration did not
envision full diplomatic relations with Vietnam until the spring of 1993, when
free elections are expected in neighboring Cambodia.

The United States is trying to keep Vietnam from meddling in the elections or in
other elements of the United Nations-brokered peace process in Cambodia.

Mr. Solomon's Vietnamese counterpart in this week's talks, Deputy Foreign
Minister Le Mai, was quoted as saying at the same Hanoi news conference that
while the talks had been constructive, the trade embargo was a "hostile policy"
against Vietnam. "We think the trade embargo is an abnormal thing in relations
between nations," he said.

Diplomats said that under today's agreement, American aid would be channeled to
educational and medical programs in Vietnam.

In return, they said, the Vietnamese Government has agreed to allow American
investigators to travel on short notice to areas of Vietnam where there are
reported sightings of missing Americans. Hanoi said today that it would also
allow Defense Department investigators greater access to Vietnamese military
archives, long a sticking point between the two nations.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Is Pressed on Vietnam Embargo

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 30


The Bush Administration is under growing pressure from American business leaders
and foreign allies to modify its embargo against Vietnam.

In response, officials say, the Government may be preparing to move to a new
phase of relations with Hanoi, which recently pledged to remove some major
obstacles to the resolution of the issue of Americans still missing from the
Vietnam War.

The sense that an American policy move is imminent is provoking protest from
some veterans organizations and groups lobbying for families of the missing. In
a letter to President Bush on March 27, the national commander of the American
Legion, Dominic D. DiFrancesco, voiced "extreme concern" that the embargo might
be lifted.

Pressure for Change

Among the organizations calling for a policy change is the President's Export
Council, a group from private business, Congress and several government
departments, which advises the White House on international trade. In a letter
to President Bush on March 4, the chairman of the council, Heinz C. Prechter,
wrote: "It is the Council's belief that the United States will lose substantial
competitive ground in Southeast Asia in the immediate future if we do not begin
some relaxation of the embargo on Vietnam."

Mr. Prechter, chairman and chief executive officer of ASC Inc., a supplier of
auto accessories who accompanied President Bush to Asia, was among about 250
people to give $100,000 or more to the Republican Party in 1988, according to
the party.

His appearance among those arguing for relaxation of the embargo indicates that
the topic is not strictly political, with Democrats urging improved relations
and Republicans using the issue of the missing to continue isolating Hanoi.

"'We cannot watch from the tailgate as other nations get their fair share of
trade in Vietnam, a big nation of 66 million people that needs to buy many
things," Mr. Prechter said. "I think this is very important to America, just as
the whole Pacific-Asia arena is."

Richard Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific, who
returned recently from Indochina, was apparently promised a higher level of
cooperation from Hanoi on the issue of the missing. The French have told the
President they will not hold off indefinitely in pressing for reintegration of
Vietnam into the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.

Virginia Foote, director of the United States-Vietnam Trade Council, a private
organization based here, said Hanoi had agreed to take five new steps.

The decision came after what some Vietnamese officials described as a "brawl" in
Hanoi between Foreign Ministry and Defense Ministry officials, with the latter
holding out against concessions to the United States, Ms. Foote said.

The steps are: allowing immediate access to the Vietnamese countryside for
checking reports of sightings of live prisoners; providing increased access to
military archives; agreeing to a 24-month schedule of excavations by
American-Vietnamese teams; accepting the need for meetings with Laos and
Cambodia to coordinate searches for Americans; and promising to turn over any
remains found whenever they are produced.

Vietnam also said that remaining political prisoners from the war years would be
freed.

Election-Year Skepticism

According to a "road map" charting milestones that must be passed before the
embargo can be lifted and diplomatic recognition extended to Hanoi, the two
sides could now be entering the second phase of a four-phase process. In this
phase, the United States would allow American companies to bid on and negotiate,
but not sign, contracts.

The Export Council letter also urges that the Administration eliminate currency
restrictions and lift the ban on the use of credit cards for American business
travel in Vietnam.

Some people who follow American policy toward the region are skeptical of
reports that the Administration or Congress can be pushed by business pressure
alone into a significant move on Vietnam in an election year.

Evelyn Colbert, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the
Pacific from 1978 to 1980, said today that before Vietnam invaded Cambodia and
set back its chances of American recognition, there was no great urgency in
Indochina policy.

"When it came to final choice, better relations with China and the completion of
the Panama Canal treaty took precedence," she said. "This is an issue on which
it is very easy to arouse emotions. Many politicians will ask, 'Why open myself
to added criticism?' "

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MARATHON;
In Vietnam, Race Sets New Course

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 35; Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 738 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Feb. 14


Le Buu was once a dedicated Vietcong guerrilla, fighting first the French, then
the Americans, whom he called "the invaders."

But today, dressed in a dapper white suit and a pinstriped shirt, he greeted his
former enemies as friendly competitors and welcomed them to the first Ho Chi
Minh City International Marathon. The race will take place Sunday, with runners
making their way through the heart of this elegant city, which residents still
call Saigon.

When an American financial consultant who does business here first suggested the
idea of a marathon, the Vietnamese were intrigued but skeptical. "They said,
'Will people come all this way to run in this heat?' " recalled the consultant,
Bruce Aitken, who lives in Hong Kong. "I brought them running magazines and
showed them there were marathons all over the world -- from Boston to Bangkok,
London, Paris. And they got excited."

Sports as Marketing

Because of its stumbling economy, Vietnam today is eager to rejoin the
international community -- to attract foreign investors and foreign loans. It
has made a number of conciliatory gestures, and this marathon, with its
surrounding silk banners, dragon dances and schoolgirls in native costumes, is
one more way to show its new attitude.

The marathon hoopla represents a real change for a country that only reopened
its doors to tourists in 1987.

With more than 250 runners from 26 countries, this is the first major
international sports event to be held in Vietnam since the fall of Saigon in
1975, said Buu, the director of the Ho Chi Minh City Sports Authority and the
deputy chairman of the marathon.

It is a race rich with meaning, as veterans from both sides of the Vietnam War
run side by side past old monuments and memories.

"I was a conscientious objector during the war, and I'm here racing with
American veterans and Vietnamese veterans," said Bill Rodgers, the 44-year-old
American who has won the New York City and Boston marathons. "I think we all
feel this marathon is a symbol -- something to bring all of us together."

Embassy Is Course Landmark

The course will take runners under the gracious shade trees of Le Duan
Boulevard, past the former United States Embassy, whose rooftop landing pad was
used to evacuate Americans and some Vietnamese when Saigon fell to the
Communists from what was then North Vietnam.

The course runs along the Saigon River into the rice paddies of the countryside,
then ends at the former Presidential Palace, now Reunification Hall.

While much of Vietnam remains impoverished, Ho Chi Minh City, with a population
of almost 4 million, is the commercial heart of the country. It has bustling
markets with stalls overflowing with fruits, vegetables, meats, pottery and even
United States Army boots, backpacks and canteens left over from the war. The
streets are filled with bicycles and motorbikes, and there are scores of discos,
bars and nightclubs, one of the most popular being Apocalypse Now, named after
the American movie about the Vietnam War.

Organizers say they expect crowds in the hundreds of thousands to line the
marathon route. The Vietnamese Government has publicized the marathon in nightly
television announcements.

Serious and 'Fun' Runners

Buu said that while soccer is the most popular sport in Vietnam and running is a
relatively new activity here, runners began to train as soon as news of the
marathon was sent to all the people's committees in the provinces. Now, 92
Vietnamese will join the international runners in the marathon on Sunday, and
600 other Vietnamese are expected to compete in "fun" races to be held on
Saturday. Buu said of his 92 countrymen, only 8 have run in a marathon before.

The race has had its problems. By international standards, the field is small,
largely because of its distant location and the lack of corporate sponsorship.

"The big problem, of course, was that American companies, which are very
generous about sponsoring sports events, were not allowed to sponsor this
marathon because it was in Vietnam," Aitken said.

Aitken believes the event will probably lose money. "But I think for the
runners, this will be fun and very, very successful," he said. "Despite our
losses, we expect to hold another one next year."

For Buu, the race will show "we let bygones be bygones. We want people to
understand our country. We want to create understanding and harmony."

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kennedy Would Have Stood by Vietnam in '65

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 399 words


To the Editor:

"How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict" by Roger Hilsman (letter, Jan. 20)
calls for elucidation.

While neither President Kennedy -- nor any other senior responsible official at
the time -- wanted to Americanize the Vietnam War, the Kennedy Administration
nevertheless made the one fateful decision in 1963 that did precisely that.

It was the decision, whose principal proponent was Assistant Secretary of State
Roger Hilsman, to encourage the coup against President Ngo Dinh Diem that took
place in early November 1963 and resulted in the the assassination of the
Vietnamese President and his brother. That decision -- though not the
assassination -- was approved by President Kennedy over the objections of Vice
President Lyndon B. Johnson, Gen. Maxwell D. Taylor, the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and John McCone, the Central Intelligence Agency director.

Ambassador Frederick E. Nolting Jr., who preceded Henry Cabot Lodge at the
Embassy in Saigon, also opposed the coup. The facts on this are on the public
record in documents released by the State Department under the Freedom of
Information Act and described in detail by the historian Ellen Hammer in the
book "A Death in November."

This decision created a political vacuum in the Republic of Vietnam that could
not possibly be filled by the United States or any other outsider. It reduced
the choices available to the Johnson Administration, which succeeded Kennedy
less than three weeks after the Saigon coup, to surrendering South Vietnam to
Hanoi or Americanizing the war. Neither the domestic nor the international
political situation made a surrender of Vietnam to the Communists a viable
option for President Johnson.

After the Bay of Pigs disaster, with which the Kennedy Administration began, and
the weakness Kennedy exhibited in his dealings with Nikita S. Khrushchev on
Berlin, surrender in Indochina would have been even less of an option for
Kennedy, had he lived. In light of the responsibility Washington assumed in
promoting the overthrow of Diem, the notion that Kennedy would or could have
walked away from Vietnam by 1965 is almost as much nonsense as Oliver Stone's
falsification of history in the movie "J.F.K."

WOLF LEHMANN
Rockville, Md., Jan. 27, 1992

The writer was deputy chief of mission of the United States Embassy in Saigon in
1974 and 1975.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Kennedy and Vietnam

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


On Oct. 11, 1963, President Kennedy issued top-secret National Security Action
Memorandum 263. In it he called for stepped-up training for South Vietnamese
forces so they could take over the duties of U.S. forces, thus permitting the
bulk of Americans to withdraw by 1965.

Based mainly on that document, Oliver Stone's "J.F.K." movie asks us to believe
one of the great historical "ifs" of the century: that if the young President
had survived through a second term, the U.S. would have been spared the ordeal
of full-scale war in Vietnam.

It is fair for Mr. Stone or anyone to take up that historical sword. But on a
matter that remains so raw for so many Americans, it is gross of him to distort
the record, and foolish to be so confident of decisions J.F.K. would have made
in circumstances he never had to face.

Stone makes swaggering assertions about mighty unknowns. First, he maintains
that J.F.K. was going to abandon South Vietnam to a Communist takeover. Second,
he tells us that right-wingers (from the F.B.I. and C.I.A. to the Mafia)
believed this, and killed the President to put Lyndon Johnson in the White House
and insure that the U.S. would stay the course in Vietnam. I am competent only
to address the first point.

To begin with, NSAM 263 was grounded in one of the few periods of genuine
optimism about the war. So J.F.K. had some basis for believing the war might be
won soon and that U.S. forces could be withdrawn -- without a Communist victory.
Put another way, J.F.K. might never have issued the directive if he had thought
it would mean losing the war.

While some officials took the directive at face value, most saw it as a Kennedy
bureaucratic scheme to regain control of the leaping American presence in South
Vietnam -- up from about 700 in 1961 to almost 17,000 in late 1963. The idea
being to keep force levels from going up, order them to go down.

Most officials also viewed the withdrawal memo as part of a White House ploy to
scare President Diem of South Vietnam into making political reforms. Without
such reforms, many officials believed, the war they thought so vital would be
lost. That is precisely how the State Department instructed the U.S. Embassy in
Saigon to understand NSAM 263.

The clarifying event was, of course, the coup against Diem and his powerful
brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu, on Nov. 1. The coup was fully supported, if not inspired,
by the U.S. in good part because of the fear that Nhu was conspiring with North
Vietnam to "neutralize" South Vietnam. In other words, the Kennedy team felt
that Diem and Nhu might be selling out to the Communists. Whatever J.F.K.'s
precise intentions, the removal and killing of Diem profoundly increased
America's political responsibility for the war.

As for Mr. Kennedy's underlying thinking about the war, that is a murky matter.
In the last weeks of his life, he gave sharply diverse signals as befits a
President trying to keep open his options, especially before an election. To CBS
he said: "In the final analysis, it is [the South Vietnamese] who have to win or
lose this struggle." Then he added: "But I don't agree with those who say we
should withdraw. That would be a great mistake. . . ." To NBC he said he
believed "the domino theory," whereby the fall of Saigon to Communism would lead
to the collapse of America's position throughout Asia.

Brushing aside these complications, some have argued that Mr. Kennedy had gained
self-confidence from successes like the Cuban missile crisis and would not have
felt the need to prove himself in Vietnam -- as did Lyndon Johnson. Soon after
the assassination, Ted Sorensen painted a more tortured picture of J.F.K.'s
thinking. "The struggle could well be, he thought, this nation's severest test
of endurance and patience," the Kennedy intimate wrote. "He was simply going to
weather it out, a nasty, untidy mess to which there was no other acceptable
solution. . . ."

These words carry great weight. They echoed the private soul-searching of
President Eisenhower and foreshadowed almost precisely the documented dilemmas
of Presidents Johnson and Nixon. These torments are not to be trifled with by
Oliver Stone, or anyone, however many men shot J.F.K. for whatever lunatic
reasons on that tragic November day.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

New Interest in Missing Servicemen May Imperil Move Toward Hanoi Ties

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1202 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Expectations that the United States and Vietnam would soon establish diplomatic
relations, more than 15 years after the end of the Indochina War, may be set
back by a resurgence of interest in one piece of unfinished business that will
not go away: the fate of missing Americans.

The revival of the issue has been spurred by a series of statements over the
last six months -- from apparently bogus reports of sightings of live Americans
to unsubstantiated information that Soviet officials interrogated Americans in
Indochina after the time Vietnam said it had freed them.

While most American officials discount such reports, their persistence has led
to the establishment of a committee in Congress that will begin to draw together
new threads of the story in hearings over the next few weeks.

This week, State Department officials are expected to meet with Maj. Gen. Oleg
D. Kalugin, the former Soviet intelligence official who reported the
interrogations in October. The former K.G.B. official, who has been interviewed
in Moscow by American Embassy officials, is expected to testify at a closed
session of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

To Interview Former Agents

The panel will begin this week to interview former intelligence agents or
servicemen who had access to secret information in the 1960's and 1970's and who
have reportedly offered to testify that more was known about the fate of missing
Americans than subsequent Administrations acknowledged.

Some members of Congress predict that the panel's findings will move the
American-Vietnam relationship into domestic politics.

Representative Robert G. Toricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, said he would
guarantee that the issue is brought up in this Presidential election year.

"The steady accumulation of information and persistent expressions of doubts
about the fate of missing Americans has now shifted the burden of proof to the
Vietnamese," said Mr. Toricelli, a member of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee, who first discussed the issue with officials in Hanoi in 1984. "If
George Bush persists in moving toward recognition now, he is putting himself at
considerable political risk. I wouldn't have said that six months ago."

In October, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said the United States was
prepared to begin talks with Hanoi to establish relations.

He said progress would depend on Vietnam's willingness to furnish information
about 2,273 Americans who are listed in records as prisoners of war or missing
in action.

On Friday, the State Department reiterated that lifting economic sanctions and
opening diplomatic relations depended on Hanoi's cooperation in making a fuller
accounting of the missing. It also said it had supplied a list of names of
missing servicemen to officials of several former Soviet republics. Richard A.
Boucher, the deputy spokesman, said Kazakhstan had offered to allow United
States officials to visit a high-security military installation at Sary-Shagan,
150 miles northwest of Alma-Ata, the Kazakh capital, to investigate a report
that Americans had been taken there from Vietnam.

Those who believe that missing Americans are still alive say progress on
accounting for has them slowed in the last year.

"In fact, 1991 was the worst year in accounting for cases," said Ann Mills
Griffiths, who heads the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia, the largest of many advocacy groups.

Referring to the Vietnamese, she said in an interview: "Did they in fact
withhold Americans after the general release in 1973? We know there are glaring
discrepancies they could resolve by giving us access to files. They could
resolve these if they had the political will to do so."

Officials say that about half the Americans unaccounted for are assumed to have
been killed. Of the rest, only a few dozen, at most, may have been left behind
or seized on clandestine operations after the American withdrawal in January
1973.

But doubts persist among those who, according to opinion polls, think more were
left behind and that some may have survived.

Most Americans close to investigations discount stories of live sightings,
saying it is inconceivable that with all the Vietnamese defectors and refugees
in the West, some incontrovertible evidence would not have been produced.

Hanoi, stung by the allegations that it held American prisoners after the 1973
withdrawal and the fall of Saigon in 1975, told a visiting American Congressman
on Friday that investigators should come and see for themselves that the charges
are not true.

"They flatly denied these, as expected," Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
Democrat of Brooklyn and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on
Asia, said in a telephone interview from Bangkok after leaving the Vietnamese
capital. "They are still hopeful of better relations with the United States. But
a lot depends on how convincing the Kalugin evidence is."

In October, General Kalugin, who said he sent interrogation teams to Vietnam
from 1975 to 1978 but did not go himself, began telling Western reporters that
he knew that Americans had been turned over to his teams for questioning before
being returned to Hanoi's custody.

In a telephone interview from Moscow, General Kalugin expanded on his
allegations that certain unidentified Americans known to possess advanced
knowledge of high technology were interrogated by his teams. The Vietnamese, he
said, lacked the expertise to interrogate these prisoners. He insisted that at
least three Americans he knew of had subsequently been freed by Hanoi and then
traced in the United States by the K.G.B in the hope that they would be useful
in the future. There are no American reports of such returnees.

On Saturday, the press agency Tass quoted a spokeswoman for foreign
intelligence, Tatyana Samolis, as saying the Russian authorities had made a
thorough study of K.G.B. files and found only one contact with an American
prisoner, in 1973. The Central Intelligence Agency on Friday also disputed
General Kalugin's assertions, saying that two of its agents had been
interrogated in Vietnam, but that one was released in 1973 and the other in
1975.

Nevertheless, General Kalugin's statements have been seized on by advocacy
groups who believe that the United States knew about such cases but kept silent
to avoid compromising intelligence.

Representative Solarz calls these accusations "wholesale McCarthyism."

"The notion that any Administration was aware that people were being held
against their will and covered it up is a monstrous accusation, which if one
thinks about it, has to be premised on the notion that there were traitors in
key positions," he said. He says the story that Americans could have been
slipped back into society, as General Kalugin says, is "extremely suspect."

The growth and influence of the advocacy groups alarm those who believe that the
only way to resolve the issue is through closer relations with the Vietnamese,
said John McAuliff, director of the U.S.-Indochina Reconciliation Project in New
York. He called the lobby for the missing "a tiger that is now out of control."

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. Oleg D. Kalugin, the former Soviet official who is
expected to testify this month at a closed session of the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. (Associated Press); Ties between the United
States and Vietnam are being affected by the fate of missing Americans in
Indochina. Last summer, copies of a photograph purporting to show three captive
American pilots were circulated, but American officials, after studying them,
decided they were fraudulent. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Fills Post on Missing From Vietnam War

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 536 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


The Bush Administration today named the nation's first Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, according to a Congressional
announcement. The nominee, Alan C. Ptak, is deputy staff director of a Senate
Select Committee set up last year to reopen investigations into the issue of
Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney announced the creation of the Pentagon post in
September, citing new information becoming available to help resolve the fate of
the 2,267 Americans still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia.

For more than a year, there has been rising public pressure to re-examine the
issue, on which progress must be made before the Administration will lift an
economic embargo on Vietnam and move toward the establishment of diplomatic
relations.

The Pentagon declined to confirm the appointment today, saying that it was
awaiting White House action.

The Senate Select Committee this week began taking depositions from Gen. Oleg D.
Kalugin, a former K.G.B. official who asserts that Soviet agents were
interrogating American prisoners in Vietnam up to five years after Hanoi said
they had all been released. The committee is also taking closed-door testimony
from former American servicemen, intelligence agents and officials who assert
that the United States had covered up information on missing Americans.

Bush Administration officials expect to meet General Kalugin, the former head of
Soviet counterintelligence, next week in Washington. The recollections of
General Kalugin, who never went to Vietnam, have been challenged by one of his
interrogators, Oleg Nechiporenko, who said he remembers talking with only one
American, in 1973 at the time of the Paris peace accord.

In an interview, Sen. John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman
of the Select Committee, said that his staff members met General Kalugin on
Wednesday "right off the plane" from Moscow. The former K.G.B. officer is in the
United States to promote a book on the failed August coup in Moscow published by
Turner Publishing, a subsidiary of Turner Broadcasting.

Bush Administration officials expect to meet General Kalugin next week in
Washington.

Senator Kerry said his committee would also meet Robert Garwood, a former Marine
private and the last American prisoner of war to return from Vietnam, in 1979.
Mr. Garwood had remained behind as a defector when 561 prisoners were returned
by Hanoi in 1973 and was later court-martialed. He has maintained that other
Americans were alive in Vietnam when he left.

"The committe has already proved that prior investigations were not complete,"
Senator Kerry said. "Evidence is now avilable and forthcoming that has not been
presented previously. No one has ever surfaced admitting Soviet involvement. Or
with information that we left anyone behind."

Senator Kerry said he hoped to gather enough information to hold public hearings
by the end of January. His committee plans to visit Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia
in February to present new evidence to the authorities there and to demonstrate
to the American committee members what the realities of searching for evidence
in Vietnam are, the Senator said.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senators Press White House on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 25


A special Senate committee investigating cases of Americans unaccounted for
since the Vietnam War has issued a subpoena to President Bush's national
security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, demanding that he turn over documents the
White House has withheld since January, Administration officials said today.

The documents being sought by the committee should, among other things, explain
why the White House closed the books on most missing-in-action cases in 1973.

The Administration officials said the White House was talking with the committee
and hoped to work out an agreement. Members of the White House staff rarely
receive subpoenas, and they are usually rejected on the grounds of Presidential
privilege.

Frustration with the White House has been reported growing in the investigating
unit, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, which hopes to wind
up by the end of this year what it describes as the most comprehensive review of
missing Americans. The issue is blocking the opening of diplomatic relations
with Hanoi.

What the Senate Wants

The committee has made two detailed requests for information about the handling
of the issue in the mid-1970's, when Mr. Scowcroft was also national security
adviser. George Bush was then Director of Central Intelligence.

According to copies of those requests, the committee is particularly interested
in the decision-making process that led to an announcement in April 1973 that
the United States no longer believed Americans were in captivity in Indochina.
By then, the last American combat troops had been withdrawn from Vietnam and
Hanoi had told Washington that it had released or accounted for all prisoners.

That public position, and on what evidence it was formed, is central to the
renewed debate. The Senate committee has heard testimony in closed and open
sessions that strongly suggests that officials knew in 1973 of credible reports
of Americans still alive in Vietnam and Laos, but chose to put aside that
information in an effort to make a clean break with the war.

Talking to Russia

The confrontation between the Senate committee and the White House comes as a
new United States-Russia commission prepares for talks in Moscow on Thursday on
information now available about Americans missing in World War II, the Korean
War and the Vietnam War. The White House announced the formation of the
commission on Friday.

The commission, which includes officials from the Defense Department, State
Department and Congress, is headed by Malcolm Toon, who was Ambassador to the
Soviet Union from 1976 to 1979. A Russian military officer, Col. Gen. Dmitri
Volkogonov, will lead the Russian side.

Senators John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Bob Smith, Republican of
New Hampshire, the chairman and the vice chairman of the Senate committee, are
also members of the commission. They went to Moscow in February to lay the
groundwork and are not part of this week's delegation. They plan a trip to
Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia beginning on April 17.

The persistent belief that a number of Americans might have been left in Vietnam
has fueled a vociferous and dedicated lobby of families of missing service
personnel who have continued to demand a fuller accounting. Several earlier
investigations have not convinced this group that the whole story of the missing
has been told.

Dolores Apodaca Alfond, chairwoman of the National Alliance of Families, based
in Seattle, described in an interview today how her family was drawn into action
on the issue by the case of her missing brother, Maj. Victor J. Apodaca.

A graduate of the Air Force Academy who spoke Russian, Major Apodaca was shot
down over Vietnam in 1967. He was first listed as "possible P.O.W.," she said,
and a former serviceman who monitored Vietnamese radio broadcasts told her he
was certain that her brother had been taken to Moscow as a prisoner.

In 1989, her family received two boxes of remains and effects turned over by the
Vietnamese as possibly his. The bones were found to be those of animals, she
said.

A few weeks ago, Mrs. Alfond said, she was suddenly advised that her brother was
now considered a "discrepancy case," meaning that the United States had
questions about his fate that might be resolved in Vietnam. She does not know
why there is new interest in his fate.

"Families don't believe anyone in the Government any more," she said.

Plea for Documents

Senator Kerry, a Vietnam veteran and a critic of the war who hoped as chairman
of the committee to put the issue to rest, told reporters in February that a few
months of preliminary research had convinced him that there was far more
information to be uncovered than he had expected.

He said it was hard to understand how repeated earlier investigations, "dubbed
the highest national priority, could leave so many stones unturned."

The committee has been able to obtain documents from the Pentagon, where a
spokeswoman said today that officials were in daily contact with the committee's
staff.

Senator John S. McCain, Republican of Arizona and a member of the select
committee, introduced a provision in the 1992-93 defense budget that mandates
cooperation with the Senate in turning over all requested files.

A Pentagon official, Alan Ptak, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, who has overall responsibility for policy on the issue
since his position was created early this year, is now in Moscow as part of the
American-Russian commission.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Credible Search for M.I.A.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 492 words


The Bush Administration may have buried the "Vietnam syndrome" in Kuwait, but
another legacy of the Vietnam War keeps corroding public confidence in
government: the M.I.A.'s. There is little responsible support for the idea that
Americans missing in action are still being held against their will in
Indochina. Yet polls show that a majority of Americans thinks they are.

That popular view is now being reinforced by sensational allegations from Gen.
Oleg Kalugin, a former top K.G.B. official. General Kalugin claims that U.S.
prisoners of war were interrogated by K.G.B. agents inside the Soviet Union
years after Hanoi supposedly returned all living prisoners to the United States.
He'll meet with Administration officials this week.

The general's story has credibility problems but warrants careful examination.
That's what it is now likely to get, thanks to the new Senate Select Committee
on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, headed by John Kerry of Massachusetts and Robert Smith
of New Hampshire, both Vietnam veterans. The committee also includes Senator
John McCain, a former P.O.W. Staff members have already taken sworn depositions
from the general.

More than a thousand Americans remain officially listed as missing in action.
Vietnam insists that it is concealing no Americans or remains. The Pentagon
believes no live Americans are being held, but presses Hanoi for information on
about 100 so-called discrepancy cases, where there is reason to suspect Vietnam
might have further information.

But the Pentagon has a credibility problem. In the first years after the war, it
did a poor job of publicizing the search for M.I.A.'s, leaving many affected
families unconvinced that everything possible was being done.

Those feelings of uncertainty were further inflamed by a misguided U.S.
diplomatic policy of isolating and demonizing Vietnam. Conspiracy theorists
flourished, arguing that the Pentagon abandoned the M.I.A. search for reasons of
its own convenience and has subsequently worked to cover up that abandonment.

The Senate Select Committee plans a yearlong investigation, interviewing
Americans, Indochinese and others who have been involved one way or another in
the search process. It may seek further information from Moscow, and plans a
trip next month to Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia during which senators can assess
the cooperativeness of those governments.

Every war leaves behind unknown soldiers, missing remains and other mysteries.
In fact, there are far more unaccounted-for Vietnamese soldiers and civilians
than American. That does not diminish the frustrations felt by America's M.I.A.
families. They deserve a conscientious and compassionate response.

By doing its job well, the committee can reduce the vulnerability of those
families to unscrupulous con artists. And it can help heal a national wound that
still festers almost 20 years after President Nixon ordered the last U.S. troops
out of Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senators Say Russians Agree to Help on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 544 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 19


Russian intelligence agencies with extensive information on Soviet activities in
Indochina during the Vietnam War have agreed to help a United States Senate
committee investigate cases of missing American servicemen, committee leaders
said today.

For the first time, files and other documents on American prisoners and
deserters collected by the Soviet Union beginning in the 1940's will be turned
over to American investigators by the Russian foreign intelligence service and
other organizations, according to Senator John Kerry and Senator Robert C.
Smith, chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

The lawmakers spoke at a news conference after a five-day trip to Moscow. During
that time, they met a number of officials as well as former Russian servicemen
who said they had served in Vietnam, operating anti-aircraft guns and missiles,
contrary to assertions by the Hanoi Government that no foreign troops fought on
its side.

Mr. Kerry said the son of a Soviet Vietnam veteran told them that his late
father had said an American who was shot down and survived had been killed by
Russian gunners so their presence could remain secret. Russian officials are now
looking for the dogtags and helmet of a dead American, which were reportedly
brought back as souvenirs, the Senators said.

Senator Kerry, a Democrat from Massachusetts, said that with new information
provided by the Russians, it may be possible to close hundreds of cases among
thousands of Americans still listed as missing from World War II and the Korean
War, and smaller numbers from the Vietnam era. More than 2,200 servicemen are
still listed as unaccounted for in Indochina.

In the first of a series of moves designed to assist the Senate committee's
efforts to pry information out of Vietnam on 80 to 100 cases that Americans
believe can be closed, the Russians gave the Senators lists of Soviet agents
based there and in Laos between 1973, when American troops withdrew from
Indochina, and 1980, after the last American prisoners of war were returned.

Mr. Kerry said Vice President Aleksander Rutskoi of Russia told them he would
send a special envoy to Vietnam to assist a fact-finding trip there by the
committee in mid-April.

Senator Smith, a Republican from New Hampshire, said that Russian officers have
advertised in their army newspaper for information from all former Soviet
republics on cases of American servicemen taken prisoner, or who came to the
Soviet Union for other reasons during the war.

"It was obvious to us," Mr. Kerry said, "that at the highest levels of
government, their officials were only just discovering this information
themselves."

In Moscow, the Americans met with Oleg D. Kalugin, the retired K.G.B. general
who directed intelligence operations in Vietnam and who has insisted that
Americans were interrogated there as late as 1978. They also met Oleg
Nechiporenko, a former K.G.B. interrogator who challenged General Kalugin's
account.

The Senators said they had found no documentary evidence that Americans had been
brought to the Soviet Union as prisoners from Vietnam, but that there were
suggestions that some deserters may have attempted to settle in the country to
start new lives.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Chef From Vietnam Is Spreading the Word Of a Cool, Vivid Cuisine

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2927 words


TWO years ago, Binh Duong, who fled Vietnam in 1975 as Saigon fell, returned for
a visit during Tet, the Lunar New Year. "It was the first time I had heard the
firecrackers again and, oh, man, it made me so happy," he said.

Mr. Duong, who owns Truc Orient Express, a restaurant in Hartford, and La Truc
Restaurant in Boca Raton, Fla., explained that during the war, the Government
had forbidden New Year firecrackers because they could be mistaken for gunfire.
"They still don't celebrate like before, but slowly it's getting bigger and
bigger," he said.

While many people associate the Lunar New Year, which began yesterday, with
China, it is celebrated in other parts of East and Southeast Asia, and in Asian
communities abroad. Festivities last for a week, sometimes longer; this is the
Year of the Monkey in the 12-year cycle.

For Mr. Duong, the New Year is the perfect opportunity to spread the gospel of
Vietnamese food. He is convinced that its balanced, delicate, clean mingling of
flavors -- aromatic, spicy, tart and sweet -- will appeal to Americans searching
for a fresh, light cooking. His recent book, "The Simple Art of Vietnamese
Cooking" (Prentice Hall Press, 1991; $30), written with Marcia Kiesel, documents
the cuisine as it is served in Vietnam, and makes the case for an increased
popularity here.

It appears many Americans are beginning to get the message. In Chicago, New
Orleans, Dallas, San Francisco, Washington, Houston and Atlanta, where
Vietnamese immigrants have settled, more and more Vietnamese restaurants are
opening. Even in New York, where Vietnamese restaurants have scarcely made a
dent, ingredients are becoming increasingly available.

Around the country, a growing network of Asian farmers is cultivating some of
the ingredients essential to Vietnamese cuisine, like tiny (and fiery) bird
chilies, kaffir lime leaves, lemon grass and rau ram. Some, like fresh lemon
grass, have started showing up in supermarkets just as fresh ginger did a decade
or so ago.

In the New Orleans area, a thriving Vietnamese community of around 6,000 people
depends on the immigrant farmers who raise many of the herbs and vegetables on
compact terraces at the edges of canals. Early on Saturday mornings there is a
bustling market in the courtyard of an apartment complex nearby.

Last Saturday, the stands were piled high with lemon grass, mint, chrysanthemum,
ngo gai (a strong type of coriander), freshly cut spring ginger and water
spinach, among other fresh ingredients. To one side, a fish market was doing a
brisk business and there were several grocery stores well stocked with staples
and freshly cooked snacks.

Virtually all the shoppers were Asian, suggesting that the market has yet to be
discovered by the city's non-Asian chefs and cooks. Most vendors were also
selling squares or cylinders of sweet rice wrapped in banana leaves and special
candy for the New Year.

Mr. Duong said that in Vietnam, the New Year is essentially a children's
holiday. Families buy gifts for the children and prepare treats and snacks like
candied melon seeds, coconut candy and the sweet rice wrapped in banana leaves.
For two days before the holiday, food markets are open around the clock.

Although the Vietnamese, unlike the Chinese, have relatively few symbolic foods
for the New Year, many appropriately festive dishes are served that are typical
of the cuisine.

Like other cuisines of Southeast Asia, Vietnamese cooking is highly perfumed
with herbs like purple-tinged basil, coriander and citric-tasting lemon grass.
Rau ram, which looks a little like tarragon and has a minty pungency, is often
used with chicken. The tart leaves of kaffir limes, tiny hot bird chilies and
sharply aromatic ginger are some other essentials. Curry powder and rich coconut
milk are also used. Thin, dark, intensely briny nuoc mam, a fermented fish
sauce, is the ubiquitous condiment and seasoning.

The influence of both China and India are evident in many dishes. In the colder
northern part of the country the food is heavier, and includes dumplings and
noodles that are often made from rice flour. Spices like cinnamon and star anise
are used in place of some of the fresh herbs of the more tropical south.

The Vietnamese kitchen is equipped with a charcoal grill, which should endear it
to Americans, plus a wok and a steamer for rice. A mortar and pestle (or food
processor) is essential for making seasoning mixtures. There are special graters
for coconut and special skillets fitted with little cuplike depressions for
making silver dollar pancakes.

At a typical meal, all the food is placed on the table at one time, and diners
help themselves. A platter of lettuce, fresh herbs like coriander and basil,
round Vietnamese rice papers and fruit, collectively called table salad, amounts
to an edible centerpiece. The lettuce leaves and rice papers are combined with
sprigs of herbs and used for wrapping finger foods like spring rolls.

Table salad should contain soft leaves, like Boston lettuce. The iceberg lettuce
used in many Vietnamese restaurants here is a travesty, Mr. Duong said.

On the other hand, French bread on the table is correct. In Vietnam, French
bread is served with every meal. "I was amazed to see baguettes everywhere sold
fresh daily, even in tiny out-of-the-way villages," said Ms. Kiesel, his
co-author, who visited Vietnam with him two years ago. Some dishes even call for
butter, reflecting the influence of nearly 100 years of French occupation.

All the grocery stores in the Vietnamese community of New Orleans carry French
bread. And along with delicate, freshly made rice pancakes filled with herbs and
bits of pork, there were stands selling roast pork, scallion and herb sandwiches
on hero rolls.

One recent morning, Mr. Duong, a wiry 30-year-old with intense eyes and an
engaging smile, was in the kitchen of his restaurant in Hartford experimenting
with dishes to serve for the New Year. Among them were a spicy golden curry soup
with grilled lobster, a salad with tender grilled duck, steamed curried shrimp
with basil, marinated skewered beef wrapped in leaves of the la-lot vine and
grilled, miniature crab cakes with a vibrant red pepper sauce and silver dollar
cakes topped with shrimp.

Like other Vietnamese who came to the United States after the war, Mr. Duong
followed an established immigrant pattern and found opportunity in the kitchen.
His mother taught him to cook over the objections of his father.

"In my country it is the opposite of here," he said. "Only the woman is the
chef. My father never wanted me to be in the kitchen cooking with my mother."

Mr. Duong is the eighth of 11 children, nine of whom have settled in the United
States. His mother, Buon Thi Tran, still lives in Nha Trang near Cam Ranh Bay
with two of his sisters. Mr. Duong has visited her on several occasions since
the war. His father, Thanh Van Duong, who died when Mr. Duong was 8, was an
engineer.

Some of the family members who were able to escape as the Communists closed in
settled in Connecticut. There Mr. Duong completed high school but refused a
college scholarship, choosing instead to be a chef. "I was not interested in
studying computer programming for four years," he said. "I was watching Jacques
Pepin on TV and that did it."

With the flavors and traditions of his country's food imprinted on his taste
buds, he went to the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y. It was a
colossal mismatch. He was too impatient with the pace, so he quit and went to
work for his sister, Trai, who owns Truc Orient Express in Stockbridge, Mass.
She also owned the Truc Orient Express in Hartford before allowing the
enterprising Mr. Duong to buy it three years ago. Truc means bamboo in
Vietnamese.

Mr. Duong's food is full of intense and intriguing flavors. "I'm a very good
cook," he said with a bit of verbal swagger.

He also behaves like a Jewish mother. "What do you want to eat?" he asked as
soon as he had said hello to a visitor, and disappeared into the kitchen to fix
some cups of inky Vietnamese coffee sweetened with condensed milk, then some
crunchy little silver dollar pancakes and a steaming restorative bowl of broth
with rice noodles.

Sensitive to eating trends in America, Mr. Duong has altered some recipes. For
example, he replaced highly saturated coconut milk in a lobstery curry soup
recipe with a kind of homemade soybean milk, but he cautioned that when
substitutions are made they should not distort a dish. As it is, the cuisine
features a number of eggless pancakes made simply of rice flour and water tinted
yellow with turmeric.

"Americans knew nothing about Vietnamese food before 1975," Mr. Duong said, so
the restaurants that opened wanted to make it a little familiar. They included a
number of Chinese dishes on their menus and, to appeal to the American palate,
often made the food too sweet.

"They think they have to do that for Americans, but I don't agree," he said.
"You make it the right way and they like it. I want to serve the kind of food
that will please a Vietnamese."

From Vietnam, a Mix of the Aromatic, Spicy, Tart and Sweet



Steamed Shrimp Curry (Adapted from Binh Duong)
Total time: 40 minutes

1shallot, peeled and minced
1 fresh hot bird chili, minced, or 1 teaspoon minced jalapeno pepper
 1/2 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sugar
1 teaspoon curry powder
 1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric
3 tablespoons unsweetened coconut milk
24 large shrimp, peeled and de-veined (about 3/4 pound)
24 small basil leaves, preferably Thai basil.

 1. Combine the shallot, chili, salt, sugar, curry powder and turmeric in a
mortar or a food processor and process to make a paste. In a large, shallow bowl
mix the spice paste with the coconut milk. Add the shrimp, coating them well
with the spice mixture. Allow them to marinate 20 minutes at room temperature.

2. Heat water in a saucepan, a wok or the bottom of a steamer. Place the shrimp
in a single layer in a metal or bamboo steamer basket, cover and steam just
until the shrimp turn pink, three to five minutes.

3. Remove the shrimp and arrange them on a plate, placing a basil leaf on each
one. Serve hot.

Yield: 4 to 6 appetizer servings.

Skewered Beef Grilled
In La-lot Leaves (Adapted from "The Simple Art of Vietnamese Cooking" by Binh
Duong and Marcia Kiesel)
Total time: 20 minutes, plus at least 2 hours for marinating

 1/2 pound eye round of beef, cut against the grain into 30 very thin slices
1 teaspoon ground dried lemon grass
4 cloves garlic, minced
2 tablespoons sugar
2 tablespoons soy sauce
2 tablespoons medium-dry sherry, like amontillado
 1/2 teaspoon vegetable oil
 1/4 teaspoon oriental sesame oil
 1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
30 la-lot, shiso or fresh grape leaves.

 1. In a medium-size bowl combine the beef with all the other ingredients except
the leaves. Mix well, cover and marinate at room temperature for two hours, or
in the refrigerator overnight.

2. Soak six eight-inch bamboo skewers in water.

3. Wrap each piece of beef in one of the leaves. Fold the ends of the leaf over
the beef, then roll to form a bundle about the size of a wine cork. Thread five
bundles close together on each skewer.

4. Preheat a grill or broiler. Grill or broil the skewers about three minutes on
each side, until crisp and brown. Serve at once.

Yield: 6 servings.

NOTE: Have the butcher slice the meat. Or if you want to slice it yourself,
first freeze the meat about an hour, until it is firm but not frozen solid.

Grilled Lobster Curry Soup (Adapted from Binh Duong)
Total time: 1 1/2 hours, plus at least 4 hours for soaking

 1/2 cup dried soybeans
2 1 1/2-pound lobsters, split
2 cloves garlic, minced
3 stalks fresh lemon grass, cut in one-inch pieces
3 bay leaves, crumbled
1 small leek, chopped
 1/8 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper
3 small fresh hot bird chilies, chopped, or one jalapeno pepper, chopped
1 teaspoon salt
2 teaspoons curry powder
1 tablespoon sugar
1 tablespoon fish sauce (nuoc mam)
1 tablespoon unsalted butter
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
8 small shallots, peeled
2 tablespoons unsalted roasted peanuts
4 sprigs fresh coriander
4 sprigs rau ram herb (or mint or basil).

 1. Place the soybeans in a bowl, cover with water to a depth of one inch and
allow to soak at least four hours or overnight.

2. Remove the claws and tail from the lobster and set aside. Cut the body into
three pieces and place them in a bowl. Mix the garlic, lemon grass, bay leaves,
leek, white pepper, chilis, salt, curry powder, sugar and fish sauce together
and season the pieces of lobster body with this mixture. Refrigerate for five to
10 minutes.

3. Meanwhile, drain the soybeans and place them in a blender with four cups of
cold water. Puree them at high speed for one minute, then strain through a fine
sieve into a two-quart bowl, reserving the liquid. Place the solids in another
bowl. Measure the drained liquid and calculate how much additional liquid will
be needed to make five cups. Add this amount of cold water, 1 1/2 to 2 cups, to
the solids. Stir and strain them through the sieve, adding to the original bowl
of liquid. Strain all the liquid one more time and reserve.

4. Heat the butter and one tablespoon of the oil in a heavy four-quart saucepan.
Add the pieces of lobster body along with the seasoning mixture and cook,
stirring, for one minute. Pour in the soybean liquid, bring it to a simmer and
cook over low heat for 20 minutes.

5. In a separate saucepan cook the shallots for two minutes in boiling water,
drain, and place them in a three- to four-quart saucepan.

6. Strain the lobster mixture into the saucepan with the shallots and add the
peanuts.

7. Preheat a grill or broiler. Crack the lobster claws. Oil the pieces of
lobster claw and tail with the remaining tablespoon of oil and grill or broil
these lobster pieces until just cooked, 10 to 12 minutes. Remove the lobster
meat from the shells and add it to the soup.

8. To serve, reheat the soup and ladle into shallow soup plates, dividing the
pieces of lobster among the plates. Garnish each serving with coriander and rau
ram leaves stripped from their stems.

Yield: 8 servings.

Duck Salad (Adapted from Binh Duong)
Total time: 20 minutes, plus at least 3 hours for marinating

6 cloves garlic
1 tablespoon sugar
1 tablespoon fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
1 tablespoon medium-dry sherry, like amontillado
1 teaspoon ground dried lemon grass
 1/3 cup olive oil or vegetable oil
breast meat of a four- to five-pound duck (not moulard)
 1/4 teaspoon finely minced fresh dill
 1/2 teaspoon hot chili oil
 1/4 cup red wine vinegar
salt to taste
8 cups mixed salad greens, rinsed and dried
1 small red onion, peeled and sliced thin.

 1. Mince five cloves of the garlic and combine with the sugar, fish sauce, 1/4
teaspoon of the black pepper, sherry, lemon grass powder and two tablespoons of
the oil. Place the duck breast into this mixture, cover and marinate in the
refrigerator for three hours or overnight. The skin of the duck can be removed
before marinating if desired.

2. Preheat a grill or broiler. Mince the remaining garlic and combine it with
the dill, chili oil, remaining pepper, vinegar and remaining oil. Beat together
and season with salt.

3. Mix the salad greens with the red onion and toss with the dressing.

4. Grill or broil the duck for about five minutes on each side, to medium or
medium-rare. Slice the duck 1/4 inch thick, at an angle. Arrange the tossed
salad on a serving platter or on four individual plates and arrange the slices
of duck on top. Serve at once.

Yield: 4 servings.

Finding the Ingredients

THE number of Vietnamese food shops is on the increase in many parts of the
country.

In addition, shops and mail-order companies that specialize in Asian ingredients
(many of them are Thai) are excellent sources for the ingredients necessary in
Vietnamese cooking. The fresh produce stands in most Chinatowns carry a number
of the essential ingredients, like lemon grass, water spinach, cilantro, Thai
basil and chives.

In Manhattan, POO PING 81 Bayard Street (near Mott Street) is one of the best
sources for ingredients -- especially condiments, but also some fresh herbs. The
owner, Wanne Thiemmedh, speaks excellent English and is extremely helpful; (212)
349-7662.

BANGKOK MARKET 180 Mosco Street (off Mott Street) has a good supply of fresh
herbs, plus most of the grocery ingredients; (212) 732-4637.

KAM MAN 200 Canal Street (near Mulberry Street) is something of an Asian
supermarket, for groceries and cooking utensils; (212) 571-0330.

ADRIANA'S BAZAAR 2152 Broadway (75th Street) is a good source for condiments and
seasoning ingredients; (212) 877-5757.

In the Hartford area, some recommended markets are:

SAI-GON MARKET 1934 Park Street, Hartford, (203) 232-7600; and A DONG ORIENTAL
GIFT AND GROCERY 158 Shield Street, West Hartford, (203) 953-8903.

VIETNAM HOUSE 242 Farmington Avenue, Hartford (06105), sells mail-order as well
as retail; (203) 524-0010.

Other mail-order sources around the country include:

VIETNAM IMPORTS 922 West Broad Street, Route 7, Falls Church, Va. 22046; (703)
534-9441.

ORIENTAL FOOD MARKET AND COOKING SCHOOL 2801 West Howard Street, Chicago 60645;
(312) 274-2826.

GLOBAL VILLAGE COOKING SCHOOL Box 51115, Seattle 98115; (800) 745-5226.

NAME: Binh Duong

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: New Year's dishes at Truc Orient Express in Hartford. At a
typical Vietnamese meal, all the food is placed on the table, and diners help
themselves.; "I want to serve the kind of food that will please a Vietnamese,"
said Binh Duong, Truc's owner. (Photographs by Steve Miller for The New York
Times); On Saturdays, a bustling Vietnamese market appears in the courtyard of
an apartment complex outside New Orleans. (Matt Anderson for The New York Times)
(pg. C6)

Drawing (pg. C1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
U.S. Lifts Ban On Travel To Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 275 words


The United States has lifted the ban on American travel to Vietnam. The easing
of a decades-old trade embargo clears the way for American travel agents to
arrange individual and group tours there. The Administration also lifted its
prohibition on American travel companies booking hotel accommodations, local
tours or transportation for Vietnamese visiting the United States..

One of the first cruise companies to offer visits to Vietnam to Americans,
following the lifting of restrictions, is Salen Lindblad Cruising. The company
had been marketing its program mainly in Britain.

One of three itineraries offered by Salen Lindblad aboard the Caledonia Star is
scheduled to leave Bali on Jan. 9. The ship is bound for Ho Chi Minh City,
calling at Lombok, Indonesia, and other islands on the way, during a 16-day
voyage. On Jan. 24, an 11-day cruise will depart from Ho Chi Minh City for Hong
Kong, calling at several Vietnamese ports including Da Nang and Haiphong, the
port for Hanoi. A 16-day trip will depart Hong Kong on Feb. 3, destined for
Singapore by way of Vietnamese ports, Hanoi, Da Nang and Ho Chi Minh City among
them.

Fares begin at $3,850 a person for the 11-day cruise. The lowest fare for the
16-day voyages is $4,640. Charges do not include air fare from the United
States. Salen Lindblad Cruising, (203) 967-2900 or (800) 223-5688, is named for
Lars-Eric Lindblad, one of the pioneers of adventure cruises. His company,
Lindblad Travel, ceased operations two years ago, partly because of fines and
legal fees that resulted when the United States Government brought action
against it for selling tours to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

This Time, He Came in Peace

BYLINE: By Michael Norman;  Michael Norman, who served in Vietnam with the
Marine Corps, teaches journalism at New York University and is the author of
"These Good Men," a book about war and friendship.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words



NO LONGER ENEMIES, NOT YET FRIENDS
An American Soldier Returns to Vietnam.
By Frederick Downs.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $22.95.

PERHAPS, at last, it is over. If a man like Frederick Downs -- a former United
States Army officer who lost his left arm to a Vietcong land mine in 1968, a man
who until four years ago still hated his old enemy, a self-proclaimed patriot
ever willing to fight for the flag -- if such a man can hand his colicky young
daughter to a former North Vietnamese battlefield surgeon, then watch with
wonder while this Communist rocks the child and soothes her with Vietnamese
lullabies, then the war that never seems to end surely must be over.

A number of veterans of the war in Vietnam have taken up the pen in the last few
years, but none seem to have come as far morally -- and perhaps politically --
as Frederick Downs. Make no mistake, he is still a Republican with war trophies
on his walls, but now he is a man committed to a humanitarian role. And the
sweet irony is that it was his old enemy that gave him back his humanity.

"No Longer Enemies, Not Yet Friends" is an account of the five trips Mr. Downs
made to Vietnam in 1987 and 1988 as part of the Reagan Administration's effort
to prod the Vietnamese Government into helping to account for the roughly 2,400
American servicemen still missing in action in Indochina. Under the direction of
a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., Mr.
Downs, who is the director of prosthetics for the Veterans Administration, was
assigned to a team whose mission it was to assess Vietnam's medical needs --
everything from artificial limbs to aid for blind children.

It is unfortunate that Mr. Downs is not a better writer. His prose can be
wooden, his reporting perfunctory, his vision too often shallow. This is his
third book, and he should have been made to shape his material. But matters of
language and structure aside, this is a remarkable story because in its approach
and its unaffected voice, it illustrates the capacity of a man who had been
savaged by battle to renew himself. And the venue in which this takes place is
in the very heart of what to Mr. Downs is hostile territory: Hanoi, the enemy
capital.

Almost from his first moments in the city, Mr. Downs began to discover that it
was not faceless ciphers he faced and has been harboring a bitter hatred for all
these years. Soon, he started to connect with people: his opposite numbers at
the negotiating table, minor officials, doctors, patients, shopkeepers, drivers
and so on. He watches them exercise in the park or play with their children or
nurse a warm beer over a long conversation late into the night.

As we follow Mr. Downs through his sessions in the diplomatic hall or his
strolls through the city or his visits to country clinics and hospitals, we
watch him slowly surrender his old intractable notions and prejudices until at
last he comes to see his enemy -- a foe that took his arm and with it some of
his dignity -- not just as three-dimensional, but, in fact, as an extension of
himself.

ALONG the way, we also get a picture of the desperate state of Hanoi, the
capital of our old nemesis. Mr. Downs tells us it is a place so poor that
cosmetics are sold by the smear from doorways and ball-point pens are refilled
rather than thrown away. Maids in the Government guest house shave soap bars
when they clean the rooms and pinch the shavings to wash their family's laundry.
Vietnam, he tells us, is a place of rampant polio and high infant and maternal
mortality. Twenty percent of children's deaths are attributable to diarrhea;
their mothers believe the cure is to starve them or feed them crushed dried
grasshoppers. Nothing works -- not electrical plants, not cars, not machinery to
make artificial limbs. A California eye bank donated 15 eyes to a Hanoi clinic
for cornea transplants, but the operations were a disaster because the
Vietnamese doctors did not have surgical gloves, and the infections that
resulted left 12 of the patients as blind as before.

Near the end of the book, one of the Vietnamese negotiators, Dr. Bui Tung, is
invited to the United States to attend a meeting of military orthopedic
surgeons. During his visit, this former army surgeon spends a good deal of time
in the Downs home in Maryland. And it is during one of these visits that he
gently walks the kitchen floor with Mr. Downs's crying daughter, Abigail, in his
arms.

"I watched this tableau from the doorway, measuring it against scenes from my
past," Mr. Downs writes. "I knew that if our countries went to war the next day,
both Tung and I would dutifully become enemies again. . . . The difference would
be, now that I knew him, I would not take any joy in his death, only sorrow at
the ways of man."

This is the way with enemies, this is the way with friends.



SEARCH-AND-ENJOY

The trip through the Vietnamese countryside was something I never tired of.
People were working everywhere: in the fields, along the road, hoeing, chopping
wood, fishing, herding ducks, planting, making bricks, herding buffalo and cows.

The villages we drove by on these back roads always reminded me of the war.
Villages had always meant Vietnam to me. During the war, my platoon and I lived
next to villages and patrolled through them. In contested territory I had burned
villages as part of search-and-destroy operations, searched through the
"hootches" looking for contraband, made prisoners of anyone in the villages I
suspected of being a bad guy, destroyed the stored rice we found if we thought
it was being used to support the enemy. There were times we had fired into the
villages because the enemy was there among the people. All of these actions were
part of our job and we were rewarded for doing it well.

In fact, in those days I never thought of the villages as anything other than a
cluster of meaningless primitive straw and mud huts. I knew people lived in the
"hootches," but I never thought of them as homes. I never thought of myself as
destroying someone's home.

I did not realize or care that the villages were the history, the guts and the
backbone of Vietnam. -- From "No Longer Enemies, Not Yet Friends."

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
B.P. in Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 12


The British Petroleum Company said it had signed a 30-year venture agreement to
produce and market lubricants in Vietnam. B.P. signed the agreement on the $28
million project with Petrolimex, the Vietnamese state-run fuel and lubricants
company. The companies will build Vietnam's largest and first modern lubricant
and grease plant, with an annual production of 350,000 barrels, south of Ho Chi
Minh City, formerly Saigon. Vietnam now consumes 490,000 barrels of oil
lubricants a year, but B.P. expects this to grow to 700,000 barrels. Vietnam has
depended on imported Soviet lubricants.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kennedy Would Have Stood by Vietnam in '65;
Feared China's Role

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 985 words


To the Editor:

Further to the discussion raised by the Oliver Stone movie "J.F.K.":

No one can be confident what a President who died in November 1963 would have
done in the quite particular circumstances of July 1965. Moreover, there is
bound to be something self-serving as well as unscientific in any such
projection. I limit myself to four statements of fact.

* Representative John F. Kennedy's view of Asia, June 1952-February 1961: Down
to the autumn of 1951, Kennedy's view of the world was narrowly focused on
Stalin's threat to Western Europe. He did not at first vote for President
Truman's Point Four. A trip through the Middle East and Asia late in 1951
changed his perspective. In the House on June 28, 1952, he said this about Asia:

"Mr. Chairman, last year when this bill was before the House, I offered a motion
to cut technical assistance. But this fall I had an opportunity to visit
Southeast Asia, and I think we would be making a tremendous mistake to cut this
money out of the bill. Here is an area, Asia, where the Communists are
attempting to seize control . . . where the tide of events has been moving
against us. The Communists have a chance of seizing all of Asia in the next five
or six years."

In that period, he also argued for Vietnamese independence from the French and
economic and military aid for independent South Vietnam.

* President Kennedy's view of Vietnam in July 1961: In the summer of 1961, Gen.
Maxwell D. Taylor and I were working with the President on this matter. Our
joint memorandum to the President dated Aug. 4 said:

"As we understand your position: you would wish to see every avenue of diplomacy
exhausted before we accept the necessity for either positioning United States
forces on the Southeast Asian mainland or fighting there; you would wish to see
the possibilities of economic assistance fully exploited to strengthen the
Southeast Asian position; you would wish to see indigenous forces used to the
maximum if fighting should occur; and that should we have to fight, we should
use air and sea power to the maximum and engage minimum United States forces on
the Southeast Asian mainland."

On this basis the Taylor mission went to Southeast Asia in October.

* President Kennedy's view of Asia in December 1961: The following passage from
my book "The Diffusion of Power" (1972) sets out President Kennedy's view of
Southeast Asia in relation to Asia as a whole, the only time I heard him make
such a statement in private:

"He said if we walked away from Southeast Asia, the Communist takeover would
produce a debate in the United States more acute than that over the loss of
China. Unlike Truman with China or Eisenhower in 1954, he would be violating a
treaty commitment to the area. The upshot would be a rise and convergence of
left- and right-wing isolationism that could affect commitments in Europe as
well as in Asia. Under these circumstances, Khrushchev and Mao could not refrain
from acting to exploit the apparent shift in the balance of power. If Burma
fell, Chinese power would be on the Indian frontier: the stability of all of
Asia, not merely Southeast Asia, was involved. When the Communist leaders had
moved -- after they were committed -- the United States would then react. We
would come plunging back to retrieve the situation. And a much more dangerous
crisis would result, quite possibly a nuclear crisis."

* President Kennedy's view of Vietnam and Asia, September-November 1963: On
Sept. 2, 1963, in an interview with Walter Cronkite:

" . . . in the final analysis it is the people and the government" -- of South
Vietnam -- "itself who have to win or lose this struggle. All we can do is help,
and we are making it very clear, but I don't agree with those who say we should
withdraw. That would be a great mistake.

"We took all this -- made this effort to defend Europe. Now Europe is quite
secure. We have to participate -- we may not like it -- in the defense of Asia."

On Sept. 9, 1963, questioned by David Brinkley:

Q. "Mr. President, have you had any reason to doubt this so-called "domino
theory," that if South Vietnam falls, the rest of Southeast Asia will go behind
it?"

A. "No I believe it. I believe it. I think that the struggle is close enough.
China is so large, looms so high just beyond the frontiers, that if South
Vietnam went, it would not only give them an improved geographic position for a
guerrilla assault on Malaya, but would also give the impression that the wave of
the future in Southeast Asia was China and the Communists. So I believe it."

His remarks prepared for delivery at the Trade Mart in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963,
included these words about countries bordering the Communist world: "Our
assistance to these nations can be painful, risky and costly, as is true in
Southeast Asia today. But we dare not weary of the task."

On Jan. 1, 1965, the Chinese Foreign Minister Chen Yi said at a diplomatic
reception: "Thailand is next." By early 1965 Sukarno had left the United Nations
and joined an aggressive coalition led by Beijing, which included North Korea
and North Vietnam. He began a massive confrontation against Malaysia, requiring
the British Commonwealth to mobilize some 80 warships. Regular North Vietnamese
forces were moving for the first time into South Vietnam.

These were the circumstances that led Lee Kwan Yew of Singapore to say: "We may
all go through the mincing machine." President Johnson reluctantly, but with
overwhelming Congressional, news media and public support, decided to send large
United States forces to Vietnam.

Those who believe that John Fitzgerald Kennedy would have walked away from the
disintegrating situation in Asia in 1965 have every right to their opinion. But
clarity about our history and wisdom about our future are not advanced by
setting aside hard, relevant facts.

W. W. ROSTOW
Austin, Tex., Jan. 28, 1992

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Kerrey Brings Vietnam Issue to Georgia

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Feb. 26


Senator Bob Kerrey marched into Georgia today and brought the Vietnam War with
him. "I tell you today," he said, "Bill Clinton should not be the nominee of the
party because he will not be able to win."

Speaking at Spelman College in Atlanta, fresh from his victory in South Dakota,
Mr. Kerrey, who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, said Mr. Clinton's avoidance
of the draft in 1969 would be an issue in the general election. "This is a truth
that is largely unspoken, but it is almost universally believed by those who
have been through this kind of thing before."

The Nebraska Senator did not refer to Mr. Clinton's not serving in Vietnam
directly in his speech. He did not need to. He was introduced by State
Representative Mabel Thomas of Georgia, who said, "We want a President to be
Commander in Chief, not commander in chicken."

This was the boldest attack yet by Senator Kerrey to try to weaken Mr. Clinton,
who as Governor of Arkansas is expected to do well in the South, and seemed
designed to get some attention and political capital in Georgia.

'A Soft Peanut in November'

At a news conference afterward, flanked by half a dozen veterans wearing
garrison caps, Mr. Kerrey elaborated on his views. He said of Mr. Clinton, "I
think he's going to get opened up like a soft peanut in November of 1992."
Though Mr. Kerrey said the Republicans would enflame the issue, he said he, too,
had problems with Mr. Clinton's explanation about why he did not to serve.

"There is an apparent unwillingness to accept responsibility for a decision that
was apparently based on conscience," Mr. Kerrey said. "I quibble with a decision
that was premeditatively designed to further a political career, even then."

For the first time today another Democratic aspirant, former Senator Paul E.
Tsongas of Massachusetts, sounded critical of Mr. Clinton, a man with whom he
says he has developed a firm friendship in the campaign.

Some 'Electability' Problems

Clearly still angered about the remarks a week ago of Gov. Zell Miller of
Georgia, a Clinton supporter, that Mr. Tsongas would lead the Democrats "back
down that well worn path of defeat," Mr. Tsongas said for the first time that he
might have to attack Mr. Clinton on the character issue.

Asked about whether the Arkansan's problems with character would make him less
likely to be "electable," Mr. Tsongas said tartly: "We all have our electability
problems. I'm not as telegenic as I should be, and he has his."

Mr. Clinton told reporters later today Mr. Kerrey was attempting to "divide the
party or the country over the Vietnam War" and must be suffering from the
"stresses and strains" of campaigning.

"Now, I think that for reasons that are obvious and highly political, he seeks
to inject this issue into the campaign," Mr. Clinton said. "I hope that he'll
wake up as his old self, remind himself that he came home as an opponent of the
Vietnam War."

He said Mr. Kerrey repeatedly said while campaigning in new Hampshire that Mr.
Clinton's draft record should not be an issue in the campaign. "Ten days ago he
said one thing, now he's saying something else," Mr. Clinton said. "I believe
that it doesn't do the country any good to try to divide America in 1992 over
the Vietnam War."

Mr. Kerrey, in a sharp response to questions about what distinctions he drew
between himself and Mr. Clinton since he, too, opposed the war after his return,
said: "Let me tell you where I go over the edge on this, it's this issue. It
should not surprise anyone to discover that it was the men and women who went to
Vietnam who suffered, and they particularly suffered when they came home. And
all of a sudden in this campaign, all the sympathy is flowing to somebody who
didn't go."

In New Hampshire, Mr. Kerrey had veered back and forth about making an issue of
Mr. Clinton's effort to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. Georgia, a state
with a sizable number of veterans and people serving in the armed forces, is
also a state where Mr. Clinton has wide support, a strong organization and a lot
of money. Mr. Kerrey, who has little of any of that, decided to play his
strongest suit.

"Imagine the general election debate," Mr. Kerrey said in an interview shortly
before delivering his speech. "Bob Kerrey, a Vietnam veteran, against George
Bush, a veteran of World War II; a businessman who created jobs against a man
from inherited wealth. Clinton will have to explain for himself what he is going
to do in the general election."

A Survival Strategy

For the time being, Mr. Kerrey must explain how he expects to stay in the race
until the fall. Before South Dakota, he and his advisers spoke in gloomy, vague
terms about "survival." After his victory in the South Dakota primary on Tuesday
they settled on a more muscular-sounding strategy yhat they call "delegate
accrual."

Kerrey aides said they did not expect to win in such closely watched primaries
as Georgia, Florida and Maryland, but that they will try to pick off as many
delegates in as many states as they can through "Super Tuesday" on March 10.
Under a change in the Democratic Party rules, no primaries are winner-take-all;
delegates are awarded on a proportional basis to candidates who reach a
threshold of 15 percent of the vote.

By April the Kerrey campaign hopes to have raised enough money and support to
win primaries in New York, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin. "Those are our
battleground states," said Tad Devine, Mr. Kerrey's campaign manager. "That's
where we fight to win."

It is a survival strategy based in part on the hope that either Mr. Clinton or
Mr. Tsongas will stumble along the way and leave Mr. Kerrey an opportunity to
establish himself as a credible, and more electable, alternative.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A group of veterans joined Senator Bob Kerrey at Spelman College
in Atlanta as he made his boldest attack yet on Gov. Bill Clinton's avoidance of
the draft during the Vietnam War. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

To the End, Kennedy Tried to Pull Back From Vietnam Brink

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


To the Editor:

Not surprisingly, Walt W. Rostow, a former Vietnam adviser to Presidents Kennedy
and Johnson, would have us believe that John F. Kennedy would not have withdrawn
from Vietnam in 1965, and accuses those who suggest this as "self-serving as
well as unscientific" (letter, Feb. 15).

The list, however, of those so labeled is impressive. It includes highly
respected members of Congress of the Kennedy years, many of Kennedy's close
aides and high-ranking military leaders. Making the case of continuity between
Kennedy and Johnson on Vietnam serves the purpose of a man who did his utmost to
push both to send United States combat troops to that tragic conflict. Mr.
Rostow poses four "statements of fact' to buttress his case.

(1) He cites an anti-Communist Kennedy statement in 1952. Mr. Rostow could have
noted the comment was made at the height of the red scare of Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy, but does not, possibly because the context undermines his point.

(2) Mr. Rostow cites a 1961 memo that alleges Kennedy's position on sending
American fighting forces to Vietnam. But the author of this document was not
Kennedy but Mr. Rostow himself. The documentary record shows that through 1961,
Mr. Rostow tried, unsuccessfully, to get Kennedy to send combat troops to
Vietnam.

(3) To explain Kennedy's view of Southeast Asia at the end of 1961, Mr. Rostow
attributes to Kennedy the remark that if the United States walked away from the
region, it would lead to plunging back in later, possibly with nuclear weapons.
But that was the precise time that Kennedy turned down Mr. Rostow's proposal to
send combat troops to Vietnam. Moreover, though the Joint Chiefs told the
President that nothing short of combat troops would turn the tide of battle in
Vietnam, Kennedy would go no further than to send military advisers.

Mr. Rostow was transferred to the State Department at the end of 1961 on the
President's orders. Kennedy explained the move to his aide Michael Forrestal (as
quoted by Townsend Hoopes in "The Limits of Intervention"): "Walt is a fountain
of ideas; perhaps one in 10 of them is absolutely brilliant. Unfortunately, six
or seven are not merely unsound, but dangerously so. I admire his creativity,
but it will be more comfortable to have him creating at some remove from the
White House."

(4) Mr. Rostow cites some of Kennedy's public comments in 1963 -- including his
ambiguous interview with Walter Cronkite -- which argue against withdrawal, a
1965 bellicose comment by the Chinese Communist Foreign Minister and a jittery
comment by Singapore's President Lee Kuan Yew. This collage is only a narrow
part of the record, while Mr. Rostow in the same breath accuses those who say
Kennedy would have withdrawn of "setting aside hard, relevant facts."

Kennedy's public comments in 1963 are sharply contradicted by his private ones.
Mr. Rostow sets these aside because they show not only that Kennedy wished to
pull back from the precipice in Vietnam but also that he kept it from the public
precisely because he feared the reaction from those clamoring for combat troops.
Mr. Rostow sets aside the fact that in October 1963, Kennedy ordered the
withdrawal of U.S. advisers to begin.

From early in his Presidency, Kennedy rejected sending combat troops, and he did
so when all of the arguments that could be mustered to send the troops had been
laid before him: The battlefield situation was dire, the fate of South Vietnam
hung in the balance, critical United States regional and global interests were
at risk, and nothing short of American combat divisions could save the day.

These were the arguments made to Johnson later, and Kennedy turned them down.
Those who argued for and eventually succeeded in reversing Kennedy's policy
would do well to heed the advice of a highly respected general, James Gavin, who
said, "Let us not lay on the dead the blame for our own failure."

JOHN NEWMAN
Odenton, Md., March 12, 1992

The writer, a historian, is author of "J.F.K. and Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PANEL ON MISSING TO VISIT INDOCHINA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 417 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The special Senate committee that is looking into cases of Americans still
missing from the Vietnam war is planning to take the unusual step of going to
Indochina to conduct investigations and hearings in February, a committee
spokeswoman said today.

The Senators hope to visit Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam Feb. 7 to 18, the
spokeswoman, Deborah De Young, said. It will also meet with American officials
in Bangkok assigned to investigate information about the 2,273 Americans still
unaccounted for.

A resurgence of interest in the issue last year led to the formation of the
panel, the Senate Select Committee of P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, at about the same
time new suggestions that Hanoi may have been withholding information on
Americans began to emerge from the crumbling Soviet Union, which supported
Vietnam in the war.

A former K.G.B. officer, Gen. Oleg D. Kalugin, who has charged that Soviet
interrogators interviewed Americans after 1973, when Hanoi said it had returned
all prisoners of war, was today challenged by another K.G.B. official who served
as an interrogator in Vietnam after the war.

The second officer, Oleg Nechiporenko, was interviewed with General Kalugin on
the NBC program "Today." Mr. Nechiporenko said he had been in Vietnam twice,
once at the time of the American peace treaty in January 1973 and again around
1976. He said he spoke with an American only once, in 1973. On the later trip he
was given information on other Americans, he said, but did not interrogate them.

He said he could not support General Kalugin's contention that at least three
Americans were interrogated by Soviet agents from 1975 to 1978.

American Defends Kalugin

A former Central Intelligence Agency officer in Vietnam, Frank Snepp, did come
to General Kalugin's defense today. Mr. Snepp, the author of "Decent Interval,"
a book that accused the United States of having left intelligence agents behind
at the end of the war, said in an interview that "Kalugin cannot be easily
dismissed."

He said one of the three people General Kalugin had referred to in interviews
may have been Tucker Gougleman, a retired C.I.A. agent who died in 1977 under
what Mr. Snepp in his book concluded was Soviet interrogation.

"Kalugin may be the first of several people who come forward with new
information not only on this issue but on other issues," Mr. Snepp said. He said
agents from other former Soviet bloc countries may also have information that
will shed new light on the issue.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

How Kennedy Viewed the Vietnam Conflict;
Further Evidence

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


To the Editor:

Historians and pundits criticize the movie "J.F.K." on the grounds that it plays
loose with the facts. On the subject at the very heart of the debate -- John F.
Kennedy's Vietnam policy -- they play loosely with the facts themselves. They
claim that because Kennedy appointees like Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara and others
advised Lyndon Johnson to send combat troops to Vietnam, that Kennedy, had he
lived, would have sent them in too.

Sound convincing? Perhaps, but it is so far from the truth. Those same men also
advised Kennedy to send in the combat troops, but that was something Kennedy
always refused to do. Kennedy turned down combat troops, not when the decision
was clouded by ambiguities and contradictions in reports from the battlefield,
but when the battle was unequivocally desperate, when all concerned agreed that
Vietnam's fate hung in the balance, and when his principal advisers told him
that vital U.S. interests were at stake.

A highly respected general, Bruce Palmer, who in 1963 was a senior officer in
the Pentagon, believes Kennedy would not have committed major U.S. forces to
Vietnam "and that quite a different situation would have unfolded" had he lived.
Another much-decorated general, James Gavin, wrote in The Boston Globe in 1968:
"Having discussed military affairs with [Kennedy] often and in detail for 15
years, I know he was totally opposed to the introduction of combat troops in
Southeast Asia."


 Kennedy's plan to withdraw from Vietnam after his re-election has also been put
in doubt in the current crossfire. Some, like Stanley Karnow, claim his order to
withdraw 1,000 U.S. advisers was a gimmick. Others, such as Leslie H. Gelb
(column, Jan. 6) say the order was a real plan but based on Kennedy's optimism
about the war. Still others say the withdrawal order was simply a device to
pressure South Vietnamese President Diem to make political reforms.

The record suggests otherwise. Recently declassified documents reveal Kennedy
ordered the withdrawal not be raised with Diem as part of the pressures being
applied to him. They show Kennedy was privy to intelligence that exposed
optimism about the war to be unfounded. The idea that the withdrawal was a
public relations ploy does not square with Kennedy's instructions to keep it
secret.

Publicly Kennedy made statements unsupportive of withdrawal, but privately
talked about his plans to withdraw. What did this mean? His secret
implementation of withdrawal suggests Kennedy was feinting right while moving
left -- not the reverse.

Looking at both sides of "J.F.K." is unsettling: the wound of Vietnam is bad
enough, but the thought that it might not have happened had Kennedy lived hurts
worse. Yet we must deal with it. The facts are that President Kennedy was
withdrawing from Vietnam at the time of his murder. It is crucial that we
understand the record instead of using it as a shuttlecock in this debate. To do
otherwise trivializes not only Kennedy's life, but also the price our nation
paid for his death.

JOHN NEWMAN
Odenton, Md., Jan. 12, 1992

The writer, a teacher of Asian history and author of the forthcoming "J.F.K. and
Vietnam," was a consultant on "J.F.K.," the film.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Trap for Candidates;
When 'the War' Means Vietnam, Politics Gets Muddy

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H.


For political longevity, it is hard to beat the generation that fought in World
War II. For the last 40 years, the nation's chief executives have been products
of this era, and seven of the last eight Presidents served in the armed forces
during what was, in the title of the Studs Terkel book, "The Good War."

Eventually, though, even the most enduring generation must yield to its
successor, and as voters prepare to cast the first ballots in the 1992
Presidential election, it is clear that this transition is haltingly getting
under way. On the Republican side, President Bush of course has the classic
military resume of a Navy pilot who was shot down over the Pacific. But none of
the five leading candidates for the Democratic nomination served in World War
II. And one of them, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, is the first major
Presidential candidate who was a hero of the not-so-good war in Vietnam.

Tomorrow, the Presidential election season formally begins when voters in Iowa
hold their caucuses, and Iowa Senator Tom Harkin is expected to win handily. The
real contest will begin in New Hampshire on Feb. 18 with the nation's first
primary. It is still too early to tell how the generational shift will play out
in the coming election, but recent events suggest that the process could be
painful.

For the Republicans, this is probably all for the best. In addition to
possessing a traditional political profile, Mr. Bush enjoys all the advantages
of incumbency, including a fully-researched biography. Having survived eight
years of scrutiny as Vice President and three as President, Mr. Bush seems
unlikely to be waylaid by any newly discovered unpleasantries from his past.

But for the Democrats, the uneasiness of the transition is emerging as a major
obstacle. In recent weeks, the primary campaign has been dominated not by the
nation's overriding concern -- the economy -- but by something far more
marginal, the private life of Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton. Last week, after
getting sideswiped by charges of marital infidelity, Mr. Clinton seemed to have
gotten his campaign back on track, only to find himself slammed by allegations
that he tried to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

With the debate over Governor Clinton's draft status, the Presidential campaign
seems to have run headlong into a booby trap that was set 25 years ago. As the
generation that came of age in the 1960's began to run for high political
office, it was probably inevitable that someone would stumble into the snare;
indeed, Vice President Dan Quayle almost did so four years ago, when charges
surfaced that he had avoided being sent to Vietnam by using family connections
to join the National Guard. The question that remains is: just how dangerous is
this trap?

Just as some of the issues raised by Vietnam remain unresolved, the nation also
seems divided about what constitutes an acceptable biography for a politician
who reached draft age while the war was escalating and also growing more
unpopular each year. With Governor Clinton, the question is whether he misled
his local draft board to avoid conscription before 1969, the year the lottery
system was implemented and he drew a high enough number to stay out of uniform.
An official of his local draft board has said that he did mislead them; Mr.
Clinton insists that he did not.

Michael Delli Carpini, a Barnard political science professor who has studied the
generation that grew up in the 60's, says he is suprised how sensitive the issue
remains.

"I would have expected that one of the changes you would have seen over the
years is that by now we would have a different set of standards for what
constitutes a legitimate experience for a politician," he said. "And one of the
standards you would think would no longer be applied would be service to the
military. But it seems the same basic standards are still being used, which
really strikes me as ironic, given the way the Vietnam War is remembered."

What the debate suggests, Professor Delli Carpini said, "is that we as a country
have not really come to grips with how we feel about people who did not support
the war. The price we pay as a nation is that when something brings it up, we
don't really have a set of rules or even a language to evaluate it."

In Mr. Clinton's case, questions about how he avoided military service are
complicated by questions of how he represented himself. Thus, the full depth of
the nation's discomfort is probably reflected better in the experience of
Senator Kerrey.

At the start of the campaign season, many Democrats hoped that Mr. Kerrey would
lead the party through the treacherous generational transition; a Medal of Honor
winner who lost part of a leg in Vietnam and later turned against the war, the
Senator seemed to successfully combine two potentially disparate elements of his
generation -- patriotism and a willingness to question authority. Even as he
lags in the polls, many Democratic leaders maintain that Mr. Kerrey's service in
Vietnam is an unalloyed plus for him, and in recent days the Senator has tried
to prolong discussion of Mr. Clinton's difficulties. But Mr. Kerrey has also
said that at times, "being a Vietnam veteran is more of a liability than an
asset." A close adviser said the Senator believes his service record can work
against him by reminding voters of unresolved issues that they would prefer to
forget. "It's still too painful," the adviser said.

For decades, military service has been viewed almost as a prerequisite for the
Presidency. The man with his finger on the button, the thinking seemed to go,
should at least have demonstrated an ability to get through boot camp. Now that
the cold war is over, voters may no longer see military experience as so
relevant.

Some analysts say that Mr. Clinton and the other Democratic candidates, former
Senator Paul Tsongas and former Gov. Jerry Brown, who never served in the
military, and Mr. Harkin, who was a non-combat pilot in the Navy, are fortunate
to be running for President at a time when the nation is most concerned about
domestic issues. "As long as domestic issues dominate," Professor Delli Carpini
said, military service "will not be as important."

But it remains to be seen how the electorate will treat the men who came of age
during the Vietnam War. Some analysts worry that the nation's uneasiness with
the issues of the 60's will, if unaddressed, end up disqualifying an entire age
group from high public office. Todd Gitlin, a professor at Berkeley who has
written a book about the decade, notes that drug use and draft resistance were
the norm of the day. He argues that applying outdated standards to a new
generation of public figures is like an old-style Kremlin purge.

"This purification crusade is generationally dangerous," he said. "What you are
really talking about is disenfranchising an entire generation."

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph A. Buttinger, Nazi Fighter And Vietnam Scholar, Dies at 85

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 46; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 582 words


Joseph A. Buttinger, a Nazi fighter who became an advocate for refugees of
persecution and a renowned authority on Vietnam and the American war there, died
on Wednesday at the Margaret Pietz Center for Nursing in Queens. He was 85 years
old.

He died of natural causes after suffering from Alzheimer's disease, friends
said.

Mr. Buttinger was born on an impoverished Bavarian farm and left home at 15 to
work in an Austrian glass factory. He soon became the leader of Austria's
Socialist youth movement and by 24 was secretary of the Social Democratic Party
and an ally of labor unions. After being imprisoned for several months in 1934,
he became chairman of the Socialist underground and a top leader of the
anti-Nazi movement.

Fled to Paris in 1938

In the resistance, he met a courier and eventually married her. She was Muriel
Gardiner, a wealthy American medical student who later became a noted
psychoanalyst and wrote a political memoir titled "Code Name Mary." Many experts
said she was the model for Lillian Hellman's book "Julia." Ms. Hellman denied it
but declined to identify the woman she had portrayed.

When Germany occupied Austria in 1938, the Buttingers fled to Paris, where he
was chairman of the exiled Socialists. In 1939, several months before the fall
of France, the couple moved to the United States.

In 1940, Mr. Buttinger helped found what became the International Rescue
Committee, a nonprofit organization aiding refugees of political, religious and
racial persecution. Its initial work was with refugees from the Nazis, and later
refugees of many Communist countries and other dictatorships. For 42 years, he
served variously as director of the organization's Paris office and European
division, board member and vice president.

Working with refugees in Vietnam in the 1950's, he became immersed in the
history, culture and politics of that nation. He formed an organization,
American Friends of Vietnam, and became a friend and supporter of the ruler, Ngo
Dinh Diem. Later, disillusioned with Diem's dictatorial ways, Mr. Buttinger
renounced him.

Despite having no formal education beyond the sixth grade, he became a respected
historian and analyst of current events in Vietnam. As the United States went to
war with Vietnam, his scholarship was in demand. His evolving view was that
American policy was historically and morally misguided and doomed to fail.

His two-volume work, "Vietnam: A Dragon Embattled" (Praeger, 1967) was heralded
in a review in The New York Times as "a monumental work" that "marks a strategic
breakthrough in the serious study of Vietnamese politics in America" and as "the
most thorough, informative and, over all, the most impressive book on Vietnam
yet published in America."

Other Titles

His other books included: "In the Twilight of Socialism" (Praeger 1952), "The
Smaller Dragon -- A Political History of Vietnam" (Praeger, 1958), "A Dragon
Defiant: A Short History of Vietnam" (Praeger, 1972) and "Vietnam: The
Unforgettable Tragedy" (Horizon, 1977).

Thirty-three years after he fled Austria, the Government awarded him its Golden
Order of Merit. Chancellor Bruno Kreisky once mused that Mr. Buttinger was such
a hero that if he had returned, he would have become chancellor.

His wife died several years ago. He is survived by his daughter, Constance
Harvey of Aspen, Col.; a sister, Marie Fuchs, who lives in Austria; a brother,
Louis, who now lives in the United States, and six grandchildren.

NAME: Joseph A. Buttinger

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Oil Deal Is Seen

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 203 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 19


One of Japan's biggest oil companies will sign a contract next month to develop
a large oil and natural gas field off the coast of Vietnam, the Yomiuri Shimbun
newspaper reported today.

The newspaper reported that the Idemitsu Oil Development Company, a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Idemitsu Kosan, was likely to reach agreement with the Vietnamese
Government in early February and begin drilling off the shore near Haiphong by
the end of the year.

Idemitsu would be the first Japanese company to acquire rights to the promising
underwater reserves off Vietnam's coast. The deal would be the first big project
since Tokyo decided to resume aid to Hanoi.

The project is estimated to cost at least $800 million, the paper said. It said
Idemitsu was expected to develop a 770-square-mile field southeast of Haiphong
for five years.

Idemitsu and other Japanese oil companies, along with leading American and
European companies, started bidding in August to develop four fields off
Haiphong in the north and 10 others off Vungtau in the south.

Oil reserves off Vietnam have been estimated at around 22 billion barrels. The
country could become the third-largest Asian oil producer after China and
Indonesia.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MARATHON;
Scotsman Survives the Heat to Win in Vietnam

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 331 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Feb. 16


Hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese here watched with curiosity and delight
today as their first international marathon was won by a Scottish lawyer,
followed by a young Vietnamese gym teacher.

Organizers said 243 runners competed in the marathon, and while Americans made
up one of the largest contingents in the race, none was among the top 10
finishers. The first American to finish was Don Kardong of Spokane, Wash., who
was 11th.

Running in 90-degree temperatures in high humidity, many of the some 150 foreign
runners found the race one of the most physically punishing they had ever run.
But many said they were buoyed by the friendliness and touched by the fellowship
they found in Vietnam.

Too Much for Rodgers

Bill Rodgers, a past American marathon champion, was almost overcome by the
conditions and called the marathon "the most difficult I've ever run."

"It was a tough course, and I was massively dehydrated -- I just couldn't get
enough water for all the heat and humidity," said Rodgers, who was leading the
field in the final minutes of the race when his legs buckled, causing him to
walk across the finish line well behind the winners.

Tim Soutar, a 36-year-old who lives in Hong Kong and has run "16 or 17
marathons," won the race with a time of 2 hours 43 minutes 23 seconds.

Luu Van Hung, the runner-up, had a time of 2:44:52 running in his first
marathon.

While some runners complained of diesel-fuel pollution from motorcycles and
trucks that occasionally drifted too close to the course, most gave the marathon
high marks for organization.

Jim Barker, a Vietnam veteran, was one of about 40 Americans competing here. He
said that while the run was painful, it was "a beautiful human experience
because of the people here."

Barker, who was trained by the military to speak fluent Vietnamese, said along
the route he heard people shouting "U.S. No. 1." He said they were "basically
delighted when they identified an American in the crowd."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Russian Offers Americans Access to K.G.B. Files

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 765 words


The chairman of the Russian parliamentary commission that oversees the archives
of the K.G.B. says he is prepared to invite American historians to search for
evidence that could shed light on the fate of Americans taken prisoner during
the Vietnam war.

The official, Col. Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov, speaking on the eve of President
Boris N. Yeltsin's trip to the United States, said the Russian president wanted
to assure the United States Senate that he was responding to a request for
information on reports that some Americans might have been taken to the Soviet
Union.

"We want to be honest," said General Volkogonov, who is also an adviser to Mr.
Yeltsin. He said he would support "one, two, three American historians or
specialists" working with his commission in Moscow.

No Support for Kalugin Yet

General Volkogonov said the commission had begun examining the K.G.B. archives
but could not yet speak definitively about contacts with Americans during the
Vietnam war.

But he said that so far, he had found nothing to substantiate the statements of
Gen. Oleg D. Kalugin, a former K.G.B. official, that Soviet intelligence had
interviewed several Americans in Vietnam as late as 1975-78, after the war had
ended and all American prisoners were reported released.

"Maybe there are documents but we haven't yet found them," he said in an
interview Tuesday at the Russian mission to the United Nations. "Maybe he spoke
all the truth. Maybe to the contrary, he spoke untruth. Kalugin spoke by memory.
I think that's not enough."

General Volkogonov is part of an advance party of Russian officials who arrived
in New York seeking technical assistance and advice on how to wrench Russia
toward a market economy and convert factories in the vast military-industrial
complex to civilian uses. Mr. Yeltsin is to arrive tonight, attend Friday's
session of the United Nations Security Council and meet President Bush on
Saturday.

Reviewing the Records

The author of a critical history of Stalin, General Volkogonov fell into
disfavor with the military establishment before the failed August coup for
saying the Communist system had been responsible for the Soviet Union's huge
losses during the World War II.

General Volkogonov said he knew of a case in 1969 when four American deserters
from Vietnam went to Japan and then by boat to the Soviet Far East. He said they
were questioned by the K.G.B., held for several months in Moscow and then
released. He did not identify the four.

He said his committee was also scouring records from the end of World War II,
when as many as 22,000 Americans liberated from German prison camps were brought
to the Soviet Union and repatriated, primarily through the Ukrainian port of
Odessa.

In some cases, General Volkogonov said, Americans with Russian, Ukrainian or
Jewish names were held prisoner by the secret police, and that three of them
were released several years later in an East-West prisoner exchange.

In December, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs appealed to
Russia for more information on reports that some Americans might have been taken
to the Soviet Union after the Vietnam war.

General Kalugin, the former K.G.B. official, testified for three hours before a
United States Senate committee last week, saying the K.G.B. interrogated several
Americans held by Vietnam in 1975-78. General Kalugin described himself as the
former head of the K.G.B.'s counterintelligence operations.

The government of Vietnam has confirmed that it allowed at least one American
prisoner of war to be questioned by the K.G.B. in January 1973. Vietnam
identified the Soviet interrogator as Oleg Nechiporenko, who worked under
General Kalugin. Mr. Nechiporenko has also said that he interviewed an American
in 1973, but he has denied that Americans were questioned any later than that.

General Volkogonov seems intent on cementing a close relationship between the
American and Russian governments, as Russia moves through a winter of simmering
public discontent with price rises and continued shortages.

"We need not only help with bread and with money," he said. "The most important
help we need is help in how we should build our market. We need technical help,
we need intellectual and organizing help."

General Volkogonov criticized the West for succumbing to a "victor's complex" as
the Soviet Union and the former Communist empire collapsed.

"It could turn into Pyrrhic victory," he said. "The problems in the Soviet Union
now are not less dangerous. They also could be a danger to the whole world."

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

High-Level U.S. Trip to Hanoi

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 352 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


The Bush Administration is preparing to send the highest-level official
delegation to Vietnam since the end of the war, led by Assistant Secretary of
State Richard H. Solomon, diplomats and Congressional aides say.

The State Department declined today to comment on the reports, but an
announcement of the mission is expected this week. The Administration team,
which is to leave on Saturday, is apparently planning to visit Laos and Cambodia
as well as Vietnam.

There is speculation in Congress that the United States may be moving toward a
new phase in relations with Hanoi. Under a "road map" presented to the
Vietnamese a year ago, faster progress on solving cases of missing Americans
would lead to a partial relaxation in an American embargo that has frozen
Vietnam out of trade and blocked assistance from the World Bank and
International Monetary Fund.

The Bush Administration, which eased travel restrictions for Americans at the
end of last year, has said that the next step will be to allow American
companies to set up offices and negotiate, but not sign, agreements with the
Vietnamese. The oil, communications and consulting industries have been lobbying
for openings, fearful that they will lose out to Japanese, Korean, Singaporean
and other Asian competitors.

The final steps, not expected until after the 1992 Presidential election, would
be a lifting of the embargo and the establishment of diplomatic relations.

Mr. Solomon met with the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, Le Mai, in New York
in November, the first of what was described as a series of high-level meetings
made possible by the peace accord on Cambodia reached in October with the help
of Hanoi. In an interview after that meeting, Mr. Mai said he thought it might
be possible to advance a stage this spring.

The visit of Mr. Solomon, head of the bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
follows the arrival in Hanoi this week of Brig. Gen. Thomas Needham, who heads a
new United States military task force on the issue of the 2,267 Americans still
unaccounted for in Indochina, including 1,656 in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Cloak and Dagger Retired, Ex-Chief Of C.I.A. Remains Hard to Predict

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1490 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 29


Which is the real William Egan Colby, "the traditional grey man, so
inconspicuous that he can never catch the waiter's eye in a restaurant," as the
former spymaster described himself in his 1978 memoir, "Honorable Men: My Life
in the C.I.A.", or the romantic who drives a red Fiat Pininfarina around
Washington as if he were in vehicular combat in Rome?

Is he the onetime secret agent who for years assiduously cultivated a manner as
colorless as his translucent eyeglasses, or the free spirit who tangoes with his
wife in the living room of their Georgetown town house?

Mr. Colby, once an unrepentant cold warrior branded a war criminal on antiwar
posters in the Vietnam era, is now promoting a 50 percent cut in the military
budget. Once the mastermind of the Central Intelligence Agency's clandestine
operations in Indochina in the 1960's, he is now advising the heads of Eastern
European intelligence services how to make their agencies compatible with
democracy.

Is the 72-year-old former Director of Central Intelligence a born-again liberal
atoning for past misdeeds? Is he, as his wife, Sally Shelton, insists,
misunderstood -- a lifelong populist who is driven to tears by the plight of the
world when he watches the nightly news, so "low key," she says, "that he
sometimes lets people walk all over him?"

A Covert Career

Mr. Colby himself, now a practicing lawyer and a consultant to a handful of
multinational corporations who is earning considerably more than he did at the
C.I.A., dismisses any seeming contradictions in his history. "The career
explains the whole thing," he said in a recent interview. "For years I was a
covert operator, and in the intelligence business you're not supposed to be
terribly open."

Though Mr. Colby had been speaking out on disarmament for years, it was the
overlit, 30-second television commercial that began in Washington in January
that portrayed the image of a man whose world has turned upside down.

"I'm William Colby, and I was head of the C.I.A.," he says in the commercial.
"The job of intelligence is to warn us of dangers to our national security.
During the cold war, those dangers were military. The cold war is over, and the
military threat is now far less. It's time to cut our military budget by 50
percent and to invest that money in our schools, our health care and our
economy."

Since then, Mr. Colby has expanded on his proposal before Congress, traveled
around the country giving speeches and drafted a long paper with Paul C. Warnke,
the former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency for the Coalition
for Democratic Values, the organization that sponsored the ads.

Their plan would halve the military budget in five years, freeing $345 billion
to help the country's sagging economy. This is considerably more than President
Bush's plan to pare $50 billion from the military budget, a plan that Mr. Colby
says "reflects a desire to continue business as usual."

Mr. Colby's is not, of course, a universe of one. Ray S. Cline, for example, who
as Deputy Director of Central Intelligence first informed the Kennedy White
House of the Cuban missile crisis in 1962, stood beard-to-beard with Fidel
Castro at a conference in Havana last January, joking about the C.I.A.'s
unsuccessful efforts to assassinate him.

But Mr. Colby said he has been waiting in the wings for the new world for more
than a decade. Indeed, as long ago as 1975, his friends say, he was made an
outcast by the Old Guard in the intelligence agencies for violating the unspoken
rule of C.I.A. secrecy, telling Congress about "the family jewels" -- the
nickname for the agency's illegal activities and dark secrets, from spying on
American citizens in the United States to operating a project to develop
supersecret weapons like poisons, biological weapons and dart guns.

Mr. Colby said his candor to journalists, and in interminable Senate hearings on
the excesses of C.I.A. covert operations, cost him his job but gained him the
respect of Congress and helped establish the process of Congressional
supervision over intelligence.

Shortly after he left the agency Mr. Colby began to speak out on military
affairs, quickly becoming the darling of the disarmament set.

Panel Discussion Recalled

"It was amazing," recalls Jeremy Stone, the president of the American Federation
of Scientists, who says he discovered the soft side of Mr. Colby at a panel
discussion on disarmament 15 years ago. "I thought I'd be the only dove among
the hawks, but I found myself saying that Colby had said everything I believed
in on disarmament and more eloquently than I did. Then, to my surprise, I
started finding Colby on panels everywhere -- traveling at his own expense."

In 1983 the man who had years before acknowledged to Congress that the C.I.A.
had regularly used overseas missionaries to gather intelligence, endeared
himself to the Roman Catholic bishops when he joined their cause, calling
himself an "unabashed supporter of the nuclear freeze."

Mr. Colby's critics say that he was always a bit of a misfit as a C.I.A.
bureaucrat, that his cooperation with the press and the Congress made "the
process of demolition" of the C.I.A. "irreversible," as Archie Roosevelt, the
veteran C.I.A. official, said in his memoirs.

Those close to him say he is nothing if not a pragmatist.

In an essay written in 1986, for example, Mr. Colby in effect called for a
military coup in Iran, arguing that the United States should "actively encourage
the appearance" of a new Shah, "preferably out of the army rather than the
clergy."

A Sense of What's Practical

"I don't think he has an ideological bone in his body," says his wife, Ms.
Shelton, a former ambassador in the Carter Administration who runs an
independent consulting firm for multinational corporations. "He just wants to
know what's practical, what's fair and what makes sense."

Mr. Colby says that he still believes in old-fashioned covert action, but only
when it works. "If you can stir up a little antagonism between rival drug lords,
if you can support covertly some more responsible people than some wild
anti-American groups, if you could give some assurances privately to a few
people in Cuba, North Korea, Burma that if they change their government and
orientation, yes, the United States would be responsive, then why not?" he asks.

When asked why he does not favor assassination plots, he does not plunge into
Jesuitical arguments about morality, but says simply, "If they're exposed, it's
usually counterproductive."

In the case of Panama, he said, an invasion that "killed several hundred
Panamanians and in which we lost 40 of our own" was better than a covert plot to
eliminate Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega.

"If he had been assassinated you'd still be hearing about it," Mr. Colby said.
"But military action fit so naturally into America's longtime relationship with
Panama, it causes no great stir."

Praise and Criticism

As for his current stand on military spending, some independent experts praise
the effort but criticize its lack of specificity. "What's missing on paper is a
sense of roles and missions," says Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget
Project, a nonpartisan research group that works on military-spending issues.
"If I were a college professor I'd give him a C-plus, or better, maybe an
incomplete. But it's not off the wall. No way."

Mr. Colby says he does not understand all the fuss about his position on
defense. A member of the American Civil Liberties Union before he joined the
C.I.A., he spent a summer organizing service-station operators when he was an
undergraduate at Princeton, parachuted behind enemy lines into France and Norway
in World War II, campaigned door-to-door for President Harry S. Truman in 1948
and joined the C.I.A. because, he wrote in his memoir "Honorable Men" (Simon &
Schuster) , it was "the most effective place for a non-Communist liberal to do
battle against the Communist menace."

In "Lost Victory," his book on Vietnam (Contemporary Books, 1989), he argues
that one of the main reasons the war was lost is that the C.I.A. had to turn it
over to the American military.

He also refuses to distance himself from the C.I.A.'s Phoenix program, a secret
operation that he supervised and that was designed to "neutralize" the Vietcong
in South Vietnam. More than 20,000 "suspects" were killed, and although he
vehemently denies charges that it was a program of systematic assassination and
torture, he acknowledged to a House committee that there had been some
"excesses."

But Vietnam was "a liberal action," Mr. Colby says, adding, "I think we had the
war won in 1972."

Daniel Ellsberg, the Defense Department analyst in the 1960's who became a
prominent opponent of the war, still insists that the Phoenix program was wrong.
But he adds, "I admire Colby for being so open, and I wish there were more like
him."

NAME: William E. Colby

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Once an unrepentant cold warrior branded a war criminal on
antiwar posters in the Vietnam era, William E. Colby, former Director of Central
Intelligence, is promoting a 50 percent cut in military spending. He stood in
his home in the Georgetown section of Washington. (George Tames for The New York
Times)

Chart: William Egan Colby

Born: Jan. 4, 1920.

Hometown: Washington, D.C.

Education: Burlington High School (Vermont); B.A., Princeton University; LL.B.,
Columbia University.

Career Highlights: 1947-49, private law practice; 1951-58, attache, American
Embassies in Stockholm and Rome; 1959-62, First Secretary, American Embassy in
Saigon; 1962-67, Chief, Far East Division, C.I.A; 1968-71, on leave from C.I.A.,
assigned to Agency for International Development as Director of Civil Operations
and Rural Development Support, Saigon (with rank of Ambassador); 1972-73,
Executive Director and Deputy Director for Operations, C.I.A; 1973-1976,
Director of Intelligence; 1977-present, private law practice and international
consultant.

Hobbies: Sailing; politics; causes.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Why Did It Have to Take 'J.F.K.' to Wake Us?;
Kennedy Was No Dove

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 493 words


To the Editor:

Oliver Stone's assertion (Op-Ed, Dec. 20) that history "may be too important to
leave to newsmen" should be expanded to include reductionist film makers.

According to Mr. Stone, the "military-industrial complex," a combine of
military, business and political interests, killed John F. Kennedy. Their motive
was to prevent the President from carrying out a policy of detente toward the
Soviet Union that would have ended the cold war and prevented a $100 billion
conflict in Vietnam. Mr. Stone's case rests essentially on the question: "What
political forces were opposed to this leader and would benefit from his
assassination?"

Mr. Stone more than implies that Lyndon B. Johnson was a principal figure in the
plot. Johnson's policies on Vietnam, according to Mr. Stone, reversed Kennedy's
plans and served the military-industrial war interests.

While Kennedy was improving relations with the Soviet Union, he and his
principal advisers were deeply concerned about an aggressive, expansionist
China, which supported a Communist takeover in South Vietnam. Kennedy had no
intention of "losing" Vietnam. He increased United States troops there to
16,700, hid their role in combat operations by the South Vietnamese and played a
part in toppling the unpopular Ngo Dinh Diem regime in October 1963.

Johnson was also determined to prevent a Communist victory in South Vietnam and
struggled with how to achieve that end. Anyone who reads George Kahin's
"Intervention: How America Became Involved in the Vietnam War" (1986) or Brian
VanDeMark's "Into the Quagmire: Lyndon Johnson and the Escalation of the Vietnam
War" (1991), based on extensive archival research, understands that Johnson
agonized over escalating the Vietnam War.

Federal Bureau of Investigation files I have obtained under a Freedom of
Information request show that Johnson had nothing to do with Kennedy's
assassination. Johnson believed that a Castro conspiracy was behind Kennedy's
death, and he feared a Cuban attempt on his own life. He asked J. Edgar Hoover
for help in assuring his safety and that of his family. Johnson had no direct
evidence of a Cuban role in Kennedy's death, and his concern may tell us
something about his cast of mind. But these records are invaluable in refuting
suggestions of a Johnson role in killing Kennedy.

Mr. Stone urges opening "all C.I.A., F.B.I. and military intelligence files" on
the assassination. I agree. But if they show there was no conspiracy or at least
not the one that Mr. Stone alleges, would he not argue that the record was
doctored to refute the truth? I doubt that Mr. Stone is open to having his mind
changed about the assassination. Let us hope, however, that those misled by his
article and movie are.

ROBERT DALLEK
Los Angeles, Dec. 24, 1991

The writer is professor of history, University of California, and author of
"Lone Star Rising: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-60" (1991).

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Ends Protection for Vietnamese at Sea

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 411 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


An anti-piracy program intended to protect Vietnamese refugees from brutal
attacks in the Gulf of Thailand has been phased out by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees because the attacks have all but ceased in the last 18
months.

Responsibility for policing the seas where, since 1975, thousands of Vietnamese
refugees have been robbed, raped, killed or drowned when their boats were
attacked, will now rest with the Thai Navy.

Officials in the United States say that Washington will be watching the
situation closely. The United States paid about $16 million of the $25 million
needed to keep the program alive since its inception in 1982, following a year
of extreme violence against refugees.

In 1981, 1,444 attacks on refugee boats were reported in the Gulf of Thailand
and nearby waters, according to the United Nations refugee agency. Of the 71,667
people known to have fled Vietnam that year, 961 were reported killed, 257 taken
hostage and 857 women said they had been raped.

As late as 1989, 762 Vietnamese or Cambodian refugees were reported killed or
missing at sea, but American and United Nations officials say that a decision
was made in November to end the program because there had been no reported
attacks on Vietnamese refugee boats since July 1990. The program was ended with
the new year.

Officials say that fewer refugees are fleeing Vietnam by sea since legal
departure programs are now functioning.

                             --------------------


Hong Kong to Speed Ousters

LONDON, Jan. 11 (AP) -- Hong Kong officials plan to increase flights taking
Vietnamese boat people back to their homeland, the British Government said
today.

Vietnamese and British officials agreed to help speed the repatriation program
during a meeting in Hanoi, the Foreign Office said.

More than 20,000 Vietnamese in refugee camps in Hong Kong await deportation and
more than 36,000 await screening to determine whether they are political
refugees or economic migrants. Hong Kong is seeking to empty the camps in two or
three years.

So far 87 refugees in the former British colony have been forcibly returned to
Vietnam on two flights, and Hong Kong officials say a third flight is scheduled
this month. Several thousand Vietnamese have returned home voluntarily,
officials have said.

The Foreign Office said Britain and Vietnam had "agreed to do what they could to
increase the rate of repatriation under existing schemes."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Southeast Asia, indicating Gulf of Thailand.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

P.O.W.'s Questioned by K.G.B. in Vietnam

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


To the Editor:

I was bewildered on reading your Jan. 13 editorial on the continuing question of
U.S. servicemen missing in action in Vietnam. At no time in the United States or
anywhere else did I say, as you assert, that American prisoners of war were
interrogated by K.G.B. agents inside the Soviet Union years after the war was
over. The public record shows that all my statements on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue
related to a handful of American servicemen who were interviewed by Soviet
intelligence officers in Vietnam, not in the Soviet Union.

I first broached this subject many months ago, and cited it simply as a K.G.B.
field operation, just another episode in the cold war. All my later statements
are based not so much on my own recollections as on conversations with my former
subordinate, Col. Oleg Nechiporenko, who elaborated on the circumstances of his
two visits to Vietnam.

These conversations took place from September to December 1991 after several
journalists and at least two United States officials asked me to clarify certain
points.

I must admit I was shocked and chagrined by Colonel Nechiporenko's retraction of
his own words, a cowardly act prompted and probably dictated by his former
superiors in the intelligence service. But this is yet another story that merits
separate consideration.

I fully comprehend the emotional side of the P.O.W. story and sympathize with
American families as well as with untold numbers of Vietnamese whose kin fell
victim to the war.

For this reason, I suggest we look beyond the inaccuracies and discrepancies,
however nagging they may be, and concentrate on the principal issue: Are there
United States P.O.W.'s still in Vietnam? Are they kept against their will in
concentration camps or solitary confinement?

One may call my statement risky, but I do state unequivocally that I see no
reason -- political, military, economic or practical -- why the Vietnamese
should keep any United States servicemen in detention. Vietnam is far more
interested in normalizing its relations with the United States than in creating
additional obstacles to progress in this area.

I do not exclude a possibility that a few former U.S. servicemen, for personal
or other reasons, got stuck in Vietnam or neighboring countries, but I'm sure
that was their choice rather than due to pressure from local authorities or
deliberate policies of the Vietnamese Government.

I hope the joint U.S.-Vietnamese commission now set up to look into the matter
and possibly a similar U.S.-Russian commission will produce sufficient evidence
to eliminate suspicions and unwarranted accusations from whatever source.

OLEG KALUGIN
Washington, Jan. 21, 1992

The writer is a former K.G.B. official.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The 60's;
Clinton and Draft Issue: Vietnam Era Revisited

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 13


In the flush of victory in the Persian Gulf war, President Bush exultantly
proclaimed, "By God, we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all."

But does the fresh controversy over Bill Clinton's efforts to avoid the draft in
1969, epitomized by his agonized letter written that fall from Oxford
University, demonstrate the contrary?  Are all the painful ambiguities of that
era, the conflicts between duty and conscience, the lack of a clear-cut
denouement, now to be revisited?

Though Vietnam veterans, once scorned, are now celebrated, and though the sting
of defeat is easing, no national consensus has ever developed as to whether the
Vietnam War was just or unjust, whether draft dodging was justified, or whether
the United States could have won with a more determined effort.

A Kind of Curse

Some see a kind of curse hanging over the generation that was fractured in the
long dark night of war, with some of its members shedding blood in Southeast
Asia while others fled to Sweden or Canada, a few went to jail and still others
found one means or another to finagle a deferment.

Three members of that generation are running for the Democratic Presidential
nomination this year: Governor Clinton of Arkansas, who opposed the war and
avoided military service; Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who served in Asia but
turned against the war, and Senator Bob Kerrey of Iowa, who served in the Navy,
lost part of a leg and earned the Medal of Honor.

Representative Thomas J. Downey, a Suffolk County Democrat who was a student at
Cornell University in 1969 and was deferred because of a punctured eardrum, said
the Clinton episode "raises the question of whether anyone in my generation will
ever be elected President."

"The problem is that the scar has weakened the tissue of American life," he
added, "and every time it is rubbed it hurts again."

But the country seems no more unanimous about what Mr. Clinton did than it is or
has been about anything else connected with the Vietnam War.

'He Chose the Wrong Path'

Take Tom Harmon, a 44-year-old government employee from Shawneetown in southern
Illinois. He served as an infantryman in Vietnam, having bowed to the inevitable
by volunteering for the draft, and said today that if Mr. Clinton knew at the
time that he intended to go into politics, as his letter indicates, "he chose
the wrong path" by avoiding military service.

"There seem to be two philosophies," Mr. Harmon added. "One is that those guys
who avoided the thing were smarter than we were. Then there is the American
Legion approach -- people who think those who avoided the war ought to be
ostracized. Who knows what's right? And who cares?"

Interviews around the country with men of roughly the same age as Mr. Clinton
brought memories of the draft flooding back. A few, like Rick Smith, now 41 and
the owner of a barber shop in Simpsonville, N.C., said they had seen no way out.
"When you're 18 -- and I think that's still a child -- you just think that if
your country calls, you go," he said.

An even smaller number spoke with contempt for draft evaders.

"I saw friends come home with no legs," said John L. Thomas, many of whose
buddies left the Blue Ridge Mountains to fight, though he himself had a lottery
number high enough not to be called. "No one really wanted to go, but we felt it
was our duty. Even today, if I met somebody who avoided the draft I wouldn't
associate with them and wouldn't vote for them."

But most talked feelingly of the attempt to escape the net and exonerated Mr.
Clinton, either by implication or in so many words.

Tony Leone, 41, of Methuen, Mass., remembered the lottery, in which numbers were
pulled from a bowl. It seemed absurd to him, he said, that "because of a
Ping-Pong ball, your life changed." He said he and his friends discussed "how
much of your life you were willing to ruin for the war."

Jeff McKee, a radio host in Richmond, remembers reading a paperback book called
"1001 Ways to Avoid the Draft" during his freshman year at Emerson College in
Boston. He said it was hypocritical to criticize draft avoiders, as did many
others -- a suggestion, perhaps, that in his own generation, at least, Mr.
Clinton will find a support group of people who did what he did, or close to it.

"Educational deferment was the biggest educational motivator of my generation,"
the 42-year-old broadcaster said. "I got out of high school with just about a C
average. In college I was on the dean's List."

Others spoke of joining National Guard or Reserve units to avoid going to
Vietnam, of attending graduate school when they might not have done so, and of
seeking medical or other justifications for deferment. None mentioned any moral
or ethical difference in the various courses of action.

And many saw a kind of heroism in Mr. Clinton's antiwar stance.

For former Representative Andrew Young, who as an associate of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. was prominent in the antiwar movement, the Clinton letter
was "the kind of thing that Martin Luther King would have written a few years
earlier, and it represents the kind of struggle that Robert Kennedy went through
as he tried to work out his moral view."

Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont, who is now 43, described Mr. Clinton's letter as "a
telling reminder of what it was really like." Mr. Dean, a Democrat from a state
that attracted many draft resisters, spoke with distaste of "Richard Nixon and
Spiro Agnew, a convicted crook and a pardoned crook, sending people our age to
be killed."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

How the Draft Dodged Me

BYLINE: By Julian Bond;  Julian Bond is visiting professor of Government at
American University.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I too received an exemption from the draft that kept me from fighting in
Vietnam.

But my exemption didn't entail entry into the National Guard, as Vice President
Dan Quayle's did; I don't think the Guard in Georgia admitted blacks when I
became draft age in 1961.

And I wasn't kept out of the Army by a student deferment, as Secretary of
Defense Dick Cheney was, or by deferments and promises to enter R.O.T.C., like
Gov. Bill Clinton. Unlike them, I didn't know anybody on my draft board.
Georgia's draft boards were all-white, too.

No, my exemption was an unsolicited gift from my draft board in Atlanta.

Here's what happened. When I took my physical in 1961 with about 100 other young
men, our last requirement -- after we had turned our heads and coughed and
jumped and squinted -- was to tell the attending sergeant whether we had ever
been arrested. Most of those in line before me either answered "no" or mentioned
drunkenness, a traffic offense or failure to pay child support.

But when I called out my last name first, Army fashion, the sergeant told me, "I
know all about you, fellow! I've got a letter here from the Atlanta Chief of
Police. It says you were arrested in one of them sit-in demonstrations. This is
serious business. You may never get into this man's Army!"

I remember being both dismayed and overjoyed and left not knowing what would
happen to me. Weeks passed without a word. Then one day while I was out an
envelope arrived from the Army. My mother's worst fear was that it enclosed the
dreaded "Greetings" so many of my friends had received. With trembling hands,
she opened the letter, which contained a card that listed my classification as
4-Y.

When there was a draft, every eligible male knew two classifications by heart:
1-A meant you were on a bus for basic training that left yesterday; 4-F meant
you had too many heads or too few brains to serve.

My mother, married to a man too young for World War I and too old for World War
II, had less familiarity with such things. She called the draft board to have
the form explained. "Oh no, Mrs. Bond," a secretary told her, "I can't tell you
what it means on the telephone." This was like wartime, after all. The Berlin
wall had just gone up. American advisers were in Vietnam.

The secretary was more forthcoming when I called. "It means mentally,
physically, or morally unfit," she told me. "Not to be called except in case of
national emergency."

I can recall receiving this news with mixed emotions. I was certainly happy not
to be going. On the other hand, having been told that I had passed the physical
and mental tests, I wondered what had made me "morally" unfit for service in my
country's defense.

Then I realized I was being kept a civilian because of my arrest in 1960 at the
segregated lunch counter in the Atlanta City Hall. That act against
taxpayer-supported white supremacy had called my morals into question, at least
so far as the Army was concerned. I realized that some draft boards -- early in
the Vietnam conflict -- saw service as a privilege, which some young American
men didn't deserve.

The head of my draft board was as confused about my exemption as I was. He later
told Newsweek magazine: "That nigger Julian Bond. We sure let him slip through
our fingers."

This episode may offer a word of caution to those who look critically and too
generally at my generation. Not all of us manipulated the system to escape the
Army. The system itself happily manipulated some of us out of harm's way. And
some of us saw parallels in our own country to charges that the war in Vietnam
was a war of northern aggression. Our cast-off textbooks from white schools had
told us the Civil War was a war of northern aggression, too.

As we hear today how common it was to use graduate school as an escape hatch
from Vietnam, some of us remember a different war we were already fighting here
at home.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words



International A2-12

FROM RUSSIA WITH ENERGY

Seeking help to harness the vast energy of nuclear fusion, the United States is
hiring more than a hundred scientists from Russia, which pioneered the field.
This is the first known case in which the Federal Government has tapped Russia's
scientific talent.A1

A journal is published in Moscow 13 years after being suppressed.  A12

THE HIGH COST OF PEACE

Congress is making a concerted attack on the Bush Administration's pledges to
support United Nations peacekeeping operations at a cost of hundreds of millions
of dollars. With the United States in a recession, lawmakers are reluctant to
grant large amounts of money for international peacekeeping.  A1

WEIGHING THE MILITARY OPTION

The Administration is considering whether to board two North Korean cargo ships
that are heading for Iran loaded with ballistic missiles for Syria and Iran,
Administration officials said.  A10

SOME HELP FOR A FORMER ENEMY

The United States pledged to increase humanitarian aid to Vietnam for more
cooperation from Hanoi in resolving the fate of Americans missing from the
Vietnam War. But the U.S. said it was not prepared to lift its trade embargo.
A2

U.S. BLAMES PALESTINIANS

The Bush Administration singled out the Palestinians as being primarily
responsible for the lack of progress in the latest round of talks with Israel,
saying they were too preoccupied with political posturing and not prepared to
engage in serious negotiations with the Israelis.  A10

RIGHTS WATCHDOG BARKS

Dispelling fears that the organization would be weakened by the addition of 10
third-world nations, the United Nations Human Rights Commission ended annual
deliberations by criticizing a record 22 countries for human rights abuses.  A3

ABORTION RULING EXPLAINED

The Irish Supreme Court justices who voted to allow a 14-year-old girl to go to
England for an abortion said they feared the girl would kill herself if they
refused. They appeared to broaden the legal grounds for an abortion, which has
been allowed in Ireland only when the life of the mother is in immediate danger.
A8

SETBACK FOR POLISH GOVERNMENT

The lower chamber of Parliament rejected the economic plan of Prime Minister
Olszewski's Government. The Government said the plan would ease some of the
sting of free-market reforms; opponents said it would rekindle inflation.  A6

British politicians await the scheduling of a general election.  A5

Miners in Turkey mourn the deaths of comrades in an explosion.  A3

Prague Journal: A Harvard graduate leads the rush to capitalism.  A4


National A14-21

SHOWDOWN IN FLORIDA

Among the 11 states that will vote in the Presidential race next Tuesday,
Florida is shaping up as the most important for Governor Clinton and former
Senator Tsongas.  A1

For Mr. Tsongas and Pat Buchanan, Texas poses a big challenge.  A18

Mr. Tsongas is set for an advertising counteroffensive.  A18

The Tsongas campaign just gets curiouser and curiouser.  A19

Former Governor Brown enjoys his new "status of wild card." A19

As expected, Senator Kerrey bowed out of the race.  A19

DUKE'S OPPONENT: INDIFFERENCE

In South Carolina tomorrow, David Duke will be on the Republican Presidential
ballot for the first time. But political analysts and some of his own supporters
there say his thunder has been stolen by Pat Buchanan.  A1

President Bush is still having trouble with his message.  A20

An I.R.S. proposal may mean more trouble for the White House.  A20


U.S. ADVICE ON PAINKILLERS
The Government recommended that doctors swiftly and aggressively provide
painkillers to patients after surgery to decrease suffering and speed recovery.
It said myths about pain management caused half of all surgical patients to
suffer unrelieved, unnecessary pain.  A1

LOS ANGELES BEATING TRIAL BEGINS

A year after a black motorist's beating by a group of white police officers was
captured on videotape, testimony began in the officers' assault trial.  A14

THE MICHELANGELO VIRUS

The nation's personal-computer users scurried to try to escape a malicious
computer virus timed to erase data and programs today.  A14

NEW HEAD OF UNITED WAY

The board of the United Way of America, grappling with the resignation of its
president and new disclosures that he agreed to the destruction of some
financial records, named an I.B.M. official, Kenneth W. Dam, as interim
president.  A15

A TRYING DIFFICULT OBSERVANCE

For the Muslim minority in the United States, the observance of Ramadan can be a
difficult one.  A21

The Government restored some water for California farmers.  A15

Law Page   B8

A judge rejected an Iran-contra defendant's bid for secret files.  A16

A student group asks to sue Harvard.

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

REDISTRICTING PLAN RELEASED

Heading toward a confrontation with Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, a state legislative
committee released a final redistricting plan intended to increase the number of
seats held by black and Hispanic politicians while cementing the Democrats'
control of the Assembly and the Republicans' lock on the State Senate.  A1

GRAVANO IS QUESTIONED

On the first day of cross-examination, a defense lawyer fired tough, sarcastic
questions at Salvatore Gravano, a former Mafia underboss and the crucial
prosecution witness against John Gotti.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

Weekend C1-34

Sports B9-15
Baseball: Sources say Yankees pitcher Pascual Perez recently failed a drug test.
B9
Torborg's opening lineup.  B9

Obituaries B7
Mary Osborne, jazz guitarist
Wheeler McMillen, a pioneer in industrial use of farm crops

Editorials/Op-Ed A32-33
Editorials A32
The New World Army.
Anonymous sources.
Topics: Not funny.

Letters A32
A. M. Rosenthal: The political disease.  A33
Leslie H. Gelb: Banana republic, U.S.A.  A33
Marlon T. Riggs: Meet the new Willie Horton.  A33
Marvin Miller: Baseball's bottom-line logic.  A33
Burton G. Malkiel: How to cut long-term interest rates.  A33

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: D-day for the Michelangelo computer virus. (Associated Press)
A14

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM'S EXODUS APPEARS TO HALT

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, March 7


The number of Vietnamese boat people coming to seek refuge here dropped to zero
last month in what officials called an encouraging sign that the exodus that
scattered nearly 675,000 Vietnamese throughout this region in a dozen years may
finally be ending.

February was the first month in seven years that no Vietnamese arrived in Hong
Kong, which had been virtually the last place in Asia where the authorities
would not quickly return them to Vietnam. Officials said they believe that
people in Vietnam are at last beginning to understand that there is no longer
much chance they can improve their lives by fleeing their country.

In recent years, a growing number of Asian countries have been closing their
doors to Vietnamese refugees. Last year, 92 percent of the 22,000 Vietnamese
refugees arrived in Hong Kong.

'Word Has Really Spread'

"No arrivals is pretty remarkable," said a refugee official in Hong Kong. "In a
country as primitive as Vietnam, with people living in conditions with poor
communications, that everyone got the message is amazing. The word has really
spread."

Halting the exodus to Hong Kong, which has a population of 5.5 million people,
has been an emotional and controversial issue, and negotiations to resolve the
problem took years. The British authorities in Hong Kong have continued to
provide food and shelter to the refugees, with some living in special centers
for at least 10 years and others who were born in them knowing no life outside
the cramped and squalid quarters. There are about 58,000 refugees now in the
camps.

Other countries adopted stricter policies earlier on and the results were
striking. Malaysia, for example, took no Vietnamese last year, compared with
1,326 in 1990 and 16,718 the previous year. Indonesia received only 1,260 last
year, compared with 13,833 in 1990. Thailand took only 164 last year after
accepting 9,054 in 1990.

It is possible that more Vietnamese will try to come to Hong Kong during the
spring season, when the seas are calmer, but officials will not know until May
whether a new exodus will begin.

Most of those who come to Hong Kong now are regarded as economic rather than
political refugees. They have little or no hope of finding resettlement in the
United States, Australia, Canada or even Hong Kong itself. Instead, they are
kept in the camps while the Government tries to encourage them to return home.
The British authorities here initially sought to get them to return voluntarily,
but recently they have also forced a small number to go back against their will.


Britain-Vietnam Agreement

The refugee flow did not appear to ebb until Britain and Vietnam agreed in
October on the mandatory repatriation of certain kinds of Vietnamese refugees.
In January, the number of arrivals dwindled to four.

Under the agreement, those who arrived after Oct. 29 were interviewed and then
returned immediately if they did not qualify as refugees who were politically
persecuted by the Vietnamese Government. Those who arrived for a second time
were also sent back.

In contrast, those who arrived before the cutoff date could remain in Hong Kong
until their turns came in a line of nearly 35,000 Vietnamese to be interviewed
and screened. The process of sending Vietnamese refugees back to their country
or resettling them elsewhere is expected to take several years. Thus, it was the
immediate returns that seemed to have driven the message home, officials here
said.

The number of Vietnamese volunteering to return home seemed to be steadily
increasing, with 2,085 returning so far this year, compared to 16,064 who have
chosen to return in the three years since March 1989, when the first volunteers
returned home, according to Hong Kong Government statistics.

The process was delayed when a riot and a fire in early February, in which
nearly two dozen people died, resulted in charges against 173 Vietnamese. About
800 Vietnamese who had volunteered to return home will have their trips delayed
pending the Government's investigation into the riot. Still, the Government says
it plans to send back five more groups in March.

Quayle Causes a Problem

The program also suffered a significant setback in mid-February after Vice
President Dan Quayle referred to the Vietnamese in Hong Kong as "political
refugees."

After Mr. Quayle's remarks, Vietnamese refugees here believed that there would
be a policy change and that they would be reclassified as political refugees
instead of economic ones. Most Governments will accept only those who are
fleeing political persecution, not those who are seeking greater prosperity.

The Voice of America broadcast a program in Vietnamese, emphasizing that there
would be no change in United States policy toward the refugees. Applications to
return voluntarily, however, are still lower than they were before the Vice
President's remarks. Moreover, about half of those who had already applied for
repatriation changed their minds and decided to remain in the Hong Kong camps.

"A statement like Mr. Quayle's had an immediate impact," said Robert Van
Leeuwen, chief of the Hong Kong mission of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees. "Corrective statements take a longer time to have an impact."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Josiah W. Bennett, 75, Specialist In Asian Affairs for the State Dept.

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


Josiah W. Bennett, a retired Foreign Service officer who served as political
adviser to the last two American ambassadors to South Vietnam, died Saturday at
Hillhaven Extended Care, a nursing home in Santa Cruz, Calif. He was 75 years
old.

He had had Alzheimer's disease, his family said.

Mr. Bennett, a China specialist, served in the War Department from 1942 to 1946
and in the American Embassy in Nanjing, China, from 1946 until the Communists
seized power in 1949. Mr. Bennett then headed the United States Information
Service in Taipei, Taiwan, and in Tel Aviv, and the political section of the
American Embassy in Lagos, Nigeria.

In the late 1950's and early 1960's, he held senior positions in the State
Department, first as chief of the political section of the China Affairs Office
and later as deputy director for East Asian affairs and country director for
Taiwan and Malaysia.

He was the Minister for Political Affairs in the American Embassy in Saigon, and
was the political adviser to Ambassadors Ellsworth Bunker and Graham Martin. Mr.
Bennett arrived in South Vietnam just before the Communists' Tet offensive in
1968 and was among the last Americans to leave Saigon in 1975. He was a senior
Foreign Service inspector when he retired the next year.

Born in Cambridge, Mass., Mr. Bennett attended Harvard University, the
University of California at Los Angeles and Yenching University in Beijing. He
received his bachelor's degree in 1938 from the University of Chicago, where he
later did graduate work in Chinese history.

He is survived by his wife, Chou Nien-tz'u; two daughters, Ann Spence of Palo
Alto, Calif., and Jean Bennett of Santa Monica, Calif.; a sister, Jane Shiner of
New Albany, Ind.; two brothers, David Bennett of West Palm Beach., Fla., and
Clark Bennett of Falmouth, Maine, and five grandchildren.

NAME: Josiah W. Bennett

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Had to Return Vietnam Refugees;
Violation of Rights

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

The forced return by British and Hong Kong authorities of Vietnamese boat people
deemed not to be refugees (news article, Dec. 11) is a gratuitous threat to the
United Nations agreement governing Vietnamese refugees in the region.

Very few Vietnamese asylum seekers are arriving in Hong Kong -- a mere seven
arrived in November -- and voluntary repatriation is increasing. A fundamental
principle of refugee protection is not to return asylum seekers forcibly, if
voluntary return is working.

Although the burden is growing lighter, the British and Hong Kong governments
evidently are not willing to wait for boat people to return voluntarily as
called for in the comprehensive plan of action of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. History will judge this as an unwarranted and
flagrant human rights violation.

Forcible return to Vietnam comes while major flaws in the screening process
remain and political conditions in Vietnam are uncertain. Returnees, according
to Asia Watch, are subject to harassment in Vietnam.

Not only do screening reforms need to be addressed, but these allegations of
harassment must be investigated satisfactorily before forced return of boat
people to Vietnam is again contemplated.

LIONEL A. ROSENBLATT
Executive Director, Refugees International
Washington, Dec. 20, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Had to Return Vietnam Refugees

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 493 words


To the Editor

As members of the Hong Kong Students Association studying in the United States
at Princeton University, we are concerned that readers may not have gotten the
full picture from your coverage in "Hong Kong Ousts More Boat People" (news
article, Dec. 11).

Since the end of the Vietnam War in 1975, Hong Kong, along with other Southeast
Asian countries, has agreed to act as a first port of asylum for political
refugees fleeing Vietnam, with the understanding that they would eventually be
granted permission to settle in the West. Yet, the speed with which Western
countries resettled the refugees failed to keep up with the Vietnamese exodus.

As a growing sign of frustration, a few states, such as Malaysia and Thailand,
have rescinded the policy of first port of asylum. Hong Kong has offered refuge
to more than 175,000 Vietnamese, 63,000 of whom are still stranded in the
territory. Over the last 15 years, the tide of new arrivals flooding Hong Kong
shores has shown no sign of receding: 32,611 Vietnamese landed in the territory
in the first 10 months of 1989, compared with 6,788 in 1980.

No Western country, including the United States, has taken the lead in solving
the problem. The West warns Hong Kong not to revoke the asylum policy, while
claiming it cannot accept so many boat people. The United States, with 5,000
times the area of Hong Kong, has absorbed only 15 times more people. Present
policy strands the unsettled boat people in Hong Kong and other first ports of
asylum to await a better solution. But no real efforts have been made to find a
solution. As the situation worsens, Hong Kong has been left to find alternative
remedies.

With an area of 1,000 square kilometers -- roughly the size of New York City --
Hong Kong supports a population of 6 million. Accommodating 63,000 boat people
has put a strain on Hong Kong's limited resources. Critics have castigated Hong
Kong for the "appalling" conditions in refugee camps. To accommodate these boat
people, camps have been built, food and necessities provided, education,
recreation, medical care and legal aid offered. Hong Kong has contributed $340
million, while reimbursement from the United Nations amounts to a mere $80
million.

Nonetheless, our efforts often go unrecognized. Critics have reprimanded Hong
Kong for using batons to disperse factional riots among the Vietnamese; however,
they often ignore that rioting Vietnamese make weapons and Molotov cocktails
from wire fences, drainage pipes and bottles -- simple weapons but lethal.
Police, armed with self-defense gear, are only called in to break up fights and
protect the boat people.

The United States has been repatriating Haitians, whom it classifies as economic
migrants, but when Hong Kong is condemned for sending back economic migrants
from Vietnam, no one questions that a double standard is being used.

KAISER FUNG, JUNE WU, FLORA CHEN
Princeton, N.J., Dec. 27, 1991

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
Nightmare of Vietnam: Can You Ever Awaken?

BYLINE: By Douglas Martin

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


I can still see the color snapshot. It showed the smiling face of a young man I
had known since kindergarten. We'd gone through school, Cub Scouts, football
seasons together. The photo showed my friend wearing an Army helmet and holding
a human ear in each hand.

That was more than 20 years ago, and my friend sort of got on with his life.
Fitfully. He has attributed his alcoholism, drug addiction, family problems to
what happened in Southeast Asia long ago. Exposure to Agent Orange, the
defoliant used in the war, is a particular culprit.

There is likely both truth and delusion in his fixation. The point is that he,
like thousands of others, believes things that happened in Vietnam have
influenced his life in sinister, mysterious ways. Vietnam is a war that won't
let go.

"The war never goes away," said Genoveva L. "It's always hunting everybody
either in their dreams or real life."

This mother was visiting the Children's Evaluation and Rehabilitation Center at
Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. She had brought her daughter,
Gloria, as she does twice a week.

Gloria is 10 years old and has always had trouble learning. "She tries to pay
attention, but she does the opposite," her mother said too matter-of-factly.

The child is a beneficiary of the suit filed in 1977 by a Vietnam veteran
against the makers of Agent Orange. The suit was settled in 1984, just as the
trial was scheduled to begin.

Some $52 million of the settlement was set aside to provide services to veterans
and their families. The two-year-old Einstein program is one of nearly 1,000
around the nation that gets chunks of this money. Its services include
evaluation and treatment of motor disabilities, birth defects and learning
problems.

Families of any veteran who served in Southeast Asia between 1961 and 1972 are
eligible. There is no need to prove Agent Orange exposure. That would be
immensely difficult, and the genetic effects of the chemical are largely unknown
anyway.

Genoveva L. -- who like other participants could only be identified by first
name -- said she suspects her husband, Juan, was exposed. "He said he would hear
the choppers come and spray something in the air," she said.

And if he was exposed, she knows that might mean everything or nothing. "You
just have to wait and see the changes as a child is growing up," she said.

Unanswered questions are what the war left behind. "There's no way of proving
anything," said Mary DeVivo, the social worker who is co-director of the
Einstein program. "What we deal with is what's going on at the present."

Unasked questions are some veterans' preference. "They don't want to learn that
if there's something wrong with their children, it's their fault," said Dr.
Susan Pincus, a physician and the other co-director. "It's a pretty big burden
to bear."

Some of it is in people's minds, but that doesn't make it any less real. The son
of a father left a nervous wreck by the war refuses to leave the house or go to
school. A girl whose father has lung disease has great difficulty breathing,
though doctors find no medical reason why she should.

Others' problems are palpably obvious. As the program has become better
publicized, younger children are coming in. These have cleft palates and other
birth defects some have linked to Agent Orange.

The main thrust of the Einstein effort is helping the learning disabled through
evaluation, then counseling and tutoring.

There is 16-year-old Daniel C., who had great difficulty learning language and
is moderately retarded. He has been medicated for hyperactivity since age 4, and
has been coming to Einstein for tutoring twice a week. His father was attacked
and murdered on the streets of the Bronx three years ago.

Usually, he completely refuses to talk about his father. Perhaps because he is
so eager to please, he did the other day.

"I'm proud of him that he fought in the war," Daniel said, smiling shyly. "But
the aftermath of the war, like, took over his mind."

Tom and Marie N. brought their daughter, Jacqueline, who was diagnosed as having
perceptual problems and helped by the center. She recently brought home a report
card full of A's.

Tom has no idea whether he was exposed to Agent Orange. Marie suspects that her
difficulty becoming pregnant and a miscarriage are related.

But Vietnam is water under a long-ago bridge. "You figure nobody's interested,"
Tom said. "Who wants to hear about it?"

And my friend has slipped again. He is not working, has resumed drinking and
wears his Army jacket everywhere. That is what his wife said when she stopped to
say they had gotten divorced.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 5, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Camps Are Tense After Riot

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Feb. 4


A riot in which 21 Vietnamese boat people, including 5 children, were burned to
death Monday night has focused new attention on the volatile atmosphere in
crowded refugee camps here, where rivalries between North and South Vietnamese
gangs often lead to violence.

The riot was by far the worst in a series of disturbances in the Vietnamese
camps, which house more than 58,000 boat people who have fled to this British
colony by the thousands since 1975 in the hope of emigrating to the West.

Tension has been particularly high in the camps since November, when the Hong
Kong government resumed forced repatriations of Vietnamese who have been
determined to be economic and not political refugees, although officials said
Monday night's riot was not a protest against the forced returns.

The police said the nighttime melee in the Shek Kong camp -- in which 126 people
were injured, 7 of them critically -- was set off by an argument over hot water
and quickly involved rival gangs from northern and southern Vietnam, who fought
with homemade spears, knives, sticks and stones.

A 'Deliberate Attack'

The victims who died had tried to escape the fighting by locking themselves
inside a camp hut, but the hut was set afire by the brawlers, officials said.
Alistair Asprey, the colony's Secretary for Security, said the dead were
northern Vietnamese who had been surrounded and outnumbered in the fight.

"It was a deliberate attack on a group of people and a deliberate case of
arson," he said.

Firing tear gas, hundreds of riot police officers restored order to the camp in
the remote New Territories area about four hours after the fighting started.

Officials said late today that 400 of the 2,600 northerners in Shek Kong had
been moved out of the camp, which houses a total 9,000 boat people. They were
taken to other camps, the officials said, adding that the rest of the
northerners would be evacuated in the next day or so.

Preventing False Rumors

Some 90 boat people have been detained for questioning, but so far there have
been no arrests in connection with the riot.

The Governor, Sir David Wilson, and top security officials toured Shek Kong
early today. Mr. Wilson called the incident "a terrible tragedy," and said he
had ordered officials at all other camps to release the details of the fire and
the fighting, to prevent false rumors from igniting new outbreaks of violence.

The fighting started in a special section of the camp that housed some 800 boat
people who had volunteered to return home to Vietnam under a United Nations
program. The volunteers, an official said, were to have been flown back to
Vietnam within a few weeks. Officials said the riot would not affect plans to
repatriate refugees.

Relief workers have long warned that tensions inside the crude, crowded camps
could erupt into serious violence, and in the past there have been deaths and
injuries from factional fights and gang rivalries. Officials acknowledged that
despite adequate patrols and supervision, the camps were in fact powder kegs.

Tension in the Camps

Speaking at a news conference, officials were at a loss to explain specific
factors and causes behind the gang rivlaries and north-south tensions within the
camps. Northern and southern Vietnam have vastly different cultures and levels
of economic development, and political differences stemming from the long civil
war won by the Communist North. Officials say people from the South who arrive
here typically have higher education levels than those of the northerners in the
camps, many of whom were farmers and fishermen in Vietnam.

In addition, tension has grown in the camps between those who are willing to go
home and those who still dream of a life in the West. Other factors are the
realization that the majority of boat people have little chance of qualifying as
political refugees, and the bleak conditions of the camps.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The riot that killed 21 Vietnamese boat people on Monday in Hong
Kong was the worst in a series of disturbances in refugee camps there. Riot
police officers patrolled yesterday at the scene of the riot. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Draft;
Brief Deferment Likely Kept Clinton From Ever Serving

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 14


The two men who were called by Bill Clinton's draft board in the fall of 1969
were younger than he, and today a Selective Service official said that that
means Mr. Clinton would almost certainly have been called into the Army if he
had not had a deferment.

"The order of call was oldest first by each draft board," said Lewis C. Brodsky,
a spokesman for the Selective Service System. "So if you have found an
individual younger than the man with whom you are comparing him, the older man
must have had a deferment."

Mr. Clinton, now the Governor of Arkansas and a Democratic candidate for
President, appears to have done what many other young men did at the time,
especially those with college degrees who opposed the war in Vietnam. He used
legal means to avoid, or at least delay, being drafted. But it is rare that
those who escaped the draft ever learned about the ones who were taken in their
place.

In Mr. Clinton's case, their names are Teddie Dwight Welch and Gordon Lee
Fendley. Both live in Hot Springs, Ark., and both said today they had no hard
feelings toward Mr. Clinton.

Mr. Clinton's avoidance of the draft has become an central issue in the
Democratic Presidential race in New Hampshire.

'Saving Me From Draft'

Until this week, Mr. Clinton had said that he had dropped his draft deferment
because he felt a moral obligation to do so after some of his high school
classmates had been killed in Vietnam. He had been given a deferment because he
had said he intended to enroll in law school at the University of Arkansas and
join the Reserve Officers Training Corps there.

On Wednesday he acknowledged that he had written a letter to the Army colonel
running the R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas in which he thanked
the colonel for "saving me from the draft" and conceded that he had never really
intended to join the officer training program.

The records of the Hot Springs draft board, like most others from that period,
have mostly been destroyed. But a chronology of events from the time seems to
explain what happened.

President Richard M. Nixon announced in September 1969 that the November and
December drafts would be canceled and that the October draft, 29,000 men, would
be spread over three months.

Mr. Welch and Mr. Fendley were probably selected for induction in October, when
Mr. Clinton, then a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in England, still had
his R.O.T.C. deferment.

They were inducted Dec. 3, but Mr. Brodsky said they must have been selected
while Mr. Clinton still had his deferment. If not, he said, Mr. Clinton would
have been drafted in place of one of them.

People who followed the draft closely at the time said several weeks often
lapsed between the time induction notices were received and the time draftees
had to report for induction. Mr. Welch and Mr. Fendley, who were interviewed
today, said they did not remember exactly when they received their draft
notices.

Mr. Clinton has said he informed the R.O.T.C. in October that he did not plan to
enroll. Records show that on Oct. 30 he was reclassified 1-A, or eligible for
the draft.

By the time he wrote the letter to the R.O.T.C. colonel on Dec. 3, draft
procedures had been rewritten, a lottery based on birth dates had been
instituted and Mr. Clinton's birthday had such a high lottery number that he
could be sure he would never be drafted.

Asked today if he knew that another man had been drfted in his place, Mr.
Clinton said, "That may be. I can't say anything about that."

He said he had not been aware of being more vulnerable to the draft at one time
than another. "This implies that I have this incredibly subtle grasp of the
future and the present," he said.

On Oct. 1, 1969, President Nixon announced that graduate students like Mr.
Clinton who were drafted could finish out the school year before they were
actually inducted. But if Mr. Clinton had not had the R.O.T.C. deferment, he
still would have received his draft notice, Mr. Brodsky said.

Mr. Welch, who was born Sept. 11, 1946, is about three weeks younger than Mr.
Clinton, who was born Aug. 19. Mr. Welch is now a controller at the Coca Cola
Bottling Company in Hot Springs. Reached by telephone, he said he had not known
that he might have been drafted instead of Mr. Clinton but that he felt no ill
will. "I don't hold any grudge about it," he said.

Favoring No One for President

He did not go to Vietnam, he said, because his brother was there, and the Army
was not sending brothers into the war. Instead, he was stationed in Alaska. Mr.
Welch said he had voted for Mr. Clinton for Governor but did not favor any
particular candidate for President.

Mr. Fendley, the other man drafted, served in Vietnam without injury. He said he
had not been opposed to the war but, "I was not pleased about having to go. If I
could have figured out some way to avoid it, legally, I would have."

Mr. Fendley said he voted for Mr. Clinton for Governor but was undecided in the
Presidential race.

Mr. Fendley said he was now a department manager of a large corporation he would
not identify.

Mr. Clinton apparently broke no contract when he reneged on his intention to
join the R.O.T.C. An Army R.O.T.C. spokesman said today he probably signed
nothing but a letter of intent.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 40 words


"I haven't been here since Dec. 23, 1973, and when I went out through the
streets here this week, it was like I left last Friday and came back on Monday."
-- ANDY ANDERSON, a Vietnam veteran, at a marathon in Ho Chi Minh City. [1:2.]

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Hotels

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 6; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


To the Editor: Steven Erlanger's calling it his favorite hotel in the city ("For
Many Vietnamese, It's Still Saigon," April 28) was good enough for me to book
the Hotel Majestic during a visit there last fall.

I found it an amiable dump badly in need of renovation and with limited
services. The only English-language newspaper in the hotel rack was two months
old, for example.

Americans who travel halfway around the world and can afford the extra $15 to
$20 a night should stay at the elegant Continental or very well-maintained and
serviced Rex.

JOSEPH D POLICANO
East Hampton, L.I.

Steven Erlanger responds: The Continental and the Rex are both good hotels.
Perhaps I suffer from a misplaced nostalgia for the Majestic.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Quayle and Clinton

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 247 words


To the Editor:

In "Bill Clinton and the Draft" (Op-Ed, Feb. 12), Prof. Michael Mandelbaum's
comparison of the nonparticipation in the Vietnam War records of Vice President
Quayle and Gov. Bill Clinton begs the question of who is more qualified to be
President of the United States and Commander in Chief of the armed forces. Their
records, whatever the nuances of one's avoidance or the other's, give no
evidence of suitability for that responsibility. Their motives were interest in
self -- their own careers -- not the interests of their country.

It is false to compare the popularity of World War II with the Vietnam War's.
Neither was popular. Despite all President Franklin D. Roosevelt's
persuasiveness and the obvious danger to United States security in 1939-41, he
could not obtain enough popular support to bring the United States into World
War II until Japan attacked Pearl Harbor. But then all America turned to and did
the job, no excuses, no explaining away, no whining, very little draft
avoidance.

Why not in Vietnam? Lack of popularity is no excuse. These two men were asking
themselves what their country could do for them, not what they could do for
their country.

Dedication to country is what the United States needs in its President and
Commander in Chief. Do you find it in men who avoided service? No way!

J. SINCLAIR ARMSTRONG
New York, Feb. 13, 1992

The writer was an assistant Secretary of the Navy, 1957-59.

<ILS>Drawing

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Who Shot J.F.K.?

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


To the Editor:

In his essay "Writers on the Grassy Knoll: A Reader's Guide" (Feb. 2), Stephen
E. Ambrose states that President John F. Kennedy's commitment to the withdrawal
of troops from South Vietnam "is a proposition that is open to debate."

Not so. Roger Hilsman, Kennedy's Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern
Affairs, wrote in a recent letter to The New York Times: "The historical record,
in sum, is clear: President Kennedy was determined not to let Vietnam become an
American war -- that is, he was determined not to send U.S. combat troops (as
opposed to advisers) to fight in Vietnam nor to bomb North Vietnam." Mr. Hilsman
also wrote: "Before his tragic death in an airplane crash, John McNaughton,
Assistant Secretary of Defense . . . said he understood President Kennedy wanted
to close out Vietnam by 1965, 'whether it was in good shape or bad.' "

Not much room for debate here, Mr. Ambrose.

FRANK OZIMEK
Irvington, N.J.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A DIRECTORY OF CRUISES WORLDWIDE;
New Ships, New Destinations

BYLINE: By TERRY TRUCCO;  TERRY TRUCCO frequently writes about travel.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 15; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2150 words


LAST year at this time, cruise line executives were nervous. There was a war in
the Persian Gulf, a recession at home and Americans simply weren't taking
cruises. "It was as if the phones had been disconnected," said Rod Seeley,
president of Cruise Pro, a cruise-only travel agency in Thousand Oaks, Calif. In
addition, three enormous ships were about to be launched, adding more than 6,500
berths to the market. The industry's response was a blizzard of discounts,
everything from 2-for-1 promotions to deep reductions on last-minute
reservations. Apparently, the ship lines got the desired result, for according
to the Cruise Lines International Association, a trade organization, cruise
ships had an occupancy rate of around 87 percent in 1991, about the same as in
1990, not bad for a year that once looked disastrous.

A year later, there is still a recession, and 18 new ships are set to start
cruising, offering more than 12,000 additional berths. Yet throughout the cruise
industry, there is a mood of cautious optimism. "We've certainly had a much
better start to the year," Mr. Seeley said. "This may not be a banner year for
the cruise lines, with all the discounting, but it's going to be a banner year
for the consumer."

Cruise passengers have rarely had so many choices, from exotic destinations to
spectacular accommodations. And the cruise industry has seldom courted
passengers as ardently. This is a year for the adventurous, with ships visiting
once-forbidden ports, like Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam, and sailing to the newly
independent Baltic capitals Tallinn in Estonia and Riga in Latvia. And this year
people taking cruises can visit a lake in Russia or be among the first
non-Russians to sail the river between Moscow and St. Petersburg. Ships are also
returning to the Mediterranean, many tying up in Barcelona for the Olympics.
Cruises prepaid in dollars are considered a particularly good way of visiting
cities in Europe and Asia where the dollar is weak.

The year's new ships range from the enormous (2,354 passengers can be
accommodated on Royal Caribbean's Majesty of the Seas) to the almost intimate
(the luxurious Royal Viking Queen holds just 212). Among the in- between are the
Club Med 2, a 386-passenger sailing ship with computerized sails, and five ships
carrying between 1,000 and 1,300 passengers. Celebrity's 1,374-passenger Zenith,
a Caribbean vessel, will serve meals devised by a noted London chef, Michel
Roux. And Holland America's 1,250-passenger Statendam, set to sail in late
December, will have a 17th-century Italian marble fountain in the atrium.

Discounting should continue through 1992, though industry executives expect the
discounts to be more predictable and consistent than in 1991. A number of lines,
for example, including Princess, Holland America and Royal Caribbean, are
offering big incentives for early bookings in an effort to discourage 11th-hour
bargain hunters.

If last month is any indication, the cruise industry could be on its way to a
buoyant 1992, at least as far as occupancy rates go. (The record was 1989, when
occupancies reached 90 percent, according to the cruise lines association.)
Several cruise lines reported record bookings, including Royal Caribbean, which
set a single-day company high of 11,102 bookings on Jan. 8 and Carnival, which
reached an unprecedented 65,000 bookings the week of Jan. 6.

True, January is traditionally a strong month for cruise bookings, and much of
the volume resulted from last-minute reservations, discount offers for early
bookings and pent-up demand. "Because of the recession, everybody is booking
late, even for round the world and Mediterranean cruises," said Stanley Rhodes,
an agent with Linden Travel in New York.

Among the discounts still being offered, Norwegian Cruise Line is featuring a
2-for-1 deal on selected three- and four-day Bahamas cruises, through Feb. 24.
Holland America is offering substantial reductions, linked with stringent
restrictions, for early reservations on selected autumn cruises. And several
lines, including Renaissance Cruises and Royal Cruise Line, have introduced
reductions on the supplements single occupants pay for use of double cabins on
selected sailings. The availability of group discounts is also growing rapidly
as well, with cruise lines accepting looser definitions of groups. "A group can
be three or four people, not an obvious affinity group," said Stanley Buchin, a
cruise management consultant for Arthur D. Little, a management consultant
company.

FOR customers in the market for longer trips, cruise lines often have good
prices on so-called positioning cruises, including trans-Atlantic trips to move
a ship from the Mediterranean to the Caribbean. "Demand for these cruises is
lower, and prices can be negotiated more easily." said Steve Wellmeier,
marketing director for Travltips, a travel agency in Flushing, Queens.

Yet in spite of discounting and concerns about possible overcapacity, cruising
is viewed as one of the few bright spots in the travel industry these days. "The
cruise industry grew about 10 percent last year," said Arthur Sbarsky, senior
vice president in marketing for Crystal Cruises. "Airplanes, hotels, trains and
buses didn't."

Some believe the single all-inclusive cost of a cruise is especially attractive
in today's economic climate. "With cruising, once you've paid the initial price,
everything is taken care of," said Joyce Landry, a partner in Landry & Cling,
cruise specialists in Coral Gables, Fla.

Cruises are becoming particularly popular with families. According to a 1990
survey by the cruise lines association, 28 percent of those who had taken a
cruise in the previous two years took their children. "The baby boomers are
taking their kids on cruises, and not just to the Caribbean," Mr. Seeley said. A
number of cruise lines, including Carnival, Royal Caribbean and Norwegian Cruise
Line, now offer year-round youth programs. Royal Caribbean will have a specially
designed teen disco, called Flashes, on its new Majesty of the Seas, which will
set sail on April 26. (A similar disco, with light shows and music, is on its
sister ship, Monarch of the Seas.) Cruises linked to land trips are attracting
families as well. Premier, for example, offers moderately priced Bahamas cruises
that conclude with a visit to Florida's Walt Disney World.

The recession does not seem to have greately dampened the demand for luxury
accommodations, either. Cruise lines and travel agents report that the year's
hottest sellers are the cheapest cabins -- and the costliest. Some passengers
are asking for the cheaper cabins in the hopes of an upgrade. But premium-priced
suites are selling, often to cruising's traditional constituents, older affluent
passengers.

Many in the industry, in fact, are betting that luxury is the future. One of the
year's most talked about new ships is the $125 million Radisson Diamond, a
futuristic looking 354-passenger luxury liner with a twin hull. The ship, due to
spend much of the year in the Caribbean, will have a five-story atrium,
glass-enclosed elevators, saunas, steambaths and a $600 a day price tag without
air fare. The company plans to launch a sister ship, the Radisson Ruby, in 1993.

Among cruise companies, the two-tiered approach -- both a luxury and a
moderately priced line -- is proving itself. The veterans include Kloster
Cruises, with its mass-market Norwegian Cruise Line and sybaritic Royal Viking
Line; and Chandris Cruise Companies, which runs the mass-market Fantasy line and
more upscale Celebrity line. .

New to the two-tiered market this year are Costa Cruise Line and Dolphin Cruise
Line. The 1,300-passenger, $325 million Costa Classica is the first in Costa's
Euro-Luxe line, aimed at the high end of the mass market and the low end of the
luxury market. The ship, launched last month, has all the trappings of a
floating hotel, with marble walls and floors, teak decks and an enormous bronze
sculpture by the Italian artist Arnaldo Pomodoro.

The 1,056-passenger, $220 million Royal Majesty, the first of three handsomely
appointed ships in Dolphin's new Majesty line, will start running short cruises
in September from Miami to Nassau and Royal Isle, the line's private island in
the Bahamas. "I think the lines are discovering that once passengers go on a
second cruise, they want upgraded vessels," Ms. Landry said.

The North American cruise industry, by far the world's richest market, has grown
dramatically in the last two decades, and is expected to continue to grow in the
90's. The Cruise Lines International Association is predicting passenger growth
of between 8 and 10 percent in 1992. The current year began with 90,000 berths
on 122 ships; an additional 30,000 berths are expected by 1994. Last year four
million passengers from the United States and Canada took cruises, a big
increase over the industry's 500,000 passengers in 1970. And, despite concerns
by some in the industry that too many ships are coming on line, others insist
cruising is in its infancy. "An enormous number of Americans have never
cruised," Mr. Sbarsky said.

Many attribute the growth of cruising to a change of strategy on the part of the
cruise lines. "Until the mid 80's, cruise lines were run by maritime people, and
passengers were considered just another cargo to move around," said Mr. Buchin.
These days, cruise lines are managed and marketed like resorts or hotels.

The creation of sharply focused lines like Carnival, and television shows like
"The Love Boat," attracted new types of passengers, as well. According to the
1990 survey by Cruise Lines International, 41 percent of the adults who had
taken a cruise in the previous two years were under 40.

Income levels were also surprisingly varied. In the same survey, 35 percent had
incomes under $40,000, while 30 percent exceeded $60,000.

Cruising's broadening audience is reflected in the popularity of short cruises,
particularly the affordable three- and four-day cruise, one of the market's
fastest growing segments. In 1984 there were three or four ships offering short
cruises, according to a spokesman for Carnival. This year there will be 10.

This market could expand dramatically if Cuba is opened to Americans, according
to Ron Bitting, owner of Personal Touch Cruise Consultants in Freeport, L.I.,
and president of the National Association of Cruise Only Agencies. " It would be
one of cruising's most exciting events, and it could happen in 1992."

At the same time, demand continues for longer cruises by older passengers. In
most cases, older, smaller ships are used for the longer journeys. Fantasy's
Britanis, which dates from the 1930's and is one of the oldest cruise ships
afloat, makes a 50-day South American cruise each autumn. "It carries 926
passengers, but they take about 500 and use the more comfortable cabins," said
Mr. Wellmeier.

Ships in 1992 will sail to nearly every corner of the world, from Antarctica and
the Amazon to Africa and the so-called Atlantic Frontier (Boston to Labrador).
Alaska has become a cruise classic, though just 16 ships will visit this year,
six less than in 1991. (Most cruise lines, concerned that last year's Gulf War
would last for months, diverted Mediterranean ships to Alaska and New England.)
Eighteen lines will visit the Mediterranean this summer. Cruises are also going
to Australia and Indonesia. Because of the civil war in Yugoslavia, Dubrovnik
has been dropped by most cruise itineraries, though Ocean Cruise's Ocean
Princess, among other ships, still plans to stop there.

The Caribbean remains cruising's major destination, with year-round visitors and
56 percent of the market. A number of the year's new ships are expected to make
the familiar stops -- St. Thomas, Grand Cayman, St. Martin, Jamaica, Puerto
Rico, Barbados. Travel agents agree that these ports are nearly overwhelmed by
cruise ships, yet until other Caribbean islands develop the tours and facilities
to accommodate daily arrivals of over 1,000 visitors, these will remain the
Caribbean's cruise capitals.

And there seems no end in sight to ships destined for the Caribbean. The ship of
the future could be the Phoenix World City, an ultramegaship built to hold 5,600
passengers and a crew of 1,800. Currently in the final stages of design,
construction on the $1 billion project could start in the United States later
this year, according to John Rogers, president of Phoenix World City
Corporation.

The supership, brainchild of Knute Utstein Kloster, founder of Kloster Cruises,
would have three hotel towers, 13 restaurants, a 20,000-square-foot casino and
home base in Port Canaveral, Fla.

From there it could cruise the southern coast of the United States or venture
into the Caribbean, where its 400-passenger tenders could deliver passengers to
nearly any island.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Riga, in the newly independent Latvia, is one of this year's
ports of call. (Fred Soloff/FPG); Ships are returning to the Mediterranean; the
Golden Odyssey off Santorini. Many ships are visiting Barcelona for the Olympics
this year. The grand arrival in Miami on Jan. 19 of the Costa Classica, launched
last month. (Costa Cruise Line)(pg. 15); The harbor at Ho Chi Minh City, a new
port of call. (David Jacobson)(pg. 47)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Gangs Terrorize Asians Near Boston

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 6


In the last six weeks the homes of at least nine Asian businessmen in Boston's
suburbs have been invaded by gangs of young Asians armed with automatic weapons
and machetes. The businessmen and their families have then been tied up, beaten
and robbed of cash and jewelry.

The attacks have largely baffled the police and have frightened many
Asian-Americans here.

Law-enforcement officials say the new wave of attacks in part reflects the
breakdown of a Chinese organized crime group that had controlled extortion,
gambling and drug rackets in Boston's Chinatown for years, leaving the way open
for a group of competing organizations.

But the new attacks in Boston's suburbs are similar to those carried out in
other parts of the country by youthful Vietnamese or ethnic Chinese from
Vietnam, and may indicate that these often very violent gangs are spreading to
New England, specialists say.

Highly Mobile Gang Members

The Vietnamese gangs, usually made up of youths 15 to 21 years of age, have no
real national organization and are highly mobile, making them difficult to track
down, said Peter Kwong, a professor of history at the State University of New
York at Old Westbury.  Professor Kwong, who is writing a book on the Chinese in
America, is one of the very few specialists who has spent time with some of the
Vietnamese gang members.

Professor Kwong said the kind of attacks that have been taking place in Boston's
suburbs, which the police call "home invasions," has been rising rapidly in
metropolitan areas with sizeable Asian communities over the last four or five
years, particularly in California, Texas, suburban Washington and parts of Long
Island. "But it is a fairly silent problem that has not gotten much national
attention," he said, because many of the victims do not report the crimes.

There are several reasons for the victims' reluctance to go to the police, he
said. For one thing, in some Asian countries there is a traditional aversion to
dealing with the police, who are often corrupt or oppressive. In addition,
Professor Kwong said, the victims are usually the owners of Chinese restaurants
or jewelry stores and may bring home large amounts of cash that they want to
shield from the Internal Revenue Service.

The victims in Boston's suburban incidents are restaurateurs or owners of
businesses like meat markets or jewelry stores in the city's cramped Chinatown.
To encourage the victims in the recent incidents to come forward, the police
have followed a policy of not reporting their names.

Police officials believe the gang members have staked out their victim's place
of business, then followed them home.

Arrested in Armed Assault

In one typical case, the police on Tuesday arrested 17-year-old Wing Fung Ng on
charges of armed robbery and kidnapping in the invasion of a Chinese restaurant
owner's home in Randoph, a town 15 miles south of Boston.

Joseph Brodigan, an assistant district attorney of Norfolk County, said in court
that Mr. Ng had admitted taking part in the armed assault on Jan. 25, along with
two other men. "He said he taped up an individual, a 10-year-old boy," Mr.
Brodigan told the court. "He said the little boy was crying."

Mr. Ng, who was seized outside a restaurant in Boston's Chinatown at 1 A.M., has
pleaded not guilty.

The youth was tracked down by members of Boston's Asian Gang Task Force and
agents of the Immigration and Naturalization Service. Police officials say they
hope his arrest may provide further information about the rash of home
invasions.

Gang Connections Suspected

But the police are quick to note that Mr. Ng. is an immigrant from Hong Kong,
not Vietnam, and lives at home with his parents and siblings in Quincy, a
blue-collar suburb of Boston with a rapidly growing Chinese population.

Still, said Joseph Saia, a Boston police superintendent who heads the city's
Asian Gang Task Force, Mr. Ng may have connections to some of the Vietnamese
gangs. Over the last two years, he said, since the slaying of Michael Kwong, the
reputed head of the then powerful Ping On organization, Vietnamese and Chinese
gang members have begun to work with each other.

George Joe, the president of the Chinatown Neighborhood Council, said he felt
certain that the members of the new gangs were transient immigrants from Vietnam
rather than youths who grew up in Chinatown. "Maybe they hear that someone who
they knew in Vietnam has become a store owner, so they come here and rob them,"
Mr. Joe said. "They are easy prey, because the gangs know they won't retaliate."

In another incident that did involve a Vietnamese gang, the police arrested
Nguyen Toan Phuoc, also 17, after the home of a Chinatown restaurant owner in
Malden, a suburb about five miles north of Boston, was invaded.

The police said Mr. Phuoc and two other men broke into the home, knocked the
businessman's wife to the floor and punched and kicked him to force him to tell
where he kept his money. The gang members also stabbed the couple's 13 year-old
daughter.

Mr. Phuoc was arrested on Jan. 24 after he boarded a Greyhound bus for New York.


Police Remain Baffled

Despite the arrests of Mr. Phuoc and Mr. Ng, many suburban police officials here
acknowledge that they have little understanding of what is happening. "We have
little cultural knowledge of Asians, unfortunately," said Police Chief Joseph
Perritano in Winchester, another suburb where a home invasion occured.

Professor Kwong said the Vietnamese gangs are usually made up of four or five
men and originate from refugee camps in Southeast Asia where the youths landed
after fleeing Vietnam.  "They don't have other family members, and that is where
they bond," Professor Kwong said.

Then, after arriving in the United States, various refugee organizations
resettle them in communities scattered across the country, giving them a natural
network, he said, adding, "For them, the country is like a big highway."

He also said the Vietnamese gangs take pride in being more violent than Chinese
criminal organizations. "They boast they are the only genuine gangsters, because
they go out and beat people up, whereas Chinese in organized crime only sell
drugs," Professor Kwong said.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment;
Clinton's Candidacy Is Shaken, Again

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 893 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 12


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas desperately needed to make New Hampshire voters
think about his message this week, not about him. Instead, in a devastating
piece of political timing, the spotlight is now fixed on a letter he wrote in
1969, thanking his R.O.T.C. officer for "saving" him from the draft.

Many of his allies today hailed the letter as the powerful expression of a man
who, even at the age of 23, was wrestling with hard issues and trying "to
prepare myself for a political life" that, in the language of the times, worked
within the system but sought to change it.

But there were basic political realities today: The letter further rattles a
candidacy already shaken by accusations from a supermarket tabloid of marital
infidelity; it creates new openings for his rivals here in New Hampshire, and it
poses new problems in his Southern base, long considered his political firewall.
Many professionals were hard put to see how Mr. Clinton could regain control.

A Clear Predicament

Even as the Governor and his advisers sought to minimize the damage and redirect
attention to the "motives of the people who leaked this letter," the campaign's
predicament was clear. He wanted to be talking about economic recovery,
educational improvement and tax cuts for the middle class in the days leading up
to Tuesday's primary. Instead, he was forced to talk about the choices he made
in one of the most divisive periods in American history.

And while he told a news conference today that the letter buttressed his
argument that he did nothing wrong, the sentiments expressed in that letter are
likely to stir old angers among many voters, particularly in the South, where
military service is held in special esteem. "It's not helpful, that's for damn
sure," said Al LaPierre, executive director of the Alabama Democratic Party.

Here in New Hampshire, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who is
running strongly in some public opinion polls, seems likely to benefit from the
furor. Analysts here say Mr. Tsongas, well known in the state thanks to months
of campaigning and his status as a neighbor, has become a "safe harbor" for many
voters.  This could also be an opening for Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who
highlighted his war record last week when the charge that Mr. Clinton tried to
avoid the draft first appeared, and was denied, by the Arkansas Governor.

Mr. Kerrey, a former Navy Seal, won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam and lost part
of his leg there. Neither the Tsongas nor the Kerrey campaign had much public
commment on the Clinton letter, although Paul Johnson, Mr. Kerrey's New
Hampshire director, offered an understated but telling comment: "It's Bill
Clinton's issue, not ours. We're going to focus on our issues -- a tax cut for
the middle class, health care and the economy -- and let Bill Clinton deal with
Bill Clinton."

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, campaigning in Maine, was not as gentle when asked
about the report. "Jeez, another one," he said. "I think voters should be
concerned about his veracity and character. Listen, if someone wanted to serve
in the military at that time, they could have served."

Questions about Mr. Clinton's military record, some analysts said, seem to be
forming a potent combination with earlier reports in the tabloid Star that he
had a 12-year affair with a singer, reports that Mr. Clinton denied.  Gerry
Chervinsky, a Boston poll taker conducting nightly surveys here for The Boston
Globe and WBZ-TV, said, "The Vietnam question has allowed people who didn't want
to admit they had problems with his personal life to move away from him -- or at
least take a second look."

Already, Mr. Clinton and his advisers have been trying to lower the expectations
for him in New Hampshire, arguing that Mr. Tsongas should be considered a
favorite son. But a poor showing will badly hurt Mr. Clinton, who until recently
was riding a wave of inevitablity in the party, the candidate who seemed to many
Democrats the only viable nominee.

His aura of electability -- as a moderate Southerner, like Jimmy Carter, the
nominee 16 years ago and the last successful Democratic Presidential contender
-- has dimmed. And the letter, with its strong language and its assertions that
the Government was forcing its citizens to serve in an immoral war, will feed
the doubts of those Democrats who were already wondering how the accusations of
infidelity would affect the voters in a general election.

Hard to Keep Perspective

Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker, said tonight, "Part of the problem is,
Clinton will be judged out of a historical context by an awful lot of people;
the voters aren't historians, and a lot of them will be thinking about this
issue as much in the context of the war in the Persian Gulf as the war in
Vietnam."

The Clinton campaign vowed to fight back; allies from the conservative wing of
the party, like Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and Representative Dave McCurdy of
Oklahoma, issued statements in his defense. But the latest furor to rock the
Governor's campaign is likely only to stir the speculation in the party that
another candidate could enter the race.

Tonight, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, on whose behalf a write-in campaign is
being waged in New Hampshire, was lurking on the border, delivering a speech at
Harvard.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton talking about his 1969 letter thanking an Army
officer for "saving me from the draft." (Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 624 words



International 3-21

PAKISTAN THE PEACEMAKER

After supporting Islamic guerrillas in Afghanistan for years, the Pakistani
Government has moved to end the conflict.  1

HEALING OLD WOUNDS IN VIETNAM

Old enemies faced one another in a new arena in a marathon race in Ho Chi Minh
City. Among the runners were American war veterans.  1

3 ISRAELI SOLIDERS KILLED

Attackers described as Arab guerrillas made the bloodiest assault on an Israeli
military post since 1987.  3

TURNABOUT IN POLAND

The new Government is reluctantly embracing the main economic tenets of its
predecessor.  14

THE SHOCK OF THE NEW

Secretary of State Baker's tour of former Soviet republics highlights how
unprepared for independence many of these states are.  16

GRAND DREAMS AMID BLEAKNESS

Officials are considering a plan for an international trading center at the
borders of Russia, North Korea and China.  18

UNPRIMING THE PUMPS

OPEC says it will reduce oil output by more than a million barrels a day.
Analysts said the cut would be too small to raise prices.  21

Refugees from Somalia's civil war pour into Kenya and find misery.  8

National 24-35

STRETCH RUN IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

Amid some evidence that the decline in his fortunes had bottomed out, Governor
Clinton spent a vigorous day of campaigning.  1
In one small Southern town, support for Mr. Clinton has faded.  29

THE MAN ON THE RISE

While the other Democrats worry about appearing too slick, too cosmic, too mean
or too flaky, former Senator Tsongas worries about appearing too pious.  1

Arnold Schwarzenegger joined the Bush campaign trail.  27

The candidates and the television screen.  26

THE ROCKEFELLERS REGROUP

Worried about the standing of its future generations, the Rockefeller family has
begun a vigorous effort to bolster its fortune.  1

TAXES AND POLITICS

News analysis: The tax bill put forward by House Democrats has three underlying
purposes, but one is plainly the most important: to make the Democratic argument
about tax fairness.  30

THE HEALTH CARE DEBATE

Retirees in Florida are distressed at the possibility that the Government will
curb their Medicare benefits to help finance health care for people who have no
insurance at all.  24

DAHMER IS FOUND SANE

Jeffrey L. Dahmer, the serial killer who claimed that sickness drove him to
murder and dismember 15 men and boys, was found to be sane.  24

N.A.A.C.P. LOSING ITS CHIEF

Benjamin Hooks announced his resignation amid a severe split over whether to
limit officers' terms.  24

Regional 36-51

DRUG ABUSE IN SHELTERS

An extensive survey of homeless people in New York City shelters finds that 80
percent of the men housed in armories and 30 percent of the adults in shelters
for families abuse drugs or alcohol.  1

A TRAIL OF CORRUPTION

New York State and Federal investigators are seeking to trace the money that
flowed through the personal accounts of Arnold I. Biegen, a former trusted
mayoral fund-raiser and admitted embezzler.  36

BATTLE OVER MEDICAID

Pharmacists across New York State are warning of economic disaster for their
businesses as the state goes to the brink of a long-planned cut in Medicaid
payments for prescription drugs.  38

BRONX ABUSE CASE

Police investigate the death of a 6-year-old girl who had been severely beaten
and sexually abused in a Bronx apartment.  37

A 15-year-old boy is stabbed to death in Brooklyn.  39

Neediest Cases 42

Obituaries 48

William Schuman, a composer.

Arts/Reviews 70

Campus Life 55-62

Life Style 63-64

Fashion 66-67

Pastimes 72-73

Weddings 67-70

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Trying to project vigor, and not sound self-righteous. 1
(Reuters)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Moving Toward a Crucial Round, Presidential Contest Turns Rough

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 27


Gov.Bill Clinton lashed out at former Senator Paul E. Tsongas today for
"coldblooded" economics, while Mr. Tsongas accused Mr. Clinton of distorting his
record and being too hot-tempered under fire.

The exchange marked a day when the candidates' gloves were off, their moods were
snappish as the Presidential campaign lurched toward a critical round of
primaries and caucuses this Tuesday in Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota,
Idaho, Utah and Washington.

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska also kept up his criticism of Mr. Clinton's
explanation of his draft record during the Vietnam War, and the Rev. Jesse
Jackson was suddenly, and accidentally, reinserted into Presidential politics.

Any semblance of collegiality was gone in the Democratic race and the Republican
primary struggle was, if anything, even rougher.

Patrick J. Buchanan broadcast television commercials in Georgia that accused
President Bush of financing "pornographic and blasphemous art" through the
National Endowment for the Arts. The advertisement was denounced today by
Charles Black, a senior adviser to the Bush campaign as "another in a series of
blatant lies."

Clinton a Target

Mr. Black suggested that a counter-strike was coming, and no one was surprised.

Mr. Clinton was the most popular target among the Democrats, and with the
campaign moving toward his home turf in the South, he fought back today with
some of the most slashing language he has used on the stump.

"If you want more corporate power with less accountability, if you want somebody
who talks tough but acts easy on the people at the top of the totem pole, you
should vote for Senator Tsongas," Mr. Clinton said in Denver.  "I am tired of
what is coldbloodedness being passed off as courage," Mr. Clinton added,
referring to Mr. Tsongas's claim to be the economic truth-teller in the race.

One of the key points of distinction between the two men is their stance on a
tax cut for the middle class. Mr. Clinton supports it as a matter of fairness,
while Mr. Tsongas opposes it, saying it might be good politics but calling it a
bad policy that will not help the economy or curb the deficit.

Mr. Tsongas, campaigning in Denver, shot back, in what seemed like a reference
to Mr. Clinton's draft record, "Is Bill Clinton now our resident expert on
courage?"

Kerrey on Clinton

Mr. Kerrey was in Florida today, trying to keep alive his dispute with Mr.
Clinton over the latter's draft status during the Vietnam War. "I've tried to be
sympathetic with Bill Clinton's problems, and all the other Americans who made
the decision in conscience not to go to Vietnam in the 60's," said Mr. Kerrey,
who lost part of his leg in Vietnam and won the Medal of Honor there. "It was a
difficult time. But I find myself not believing that he really wanted to get in,
but couldn't."

Mr. Kerrey, who has used the draft issue to attack Mr. Clinton's ability to beat
Mr. Bush in the general election, added, "Electability was a question that Bill
Clinton raised. I'm now saying on that question what everybody privately is
saying."

Mr. Clinton has denied accusations that he sought to avoid the draft, but Mr.
Kerrey and others have questioned his account that in the fall of 1969 he made
himself eligible for the draft and did not try to manipulate the system to avoid
it.

Today, Mr. Clinton chastised Mr. Kerrey and asserted the Nebraskan was
questioning his patriotism. "I love my country," he said. "I love and support
the idea that people are willing to serve it in uniform."

The Jesse Jackson Issue

The pressurized atmosphere led, inevitably, to the kind of stumble Mr. Clinton
made Wednesday night that brought him into conflict with Mr. Jackson.

The Arkansas Governor, who was giving a series of interviews to local television
stations, was asked by a reporter about Mr. Jackson's campaigning in South
Carolina with Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa Mr. Clinton apparently and mistakenly
understood this to mean that Mr. Jackson had endorsed Senator Harkin. Between
interviews, in remarks that the Governor did not know were picked up by a
waiting crew -- and which were later broadcast by a Phoenix, Ariz., television
station -- a furious Mr. Clinton told his aide, "It's an outrage, it's a dirty,
double-crossing, back-stabbing thing to do."

Mr. Clinton called Mr. Jackson to smooth things over today and later announced,
"It's fine between us." Perhaps equally important, Mr. Clinton was in Atlanta
today picking up the endorsement of Mayor Maynard Jackson, a formidable power in
the region and a longtime ally of Jesse Jackson.In a statement today, Jesse
Jackson, who accrued significant power in the Democratic Party with his past two
drives for the nomination, seemed not entirely mollified.

He said he remained open to "offer advice and counsel to all of the campaigns,"
that he was "disappointed" by Mr. Clinton's remarks and that a meeting was in
order. Still, the statement seemed more muscle-flexing than high pique, by
Jackson standards.

Given the mood of the day, however, it did not take Mr. Tsongas long to try to
turn Mr. Clinton's outburst about Mr. Jackson against the Governor from
Arkansas.

Initially, Mr. Tsongas had to prompt reporters to ask him about the incident.
After fielding several questions from local reporters in Seattle about his
policies on bicycles and the spotted owl, Mr. Tsongas bluntly said: "Is someone
going to ask me about the Reverend Jackson issue or should I just expound on my
own?"

"I think the American people want a President who's cool under fire," Mr.
Tsongas said once he got the question he wanted. "And that kind of instinctive,
angry, emotional outburst, I don't think is appropriate." He added that the
Clinton outburst "gave the American people a pretty good look into what a person
does under stress."

Senator Harkin, meanwhile, asserted, "Do we want as a President someone who on
the basis of a rumor flies off at the handle, vehemently making statements on
the basis of a rumor?"

Mr. Tsongas, who held a news conference in Denver this morning and traveled to
Seattle later in the day, joined the crowd trying to cast themselves as the most
"electable" candidate in the field, which is becoming the buzz word among
Democrats who see a new vulnerability in President Bush this fall, and fear that
their party will not exploit it.

Mr. Tsongas's differences with his party were on full display today, however, as
he called on the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee to stop running
advertisements advocating a middle-class tax cut, which the Democratic
leadership supports and Mr. Tsongas does not. A spokeswoman for the campaign
committee said the advertisements were aimed at Mr. Bush, not Mr. Tsongas.

The Clinton campaign clearly hopes to make Mr. Tsongas's economic policies a
vulnerability as the race moves toward more blue-collar areas. Mr. Clinton
asserted today that Mr. Tsongas lacked a true understanding of the human side of
the nation's problems.

"I believe that a President is more than an economic mechanic pushing buttons
and pulling levers," Mr. Clinton said. "I reject that cramped and limited view
of the Presidency. Franklin Roosevelt didn't get this country off its back by
saying the only thing we have to fear is a lack of venture capital."

Mayor Jackson of Atlanta used his news conference with Mr. Clinton today to
chide Democrats for attacking one another. "Please let's not end up with a
nominee who is attacked by the other candidates and therefore is weakened when
the time comes to take the fight to George Bush," the mayor said.

This was not, however, the theme of the day.

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton discussing his draft record and his criticism
of the Rev. Jesse Jackson during a news conference yesterday in Atlanta. With
him was Mayor Maynard Jackson of Atlanta. (pg. A1); Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska speaking at a rally yesterday in Tampa, Fla. He criticized Gov. Bill
Clinton's explanation of his draft record. (pg. A17) (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Not Worth the Risk

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


To the Editor:

Re "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17) by Walter McDougall: Throughout
a decade of fighting in Vietnam, legislators and Presidents hid behind the
Tonkin Gulf Resolution, rather than bring to a vote a formal declaration of war.
At the time, many of these same officials said that such a vote would tear the
country apart. Of course! The declaration of war clause is in our Constitution
to end "King's wars" -- wars declared and fought without regard for the public
will.

The domestic controversy about the Vietnam War grew more ferocious each month.
Pro-war and antiwar legislators alike knew they would be losers if a declaration
of war was finally brought to a vote. Whichever side they chose, back home, 5
percent, 10 percent, 50 percent of their constituents would never forgive them.
Rather than diminish their chances for re-election, the House, the Senate and
two willing Presidents simply avoided the vote, and the Constitution.

If our elected civilian commanders didn't believe the war or the Constitution
was worth the risk of their political lives, I certainly didn't feel it was
worth the risk of any citizen's mortal life, my own or any other.

Our country didn't call us, just our draft board. Where is the honor in that?

JEFFREY WILKINSON
Brookline, Mass., Feb. 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Windstorm Kills 100 People In Three Provinces in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 31


High winds devastated parts of two Vietnamese coastal provinces over the
weekend, killing at least 100 people and leaving nearly 500 missing, the
official Vietnam News Agency reports.

The agency, in a dispatch seen here in Bangkok today, said 22 people died
Saturday morning when a windstorm struck Quang Nam and Da Nang Provinces,
destroying or sweeping away many boats in its path. It said 193 people were
missing, with a greater number possible.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
Kerrey Tries to Cast Doubt on Clinton

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 8


Bringing some forceful imagery to a campaign that has been surprisingly bereft
of symbolism, Max Cleland, a former head of the Veterans Administration who lost
both legs and an arm in the Vietnam War, traveled to New Hampshire today to
campaign on behalf of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska.

Mr. Cleland, who now serves as Georgia's Secretary of State, insisted that his
appearance in the state had nothing to do with recent accusations that Gov. Bill
Clinton tried to avoid service during the war. But it clearly helped to keep the
issue of military service in the news for another day. And it drew attention to
one of Mr. Kerrey's major strengths: his heroism in Vietnam, which cost him part
of his leg and won him the Medal of Honor.

"The late 60's were a very difficult time for young Americans who were draft
age," Mr. Cleland said at a news conference. "They had to make some very
difficult choices. Bob and I made our choice. We've had to live with our choice.
It's been very tough."

Mr. Cleland declined to comment directly on Mr. Clinton's draft history. But he
said that he thought the experience of serving in the military was important for
anyone running for the nation's highest office.

"I think that kind of special preparation helps you if you're a candidate for
the Presidency of the United States, when you have to serve as Commander in
Chief," he said.

Stepping Up Attacks

With polls here showing Mr. Kerrey running a distant third among the Democrats,
behind Governor Clinton and former Senator Paul Tsongas, his campaign is hoping
to use questions about Mr. Clinton's draft record as a wedge to pry voters away
from him. Over the last two days, the normally deferential Mr. Kerrey has
stepped up his attacks on Mr. Clinton, criticizing him not on his military
record but on his trustworthiness.

"When somebody's voting, they measure all sorts of things," the Senator said
Friday. "But in the end they've got to answer the question: Do we like him, do
we trust him, do we feel comfortable with him as an individual?"

About Mr. Clinton, he said: "There's doubt. I don't think there's a massive
amount of doubt, but there's doubt."

With just 10 days to go before the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Kerrey, at the
urging of his not-so-deferential campaign advisers, is clearly trying to
challenge Mr. Clinton on this year's hot issue for the Democrats: electability.
Subtly reminding Democrats that their last nominee, Michael S. Dukakis, was
attacked for insufficient patriotism, Mr. Kerrey said President Bush would not
be able to attack him "for not being patriotic enough."

And at a rally here today, Mr. Kerrey's campaign staff handed out miniature
American flags.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Clinton's Woes Are Kerrey's Frustration

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 13


After spending 20 weeks campaigning, and cycling through nine television
commercials with three different slogans, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska seems
to have finally alighted on a definitive theme: "electability."

For the last few days, Mr. Kerrey has been exploiting this theme with all the
subtlety of a supermarket tabloid. The Senator's latest television
advertisement, which will go off the air on Friday to make room for yet another
generation of commercials, declares, "With America in crisis, the Democrats have
to nominate someone who can win the Presidency in November."

But even as the campaign seems to have found a message, the theme seems to be an
extension of the problems that have plagued Mr. Kerrey's candidacy from the
beginning.

"Electability" was a quality that Mr. Kerrey, a Medal of Honor winner with a
liberal voting record and engaging manner, was expected to demonstrate
implicitly during the campaign. That did not happen, though. Instead of charm,
Mr. Kerrey has tended to project the dry reserve of a technocrat. In a year when
voters seem most interested in jobs, he has focused almost exclusively on health
care, and when they seemed to be demanding detailed economic plans, he has
insisted that lengthy position papers are not important.

Like Something Tacked On

Now the message of "electability," analysts say, gives the impression of
something tacked onto the campaign, like a happy ending on a sad movie.

"I think to make a candidate viable on the strength of electability is pretty
weak," said David Moore, a poll taker at the University of New Hampshire.
"Electability is kind of in the back of the minds of many voters, but it isn't
something you can bring up front."

With his record of valor in Vietnam, Mr. Kerrey inherited the electability
factor after disclosures that Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas had maneuvered to
avoid the draft. The Kerrey campaign clearly hopes to use the same theme against
former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who has advanced in polls as
Mr. Clinton has slipped.

The issues raised by Mr. Clinton's draft record seem to have been tailor-made
for Mr. Kerrey's benefit: the Governor and the Senator are both seeking to
become the standard-bearer for new generation of Democratic politics and as one
stumbles over the generation's most wrenching experience, the Vietnam War, the
other should gain.

The fact that Mr. Kerrey has, so far at least, failed to benefit from the
campaign's focus on service in the military is something that the Senator's
advisers seem increasingly hard-pressed to explain.

An Ambivalent Public

"I think we're doing what we can do," said Harrison Hickman, the Kerrey
campaign's poll taker. "But it's awfully hard to communicate when the only story
of the week is, 'What evidence do we have that Bill Clinton did what somebody
said he did?' "

Mr. Kerrey himself seems to have a keen understanding of the public's
ambivalence about Vietnam and the difficulty of turning the war to political
advantage. Last week, when the first disclosures surfaced about Mr. Clinton and
the draft, Mr. Kerrey was uncharacteristically critical of the Arkansas
Governor, saying his explanation of his record sounded false. Since then,
though, as new questions have arisen over a letter Mr. Clinton wrote to an
R.O.T.C. officer, Mr. Kerrey has reverted to a more reflective tone.

"I was in the Philadelphia Naval Hospital when Bill Clinton was going through
all this," Mr. Kerrey said today. "The polls at the time showed that Americans
didn't support the war. The thought of going to war in 1969 in the face of that
kind of opposition was a terrifying thought and people of conscience were saying
no, and people were doing lots of things to make sure that they didn't go.

"The fundamental problem," he continued, "and the thing that causes all of us a
great deal of anguish, is that we know if you graduated from high school and
couldn't go on to college, you were on your way. That was the anguish of the
time, of 1969."

New Challenges

Mr. Kerrey's reluctance to issue new reproaches is in keeping with a campaign
strategy of keeping the Senator above the fray while Mr. Clinton defends
himself. Indeed, advisers to the Senator say they are less worried about Mr.
Clinton now than they are about Mr. Tsongas, and about Senator Tom Harkin of
Iowa, whose standing in some polls has inched past Mr. Kerrey.

With the focus on electability, the Kerrey campaign is apparently hoping to
undermine rivals without explicitly attacking them. Polls show Mr. Kerrey is
viewed favorably by most New Hampshire Democrats, and his campaign is still
hoping to turn this generalized good feeling into votes without resorting to
negative campaigning.

"To have your positives be as high as his are and not move in the polls," said
one Kerrey adviser, explaining the strategy "sort of defies gravity."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey campaigning in Hampton, N.H., where John
Blacklock was having breakfast. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Kerrey 'Angry' At His Adviser

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 16


Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska said today that he had suspended his longtime
poll taker, Harrison Hickman, who had sent reporters a memorandum raising new
questions about Gov. Bill Clinton's account of his draft status.

Copies of the memorandum were sent late last week to The Boston Globe and CBS
News.

Mr. Kerrey, a decorated Vietnam veteran, insisted that he had not dismissed Mr.
Hickman, but said that as a result of the memorandum Mr. Hickman was not working
for the campaign "at the moment."

"I'm not only quite angry in a personal way but feel that he betrayed me in this
campaign," Mr. Kerrey said of Mr. Hickman. "I made it clear both publicly and
privately to my campaign people that I have no intention of bringing the war in
Vietnam any further in this campaign. I do not want anything to be said about
Bill Clinton in that regard. He operated independent of any instructions that I
gave him and as a consequence violated a personal trust."

Mr. Hickman could not be reached for comment.

When questions about the Arkansas Governor's draft record first became public
more than a week ago, Mr. Kerrey questioned his account of his actions, but has
since declined to criticize him.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sowing the Killing Fields

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm;  Henry Kamm, a longtime foreign correspondent for The
Times, has covered Cambodia periodically since 1970.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 975 words


THE TRAGEDY OF CAMBODIAN HISTORY
Politics, War, and Revolution Since 1945.
By David P. Chandler.
Illustrated. 396 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $35.

THE name "Cambodia," like "Auschwitz," has become synonymous with modern
barbarism in its ultimate dimension. In public opinion, Pol Pot ranks with
Hitler as evil personified. Yet Cambodia's remoteness and isolation, its small
size and economic weakness, its role as object rather than subject in foreign
relations have left its high symbolic stature largely unsupported by knowledge
of what really happened and why.

Cambodia was the most fortunate country in Indochina until 1970, because it
avoided being drawn more than marginally into the wars that were ravaging
Vietnam and Laos. But it stumbled out of its neutrality after the 1970 coup that
overthrew Prince Norodom Sihanouk. This ushered in the tragedy, not yet ended,
that David P. Chandler, a former American diplomat in Cambodia and now the
research director of the Center of Southeast Asian Studies at Monash University
in Australia, has taken for the title of his instructive book.

Mr. Chandler's spadework in French, American and British archives, the multitude
of interviews he conducted with participants and observers of many
nationalities, and his readings in the largely French-language Cambodian press
going back to colonial days have enabled him to construct as complete a
historical narrative as has ever been compiled.

He has enriched "The Tragedy of Cambodian History" with judicious appraisals of
the major figures, such as Prince Sihanouk, the key actor. Mr. Chandler is
generous in recognizing the immense diplomatic skill by which the Prince gained
early independence from France and limited the selfish intentions on his country
of North and South Vietnam, the United States and Thailand. At the same time, he
is justly critical of the Prince's cruelty to opponents, his highhandedness with
critics and suspected rivals, his tolerance of corruption by his family and
courtiers, and his self-indulgence in his wayward hobbies, like making and
starring in feature films -- all of which led to his overthrow.

The author sheds light on the student years of Pol Pot and other Communist
leaders in France, where gifted scholarship students were turned into incipient
revolutionaries. (One is left to wonder whether the shaping of those who made
their country a killing field was the final gift of colonial power.)

Mr. Chandler is also evenhanded in apportioning responsibility for the tragedy
to the various foreign powers who interjected themselves. But he disappoints the
high hopes that his title awakens. His evenhandedness has kept him from writing
the tragedy he promised; as a historian he fails to infuse his narrative with
the moral imagination that discerns and defines the nature of tragedy.

Mr. Chandler no doubt disapproves of the two Vietnams exporting their war to
their neighbor. He surely does not condone the United States' policy of
financing and arming the anti-Communist Lon Nol Government and spurring it into
continuing a long-lost war beyond its people's endurance, although Washington
considered the regime incompetent in all respects. He cannot approve of the
massive, indiscriminate American bombing of the countryside to delay a Communist
victory the United States knew to be inevitable.

And clearly he feels as the rest of the world does about the Pol Pot regime's
lunatic project in social engineering, which in the name of Revolution took,
according to Mr. Chandler, the lives of one million Cambodians.

But such attitudes do not come alive in Mr. Chandler's discussion. In an
evenhandedness that approaches impartiality between oppressors and oppressed, he
denies himself the passion that makes the writing of history literature, a
passion that should stimulate in the reader of this book outrage at everyone's
cruel use of a nation of farmers and fishermen.

"A million Cambodians, or one in eight, died from warfare, starvation, overwork,
misdiagnosed diseases, and executions," Mr. Chandler writes on his first page.
"Most of these deaths, however, were never intended by [Democratic Kampuchea,
the Pol Pot regime]."

The author concedes that such lack of evil intent does not "alleviate the
horror" or relieve the leadership of responsibility. But his concession does not
take the curse off that unfortunate "however."



POL POT'S OBSESSION

Pol Pot and his colleagues believed in the necessity of revolution. Some of
them, by 1975, had spent over 20 years attempting to bring one to fruition.
Being a revolutionary was a full-time, lifelong occupation. In describing Pol
Pot, a former companion of his appropriated the celebrated remark made by
Axelrod about Lenin: that he was "the only man who had no thoughts but thoughts
about the revolution, and who in his sleep dreamt of revolution." Others . . .
had similarly incandescent views. They were not prepared to abandon them in the
wake of their victory because they discovered that preconditions, social
analyses, or human resources for a revolution in Cambodia were lacking or in
short supply. . . .

The [Communist] leadership's choosing to wage revolution everywhere in Cambodia
did not spring from a study of Cambodian social conditions or from consultation
with others but from a conviction on the part of the . . . leaders that a
recognizably Communist revolution needed to be waged. If the right preconditions
did not exist, that problem could be overcome by revolutionary fervor. The
absence of a proletariat in Cambodia, for example, was not seen as an impediment
to progress. An industrial labor force could be created from poor peasants and
young children operating en masse. Cambodia soon became a gigantic prison farm.

From "The Tragedy of Cambodian History."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Cold War: From Containment to Commonwealth

BYLINE: By MONICA BORKOWSKI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 953 words


MARCH 5, 1946: Former Prime Minister Winston S. Chruchill of Britain warns of
Soviet expansion and declares that an "iron curtain" has descended over Europe.

JULY 1947: George F. Kennan's "X" article in the journal Foreign Affairs sets
forth "containment" as the major goal of American foreign policy.

JUNE 1948: The Soviet Union imposes a blockade on West Berlin. The Allies, led
by the United States, mount the Berlin Airlift, sending food and other supplies
to the beleaguered West Berliners.


AUGUST 1948: Whittaker Chambers, a former Communist Party member, accuses Alger
Hiss, a high-ranking State Department official, of being a Soviet agent. Hiss is
later convicted of perjury for denying that he gave classified documents to
Chambers for relay to the Soviet Union.

JUNE 1950: North Korea invades South Korea, setting off a three-year war. The
United States and other pro-Western nations fight for South Korea; Chinese
troops aid the North.

JUNE 19, 1953: Julius and Ethel Rosenberg are executed for conspiring to pass
atomic bomb secrets to the Soviet Union.

JUNE 1954: In Guatemala, a coup organized by the Central Intelligence Agency
overthrows the elected Government of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman. The United States was
concerned about leftist tendencies of the Government.

APRIL 22, 1954: The Senate Army-McCarthy hearings begin.

NOVEMBER 1956: Soviet troops crush a popular uprising in Hungary.

OCT. 1, 1957: B-52 bombers begin flying on full-time alert; planes carrying
nuclear weapons are airborne 24 hours a day in case of Soviet attack.

OCT. 4, 1957: The Soviet Union announces it has successfully launched the first
man-made earth satellite, Sputnik.

OCT. 23, 1958: The Soviet Union lends money to the United Arab Republic to build
the Aswan High Dam, opening Soviet influence in the Middle East.

FEBRUARY 1960: Cuba and Soviet Union sign a sugar agreement; in September, Cuba
receives its first Soviet military aid.

MAY 26, 1960: An American U-2 reconnaissance plane is shot down over the Soviet
Union and its pilot, Francis Gary Powers, is captured.

APRIL 12, 1961: A Soviet astronaut Yuri A. Gagarin completes the first human
space flight.

APRIL 17, 1961: About 1,500 C.I.A.-trained Cuban exiles invade Cuba at the Bay
of Pigs in a fruitless attempt to overthrow the Government of Fidel Castro.

MAY 25, 1961: Following up on America's first manned space flight by Alan B.
Shepard Jr., President Kennedy asks Congress to approve a program to send a man
to the moon and back by the end of the decade.

AUGUST 1961: East Germany erects the Berlin wall.

NOVEMBER 1961: The Kennedy Administration announces that the number of United
States military advisers in South Vietnam will be increased from 685 to 16,000
by late 1963.

OCTOBER 1962: President Kennedy orders an air and naval blockade to force Cuba
to remove Soviet missiles from its territory.

AUGUST 1963: A diplomatic "hot line" designed to reduce the risk of accidental
war goes into operation between Moscow and Washington.

AUG. 7, 1964: After a reported clash between North Vietnamese gunboats and
United States ships in the Gulf of Tonkin, Congress passes a resolution
authorizing President Johnson to prusue a military buildup in Vietnam.

APRIL-MAY 1965: President Johnson sends troops into the Dominican Republic for
the announced purpose of protecting and evacuating Americans. The force is
expanded to 14,000 after the Administration charges that the country is being
taken over by the Communists.

1968: The United States increases arms sales to Israel, from $9 million to over
$300 million, in part to counter growing Soviet influence in the region.

AUG. 21, 1968: Soviet troops and tanks roll into Czechoslovakia and crush
reformists' efforts to remodel the Communist system.

JULY 20, 1969: Two American astronauts, Neil A. Armstrong and Col. Edwin E.
(Buzz) Aldrin of the Air Force, become the first people to land on the moon.

MAY 1972: President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader, sign the
first treaties setting limits on strategic nuclear arms.

MARCH 29, 1973: The last United States military personnel leave South Vietnam.

APRIL 1975: Communist guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge seize the Cambodian capital,
Phnom Penh. Saigon falls to the North Veitnamese.

JULY 1979: Leftists aligned with moscow take power in Nicaragua.

DECEMBER 1981: President Reagan signs a "finding" authorizing a covert Central
Intelligence Agency operation to support right-wing Nicaraguan rebels.

MARCH 1983: President Reagan says the Soviet Union is "an evil empire."

OCTOBER 1983: The United States invades Grenada after a power struggle in the
island's Marxist leadership turns bloody.

MARCH 1985: Mikhail S. Gorbachev is named to succeed the late Konstantin U.
Chernenko as Soviet leader and emphasizes the need to reshape the economy and
reduce rigidity in the Soviet system, in a process known as perestroika.

NOV. 25, 1986: Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d announces the diversion of money
from United States arms sales to Iran to the Nicaraguan rebels.

NOVEMBER 1989: East Germany lifts restrictions on emigration and travel to the
West; after 28 years the Berlin wall comes down.

AUG. 19-21, 1991: The day before President Gorbachev plans to sign a union
treaty intended to keep several republics together, hardliners move to overthrow
him. The coup fails.

SEPT. 27, 1991: President Bush announces his decision to take B-52 bombers off
alert status.

DEC. 8, 1991: The leaders of Russia, Ukraine and Byelorussia declare that the
Soviet Union has ceased to exist and proclaim a new Commonwealth of Independent
States open to all states of the former union.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 4, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

18 Vietnamese Die in Violence at Refugee Camp

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Tuesday, Feb. 4


Eighteen Vietnamese boat people were killed and 128 were injured in a detention
center in Hong Kong Monday night when rioters set fire to a hut during a clash
that began over hot water, the authorities said.

The fire was set by Vietnamese who stuffed burning blankets through a Quonset
hut window, said Hong Kong's Secretary for Security, Alistair Asprey.

"It was a deliberate attack on a group of people in the hut," Mr. Asprey said
today.

Officials said the dead, including at least one small child, were Vietnamese who
had volunteered to return home and were awaiting repatriation. The incident, the
deadliest ever in this British colony's crowded camps for boat people, began
about 11 P.M. in a section set aside for voluntary returnees in the Sek Kong
center, a former military air strip in Hong Kong's remote New Territories.

Officials said 17 of the victims had burned to death in the fire, and another
died later in a hospital. Of 55 people being treated for injuries at the
hospital, seven are listed in critical condition. Officials expect the death
toll to climb.

They said several hundred Vietnamese took part in the melee, between gangs from
the north and south of Vietnam, who fought with homemade knives, spears and
other makeshift weapons. The dead were northerners who were believed to have
sought refuge in the quonset hut, officials said.

Mr. Asprey said dispute over the hot water, for which people wait in line to
use, was broken up by the police but erupted again later in the evening. As
police officers tried to stop the fighting, hundreds of Vietnamese from an
adjoining section of the camp broke down a fence and joined in the fray, forcing
the officers to retreat and call for reinforcements, officials said.

About 400 police officers were called in to the camp and helped put an end to
the violence by firing 33 rounds of tear gas into the camp. Firefighters spent
90 minutes bringing the blaze under control.

Hong Kong, which returned to forced repatriation of boat people in December,
houses about 54,000 Vietnamese in closed camps under prison-like conditions. Sek
Kong holds 9,000 Vietnamese, including about 800 who had volunteered to return
home. Mr. Asprey said they would have been returned to Vietnam within the next
few weeks.

Hong Kong's Governor, Sir David Wilson, and top security officials arrived at
the camp by helicopter this morning at the start of three-day Chinese New Year
celebrations, which normally bring the colony's business to a virtual halt.

The Governor ordered that boat people in all of Hong Kong's camps be briefed
about the incident, "so we don't have rumors spreading around the camps." He
said orders had been given today to separate Vietnamese from the north and those
from the south.

About 2,000 northerners are expected to be moved to other camps. Most of the
boat people in Hong Kong's camps are from the north of the country.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry Asked on 'Lost P.O.W.' Photo

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 481 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 13


Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam, has asked the Attorney General to investigate the latest case of an
apparently fraudulent photograph that purports to show a missing American
serviceman still alive in captivity in Indochina.

The photograph, said to be of Capt. Donald G. Carr, an Army officer whose plane
crashed in Laos in 1971, was made public last August by a retired Air Force
Lieut. Col., Jack E. Bailey, who has devoted years to searching for missing
Americans in Indochina.

The Defense Department, initially uncertain about dismissing the photograph as a
fake immediately, as it has in the past, sent investigators to Bangkok with Mr.
Bailey to meet intermediaries who supplied the picture. Members of the Carr
family seemed convinced that it was genuine.

Reporting from Thailand on Tuesday, an ABC News team said the photograph had not
been taken in a prison camp in Laos, as Mr. Bailey's contacts indicated, but at
a tropical bird export company near Bangkok. The man in the picture was
identified by a Thai associate as a German citizen, Gunther Dietrich, who has
been reported to be trafficking illegally in wild birds.

Criticism From Family

The Pentagon investigation has been criticized by Carr's family.

In November, while the family was awaiting a definitive statement from the
Defense Department, two Pentagon officials were reported to have told an
audience of cadets at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs that the picture
was a fake.

A relative of Captain Carr was in the audience, and he told the shocked family.
According to the family, the Pentagon denied that the remarks had been made. The
Carrs began petitioning their Congressional representatives for help in getting
an explanation.

The chairman and co-chairman of the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Robert C. Smith,
Republican of New Hampshire, complained in a letter to Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney about the "insensitive treatment of the Carr family."

In his letter to Attorney General William P. Barr, Senator McCain, a committee
member, said that the larger question is: "to what extent are the families of
American P.O.W-M.I.A.'s being preyed upon by foreign and domestic criminals who
exploit their misery by selling bogus information about the fate of their
missing loved ones?"

In some cases, families are asked to pay for information, but whether or not
money is involved, Senator McCain said that all cases of fraudulent information
on the 2,267 men still unaccounted for should be investigated.

"Some men may still remain in captivity in Southeast Asia," Mr. McCain wrote.
"But frauds of the nature reported by ABC make our efforts to ascertain
knowledge of their fate vastly more difficult, and should be swifly uncovered
and properly punished."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A photograph, described as a fraud, is said to show Capt. Donald
G. Carr of the Army, whose plane crashed in Laos in 1971. (ABC News)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The 1992 Campaign: Media;
TV Viewers Get to See the Candidates, and See the Candidates

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 15


For anyone who still wants to get to know the Presidential candidates, these are
happy days to be a television viewer. The candidates are showing their inner
selves. They are looking haggard on the news. They are turning mean in their
advertising. They are personally pre-empting entire programs.

At 9 o'clock Friday evening, for instance, viewers expecting the situation
comedy "Baby Talk" were instead offered Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and a
toll-free number for asking him questions. Not being seasoned political
journalists, most viewers did not realize that the only important question this
election is Mr. Clinton's 1969 draft deferment, so they got sidetracked on other
issues, but there were valuable lessons nonetheless.

"I'm very interested in trains," one potential voter said. "I'd like to be able
to take a train from Portsmouth to Boston. You know, I'd like to commute. Are
you going to do anything about trains?"

"I am," Mr. Clinton replied, but before he spelled out his high-speed-rail
program he made a confession. "I can't promise you a route from Portsmouth to
Boston because I don't know enough about the economics of that." He smiled
sheepishly and shrugged. "Perhaps I should, but I don't."

Candidate With a Plan

Yes, he was apologizing for not knowing offhand the projected ridership of the
Portsmouth-Boston rail corridor, and that says quite a lot about who Mr. Clinton
is: the candidate with an earnest smile, a statistic and a plan for just about
every other question facing himself or America.

When he is in good television form, it is tempting to disregard all the
political obituaries for him in the national press, and the last couple of days
he has had his moments again: hugging a weeping woman on the evening news,
sincerely talking to the camera on his commercials, intelligently handling
question after question on his 30-minute live commercials.

But then there have been the awkward moments when he is seen facing reporters
determined to know why he did not fight in Vietnam. It is difficult to say who
comes off worse: the righteous reporters, most of whom do not look like veterans
of the Tet offensive, or Mr. Clinton, whose poised answers start to look
suspiciously pat.

"He seems like a Barbie doll to me," one caller complained on Boston's WRKO
radio, and on late-night television they keep saying much worse things. On
Friday, as Los Angeles braced for more flooding rains, Johnny Carson told his
audience, "We need another storm like Bill Clinton needs another revelation." He
expressed doubts that Mr. Clinton's unraveling campaign could be saved by the
new slogan, "Clinton: He never robbed a liquor store."

Going for the Media Gusto

The other candidates are not quite this mean to Mr. Clinton, although Senator
Tom Harkin of Iowa has come close. Lately he has done some advertising to soften
his image, like a half-hour commercial Friday that pre-empted "Entertainment
Tonight" and featured him chatting with a woman who asked questions like, "I'd
like to know a little more about Tom Harkin the man." But he is still the
candidate most willing to go for media gusto.

He looked most at home in front of a foreclosed home -- a favorite photo scene
for everyone this campaign -- as he shook his fist and proclaimed, "I just want
to grab Bush and shake him, you know, grab him and shake him a couple of times,
and see if I get some sense into that skull of his."

Mr. Harkin appeared this week on the news in front of a nuclear power plant as
he lambasted former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts for supporting
nuclear power. He was quick to speak out about Mr. Clinton's character problems.
And he lumped both men with Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska in a commercial that
began the negative advertisement war on television this week. It showed their
photos as the announcer intoned, "These three Democrats are all saying the same
thing: more tax cuts for the rich and big business."

Projecting Nicer Image

Mr. Kerrey retaliated on Friday with an advertisement denying that he supports
tax breaks for the rich. Mr. Kerrey's advertisement said he supports tax cuts
for the middle class, which are opposed by Mr. Harkin, and the announcer sums up
Mr. Harkin this way, "Old style Democrat, old-style negative campaign."

Mr. Kerrey's other negative advertisements have been a little more subtle,
criticizing his rivals without naming them. One advertisement stresses the
importance of choosing someone capable of beating President Bush and points out
certain qualities of Mr. Kerrey's, like his military record: "No one can
question his patriotism."

In other ways, though, Mr. Kerrey has recently been projecting a nicer image. On
the news he has refrained from commenting about Mr. Clinton's Vietnam problem. A
new advertisement shows him sitting in a living room, smiling slightly and
speaking in much gentler tones than in the previous commercials that stressed
his toughness.

Mr. Tsongas' commercials still show him doing everything but talking; that is
left to an announcer with good diction. And he still spends a lot of television
time in the pool, both in his commercials and on the evening news. Last week
dozens of reporters were on hand for his daily swim, which has become his visual
answer to questions about his recovery from cancer.

The face of Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York has become familiar in New
Hampshire, thanks partly to the news coverage of his speech at Harvard
University on Wednesday, but mainly to the television commercials urging voters
to write in his name. One half of the screen shows Mr. Cuomo speaking -- "We are
going absolutely down the wrong road" -- while the other half shows his name
being written.

Bush, Flag and War

President Bush's advertisements are broadcast constantly, but for some reason
they seem the easiest to ignore. Perhaps this is because they look like so many
other images of Mr. Bush over the last four years, or because the strategy
behind the commercials seems so blatantly manipulative: combine Mr. Bush, the
flag, stirring music, the Oval Office and fighter planes from the Persian Gulf
war.

Or perhaps it is because of the commercials of Patrick J. Buchanan, who may have
pioneered a new form of negative campaigning: consciousness alteration through
saturation advertising.

Mr. Buchanan has some advertisements showing himself speaking somberly to the
camera about America's future, but his most memorable commercials continue to be
ones featuring Mr. Bush's 1988 pledge: "Read my lips. No new taxes." The
advertisements have been on so often for so long that a curious effect has
occurred. The advertisement at first seems hard-hitting, then tiresome, then
reason to lunge for the mute button.

But then at some point, maybe around the 50th showing, for some viewers the
sound bite begins to acquire a surreal fascination, as if it is disclosing
something deep inside Mr. Bush. As he jabs his finger into the air and screeches
the words again and again, with each commercial he begins to seem more and more
desperate, more and more absurd. For these dedicated television viewers, it has
been difficult to take the President seriously ever since.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Volunteers for the campaign of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
delivering promotional videotapes to voters in Manchester, N.H. (Edward
Keating/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Suddenly, the Choices Are Clearer

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 19


With the abrupt withdrawal of Paul E. Tsongas from the contest for the
Democratic nomination, the likely shape of the 1992 Presidential race has
suddenly come into sharper focus. A long, fierce and possibly close fight is in
prospect between President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

Election Day is more than seven months away, but a few things can be said with
confidence.

It will be a fight between a self-described agent of "fundamental change" and a
longtime champion of the status quo, a fight between an older generation (Mr.
Bush is 67 years old and fought in World War II) and a new one (Mr. Clinton is
45 and graduated from college in the year of the big Tet offensive in Vietnam).

It will also be a fight between two men who have spent almost their whole adult
lives in politics. Mr. Clinton calls himself an outsider, but he is as much a
part of the Democratic establishment as Mr. Bush is a member of the Republican
hierarchy.

Not for 50 years, what's more, have the habitually fractious Democrats settled
so early on their nominee. Not since John F. Kennedy was chosen in 1960 have
they done so with so little bad feeling and so few overt concessions to
special-interest groups of the kind that then hurt them in the fall.

Perhaps the oldest of political maxims holds that elections are won or lost in
the middle, not on the extremes, and Mr. Clinton seems positioned to challenge
Mr. Bush on that ground, as Jimmy Carter successfully challenged Gerald R. Ford
in 1976, the last time the Democrats won the White House.

Mr. Carter, a moderate Southerner without Washington experience, like Mr.
Clinton, ran against a wounded Republican incumbent, like Mr. Bush, although the
opprobrium of having pardoned Richard M. Nixon was small potatoes compared with
Mr. Bush's economic woes, which have driven his overall approval rating down to
40 percent.

Character Issue

The Arkansas Governor remains vulnerable, of course, to fresh accusations about
his private life, of the kind that have plagued him for months, and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, his sole remaining Democratic rival, intends
to keep pressing his attacks on the man he calls the "scandal a week" candidate.
The White House is expected to take up where Mr. Brown eventually leaves off.

"We've been keeping track this winter," said a Bush campaign official who spoke
on the condition that he not be identified, "and you can rest assured that we
will be exploring the nature of Mr. Clinton's character."

Political prognostication is a mug's game in the best of times. Few will attempt
it with conviction this year, when bitter, frustrated voters have turned
vindictively upon a President they lionized a few months ago.

Still, because of Mr. Bush's lack of popularity, the broad appeal to the
traditional Democratic constituencies that Mr. Clinton has demonstrated in the
primaries, and the political moxie the Governor demonstrated in holding his
campaign together when he was under constant attack, he is widely considered in
both parties to be the Democrats' strongest candidate since the Vietnam era.

If -- always that "if" -- if he does not self-destruct.

There are other "ifs" as well. If the economy bounces back, as some statistics
published on Wednesday suggested it might be doing, and if it does so in a way
that becomes palpable to the voters, the advantages that typically accrue to a
President seeking re-election should reassert themselves.

Liability of Incumbency

Among those, the capacity to focus the nation's attention is primary; the mere
arrival of a President and his big red, white and blue airplane are enough to
dominate the news in most cities and states. In a communications era, the power
to command audiences is very serious political magic.

If, on the other hand, Mr. Bush allows himself to be defined as "the incumbent
in chief" in a year when incumbents as powerful as Representative Dan
Rostenkowski of Illinois, the chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee,
have to fight for their political lives, the trappings, powers and perquisites
of high office could turn out to unexpected liabilities.

The key for Mr. Bush, said Ed Rollins, a White House political director under
Ronald Reagan, is "not asking people whether they are better off than they were
four years ago, but telling them where they are going, explaining what you want
the Bush Administration to be remembered for in the history books and not just
trying to get your ticket punched again."

So far, he said, not only has the White House not developed a plan of action for
the next four years, it has not begun to think about one.

For Mr. Clinton, said Paul Tully, the political director of the Democratic
National Committee, the key is making himself better known to the hundreds of
thousands of Democrats and independents who still do not know much about him or
his ideas.

Needing More Exposure

"We're trying to invent a new generation of Democratic leadership," Mr. Tully
said. "None of our guys had ever run for national office before, so Clinton is
still a stick figure to a lot of people, a cartoon figure who's a bit better
defined for a lot more and a fully rounded person only in the states where he's
run."

In that sense, Mr. Clinton could be hurt if there is no full-fledged Democratic
contest in big states like Ohio, Pennsylvania and California. In New York, where
the primary is scheduled for April 7, John A. Marino, the Democratic state
chairman, said Mr. Clinton should go all out for the next three weeks as a means
of introducing himself to a potentially pivotal state.

"He's got to talk about gun control, the homeless, crime and rebuilding the
cities," Mr. Marino said. "He needs to spend time in the suburbs. He needs to
forget about rallies and visit drug rehabilitation centers and homeless shelters
and learn about our problems firsthand."

A New York Times/CBS News survey that ended on March 1 showed Mr. Clinton
trailing Mr. Bush, 50 percent to 40 percent, with the rest saying they did not
plan to vote or had no opinion. But that was before the Arkansan's impressive
string of victories on March 3, on Super Tuesday and this week, and subsequent
polls in major states like Illinois have shown Mr. Clinton leading in such trial
heats.

Factor of Independents

Mr. Bush's ability to attract independent voters and to hold on to the Democrats
who crossed over to support him in 1988 will be major factors.

In the voting on Tuesday in Michigan and Illinois, the omens were not favorable
for the President. Exit polls in both states showed about 4 of 10 Democrats or
independents who backed Mr. Bush in 1988 voted for Mr. Clinton this time. Over
all, 685,000 independents voted in the primary in Illinois this year, and 71
percent asked for Democratic ballots; in Michigan, of 292,000 independent
primary voters, 64 percent cast Democratic ballots.

Those figures shed no light, of course, on the predilections of independents who
skipped the primary, and they may be skewed because of more interesting local
races this year on the Democratic side of things.

Republican and academic theorists have speculated for years about whether the
Republican Party has developed an "Electoral College lock," in which
geopolitical trends have made it all but impossible for the Democrats to
recapture the White House. They have won only once in six elections.

But this year, both Republican and Democratic strategists believe the supposed
lock could be picked. One reason is Mr. Clinton's Southern roots, which may give
him a chance in a few Southern states and most of the border states, like
Maryland, Oklahoma, Kentucky and Missouri, although his prospects are poor in
Florida and not a great deal better in Texas.

Belt of Industrial States

All through the West, from the Plains States to the Pacific, Democratic strength
has been improving. Michael S. Dukakis, the 1988 Democratic nominee, did 10
percent better nationally than Walter S. Mondale, the 1984 nominee, but Mr.
Mondale did 22 percent better in the Western region.

California, the biggest prize in the region and the nation with 54 electoral
votes, is leaning heavily Democratic at the moment and would give Mr. Clinton a
huge boost.

The election could then be won or lost by the Democrats in the belt of
industrial states stretching from Wisconsin through Illinois, Ohio and
Pennsylvania to New Jersey and New York, where American elections, more often
than not, have been decided since the 19th century. At the moment, Illinois,
Michigan, Pennsylvania and New York all look winnable for Mr. Clinton.

"But they shouldn't be worrying about that now, or about attacking each other,"
said Mr. Rollins. "It's not Labor Day. The public doesn't want circuses yet. It
wants ideas, solutions, ways out of this mess."

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPUS LIFE: Swarthmore;
Students Visit Hong Kong Camps For Vietnamese

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 39; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: SWARTHMORE, Pa.


Instead of tanning on beaches and playing volleyball, seven students from
Swarthmore, Bryn Mawr and Haverford Colleges spent their spring break visiting
Vietnamese refugee camps in Hong Kong.

The all-expense-paid trip was this year's Peace Studies mission, a program that
"enables students to do an in-depth study of an area of the world where there
are tensions and then gain first-hand experience there," said one of the two
professors who made the trip, Jen Wu, who is an associate dean and lecturer in
human development at Bryn Mawr College.

Each institution paid its students' expenses, said Varney Truscott, the
assistant to the president at Bryn Mawr and coordinator of the Peace Studies
trip.

Ms. Wu said the group met with government and charity leaders in Hong Kong, and
visited two camps: Shek Kong, a detention center holding 7,000 to 10,000
Vietnamese who sought asylum elsewhere, and Lo Wu, a transit center holding 500
people who had agreed to return to Vietnam after being denied refugee status.

Quoc Trang, a junior political-science major at Swarthmore, said meeting the
Vietnamese asylum-seekers in Hong Kong was a moving experience, especially for
himself and the other three Vietnamese-American students. "I talked to a lot of
children when I was walking around the camps, and I felt that I was looking at
myself, except I was lucky enough to be accepted for asylum," he said.

'Surrounded by Barbed Wire'

Lan Van, a Bryn Mawr senior and biology major from Philadelphia, said she spoke
with a young boy in a camp. "When I was leaving, he asked me, 'So where are you
going now?' I told him that I was going home. I thought to myself, what do they
call home?"

Ms. Van said she had hoped to visit the two refugee camps in Hong Kong where she
had lived 12 years before, but one was closed, and the other was not open to the
public.

She added that when she had arrived in Hong Kong, all Vietnamese were considered
refugees and lived in open camps without fences. But now asylum-seekers must
live "surrounded by barbed wire, as though they were in a cage," while waiting
to hear if they have been granted refugee status, she said.

Mrs. Truscott said a panel of deans and faculty members selected the seven Peace
Studies' group participants from a large applicant pool after reading their
2,000-word essays, resumes and letters of recommendation. She said that Hong
Kong was selected for this year's Peace Studies because "Hong Kong is among the
many places in the world that are confronted with refugee emergencies and
because a Bryn Mawr alum had connections there."

In past years, she said, the Peace Studies' mission has gone to Eastern Europe,
South Africa and cities in the United States. While Bryn Mawr and Haverford have
held joint Peace Studies' trips since 1983, she said, this year is the first
time that Swarthmore has participated.

Weekly Seminars

Group members prepared for the trip, which was made over spring break from March
5 through March 15, by reading from an extensive list and attending weekly
seminars for background on the "political, economic and social issues pertaining
to the trip."

She also said that trip participants would speak at discussion panels at
Haverford, Bryn Mawr and Swarthmore.

Mr. Trang said he was concerned about "whether the Vietnamese people in Hong
Kong are educated about the screening procedure and whether the continuing
American trade embargo is exacerbating the refugee situation."

"I want to educate people that America is still waging a psychological war
against Vietnam, as long as it continues to have a trade embargo, which hurts
the Vietnamese people and causes the refugee crisis to worsen," he said.

Annie Wright, a political science senior at Bryn Mawr from Washington, said that
she hoped the discussion forums would cause students to question "why Vietnamese
refugees who face death from persecution are granted asylum but those facing
death from famine are not."

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Draft;
Clinton Could Have Known Draft Was Unlikely for Him

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 13


When Bill Clinton gave up his deferment and exposed himself to the draft in the
fall of 1969, information was readily available from local and Federal
authorities that he was protected from induction at least until the following
June, and that almost no one would be drafted from his town for the rest of that
year.

President Richard M. Nixon announced on Oct. 1, 1969, that draft-eligible
graduate students like Mr. Clinton could finish the school year before
induction. And a review of public records shows that only two men were sent
draft notices by Mr. Clinton's draft board, No. 26 in Hot Springs, Ark., in the
last three months of 1969.

No Immediate Risk

Mr. Clinton, today the Governor of Arkansas and a Democratic Presidential
contender, has said on the campaign trail that he made himself eligible for the
draft because he felt a moral obligation to do so after learning that some of
his high school classmates had been killed in Vietnam.

But when Mr. Clinton's Selective Service records are placed side by side with
the events at the time, it appears that he was never in immediate risk of being
drafted, a fact he could easily have determined through news reports and
inquiries. He seems to have done what many other draft-age college graduates did
in those days, namely take advantage of all the changes in the rules and
circumstances to delay being drafted as long as possible.

Each Day Was Important

"Every day you could delay improved your chances of never being drafted," said
Victor Rabinowitz, a New York City lawyer who counseled many men on the draft in
the 1960's.

On Wednesday, Mr. Clinton acknowledged that in 1969 he wrote a letter to an Army
colonel supervising the R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas in which
he thanked the colonel for "saving me from the draft," conceded the depth of his
antiwar feelings and admitted that he had been misleading when he said he had
intended to take part in R.O.T.C.

Eventually, Mr. Clinton avoided the draft altogether because the lottery was
instituted, and his birth date, Aug. 19, drew 311, too high to put him at risk.

At the age of 23, Mr. Clinton should have been a prime target for the draft in
1969, since the oldest eligible men, up to the age of 26, were taken first, and
most men who were older than he had either fulfilled their obligation or been
disqualified.

Mr. Clinton recently said he was told that September and October 1969 was his
period of greatest vulnerability. In retrospect, that seems to have been the
case, and it is why his R.O.T.C. deferment was so important.

He was first classified 1-A, or eligible to be drafted, in the spring of 1968,
when he graduated from Georgetown University and lost his deferment.

Graduate student deferments were no longer allowed. But Mr. Clinton's draft
board gave him special treatment so he could begin his studies as a Rhodes
Scholar at Oxford University in England.

'Leaned Over Backwards'

"They kind of leaned over backwards to let him go to Oxford," Opal Ellis, now 84
years old, who was executive secretary of Board No. 26, said in an interviewed
last week by telephone.

According to records made available by the Selective Service System today, Mr.
Clinton passed the draft physical examination in England on Feb. 3, 1969.

Army records show that in Massachusetts, which had a high proportion of students
opposed to the war, 45.7 percent of potential draftees failed the physical,
while in South Carolina, where the proportion of students and opponents of the
war was much lower, only 17.9 percent failed.

Home for vacation in the summer of 1969, Mr. Clinton visited his draft board to
assess his prospects. Ms. Ellis remembers that he was rude. Mr. Clinton has
denied that, saying he would never have been so foolish as to alienate the
secretary of his draft board.

In any case, he probably found out that he was then vulnerable to the draft,
because he signed up for R.O.T.C. at Arkansas, a step that removed his exposure
to the draft until the following summer.

Mr. Clinton says he had second thoughts almost immediately and on Sept. 12
actually wrote a letter asking to be reclassified 1-A. But he returned to Oxford
without mailing the letter. In late September or early October 1969, Mr. Clinton
said Wednesday on the ABC News program "Nightline," he asked his stepfather to
contact his draft board and to tell Col. Eugene Holmes, the Army R.O.T.C.
recruiter at the University of Arkansas, that he would not be joining the
program.

By that time, two events had sharply reduced Mr. Clinton's immediate exposure to
the draft.

First, on Sept. 19, President Nixon announced that draft calls for the rest of
the year would be curtailed, and that only 29,000 would be taken nationwide --
10,000 each in October and November and 9,000 in December.

As a consequence, Mr. Clinton's stepfather, who is now dead, was probably told
that few inductees would be taken from Hot Springs. Lewis C. Brodsky, who is now
the public affairs director of the Selective Service system, said in an
interview today that men and their families routinely learned from their draft
boards what their were.

Apparently, the quota for the Hot Springs board was low, because only two men
were inducted in the last three months of 1969. A larger number had been taken
in September, as had been true for many months previous.

Second, Mr. Nixon announced that graduate students like Mr. Clinton could finish
the school year before being inducted even if they received draft notices. That
meant that Mr. Clinton, who seems to have had no intention of ever actually
entering the R.O.T.C. program, was protected from induction, at least, for as
long as he would have been with the R.O.T.C. deferment.

In any case, Mr. Clinton was reclassified 1-A on Oct. 30.

In October, when Mr. Clinton gave up his deferment, he had no way of knowing
whether the lottery would ever come about. In fact, some influential lawmakers
opposed the plan.

However, the lottery was enacted on Nov. 26. On Dec. 1 the first lottery was
held, and Mr. Clinton drew No. 311.

The Clinton campaign released today a Rhodes Scholarship questionnaire Mr.
Clinton filled out in June 1970 in which he said he had not decided whether he
would return to Oxford in the fall because he might be "entering Yale Law School
or getting drafted."

But by then Mr. Clinton could easily have known that the draft was no longer a
threat. News accounts at the time said men with numbers above about 250 were
almost certainly safe. In fact, 195 was the highest number taken.

On Dec. 2, the day after the lottery, Mr. Clinton submitted his application to
Yale Law School. On Dec. 3, he wrote Colonel Holmes, thanking him for "saving me
from the draft."


NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Alexander Pirnie of New York draws a capsule
containing a birthdate in the draft lottery on Dec. 1, 1969 (Associated Press)
(pg. A17)

Chronology: "A Matter of Timing"

Gov. Bill Clinton's draft status from 1964 throough 1969.

1964

November - Bill Clinton is classified 2-S (student deferment) by his Hot
Springs, Ark., draft board when he enrolls as an undergraduate at Georgetown
University.

1968

Feb. 16 - The Johnson Administration abolishes draft deferments for all graduate
students except those in medicine, dentistry, osteopathy, optometry and
veterinary medicine, and those completing two or more years of graduate study by
June 1968.
 March 20 - Clinton is reclassified 1-A (available). He is told by his draft
board that he will be given leniency.

June 9 - Clinton graduates from Georgetown. In the fall, he begins a term in
England at Oxford on a Rhodes Scholarship.

1969

Feb. 3 - In Oxford, England on a Rhodes Scholarship, Clinton passes the draft
physical examination.
 Aug. 7 - Clinton is reclassified 1-D because he says he agrees to enter the
Army R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas Law School.

Sept. - Mr. Clinton says he wrote a letter to his draft board asking to be made
1-A, but never mails it.

Sept. 19 - President Nixon announces a cutback in the draft. Nationwide, 29,000
men will be drafted from October through December.

Oct. 1 - President Nixon announces that graduate students can complete the
school year without being inducted, though they still might be drafted.

October - Mr. Clinton, who had returned to Oxford, has said this is when his
stepfather met with local draft officials and told the University of Arkansas
R.O.T.C. that his son wanted to be let out of the agreement.

Oct. 30 - Mr. Clinton is reclassified 1-A after R.O.T.C. tells the draft board
he would not be attending the University of Arkansas.

Nov. 26 - Congress enacts the lottery law.

Dec. 1 - In the lottery, Mr. Clinton's birthdate is assigned number 311, to high
to be called.

Dec. 2 - Mr. Clinton applies to Yale Law School.

Dec. 3 - Clinton writes Col. Eugene Holmes, the Army R.O.T.C. recruiter at the
University of Arkansas, and thanks him for "saving me from the draft."

TYPE: Biography; Chronology

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rev. John B. Sheerin Dies at 85; a Catholic Editor and Columnist

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 540 words


The Rev. John B. Sheerin, a Roman Catholic editor, columnist and pioneer in
interfaith relations, died on Monday at St. Joseph's Nursing Home in Totowa,
N.J., after a long illness. He was 85 years old.

From 1948 to 1972, Father Sheerin was editor of The Catholic World, a monthly
journal published by the Paulist Fathers, the religious order of priests that he
had entered after receiving a law degree and embarking on a legal career.

In 1957, he was one of two Catholic observers at a meeting on Christian unity in
North America sponsored by the largely Protestant World Conference of Churches
and National Council of Churches in the United States. In August 1962, he was
one of the first two Catholics appointed by the Vatican as official observers at
the World Council's Central Committee meetings.

In the 1960's, Father Sheerin became a major interpreter of the church reforms
initiated at the Second Vatican Council. He was a leading member of the panel of
American bishops and experts that briefed the press in Rome during the 1962 and
1963 sessions of the council. He served as a theological adviser during the
council's fourth and final session in 1965.

A Weekly Column

The council, he said as its first session closed, signaled the end of "a
knockdown, drag-out fight" that the church had conducted with Protestantism
since the 16th century. As an editor and writer of a weekly column widely
syndicated in Catholic diocesan newspapers, Father Sheerin urged unity among
Christians and attacked religious traditions fostering anti-Semitism.

He was also a supporter of civil rights efforts. In April 1960, he criticizied
the idea that sit-ins in segregated places by black students were a passing
episode, saying that they were "the opening of a long campaign" and that the
demonstrators were "entitled to our sincere admiration."

An outspoken opponent of the Vietnam war, Father Sheerin was among 18 religious
leaders who announced in 1967 that they would risk fines or imprisonment to help
young men resist or evade the draft if they opposed the war on the ground of
conscience.

A year later, he joined a group of 29 Protestant, Catholic and Jewish clergymen
who issued a 6,000-word statement, supported by a volume of excerpts from news
reports, that charged the United States military forces with committing numerous
war crimes in Vietnam.

Strong Convictions

In 1973, Father Sheerin said that "the American bishops have been very
disappointing in their failure to take a stand" about the war, and he argued
that the conscientious-objector status should be open to those morally opposed
to specific wars as well as to total pacifists -- a position the bishops
eventually adopted.

Father Sheerin managed to express his strong convictions in a measured and
conciliatory manner and never lost his close ties with many bishops and with the
Vatican.

He was born in Brooklyn and received a bachelor's degree from Fordham University
in 1928 and a law degree from Fordham in 1930. After retiring from The Catholic
World, he worked for the Catholic bishops' office for Catholic-Jewish relations
in Washington.

He is survived by two sisters, Muriel Sheerin and Eunice Skelly, both of
Brooklyn.

NAME: John B. Sheerin

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. John B. Sheerin (The New York Times, 1967)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

K.G.B. Telltale Is Tattling, But Is He Telling U.S. All?

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1487 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


A spy who came in from the cold is suddenly hot. Oleg Danilovich Kalugin, the
former senior K.G.B. official who burst into public view in mid-1990 by
denouncing the Soviet intelligence service that employed him for 32 years, is
barnstorming America.

Appearing nonstop on radio and television talk shows from Los Angeles to New
York, Mr. Kalugin is helping Cable News Network promote its book on the collapse
of the Soviet Union. He is also addressing foreign policy groups, trying to find
a publisher for his memoirs, arranging television and movie projects and talking
to officials in Washington about his assertion that the Soviets interrogated
American prisoners of war in Vietnam long after such prisoners were reportedly
released.

Smartly turned out in double-breasted navy blazer, pinstriped shirt, paisley
tie, gray flannel pants and wing-tip shoes, Mr. Kalugin addresses his audiences
in flawless English that he refined during more than a decade of service in the
United States. He portrays himself as a tell-all former spy who was at worst
devious, at best benign, an administrator who never had to soil his hands with
assassination or violence, leaving such gritty tasks to others.

Mr. Kalugin, a former major general who headed the K.G.B.'s foreign
counterintelligence service, sprinkles his remarks with spicy bits of spy lore
-- from his claim to have hired the notorious American spy John Walker to
anecdotes about Warsaw Pact collaboration with Carlos the Jackal and other
international terrorists. According to Mr. Kalugin, Lee Harvey Oswald was not
K.G.B., but was viewed as C.I.A.; the Russians never tried to kill Pope John
Paul II; "Coca-Cola City," a replica of an American city for K.G.B. training,
never existed; the apartments of foreign journalists living in Moscow were
routinely bugged and their conversations meticulously transcribed.

Is he credible? Or does he suffer from defector's syndrome, that is, an initial
recitation of red-hot, firsthand data, followed by bits and pieces stitched
together and embellished to keep the receiver's interest?

Even some of America's top spymasters are confounded, both suspicious and
admiring of the 57-year-old Russian whose first undercover assignments were as a
graduate student at the Columbia School of Journalism and a Radio Moscow
correspondent at the United Nations.

"Smooth as silk, the smoothest guy I've seen in years, with his own agenda, of
course," said William E. Colby, the former Director of Central Intelligence. "We
may be seeing what traditionally happens with defectors -- when they first come
over to the other side they are very good, and then when it looks as if they'll
be sent off to a farm in Arkansas, they suddenly say, 'Oh, gee, I have something
else.' "

Joys of Free Enterprise

For Richard M. Helms, one of Mr. Colby's predecessors, Mr. Kalugin continues to
protect secrets.

"Certainly he was in a position to know one hell of a lot about intelligence,
and he obviously wants to make an impression in the United States," Mr. Helms
said. "After all, he's got to make a living. But he's not telling the whole
truth, as no intelligence officer ever would in public. He doesn't want to get
totally on the outs with people in his own country. If I were in his position I
would do exactly the same thing."

Like other longtime loyal Communists who are rushing to cash in on the cold
war's demise, Mr. Kalugin now gushes about the joys of free enterprise and seems
to thoroughly enjoy the stretch limousines with televisions and Scotch-filled
crystal decanters provided for the tour by Ted Turner's media empire.

"It's been a riot, a K.G.B. major general taking part in the most capitalistic
of endeavors, the book promotion tour," said his teammate on the tour, Stuart H.
Loory, vice-president of CNN and a co-author of the book, "Seven Days That Shook
the World." Mr. Loory was a year ahead of Mr. Kalugin at Columbia and came to
know him well when he served undercover as a press officer in the Soviet Embassy
in Washington in the 1960's. They met again after the failed coup last August,
which Mr. Kalugin witnessed at the side of Boris N. Yeltsin.

Many More Projects

Mr. Kalugin has also landed a lucrative consulting contract for a joint
British-American television series on the K.G.B. and the Central Intelligence
Agency. He is poised to sign another contract with the William Morris Agency to
represent his own book, a 430-page memoir, and to arrange speaking engagements
and television and movie projects in the United States.

When asked in an interview on Thurday what it is like to be a born-again
capitalist, Mr. Kalugin said with some disdain, "I don't care about all these
labels." But, he added, "I do care about a decent life, an honest life, material
well-being and good Christian values."

Mr. Kalugin has already suffered his first literary setback. Alfred A. Knopf
turned down his memoirs, in part because they did not reveal much about the
"black" operations of the K.G.B. -- the assassinations, poisonings, setups,
disappearances, labor camps and tortures.

"I told them, 'I was in the intelligence service, I was a tool of foreign
policy,' " he said, portraying himself as more of a diplomat than a covert
operator whose main mission was to persuade Americans to commit treason. "I
never witnessed such things, so why should I write about things I know nothing
about?"

Ashbel Green, vice president and senior editor of Knopf, believes that Mr.
Kalugin has a better story to tell. "He tells his story like a bureaucrat, and
presents the K.G.B. as a bunch of bureaucrats with some bad guys among them,"
said Mr. Green. "Kalugin wants a lot of money for the book, and if he wants a
lot of money he can't tell a story that is incomplete."

Mr. Kalugin's most explosive disclosure for the American public is his assertion
that the Soviets interviewed at least three American prisoners of war in Vietnam
after 1973, when Hanoi said that all of them had been returned. On his current
trip he has met with State Department officials to discuss the matter and plans
to testify under oath on the subject before a Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs on Tuesday.

Oleg Nechiporenko, the man who Mr. Kalugin said conducted the interrogations,
has publicly denied the story. Soviet officials have said that a thorough
investigation of K.G.B. files has failed to reveal any evidence of such
interrogations; the C.I.A. has denied Mr. Kalugin's claim that a C.I.A. official
was one of the men interrogated, and the Vietnamese have denounced Mr. Kalugin
and invited him to go for a visit to see for himself.

Still, Mr. Kalugin has stuck to his story that at least three Americans were
interrogated from 1975 to 1978, adding, "Why should I lie?"

Mr. Kalugin may not lie, but a bit of embellishment is another matter. At one
point in the two-hour interview he boasted that in 1959 he "took President Nixon
around as a guide" for a Soviet exhibit at the Coliseum in New York, then
acknowledged that they exchanged "only a few pleasantries" until the official
interpreters took over. He did not bother to correct an error in the official
biography accompanying the CNN press packet that identified him as the former
chief of counterintelligence for the entire K.G.B., not just its foreign
service. "Sometimes I just stop correcting them," he said.

He denied an article published in 1970 by Jack Anderson that called him a
"handsome Lotharian" whose recruitment activities included seductions of women
with United States Government contacts. The article blew his cover and led to
his recall. Instead, he insisted, he was simply trying to have one of his
agents, a businessman of Greek origin, "find some nice girl" in the State
Department or C.I.A. The F.B.I., he believes, uncovered the plot and leaked it.

Thriving at Home

Back home, Mr. Kalugin has thrived. In the weeks after he publicly revealed
K.G.B. abuses in the summer of 1990, he was officially denounced, stripped of
his military rank and pension and charged with the crime of disclosing state
secrets. He left the Communist Party, became a local celebrity, ran for and won
a seat in the Soviet Parliament -- now disbanded -- and plans to run again for
public office.

Last year he served as a consultant to a film on a fictional K.G.B.-inspired
coup that was released in the former Soviet Union, and he is helping to begin a
new Russian magazine called "The Red Archives" that will publish political
commentary, fiction and previously secret government documents.

His military privileges and nearly worthless K.G.B. pension of 700 rubles a
month were restored by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in September 1991, and he
said that he lives "quite well" with his wife, Lyudmila, a clerk, in an
apartment building built for K.G.B. generals. "We have three rooms, three big
rooms," he said proudly.

NAME: Oleg Danilovich Kalugin

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oleg Danilovich Kalugin (George Tames for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Opens Singapore Trip With Announcements

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, Saturday, Jan. 4


President Bush said today that the United States and Singapore have tentatively
agreed to shift command of the Navy's Seventh Fleet logistics operations to this
island nation from the Philippines, where the Government ordered the vast Subic
Bay naval base closed down.

The announcement was one of a string of agreements that Mr. Bush made public
during a one-day visit here, the second stop on his four-nation tour of the
western Pacific.

Mr. Bush also disclosed a decision by Washington to lift a trade embargo imposed
16 years ago against neighboring Cambodia, a new initiative to finance
improvements in the region's troubled environment, and a bilateral investment
accord with Singapore.

The shift in naval logistics is part of a plan by the Navy to disperse its Subic
Bay operations around the Pacific in what American officials are calling a
"security network and fabric" woven among several nations.

Singapore's prime minister, Goh Chok Tong, said that details of the Navy shift
remain to be worked out before a formal agreement is signed. Another, earlier
accord allows American ships and F-16 jet fighters to use port facilities and
landing strips.

Administration officials said that no more than 200 Navy officers and family
members would move to Singapore under the new accord, which does not encompass
building a major naval port to replace Subic.

Singapore will not charge the Pentagon for the additional use of its territory,
officials said, but the United States will train Singaporean military personnel
as compensation.

In a speech today, Mr. Bush also disclosed an "environmental partnership" with
Asia to exchange and train environmental experts, share pollution cleanup and
reduction technologies and assess damage to the region's plant and animal life.

American Government lending agencies such as the Export-Import bank will provide
loan guarantees to finance investments in fighting pollution in the region, the
White House said.

"This will be good -- good for Asia's environment, good for American jobs," he
said. Administration officials also said that it would help open a vast market
for pollution-control equipment, an area in which the United States enjoys a
commanding technological and market lead.

The President also gave the go-ahead to a decision made last fall to lift trade
sanctions against Cambodia. The embargo, which has been in effect since 1975,
when Americans fled the advancing Khmer Rouge, would open the way for American
business to return to Indochina for the first time since the end of the Vietnam
War.

Cambodia recently ended a lengthy civil war with guerrilla forces, some backed
by the United States, in a United Nations-sponsored peace accord.  The President
also met today with 11 American business leaders, part of a 21-member group that
is following Mr. Bush on his visit to explore business opportunities and press
for open trade.

This visit to Singapore, the first by an American President, is less of a
whistle stop in Mr. Bush's campaign for American exports than it is a last
respite before he confronts large and potentially serious trade problems in
South Korea and Japan, the final two destinations in his 12-day trip.

Of the four Pacific nations Mr. Bush is visiting, none better supports his
argument that free trade creates jobs and raises living standards. Singapore's
2.8 million people have an average income of nearly $14,000, second in the
region only to Japan, and the island's lack of trade barriers has made it a
haven for major manufacturers and financial-services companies.

Like Australia, Mr. Bush's first stop, Singapore must battle an array of
protectionist trade barriers in selling its goods to the United States.
Washington has in recent years imposed stiff duties on imports from Singapore of
textiles, electronics and pharmaceutical goods.

But Singapore's leaders are unlikely to accuse Mr. Bush of using a double
standard by preaching free trade, but not practicing it. Singapore's rigidly
controlled society frowns on dissent and has been accused of restricting press
and religious freedoms.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words



International A2-9

U.N. VOTE CONDEMNS ISRAEL

With American support, the United Nations Security Council unanimously condemned
Israel's decision to deport 12 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
A1

ISRAELIS IN WASHINGTON FOR TALKS

An Israeli delegation arrived in Washington to resume Middle East peace talks,
but Syrian, Lebanese, Jordanian and Palestinian negotiators stayed away in
protest.  A9
Cardinal O'Connor said the Vatican had reconsidered on Jerusalem.  A9

GEORGIAN PRESIDENT FLEES

The President of the former Soviet republic of Georgia slipped away from the
capital as rebel forces stormed the government building where he and members of
his family had been holed up.  A1
Russia reluctantly accepted an aid shipment of beef from Britain.  A6

U.S. AND JAPAN AT ODDS OVER TRADE

As President Bush visits Japan, negotiators for the United States and Japan are
at odds over an American demand for higher Japanese targets for buying American
automobiles and parts.  A1

President Bush's trade talks in Japan are politically freighted.  A8
The Treasury Secretary will accompany the President in Tokyo.  A8

SEOUL WAR GAMES CANCELED

South Korea announced it would cancel it's annual military exercises with the
United States after North Korea indicated that it would allow inspections of its
nuclear sites.  A8

GERMAN ASSERTIVENESS PONDERED

United States policy makers say they have become disturbed during the last six
months by what they regard as Germany's new willingness to flex its muscles in
international relations.  A2

A Senate panel on Vietnam War missing is to go to Indochina.  A5
Surprising records of the 1962 Cuban missile crisis were released.  A5

After plea, Imelda Marcos tosses her shoe in the presidential ring.  A8

Algeria's fundamentalist Muslims say Islamic rule is imminent.  A3

There is a crisis affecting black education in South Africa.  A3

Blacks are boycotting white businesses in a South African town.  A3

Fort St. John Journal: A Canada-Alaska road will be celebrated.  A4

National A10-13

FOR BUSH, A LESSON FROM BRITAIN

Measures that President Bush has prescribed to improve education in the United
States are now the law in Britain, but the results there so far serve as a
warning to him that success is far from guaranteed.  A1

CHANGE IN BOSTON SCHOOLS

In Boston, where public schools have long had financial and racial troubles, a
school board appointed by the Mayor formally replaced the elected board.  A12

A NEW WAY OF WORKING

If planners have their way, long drives to work and worsening traffic will be a
thing of the past thanks to development of regional work centers where employees
can do their jobs by computer, telephone and fax machines.  A10

THE POST-COLD WAR PENTAGON

Responding to the death of the Soviet Union, the head of the House Armed
Services Committee outlined a broad framework for restructuring the Pentagon.
A13

MILITARY CUTBACK IS PROPOSED

Senator Gramm, a Texas conservative, proposed a cut in military spending and an
increase in the personal income tax deduction.  A13

NEW WOMAN IN CABINET?
 Carol Boyd Hallett, a woman with strong political credentials who
Administration officials say would be an asset to President Bush in an election
year, is the leading candidate to become Transportation Secretary.  A10

FIFTH BOMBING IN INDIANA

A bomb that shattered windows in an apartment complex was the fifth detonated in
two weeks in the Hammond, Ind., area.  A10

A power failure darkens part of Washington.  A13

Metropolitan Digest, B1

NEW YORK CREDIT DOWNGRADED

Moody's Investors Service downgraded the rating on most of New York State's
debt, citing Albany's inability to solve the state's budget problems. The
downgrading could mean that the state will have to pay higher interest rates to
borrow money.  A1

PCB'S CLOSE SUNY CAMPUS

Officials of the State University of New York at New Paltz have delayed the
spring semester by two weeks because an explosion in an electrical transformer
has left at least five buildings contaminated with PCB's, which are known to
cause cancer in animals. Twenty-two people were exposed to polychlorinated
biphenyl particles.  A1

Neediest Cases B3

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-10

BREAST IMPLANT HALT

The Food and Drug Administration urged doctors to stop using silicone-filled
breast implants until a full study of whether they are safe can be completed.
A1

What are dreams made of? A chemical mechanism is suggested.  C1

Major effort is mounted to measure impact of the ozone hole.  C1

A machine to capture plagiarists raises hopes and doubts.  C1

Running may not be a man's world a few years down the pike.  C3

Arts/Entertainment C11-22

Dizzy Gillespie in New York for a month for his jubilee.  C11

Top price of $50 announced for two Broadway plays.  C11

A festival for mid-career choreographers.  C11

Word and Image: A new Michael Frayn novel.  C15

Fashion Page B9

Four newcomers' best sellers.

Obituaries B7-8

Dr. Robert Gordis, author and rabbi.  B8

Pedro Manuel Valls, interior designer.  B8

Sports B10-15

Baseball: 'More things coming,' say Yanks.  B11

Steinbrenner's role discussed.  B11

Basketball: Nets defeat Clippers.  B12

New Knicks breaking old habits.  B12

Column: Anderson on Tartabull.  B11

On Pro Football.  B14

Football: Lions will do their talking on the field.  B14

Hockey: Rangers recapture share of first.  B11

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials A14
Tax credit? Health discredit?
The perils of "lustration."
North Korea opens up.
Mr. Gingrich's prison math.

Letters A14

Russell Baker: Boat and Bridge People.  A15

A. M. Rosenthal: Presenting Hypocrisy Inc.  A15

James Bovard: Don't brake for Detroit.  A15

Whitney North Seymour Jr.: Cheaper, faster civil justice.  A15

Aram Bakshian Jr.: America first, Buchanan last.  A15

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cardinal vistis Bethlehem during trip to West Bank. A9.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tourists, the Peacetime Target Of a Shipful of Military Magic

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2136 words


PERHAPS the most comical sight at the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum is the
people lined up in front of a ring about three times the size of a toilet seat.
Some stand and stare at the ring as if it were Mike Tyson wearing light gloves
and a sneer.

The task before them is to wriggle through it. If they succeed -- and even most
chubbies seem to -- they will be admitted to what is billed as "the world's only
guided missile submarine open to the public." Inside, there will be hatches of
roughly the same size to squirm through.

The sub, the Growler, is only one of tons and tons of military attractions at
the Intrepid, on the Hudson River in Manhattan. Like the sub, most of them were
snatched away before they could be sold as surplus or shot up for target
practice.

There is so much to see: the Edson, whose guns once pounded Vietnam's coast; the
Intrepid itself, an aircraft carrier the length of 3 football fields, whose
flight deck is now home to more than 40 aircraft. Among them is a Lockheed A-12
Blackbird, said to be the planet's fastest, highest-flying, most secret plane.
It is certainly big.

There are countless exhibits, from the outer shells of the kinds of missiles
used to punish Iraq, to one of the first planes to land on a ship, to hundreds
of child-size models assembled by a Brooklyn hobby club. There are jet cockpits
that children can actually sit in. There are more than seven hours of films
constantly being shown here and there, sometimes in focus. All this and more for
$7.

Even in more bellicose times, the allure might seem elusive to some people. But
with the cold war rapidly becoming a piece of nostalgia, it seems passing
strange that a massive aircraft carrier still lurks in New York Harbor. And how
many tourist attractions have two cannons aimed directly at midtown? (Not
necessarily a bad idea, but still.)

But the bottom line, inescapably, is that the Intrepid does what it does better
than anybody else in a town where cornering a market is everything. This
achievement is what one must keep in mind as one looks in vain for a guide. Or
makes note of the rotting pier, the rust, the occasional leaky ceiling. Or
munches cardboard cuisine from the vending-machine cafeteria. Or is rudely
forced to return one's ticket at the exit.

For half a million visitors a year, who show up by the hundreds on even the
coldest days, the Intrepid experience seems to work marvelously. Most of the
sights, in fact, are indoors, and there's something uniquely bracing about
standing on a flight deck in what feels like Arctic waters. Families account for
most of the visitors, although when Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, was looking for a place in the Big McIntosh to entertain his
Soviet counterpart, this military smorgasbord was where he took him. May Day on
the Hudson?

The multitudes come to relive history from World War II to Vietnam to moon
landings, a history actually shaped by these vessels and the objects they
display. Exhibits, including such treasures as the elegant figurehead from the
New York, go back much further.

The scene is one of visitors walking miles where heroes once trod. They laugh
and talk and point and, sometimes, cry. Truth to tell, most seem at least as
captivated by what they are seeing and doing as the folks at, say, the Museum of
Modern Art.

And, yes, this noisy museum next to the Circle Line pier might be the beginning
of a trend. Peace is the reason. "It's our hope that someday most of our ships
will be museums," declared Lawrence Sowinski, the Intrepid's executive director
and a refugee from the advertising business.

The Intrepid rests along a regal river that was once the Manhattan home to grand
liners like the Queen Mary and the France. We arrived by foot after a tawdry
20-minute hike from Times Square.

What a pitiful section is the far West Side, with its parking lots, abandoned
wharfs, unused buildings, refuse piles! Any of the many development schemes for
this battered shoreline would surely be better than the worse-than-nothing that
has happened. The Intrepid museum was planned as part of the development that
was to accompany the rejected Westway highway. Now, except for the Circle Line
and the occasional carnival, it is an orphan. "An oasis," Mr. Sowinski calls it.

We slog serenely through the grim neighborhood, arriving at the public plaza in
front of the museum, to discover a patriotic display on the order of a
small-town park in Indiana. Only more so: sculptures of military men, a tank, an
anti-aircraft gun.

There is grass and room to breathe, even think. The thought is of the men who
died fighting. And this thought is clearly at the heart of this whole
enterprise: to die for one's country is to be never forgotten.

Is it true? If so, should it be true? And would the dead want their memorial to
be rusting gunships, tanks and such? Is this all one enormous metaphoric V.F.W.
Hall, full of pot-bellied warriors from long ago telling worn stories to justify
otherwise empty lives?

There are no answers to any of these questions, other than one's own. Some
veterans march in parades and wear old uniforms well past the bursting point.
Some burn their uniforms and discard their medals.

Zachary Fisher, the chairman of the Intrepid museum, is of the belief that
veterans, like the causes they served, deserve all possible recognition.
Accordingly, the millionaire construction executive vowed to dedicate his
retirement to those who fought for their country. The retirement remained
forever postponed, but his generous initiatives made all this happen.

The Intrepid was the Official Bicentennial Vessel at Philadelphia in 1976, but
afterward it was to be scrapped. Mr. Fisher and his wife, Elizabeth, led a
campaign to save the ship, contributing many of their own dollars. Why? They are
"two very dedicated patriotic New Yorkers who believe that 'freedom is never
free," ' says the program distributed at the gate.

As we waited our turn to squeeze through the jumbo toilet seat, we overheard
employees talking to one another on the radio. They talked about the people just
arriving. Some were "code 7's," which we asked about; the term means unruly
children. The arrival of "bimbos," a term we didn't ask about, was also eagerly
heralded.

Just 1,700 of the more than 3,000 people a day who visit the Intrepid enter the
Growler submarine. Groups are limited to a dozen people because space is so
tight.

The Growler was one of the first submarines to launch nuclear missiles, big, fat
ones that look more like airplanes. This is the Model T of subs carrying nukes,
having been superseded by the Polaris, then the Trident. Officials of the
Intrepid say they hope the drastic changes in superpower relations may
eventually allow them to latch onto one of the newer models, too.

The Growler is plenty impressive to at least one landlubber. Right next to the
torpedoes are bunks where crew members slept in rotation around the clock. Cozy.
The missile bay is bathed in a soothing coral light of the sort restaurants use
to flatter women's complexions. Nice touch.

The top-secret missile guidance control center is more impressive than your
dashboard, but not as riveting as how small the showers seem, even to a New York
apartment dweller. Prisoners on Rikers Island get more space. Indeed, the
claustrophobic are warned to avoid the Growler, although too many don't realize
their phobia until they're aboard. Maps are omnipresent to give visitors a sense
of where they are, as well as certain knowledge that there are ways out.

A small thing that caught our attention was the pathetic-looking plastic bacon
and eggs that a mannequin was cooking. Underwater for days and grub like this?

The nicest thing about the Growler from a tourist's perspective is that a guide
accompanies you. There is also a little film giving some context and history.
These are in sharp contrast to most of the museum, in which you wander rather
aimlessly.

Guides are in exceedingly short supply at the Intrepid because of a fiscal
crunch that has decimated maintenance and other areas. In April, city and state
financing for the year was cut to $97,000 from $1.5 million. Mr. Fisher and his
board members are scrambling to make up the shortfall from private sources. So
far, Chapter 11 bankruptcy, under which the Intrepid operated for two years in
the mid-1980's, has been avoided.

The meaning of all this to the visitor is that if you are going to see
everything, you will most likely have to find it yourself. You can easily spend
more than twice the three hours the guide says is necessary to see everything.

Just as most visits to the museum often have a haphazard quality, so will the
remainder of this piece. Since there is so much to see, we will keep to the high
points, at least ones we happened to bump into.

Aboard the Edson, the aforementioned destroyer, we particularly took to the
combat information center, "the brains of the ship": the eerie blue lights on
the dials, in particular. Here, there is much more opportunity to get some feel
for what the top officers do than on the aircraft carrier's much more crowded
command bridge.

The Intrepid itself is an undertaking. Aircraft carriers are that way. "I spent
seven years on a carrier and saw a new face every day," said Ken Onley, the
supervisor of the more manageable Growler. "I never did see the whole ship."

Neither will you. The scale of the Intrepid boggles, and it is small in
comparison with the real super-carriers that came later. To stand on the deck
and look at the city towers and the sweep of the river is thus a striking
experience.

There are all manner of planes to look at, including the speedy Blackbird. Many
have stories. One is the kind of jet flown by Capt. Manuel Rivera Jr., a Bronx
native killed in the Persian Gulf war. Another is the comparative putt-putt A-4
Skyhawk, a mainstay of the less-than-formidable Kuwaiti military.

The most memorable, moving thing on the flight deck is marked by a plaque. It is
the exact spot where 22 men were injured or killed in a kamikaze attack near the
Philippines in 1944. The men were all blacks, restricted to serving white
officers in the galley. A photo downstairs shows them doing this, all smiles,
bows and scrapes. For love of country, they had volunteered for the ill-fated
"gun tub."

Most of the Intrepid's sights are inside on the gallery and hangar decks. The
exhibits vary greatly in quality. The exhibition on the Persian Gulf war seemed
particularly hollow. Many points are made though blowups of magazine articles.
Some twisted hunks of metal, resembling chunks of an abandoned car on nearby
12th Avenue, are said to be Scud missile wreckage.

So what? You need more explanation and guidance. But at other points you are
buried in dense, hard-to-read verbiage and left gasping. There is no happy
medium.

The overarching idea of these exhibits seems to be the serendipitous one that
we'll take what we can get. A big scale model of the Arizona is on loan from the
producers of the film "Tora! Tora! Tora!" All the child-size models might better
befit a Boy Scout exhibition, although in fairness they would have to be very
handy Scouts.

Other exhibits are quite moving. The Medal of Honor Hall shows a quietly
resonant film of men describing their heroism, almost always performed out of
fierce loyalty to their comrades in arms. There are the heart-shaped pins of
Gold Star mothers, who sacrificed sons in World War II. There is a letter from a
Brooklyn father to the Secretary of the Navy, wondering what happened to a son
stationed at Pearl Harbor.

There is much that is, uh, surprising. The plastic F. D. R. reading Fortune
magazine and looking a bit under the weather in a glass case. The cockpit of an
El Al jetliner. A large hall devoted to undersea exploration, replete with live
fish. A children's ride that simulates the experience of bobsledding, flying,
driving a racing car and a couple of other "thrills" in too rapid succession.

But go see for yourself, particularly if the unexpected boredoms of peace are
weighing a tad heavily. The Intrepid takes you back to boom-boom, John Wayne and
simple values that, when all is said and done, have kept the United States
kicking like a colt for almost 216 years.

"She is the only World War II national battlefield located in New York Harbor,"
a museum fact sheet proclaims of the Intrepid.

She is that. And more.
(HBSeeing The Intrepid

The Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum is at Pier 86, 46th Street at the Hudson
River, Manhattan. Hours are Wednesdays to Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed
Christmas and New Year's Day. Admission: $7 ($6 for the elderly; $4 for children
6 to 11 years old; free for children under 6). Information: (212) 245-0072.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Visitors on the flight deck of the Intrepid, above, a part of
the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum on the Hudson River in Manhattan, left. (pg.
A1); More than 3,000 people a day visit the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum. (pg.
C26)
(Photographs by Dith Pran/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Gives 2 Sets of Remains to U.S.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodia gave the United States what officials said might be the
remains of two marines killed in Indochina. Flag-covered boxes of the remains
were placed on an Air Force transport plane in Phnom Penh. Charles Twining,
center, the top American diplomat there, looked on. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hey, Walt! Nobody's Perfect!

BYLINE: By Suzanne Berne;  Suzanne Berne teaches expository writing at Harvard
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 659 words



A HANDBOOK FOR DROWNING
Stories.
By David Shields.
178 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $19.

WHAT's both interesting and disappointing about obsessions is that eventually
everybody has the same ones: We're afraid of death, hungry for love, anxious for
approval, spooked by the past -- only the variations differ. So it's no surprise
that authors write out of their own obsessions; the surprise is when they
transform the banal into something significant, when they present an obsession
we instinctively recognize but feel we have never met before.

David Shields' third work of fiction, "A Handbook for Drowning," introduces a
character driven by familiar obsessions. Walter Jaffe, the hero of this
collection of related stories, is also preoccupied with defects -- everything
from his girlfriend's deformed toe to his parents' self-conscious political
idealism. Sometimes this fixation can be funny, as in the story called "The War
on Poverty," in which Walt describes his mother's earnest attempt to befriend
Darryl, "a young man from Watts." To make Darryl feel welcome, she "prepared
dishes such as black-eyed peas, grits, and Southern fried steak, which she
thought might appeal especially to him but which neither he nor anyone else was
able to swallow." Many of these stories take place in the 1960's and early 70's,
an era Mr. Shields finds compelling precisely because the noble was so often
hobbled by the silly (as in "The Sixties," when a high-school ecology club
retaliates to Walt's satire of one of its demonstrations by "toilet-papering my
house").

But mostly the stories are submerged in unhappiness, the side effect of an
imperfect world. "War Wounds" lists a barrage of horrors, those caused by the
war in Vietnam as well as the everyday atrocities we read about in the
newspaper, as the prelude for a story about becoming a conscientious objector.
Walt objects to so much suffering, yet at the same time he's drawn to it. Like
Prometheus, one of his heroes, he gets a certain kick out of torment. When his
girlfriend nearly drowns in "The Moon, Falling," Walt finds the experience of
resuscitating her erotic; in another story, he enjoys reading unflattering
descriptions of himself in her journal. Even his mother's cancer seems to
fascinate as much as grieve him. His conscience overwhelmed by neurotic fears
and desires, Walt's real obsession surfaces -- it is his own defective self.

An obsession with imperfection also runs through Mr. Shields' second novel,
"Dead Languages." In that book, he explored "disfluency" by creating a
brilliant, articulate narrator who stutters. This defect reveals the painful
inadequacies of speech -- a familiar frustration, and yet surprising to
encounter so dramatically. The struggle for self-expression may be universal,
but it's rare to see that struggle enacted between such a lyrical interior life
and its clumsy, halting exterior. However, the link between Mr. Shields'
previous book and this one goes beyond a common obsession. Even details in "Dead
Languages" reappear in "A Handbook for Drowning": the mothers in both works are
successful journalists who die of cancer; both fathers are devoted to the cause
of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg; the families even take the same vacations.

In other words, the circumstances within this third book often seem convenient
rather than purposely selected; reading this material sometimes feels like
leafing through an artist's sketch pad. The stories flip restlessly between
Walt's childhood and adulthood, seen from different perspectives, as if a range
of angles can substitute for new subject matter. Walt's fixations stay too
undeveloped to become truly involving; he is certainly drowning in his
obsessions, but we never really find out why. Alas, we all have our neuroses.
What we may not have is insight into the reasons for them. Everyone knows how to
drown; perhaps what we could use is a handbook for staying afloat.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Dominoes That Didn't Fall

BYLINE: By David E. Sanger;  David E. Sanger is a correspondent in the Tokyo
bureau of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1320 words



THE FOUR LITTLE DRAGONS
The Spread of Industrialization in East Asia.
By Ezra F. Vogel.
138 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $16.95.

THIS has been a tough year for free-marketeers in Washington, who find
themselves trying to explain why the United States is practically the only major
industrial power without a cohesive industrial policy. The recession that has
hit the United States so dramatically is felt much less in Asia, home of the
world's most booming economies. Without question, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and
other industrial powerhouses in the region have their share of economic woes --
many of them an echo of problems in the United States. But many of them also
seem to share a skill that has all too often eluded American society: the
ability to put government and industry to work at focusing national economies on
high-growth, strategically vital industries.

In his latest and slimmest book on Asia, Ezra F. Vogel, the Henry Ford 2d
Professor of Social Sciences at Harvard University, who has written extensively
about Japan and China, tries to explain how government and industry have
interacted in South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore and Hong Kong, turning charity-case
nations into business school case studies. "The Four Little Dragons" may be the
quickest dose of reality yet for anyone left with a romantic vision of Asia. And
while at times it suffers from superficiality and a strangely benevolent view of
authoritarian regimes, it has a lot to say about how nations keep their eyes on
the ball.

What makes the so-called four dragons such important topics of study these days
is that, in the years leading up to the war in Vietnam, they were the dominoes
supposedly waiting to fall. But while none of them became Communist, none of
them chose capitalism either -- at least not in the American sense. Instead,
they turned to various forms of the Japanese model -- what one Singapore
official terms "capitalism with socialist characteristics."

Though American economists tend to lump the four dragons together as very
similar economies, and by implication similar societies, Mr. Vogel is at his
best when he describes what different economic animals they really are. He draws
a picture of South Korea, for example, as a nation virtually obsessed by its
competition with its onetime colonial ruler, Japan. Almost half a century after
the end of World War II, he writes, the Korean relationship with the Japanese is
"not 'love and hate' but 'respect and hate.' " Yet Korea, more than any other
country in the region, has mimicked the Japanese system. It has set up replicas
of each of the bureaucratic entities Japan has used to target industries; the
Korean chaebol -- huge business conglomerates -- are closely patterned on the
zaibatsu that Mitsubishi, Sumitomo and others established before the war (and
that live on today, though with far less central control, through Japan's famous
keiretsu system of interlocking ownership). Indeed, in work habits and
dedication, the Koreans are so much like the Japanese that they scare Tokyo to
death -- or at least they did until steps toward democratization in South Korea
brought far higher wages and far less docile workers, and now far less
competitive exports.

Taiwan, in contrast, is a land of entrepreneurs who are allowed a much freer
hand than their Korean counterparts. There the secret is guanxi -- carefully
nurtured connections -- and family businesses. Overarching these is the Taiwan
regime. It has built an enormous infrastructure, including Government-run
manufacturing parks that breed computer companies, chip makers and -- in the
last few months -- an aerospace firm that bought 40 percent of McDonnell
Douglas's commercial aircraft business. But the relationship between the
entrepreneurs and the Government planners seems less direct, more elusive, in
Taiwan than elsewhere, and Mr. Vogel's explanations of how it works are
unsatisfying. At one point, raising the question of why Taiwan has been better
able to penetrate the American market than most other third world countries, he
concludes simply that "the people in resource-poor Taiwan were in general more
eager than their counterparts in other parts of the world to respond to these
opportunities."

The shortest treatment is given to the two most fascinating of the dragons:
Singapore and Hong Kong, the tiny city-states that, emerging from British
colonization and wartime ruin, have learned to live by their wits as the finance
and manufacturing centers of the West in Asia. Few countries plan every facet of
life the way Singapore does, and few could thrive under the imminent threat of
economic extinction the way Hong Kong has been doing in the years before its
reversion to China in 1997. What Mr. Vogel leaves out is much talk of the
future: Does Singapore have the critical mass of talent to develop its own
technology and industry, rather than relying on the United States and Japan?
Does Hong Kong's economic vitality have long-term prospects under Beijing's
thumb?

Trying to draw the experiences of these four vastly different cultures together,
Mr. Vogel toys with theories about the dragons' (and Japan's) common ethos of
"industrial neo-Confucianism," in which bureaucrats, "selected on the basis of
merit, had a sense of responsibility for the overall social order, including the
overall moral tone of the society." Perhaps so, but Confucius would probably
have been taken aback by the moral tone of a Japan racked by influence-peddling
scandals, or of a Taiwan and Hong Kong where corruption is rampant, or of a
South Korea dominated by selfish, family-owned conglomerates. Fear, in fact, may
be as good an explanation of Asia's success as Confucianism: South Korea's fear
of Japan and the North, Taiwan's fear of Japan and China, Hong Kong's fear of
Beijing, Singapore's fear of everyone bigger than itself. For each, industry has
meant security.

One wishes "The Four Little Dragons" were a bit longer, and detailed not only
economic success but also the price of that success to democratic values. South
Korea's leadership brutally suppressed dissent, and Taiwan's was not much
better. Even in modern Seoul, more than 1,000 political prisoners remain in
jail, held by a democratically elected regime that still feels insecure, though
its success over the Communist North is beyond question. When Singapore had an
election a few months ago and the ruling party lost a handful of seats for the
first time, the new generation of leaders began wondering aloud whether they had
gone too far in creating a kinder, gentler regime. In short, what the four
dragons often admire most about Japan is the facet that Americans admire least
-- the control of a society by a single party that is supported by a business
elite whose interests prevail in virtually every domestic battle.

Still, there are many lessons that Americans might learn from the four dragons.
The most fundamental may be that a government that intervenes in an economy
through industrial planning does not necessarily "pick winners" -- as the Bush
Administration puts it every time it warns against tinkering with the invisible
hand. Instead, such a government picks directions, strategic industries that
everyone, from the Japanese to the Germans, seems capable of identifying. And in
the industrial policies of the four dragons there is a shared sense of national
purpose in building economic enterprises, a sense that even shop workers and
bolt-tighteners seem to possess.

To compete in today's global economy, the United States will also have to
develop a shared sense of economic goals, as it did during World War II and, in
some industries, during the cold war. At least we have the advantage of knowing
it can be done if we wish. For, as Mr. Vogel so capably demonstrates, several
models of how to do it lie west across the Pacific.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Clinton the Front-Runner Is Also the Prey as the First Primary Nears

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 7


Sensing both that Gov. Bill Clinton is vulnerable and that he remains the
leader, his opponents are stepping up their attacks on him as the New Hampshire
Presidential primary approaches.

"They're afraid that if he wins here he'll roll through the South in the March
primaries there," said a senior Democratic Party official, who spoke on
condition that he not be identified. "So they figure if they're going to get
him, now's the moment."

But so far, no negative commercials have been aired in the Democratic contest.
Only Patrick J. Buchanan, President Bush's rival in the Republican race, has
launched a specific, direct assault in his television advertisements, ridiculing
the President's agreement to raise taxes after having promised not to do so.

On Thursday, Mr. Clinton drew criticism from two rivals who are in danger of
finishing fourth here, which might eliminate them from the race or at least dry
up their funds -- Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska. Both
pounced on a report in The Wall Street Journal that the Arkansas Governor had
manipulated the draft system in 1969 to avoid serving in Vietnam. Mr. Clinton
denied the charge and said it was an old one.

"I hope he's telling the truth, but I've got some doubt," Mr. Kerrey said. And
Mr. Harkin, alluding to earlier charges of marital infidelity, said that "the
last thing Governor Clinton needs is another story questioning his veracity and
his character."

Mr. Harkin has been perhaps Mr. Clinton's sternest critic, attacking him as well
for his record as Governor by citing figures showing that Arkansas still ranks
next to last among the states in average weekly wages and per capita income,
despite the progress of which Mr. Clinton's ads speak.

Starting in Maine 10 days ago with criticism of Mr. Clinton's environmental
record, Mr. Kerrey has been only a bit less tough. He charges that contrary to
what Mr. Clinton has said, he supported the controversial Congressional pay
increase.

'Sharper Scrutiny' Expected

Asked whether more attacks would be forthcoming from Senator Kerrey, Steve
Jarding, a spokesman for the Kerrey campaign, said he expected that in the 10
days before the voting here on Feb. 18 there would be "much sharper scrutiny of
the candidates' records from reporters, voters and the other candidates, and a
lot of it will obviously focus on Governor Clinton."

Other aides said Mr. Kerrey, who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, would try to
keep the draft issue alive by contrasting his record with Mr. Clinton's and by
campaigning with old Navy SEAL comrades.

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California has focused on Mr. Clinton's
record on worker safety and education, citing national studies that rank
Arkansas at or near the bottom.

Ileana Wachtel, a Brown spokeswoman, said Mr. Brown's attitude toward Mr.
Clinton could be summarized with the comment, "He has all of these programs for
the country, but he's had 11 years as Governor of a very small state and he
hasn't managed to put much into effect there."

Only former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts has held back from
criticizing Mr. Clinton on character issues or his record as Governor. Although
he has attacked the Arkansan's proposal for a middle-class tax cut, the
centerpiece of the Clinton campaign, his comment on Mr. Clinton's troubles with
the other issues was mild.

"This is the big leagues," Mr. Tsongas said on WMUR television Thursday night.
"In many respects you're not in control of what happens to you."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Theater in Review

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 509 words



Korea
Ensemble Studio Theater
549 West 52d Street
Manhattan
In repertory through March 4

By Bill Bozzone; directed by Kate Baggott; stage manager, Elizabeth Brady Davis;
lighting by Greg MacPherson; set by Sarah Lambert; sound by Michael Sargent;
costumes by David Sawaryn. In Pursuit of America, Series 2, presented by the
Ensemble Studio Theater, Curt Dempster, artistic director; Christopher A. Smith,
associate artistic director; Dominick Balletta, managing director; Kevin Confoy,
producer.
WITH: Pete Benson, Bill Cwikowski, Zach Grenier, Josh Hamilton, Bai Ling, Kevin
O'Keefe and Kevin Thigpen.

It is 1968 and the war is raging in Vietnam, but the G.I.'s in Bill Bozzone's
"Korea" could be slackers in the peacetime Air Force. They have been called up
and sent to Korea, where they idle away their nights and days in soldierly
pastimes like wisecracking and womanizing. This new play by the talented Mr.
Bozzone has a gentle, wistful tone that wraps its characters -- some of its
characters -- in a nostalgic hue, especially so in the case of the protagonist
played by Josh Hamilton.

In this play at the Ensemble Studio Theater, Mr. Hamilton and his high school
buddy (Pete Benson) are the self-styled Two Musketeers of Scranton, Pa. They are
neither pro nor anti-war, but they are very much in favor of expanding their
experiences. They want tales to tell when they go home, and their barracks-room
banter is filled with amusing put-downs and verbal sleight of hand, even as it
becomes clear that Mr. Hamilton has been Dear John-ed by his fiancee and has
very little waiting for him back home.

Shadowing the lives of the G.I.'s is the threat of being sent to Vietnam. Even
more ominous are the reports that come into their outpost via radio, news of
race riots and other outbreaks of violence in the United States, which culminate
in the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. One of the telling
points of the play is that the characters are insulated and isolated, or, in the
case of the third man in the barracks room, a redneck from New Hampshire,
bigoted. Only gradually does Mr. Hamilton realize that he has an obligation to
himself and to society, even if his best friend is ready to compromise every
principle.

The dialogue and the acting, under Kate Baggott's direction, are so sharp that
they almost make one overlook the familiarity of the plot. Naturally, the hero
will fall in love with a prostitute (Bai Ling), and he and the bigot (Kevin
O'Keefe) will come to blows. But Mr. Bozzone always has a few twists left in his
typewriter, as in Mr. Hamilton's attempts to assimilate. He tries to learn
Korean, which he does with comic ineptitude, accidently wishing Miss Ling
"potatoes" instead of "good luck."

"Korea" is not a play like David Rabe's "Streamers," which moves into darker
dramatic waters. Despite its increasing seriousness, it remains a service
comedy, small in scale but with deft observations to make about the nonmilitant
military life and a young man's desire to come of age.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Left Out

BYLINE: By Maurice Isserman;  Maurice Isserman, who teaches history at Hamilton
College, is writing a biography of the Socialist leader Michael Harrington.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


THE RISE AND FALL OF THE AMERICAN LEFT
By John Patrick Diggins.
Illustrated. 432 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company. $22.95.

ALTHOUGH John Patrick Diggins entitles his history of American radicalism "The
Rise and Fall of the American Left," the actual course of events he describes
follows a more complicated trajectory. Three times in the 20th century, he says,
American radical movements were on the ascendant: in the dozen or so years just
before World War I, when Eugene V. Debs's Socialist Party saw a tenfold increase
in its vote and membership; in the 1930's, when Socialists, Communists and
Trotskyists vied for leadership of the newly organized industrial unions; and
again in the 1960's, when a New Left, inspired by the civil rights movement and
angered by the war in Vietnam, attracted adherents on hundreds of college
campuses. Mr. Diggins also describes "a fourth Left that represents a curious
afterlife of the third," referring to the presence of a fair number of veterans
of 60's radicalism on college faculties today.

Mr. Diggins, a Distinguished Professor of History at the Graduate Center of the
City University of New York, is the author of seven other books of intellectual
and political history, including an earlier version of the present volume, "The
American Left in the Twentieth Century" (1973). "The Rise and Fall of the
American Left" revises that work in some significant ways (expanding the section
on feminism, for example, from the original two sentences to about a dozen
pages), while bringing the story up to the 1990's. Describing his own politics
as lying somewhere "to the right of the Left and to the left of the Right," Mr.
Diggins writes perceptively about those movements on the left for which he has a
measure of sympathy, particularly the "Lyrical Left" of writers and artists who
congregated in Greenwich Village before World War I (Max Eastman and John Reed
prominent among them) and the early New Left, which "in its elan and anarchist
bravado . . . resembled the Lyrical rebels." One of his central insights
concerns the Americanness of these successive radical movements: "Although each
Left generation would have its rendezvous with European Marxism, Marxist ideas
were usually embraced to support a radical movement that had already come into
being. . . . Sprouting from native soil, the Left often erupted in a fury of
radical innocence and wounded idealism so peculiar to American intellectual
history."

Despite such strengths, "The Rise and Fall of the American Left" is a seriously
flawed book, both in the matter of interpretation and in the manner of
execution. Mr. Diggins views the path of the American left through the prism of
intellectual history. However well that works for the Greenwich Village radicals
and the early New Left, it skews his account of other places and eras, when
trade unions and working-class movements were major influences. His chapter on
the 1930's, for example, includes five pages on the philosopher Sidney Hook but
never mentions so important a labor leader as Harry Bridges. John Dewey's 1937
debate with Leon Trotsky unfolds over three pages; the history of the C.I.O. is
summed up in one sentence.

Mr. Diggins devotes the three concluding chapters of his book to a critique of
the "Academic Left" of the 1980's and 90's -- that loose coalition of
fortysomething Marxists, feminists, black nationalists and deconstructionists
that has been the source of so much recent controversy on campus. He generally
provides a more nuanced treatment than do some other recent opponents of the
"tenured radicals." For Mr. Diggins, the influence that the academic left has
attained within certain scholarly disciplines, particularly the study of
literature, is less a reflection of its sinister power to warp young minds than
of its headlong retreat from engagement with real politics: "Since there is no
world outside the text, the point is not to interpret the world but to capture
the canon."

Mr. Diggins is less judicious about his own discipline of history, where he
seems to be settling scores. Unlike the 1960's, he writes, when New Leftists
"suspected workers of being conservative if not reactionary and racist," former
student radicals turned historians have now "forgiven" workers, depicting them
in "book after book . . . as potentially radical, free of racism and chauvinism,
and so virtuous that one would never think that a worker might drink heavily,
abuse his children and take out his frustrations by belting his wife around the
kitchen." The imagined virtues of proletariats past thus take the sting out of
the current political impasse of the left. This is clever, but it is poor
intellectual history. The vogue for "history from the bottom up" began in the
heady days of 1960's activism, not in the politically disappointing years that
followed. And the new labor history, whatever its shortcomings, has been
characterized precisely by its attention to issues of race and gender.

Apart from questions of interpretation, "The Rise and Fall of the American Left"
reads like a book written in a hurry, marred by a series of casual inaccuracies.
Mr. Diggins, for example, dates the passage of the Gulf of Tonkin resolution as
February 1965 (actually, August 1964); claims that the Beat poet Allen Ginsberg
was expelled from Columbia University "around 1950" (actually, 1945); reports
that Jane Fonda was photographed "in front of a Vietcong artillery installation"
(actually, a North Vietnamese anti-aircraft battery); and describes how the
former Weatherman Mark Rudd surfaced from the underground as "a high school
teacher in Arizona" (actually, a community college instructor in New Mexico).

One final quibble: Mr. Diggins's title suggests a sense of closure to the story
of American radicalism that he perhaps did not intend. After discussing the
dismal state of the left in the 1950's, he notes that the appearance of a new
generation of radical activists came as "one of the great political surprises of
the mid-20th century." History has been full of surprises recently. The collapse
of international Communism and the end of the cold war may well prove to be the
prelude to another, more enduring, rise of the American left.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two generations of radicals: From left, Abbie Hoffman, Rennie
Davis and Jerry Rubin in 1970 during the trial of the Chicago Seven. (Associated
Press); Inset, from left, Max Eastman, the political writer; James D. Cannon,
founder of the Socialist Workers Party; and William D. (Big Bill) Haywood, the
Wobbly leader, in Moscow in the 1920's. (From "The Rise and Fall of The American
Left")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Cambodia Chief, a Communist Survivor, Is Welcomed in U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 24


In the turbulent recent history of Cambodia, Hun Sen has been a survivor. He
came of age in the ranks of the Khmer Rouge, turned against them to serve the
Vietnamese and is now gambling on a peace plan that promises to turn his
battered Communist country into a democracy.

Mr. Hun Sen, the 40-year-old Communist Prime Minister of Cambodia, is on his
first visit to Washington this week and the Bush Administration, which does not
recognize his Government, is extending a cautious welcome nonetheless.

For the United States, Mr. Hun Sen is not only a Cambodian transformed, a man
whose life illustrates the complexities of Cambodia's political and social
situation as it attempts to construct a new nation. He is also a crucial player
in Indochina.

"With the help of the United Nations, Hun Sen has the opportunity to make
Cambodia the first Asian Communist nation to move to democracy and a free
market," said Senator Alan Cranston, the California Democrat, as he welcomed the
Cambodian Prime Minister to the Capitol this afternoon.

Plea for U.S. Money

"I have more and more friends in the United States," Mr. Hun Sen told reporters
this morning. "I do not feel any hostility at all."

"The United States wants to prevent the return of the Khmer Rouge to Cambodia,"
he said, describing that as also the aim of his Government, which is still
picking up the pieces of the movement's brutal attempt to remake Cambodian
society from 1975 to 1979. "We constitute the major force against a Khmer Rouge
return."

On his three-day visit, sponsored and organized by the Federation of American
Scientists, Mr. Hun Sen plans to make a strong plea to members of Congress to
appropriate the money -- about $600 million -- that the United States is
expected to contribute to a United Nations peacekeeping force now being
installed in Cambodia.

He said today that backing the peace force was necessary to thwarting the return
of Pol Pot's movement, under whose rule more than a million Cambodians died..

Cases of U.S. Missing

When Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d went to Congress recently to argue for
the allocation of additional money for the Cambodian force and other peace
operations in the post-cold war era, he got a cool reception from members not
enthusiastic about spending on foreign projects.

In a gesture to those who are wary of making any commitments to the nations of
Indochina -- Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos -- Prime Minister Hun Sen today placed a
commemorative plaque at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, in remembrance of
Americans still listed as missing in Cambodia.

The inscription on the plaque reads: "To the hundreds of U.S. M.I.A.'s in
Cambodia from the millions of Cambodian families who also lost a relative in
some Cambodian place they know not where."

Administration oficials say that Cambodia has been very cooperative recently in
attempting to solve cases of Americans still listed as missing. A case that may
now be nearing solution involves five journalists captured in 1970, among them
Welles Hangen, a correspondent for CBS News, and a crew from NBC. Early this
month, a joint American-Cambodian team found bodies near the area where the
journalists were last seen alive.

Mr. Hun Sen confirmed today that the four bodies would be turned over today for
identification at the United States Army Central Identification Laboratory in
Hawaii.

Mr. Hun Sen also said today that he was prepared to try to draw the Vietnamese
into greater cooperation in looking at other cases along their common border.

Mr. Hun Sen is expected to lead the ruling Cambodian People's Party into
elections, which the United Nations hopes will take place in 1993. Under the
terms of the October peace agreement for Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge, Prince
Norodom Sihanouk's political followers and candidates from the non-Communist
Khmer People's National Liberation Front -- now all members of the transitional
Supreme National Council -- will also take part in the voting.

The biggest challenge the Prime Minister faces is thought to come from Chea Sim,
the hard-line People's Party chief, who has influence if not control over the
police and army. Mr. Hun Sen told reporters today that he had warned party
leaders last year that if the Cambodian Communists did not reform themselves, he
would form his own breakaway political organization.

Political Evolution

Later today, he told Senators over tea at the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
that Vietnam, which began his political career, may also no longer be happy with
his policies now that he has taken a plunge into democracy.

In the Administration and Congress, there is an increasing sense that the young
Prime Minister has evolved into a statesman.

"When I first met him in 1981, he was a rustic from the countryside, a Cambodian
bumpkin," said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the New York Democrat who is
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee for East Asia and the
Pacific.

In 1984, at a subsequent meeting in Phnom Penh, an unsmiling Mr. Hun Sen, once a
brigade commander for the Khmer Rouge, hectored Mr. Solarz for more than two
hours on the perfidy of the West and the righteousness of the
Vietnamese-installed regime that replaced them.

Opposition to Pol Pot

"Now he looks like he was shaped up by media consultants," said Mr. Solarz, who
last met the Cambodian leader on Jan. 1 in Phnom Penh. By then Vietnamese troops
had left Cambodia and Mr. Hun Sen was expressing commitment to capitalism and
the peace process.

"He now derives his legitimacy from his opposition to Pol Pot and the Khmer
Rouge, which are still a threat," Mr. Solarz said.

But Mr. Hun Sen will face a few problems in Congress. Representative Chester G.
Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts, says that he will draw to the Prime
Minister's attention the concern about reports of widening corruption in
Cambodia.

Mr. Atkins said in an interview that it was that kind of corruption that helped
fuel the growth of the Khmer Rouge more than two decades ago.

At the State Department, Mr. Hun Sen, representing the transitional Supreme
National Council of Cambodia, not the Phnom Penh Government, is to be
entertained at dinner by the Assistant Secretary for East Asia and the Pacific,
Richard H. Solomon, and will meet with Under Secretary of State Arnold Kanter.
The Prime Minister is also to hold talks at the White House with Adm. Jonathan
T. Howe, Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.


NAME: Hun Sen

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 26, 1992, Thursday

 CORRECTION:
An article yesterday about the United States visit of Prime Minister Hun Sen of
Cambodia misstated the affiliation of Welles Hangen, an American television
correspondent missing in Southeast Asia since 1970. Mr. Hangen, who was
reportedly captured by Communist forces in Cambodia and is believed dead,
reported for NBC News, not CBS.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Fighting Beside the Maoris Against the Colonists

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 832 words



Monday's Warriors
By Maurice Shadbolt
308 pages. David R. Godine. $21.95.

Kimball Bent, the laconic hero of Maurice Shadbolt's stirring new historical
novel, "Monday's Warriors," is a Yankee from the state of Maine who in 1859
somehow managed to get himself "borrowed" by the British army, "when I wasn't
looking," to aid and abet, as the narrator puts it, "the reddening of the
world's maps, sweating and swearing in Cork and Poona, Calcutta and Pondicherry,
and now even more remote estuaries of empire."

When Kimball winds up in a regiment on the North Island of New Zealand, trying
to put down recalcitrant Maori tribesmen, he begins to weary of his service. But
his superiors are so far from excusing him that in response to his
disinclination to continue they flay the skin off his back with whippings. A
more sympathetic officer befriends him, takes him on patrol in the woods, orders
him to disrobe and begins a sexual advance. Kimball is considering a word of
protest when a volley of Maori bullets carries his seducer's life away.

Kimball's saviors have no better use for him, but when he persuades them of his
dislike for the British and of his possible value as a spy, they reluctantly
drag him along with them. He soon finds himself in the presence of a small,
ugly, one-eyed man who sports a dark suit, a bowler hat, a gold watch-chain and
a silver-capped cane, and who professes to be a Methodist preacher. This is
Titokowaru. This is the guerrilla strategist who will fight the foreigners
nearly to a standstill.

The action that follows moves right along at the pace and with the rising
excitement of an old-style American western. Titoko, as the Maori chieftain is
called, wants peace, so long as the colonists, who are cutting down the forest
and planting grass, stay south of the Waingongoro River. But the only boundaries
colonists respect are those set by lines on the map, not by the "whims of alpine
water." A provocation on one side leads to a response on the other. Surveying
pegs lead to a raiding party and the battle is shortly joined. What Titoko has
designated a sabbath year of peace becomes Monday's war. Kimball Bent fights
alongside the Maori leaders, a Shakespearean fool who keeps his powder dry and
shoots straight.

But if the story is old-fashioned, it has contemporary implications. As Titoko
devises his brilliant but ultimately hopeless guerrilla campaign, you brood on
such subjects as the American Revolutionary War, the conquest of the Plains
Indians, the war in Vietnam and the destruction of the world's rain forests. The
proverbial machine is plowing up the garden again, and whether or not you are
for progress theoretically, in this particular case you root for the garden.

Mr. Shadbolt is not solemn about these matters. He is a New Zealander of
English, Irish, Welsh and Australian convict ancestry who has published four
collections of short stories, several works of nonfiction and eight novels,
including "Season of the Jew" and "Among the Cinders." He has fashioned a wry
style for his narrative that paints the New Zealand landscape vividly:

"Against his better judgment" Kimball "breakfasted on two mouthfuls of rum. . .
. The forest fell away from his feet. The sea was bold in the distance; tall to
the west was Mount Taranaki with a turban of cloud. It was as fine a day as any
to be alive and unfettered. By way of celebration he transferred more rum from
canteen to belly."

The story the novel tells actually happened, more or less. In an afterword,
called "In Fact," the author affirms the careers of Titokowaru and his American
adviser, whose reputation for turncoat ferocity lives on in New Zealand in the
words of parents who warn their children not to wander off "or you'll be caught
by Kimball Bent."

As for the Second Maori War, as the conflict this novel covers is formally
designated, "The Encyclopedia of Military History," by R. Ernest Dupuy and
Trevor N. Dupuy, notes: "In the end it was quelled more though diplomacy than by
force of arms. As a result, the Maoris became a respected element of an
integrated nation." If that indeed is so, Mr. Shadbolt makes one understand just
why.

But the author's sly humor rules the day. One major development of the story is
the sexual activity Kimball enjoys with another warrior chieftain's daughter,
named Rihi.

This activity, as Rihi bluntly tells Kimball, is known in Maori talk as "a
wriggle." Perhaps Mr. Shadbolt is trying to prepare us for this aspect of his
story with his epigraph, which is taken from E. M. Forster, of all people. It
reads: "Failure or success seems to have been allotted to men by their stars.
But they retain the power of wriggling, of fighting with their star or against
it, and in the whole universe the only really interesting movement is this
wriggle."

Despite Mr. Shadbolt's attempted mischief here, one can rest certain that Mr.
Forster did not for even an instant have the Maori meaning of this word in mind.


LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maurice Shadbolt (Sean Shadbolt/David R. Godine)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Disconcerted, Kerrey Changes Course

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: RAPID CITY, S.D., Feb. 24


As he struggles for survival, hoping that a victory in South Dakota will give
him the lift he needs to remain in the Democratic race for President, Senator
Bob Kerrey seems to have cast off some of his skepticism about conventional
political behavior.

The candidate who entered the campaign late, acting on impulse, and who often
seemed as much at war with himself as with any of his Democratic rivals, has
shed some of his quizzical detachment from the contest.

The Nebraska Senator attacks the two leading contenders, former Senator Paul E.
Tsongas of Massachusetts and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, with vigor. His
standard speech has grown broader and better organized. Known for his
off-the-cuff, self-deprecating wit, Mr. Kerrey is now careful to leaven his
remarks on planning the post-cold-war era and the need for national health
insurance with prepared jokes -- at someone else's expense. "George Bush's
contact with working people," he told college students in Aberdeen, S.D., "is
bumping into the hired help."

His advisers explain that in the last week of New Hampshire, once his prospects
had dimmed, Mr. Kerrey was "liberated." He has said that after a "pretty clunky"
debut he has found his stride. What Mr. Kerrey seems to have discovered is that
common motivation for politicians: a dread of losing. "I have to fight my way
back to the perception that I can compete," is how Mr. Kerrey describes his
plight.

Charmed Political Existence

Senator Kerrey, who lost part of a leg in Vietnam, has known extraordinary
personal adversity in his life, but he has never in the course of a charmed
political existence confronted as directly the prospect of public failure.

When Mr. Kerrey was a popular Governor of Nebraska, he surprised virtually
everyone in his state by deciding not to seek a second term that was all but
assured. He told a reporter, rather airily, that he wanted "more danger" in his
life. Walking out on defeat, however, is an entirely different prospect.

At a child care center in Sioux Falls today, Mr. Kerrey, echoing the theme of
one of his advertisements, attacked Governor Clinton for seeking economic advice
from a Washington consultant whom Mr. Kerrey said was "negative" about farm
subsidies. Mr. Clinton insisted in the debate Sunday night that the consultant
helped him only on tax issues. Today, Mr. Kerrey said sharply, "Not only does it
not have the ring of truth, it's not true at all."

In Colorado on Saturday, Mr. Kerrey described Mr. Tsongas as "a corporate lawyer
and registered lobbyist in Washington." Mr. Tsongas's economic plans, he added,
included "elements of the trickle-down economics that failed in the 1980's."

And like any seasoned politician, he denied in an interview today that there was
ego attached to his competitive spurt. "I'm not in this to drive up my name
identification," he said, "If I am President, this country will be different
from the one of Paul Tsongas or Bill Clinton. I'd be the better President."

No 'Baptism by Fire'

A supporter in Sioux Falls, Arnold Snortland, said he and others had wondered
what was keeping Mr. Kerrey from catching fire. "I think he is finding himself,"
said Mr. Snortland, an insurance company executive. "That's been the big
problem."

Mr. Kerrey, he said, has "had it pretty easy until now, from Governor to the
Senate. He hasn't had a baptism by fire."

Mr. Kerrey has complained about reporters' depictions of him as "quirky" and
"diffident." But Mr. Snortland said he was not bothered by psychological
examinations of Mr. Kerrey. "I have advice from that great philospher, Mae
West," he said. "It's better to be looked over than overlooked."'

Mr. Kerrey had said of New Hampshire, where he finished behind Mr. Tsongas and
Mr. Clinton, that his efforts there had not been wasted because "I learned
something about myself." He now says he wishes he had not said that. "I'm not on
a mission of self-discovery," he said. "I am running because I am concerned
about the future of the country."

A Crucial Contest

Most analysts say the South Dakota contest is crucial for Senator Kerrey as well
as for his rival, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, because their states both share
borders with this state and, as the only Midwesterners in the race, they must
prove they can show strength in their home region if they are to be taken
seriously elsewhere.

Saying that he expected to win in South Dakota, Mr. Kerrey described his
strategy for survival after Tuesday as "just stay in the boat." (One Kerrey
adviser, Tad Devine, adopted the motto from a line in the Vietnam film
"Apocalyse Now.") But with sparse national press coverage of the campaign here,
and a depleted campaign treasury, the complications for Mr. Kerrey are mounting.

Still, he is seeking a second chance to be discovered, and that hope mainly
rests on something's causing Mr. Clinton or Mr. Tsongas to stumble. "The best
hope for Bob Kerrey is that voters take a look and say, 'These two guys aren't
good enough,' " said William Carrick, a Kerrey adviser.

The competitive zeal that has infected Mr. Kerrey has not entirely transformed
him. In the debate in Sioux Falls on Sunday, he was at turns good-humored and
aggressive, but his performance lacked the fire he showed in previous debates.
He was not as "electrifying," as he sarcastically said the day before that he
needed to be.

Nor are all his Presidential-sounding comments on the global economy as direct
and forceful as he intends. Talking about world trade in Sioux Falls, Mr. Kerrey
discussed about the importance of making payments to the International Monetary
Fund, which, he said, helped world prosperity. A reporter asked him to name a
few countries that have been helped by the I.M.F. Mr. Kerrey was caught off
guard. "Oh God, you've stumped the band," he said, with an embarrassed smile.

And in still other ways, he remains an unconventional politician. Flying from
Sioux Falls to Aberdeen, surrounded by aides inspecting scheduling sheets and
newspaper clippings, Mr. Kerry sat quietly by himself, reading the Thomas Hardy
novel "Jude the Obscure." He insisted that neither the title nor the book's
themes, about fate being determined by character, held any special meaning for
his campaign. "I just like good writing," he said.

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Results of Sunday's Democratic caucuses, with 645 of 665 precincts
reported (97 percent). The remaining 20 precincts, in remote areas, will not be
counted for several days, and projections of national delegates won by each
candidate will not be made until then. Figures are a candidates's percentage of
delegates to the state convention.

Tsongas               30%
Brown                  29
Clinton                15
Harkin                  5
Kerrey                  3
Cuomo                   0
Uncommitted            16
Others                  1

Table: "Maine Caucuses"

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Profile;
Can Morality Be a Campaign Issue? Tsongas Has Trouble Not Making It One

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1906 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Feb. 29


St. Paul is fiddling with his halo.

Paul E. Tsongas, christened with his saintly nickname by a former political
rival in Massachusetts, says he struggles not to lay claim to all the moral high
ground in the Presidential campaign. But some days it is hard.

"I try not to couch things in that context," Mr. Tsongas said on a ride through
Beverly Hills, Calif., one recent day when asked if he worried about the
political sin of moral vanity. "I could have accused George Bush of having been
generationally immoral, but I call him generationally irresponsible."

But references to morality keep creeping back into his conversation, and he
often returns to his fight with cancer to explain his ambition, his fatalism,
his existentialism and his spirtuality, and to stress that the key to this
campaign will be "those moments when you can really look into a human being and
get a glimpse of that inner self."

Steely and Assured

Beyond all the self-deprecating jokes about his lack of charisma and the
admission that his campaign has not yet ignited nationally because the public is
still craving what he calls "a Mario Cuomo personality," the 51-year-old Mr.
Tsongas is a steely and assured candidate.

Beyond all the talk about a death penalty for poll takers and media consultants,
beyond the kidding about his new red ties and shoulder pads, beyond the
amateurish style of his campaign organization, the "unpackaged" candidate is
packaging himself very shrewdly for a public that is fed up with politics as
usual.

This week, Mr. Tsongas firmly established his place as the class of '92
goody-goody when he called Democratic Party chairman, Ronald H. Brown, to ask
him to make all the candidates agree to a "nonaggression pact" that would put a
moratorium on negative campaigning.

"I just want to put the burden on party officials to exercise their
responsibility," he said primly as he campaigned in Los Angeles and Denver this
weekend.

Less Saintly With Clinton

But politics being politics, Mr. Tsongas announced at the same time that he had
"very reluctantly" authorized his staff to put on what he termed "counterpunch"
commercials. The first, now on the air, says that the other contenders are
attacking Mr. Tsongas only because he is ahead in some primary polls. The second
attacks Mr. Clinton's credibility on the gas-tax and pay-raise issues.

"I have to demonstrate to people that I know how to fight back," Mr. Tsongas
said.

Although Senator Kerrey of Nebraska has been attacking Mr. Clinton's patriotism,
Mr. Tsongas excused that on the basis of Mr. Kerrey's experience of getting
badly wounded in Vietnam. But about Mr. Clinton's attacks, he sounds betrayed:
"Through all Bill Clinton's troubles, I never said a word. Now he's using a kind
of kamikaze approach. If he cannot get nominated, he will try to take everybody
else down with him."

Only a couple of weeks ago, Mr. Tsongas was happily explaining to a group of
friends at a fund-raising event at his doctor's house in Concord, Mass., that
one of the best things about the campaign was getting to be good friends with
Mr. Clinton.

But Mr. Tsongas now calls that friendship "a pretense."

The two erupted in argument at the candidates' debate in here tonight, where all
the other candidates tried to paint Mr. Tsongas as smug. Mr. Clinton said at one
point: "No one can argue with you, Paul. You're always perfect."

Mr. Tsongas snapped back, "I'm not perfect, but I'm honest."

When Mr. Tsongas was asked in an interview if he would support Mr. Clinton if he
is the nominee, his mouth pursed. The reserved and deadpan candidate often
signals his feelings, both humorous and starchy, with the trademark mouth
twitches that precede his remarks.

"I would support the nominee," he said coldly as he rode from a breakfast fund-
raising event in Beverly Hills to an appearance on a local television show in
Burbank. "But at some point a person's basic core should give you confidence. I
understand what it means to feel you're not doing as well as you expect. But
ultimately you have to sit down and figure out who you are."

Mr. Tsongas says three actions reveal that Mr. Clinton lacks the core to be
President. He says that Mr. Clinton's aide, James Carville, fed Gov. Zell Miller
of Georgia misleading information on the former Senator's position on the death
penalty, causing Mr. Miller to say that Mr. Tsongas opposed the death penalty
when he favors it for drug kingpins and killers of police officers; he said that
Mr. Clinton attacked him unfairly when he called him a coldblooded technocrat
who believed in trickle-down economics, and he said that Mr. Clinton's outburst
about the Rev. Jesse Jackson -- remarks picked up on an open microphone when Mr.
Clinton mistakenly thought that Mr. Jackson was endorsing Senator Tom Harkin --
showed that his judgment is flawed under stress.

"I would not be capable of that, to decide whether someone is good or bad
depending on whether they endorse you or not," Mr. Tsongas said. "That is a
remarkably self-centered view of that person. They go from an angel to a devil
depending on whether they endorse you."

Mr. Tsongas had an outburst of his own at Dartmouth University a few weeks ago,
when a young man asked him about the dangers of radiation at a nuclear plant
where he serves on the board, and Mr. Tsongas replied petulantly that he did not
need to be told anything on the subject of cancer.

Why, Mr. Tsongas was asked, was Mr. Clinton's outburst any different?

"I was challenged on cancer and I responded back," he replied. "I did not call
into question the integrity or the morality of another person. That's the
difference."

Mr. Tsongas, who gets tetchy when his ideas are challenged, was asked whether he
was being a bit disingenuous about Mr. Clinton. After all, calling someone
coldblooded is tame compared with what has been said in the current Republican
Presidential campaign, and Mr. Tsongas has been generically assailing all his
rivals as panderers who would offer tax breaks by borrowing money from the
nation's children. Mr. Clinton has complained that Mr. Tsongas has distorted his
record by not explaining in his advertisements that he would pay for his middle
class tax cut and child care tax credits with a higher tax on the rich.

"I've been in a lot of bloody battles," Mr. Tsongas replied. "There's nothing at
a Presidential level that I have not experienced in the Lowell City Council. But
the fact is, there is a higher standard that you would try to impose on a
Presidential race."

What does Mr. Kerrey's abrupt about-face, from saying in New Hampshire that Mr.
Clinton should not be criticized for avoiding military service during the
Vietnam War to saying in Georgia that Mr. Clinton would be carved open like a
peanut for finessing the draft, tell the public about his core?

"I was thinking a lot about that yesterday on the plane," Mr. Tsongas said. "And
I was imagining lying in that hospital bed for nine months and watching this
unfold and thinking how would I feel. I must say that it's like when I was
challenged at Dartmouth about cancer. It just hit a vein. And so, when I put
myself in Kerrey's shoes, I'm not sure I would react any differently."

The Eyes of a Beagle

In Time magazine in 1988, Lance Morrow wrote that to see Michael S. Dukakis was
to see a man with all his vectors pointing down. Mr. Tsongas has the sad hazel
eyes of a beagle and a mouth that turns down at the corners, but he is by no
means as robotic and dour as Mr. Dukakis. He leavens his tough economic message
with jokes, and his face often brightens with a dimpled smile.

Instead of poring over papers, as Mr. Dukakis invariably did, Mr. Tsongas spends
most of his time on the plane napping, and even then he concedes that he gets
tired at the pace, which is still slower than that of other candidates.

Unlike Mr. Dukakis, Mr. Tsongas has a gentle, direct gaze that attracts voters.
At rallies in Denver and Seattle, it took him 20 minutes to work his way through
the crowd, as he signed copies of his economic book or any other handy piece of
paper.

Mr. Tsongas is not like George McGovern, of whom people joked that when he came
into a room it seemed as if someone had left. But his presence is so quiet that,
at a rally at Manuel's Tavern in Atlanta, voters eagerly waiting to hear the
candidate shooed him away when he tried to reach the microphone.

Mr. Tsongas never makes an entrance; camera operators and voters will often not
know he has taken his place for several moments after he is there, or even until
he is grasping their hand, or, in the case of one cameraman, waving in his face,
saying: "I'm over here! Wake up!" But once he is in place, his technique is
reminiscent of that of Daisy Buchanan in "The Great Gatsby," who used to speak
in a soft voice so people would need to lean closer to hear her. He stands very
still and speaks so softly that you are never sure he will make it to the end of
the sentence, and those listening lean in to him.

Morgan Fairchild, the actress who attended a breakfast fund-raising event for
Mr. Tsongas at the Beverly Hills Hotel on Friday, echoed the anti-slick mood
gripping the country: "I photograph real well and I can stand up and make a
great speech, but it doesn't mean I should be President. We need someone who
knows how to run the country, not someone who looks cute."

Deborah Iddins, 38, a computer programmer from Island City, Wash., came to a
crowded rally in downtown Seattle on Thursday and liked what she saw.

"When I saw him in the first Democratic debates, I was kind of turned off," she
recalled. "He did not look very healthy. He looked kind of peaked. But I read
his economic book and I changed my mind. I think, in the past, we judged too
much on appearance and presence and we were really way off sometimes. People can
fool you. But this fellow's a man of ideas and you can hold onto ideas more than
presentation."

Now, she said, she likes that Mr. Tsongas has had cancer. "It makes him fallible
in some way so that you fell you can relate to him," she said. "I respect him.
He has a lot of courage and he's had to struggle with his life, like the rest of
us have."

Concentrating on Cancer

Far from avoiding the subject that once seemed destined to doom his bid before
he even got started, Mr. Tsongas refers often to his illness, presenting it as
the crucible that transformed him into someone who would make a great President,
and who would also accept defeat gracefully.

"The one thing about the cancer experience is, I don't get bothered by things I
have no control over," he said. "In the larger scheme of things, this is all
very transitory."

Mr. Tsongas says he gets angry now only when his aides do not have enough copies
of his 85-page economic booklet to pass out to the crowd. And he gets sad only
when he stays away from his three daughters for more than three days at a time.

"When I have to go without seeing them, it's almost like at the hospital," he
said referring to his six-week stay in isolation in room 1220 at the Dana-Farber
Cancer Institution in Boston, after his drastic and experimental treatment for
lymphoma. "When they would come and they would look through that window at me,
it was excruciating. I was better off not seeing them.

"So what I've done in these last few days is not think about them, but keep the
focus on Bill Clinton."

NAME: Paul E. Tsongas

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

4 Space Veterans and 3 Novices Make Trip

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 746 words



Col. Ronald J. Grabe
Mission Commander

Colonel Grabe, a 46-year-old Air Force pilot and veteran of two shuttle flights,
made his first trip into space seven years ago.

After receiving his test pilot's wings in 1975, he spent three years as an
exchange test pilot with the Royal Air Force.

Colonel Grabe completed more than 200 combat missions in Vietnam and has logged
more than 4,500 hours flying various aircraft. He became an astronaut in 1981.

Colonel Grabe received a bachelor's degree in engineering science from the Air
Force Academy and studied aeronautics as a Fulbright Scholar in West Germany.

He and his wife, Marijo, have two daughters. His hometown is New York City.

Stephen S. Oswald
Pilot

Mr. Oswald, a former Navy pilot, became an astronaut in 1985 and is making his
first space trip. He flew the Corsair II fighter jet aboard the U.S.S. Midway in
the Western Pacific and Indian Oceans and has logged more than 4,700 hours in
flight, piloting 38 different types of aircraft.

After leaving the Navy in 1982, Mr. Oswald, 40 years old, became a test pilot
for the Westinghouse Electric Corporation.

He received a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from the Naval Academy.
Mr. Oswald and his wife, Diane, have one son and two daughters. His hometown is
Bellingham, Wash.

Dr. Norman E. Thagard
Mission Specialist

Dr. Thagard, 48 years old, is making his fourth shuttle mission. He has been a
mission specialist aboard two Challenger voyages and on a Spacelab 3 mission.

Dr. Thagard entered the Marine Corps Reserve in 1966 and became a fighter pilot
two years later. He flew 163 combat missions in Vietnam. He earned his
bachelor's and master's degrees from Florida State University and later received
his medical degree from the University of Texas Southwestern Medical School.

Dr. Thagard, of Jacksonville, Fla. and his wife, Rex, have three sons.

William F. Readdy
Mission Specialist



This is the first shuttle mission for Mr. Readdy, who became an astronaut in
1987. He joined the space agency as a research pilot.

After serving aboard the aircraft carrier Forrestal in the North Atlantic and
Mediterranean from 1976 to 1980, Mr. Readdy became an instructor pilot at the
Naval Test Pilot School and then a strike operations officer on the carrier
Coral Sea.

Mr. Readdy, 39 years old, received a bachelor's degree in aeronautical
engineering from the Naval Academy.

His hometown is McLean, Va. His wife, Colleen Nevius, is a military test pilot.

Lieut. Col. David Hilmers
Mission Specialist

Colonel Hilmers, of the Marine Corps, is making his fourth trip into space. He
was a mission specialist on the maiden voyage of the space shuttle Atlantis in
1985, on the September 1988 voyage of the Discovery and on the first shuttle
flight after the Challenger exploded in 1986.

He joined the Marine Corps in 1972 and was later assigned to Iwakuni, Japan. He
became an astronaut in 1980.

Colonel Hilmers, 40 years old, received a bachelor's degree in mathematics from
Cornell University and a master's degree in electrical engineering from the
Naval Postgraduate School.

He and his wife, Lynn, have two children. His hometown is DeWitt, Iowa.

Roberta L. Bondar
Payload Specialist



Dr. Bondar, 46 years old, of Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, is the first foreign
woman to fly on a United States space flight.

Dr. Bondar joined the Canadian Space Agency in 1984. She was chosen to begin
training for this mission in 1989. A neurologist, Dr. Bondar conducts research
on stroke patients and reduced gravity.

She received a bachelor's degree in zoology and agriculture from the University
of Guelph, Ontario, a master's degree in pathology from the University of
Western Ontario, a doctorate in neurobiology from the University of Toronto and
a medical degree from McMaster University. Dr. Bondar is single.

Dr. Ulf D. Merbold
Payload Specialist

Dr. Merbold, 50 years old, will be making his second space flight for the
European Space Agency. He first flew on Spacelab 1 in 1983 and was the first
non-American to participate in a shuttle mission.

Dr. Merbold was a staff member at the Max-Planck Institute for Metals Research
in Stuttgart and later worked at the European Space Technology Center in
Holland.

He received a doctorate in science from Stuttgart University.

He and his wife, Birgit, have one son and one daughter. His hometown is Greiz,
Germany.

NAME: Ronald J. Grabe; Stephen S. Oswald; Norman E. Thagard; William F. Readdy;
David Hilmers; Roberta L. Bondar; Ulf D. Merbold

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Columnist Shares Glimpses of His World

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 955 words



I've Seen the Best of It
Memoirs
By Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt
Illustrated. 495 pages. W. W. Norton. $29.95.

In a preface to these memoirs written shortly before he died on Aug. 28, 1989,
at the age of 78, Joseph W. Alsop explains that when his doctor told him he had
lung cancer, the news did not greatly surprise him, since he had smoked 95
cigarettes a day until not so many years earlier. He adds: "To my more real
surprise, the news did not enormously distress me, either. I have had an
improbably lucky and satisfying life." As the title of this reminiscence puts
it, "I've seen the best of it."

He certainly saw one extreme of life, if one is to judge from these appealingly
personal memoirs, which take him from his childhood through his nearly
half-century career as a newspaper columnist and up to the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy. They were written by a younger friend, Adam Platt,
because the consequence of Mr. Alsop's bypass surgery in 1982 was, for reasons
he never quite understood, "near-total writer's block."

One remembers Mr. Alsop most vividly from the late 1960's, when his avid support
of the United States' mission in Vietnam led him to lose touch with his
audience. As he himself puts it, "The truth is, I could no longer understand
what was happening in America, perhaps because I had finally become an old man,
frozen in the viewpoints of the past." But up to that point his life reads like
a golden dream.

A slightly less well-off cousin of both Theodore and Franklin D. Roosevelt, he
was nevertheless reared as a "cosseted child of privilege" on a gentleman's farm
in Avon, Conn., and sent off to Groton and Harvard for his education. His life
might have continued to be a feast of books and drinks at the Porcellian Club
had not his grandmother noted that his letters to her from Harvard showed a
talent for writing and thought to persuade "dear Helen Reid" to give him a job
at The New York Herald Tribune, which the Ogden Reids then owned.

He went to work for The Trib in 1932, and by the end of 1937 he had been
assigned to Washington, given his own column to write and plunged into the
capital's social swim, where he mixed with everyone who counted, from his cousin
the President on up to his cousin Alice Roosevelt Longworth. World War II took
him to Burma, where he served with Col. Claire L. Chennault's American Volunteer
Group and witnessed the catastrophic (for future Chinese-American relations)
wrangle between Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek and Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell.

Peace took him home again to what he describes as the mediocrity of the
Eisenhower Administration and the abomination of McCarthyism, which he and his
younger brother Stewart, who by then co-wrote the column, attacked unstintingly.
Finally came the climax of his career, when his good young friend John F.
Kennedy was elected President. And then abruptly Kennedy's life was cut short,
thereby robbing the country of someone who Mr. Alsop believes would have been a
great enough wartime leader to have stayed the course in Vietnam.

Up to a point, Mr. Alsop invites the reader into what he calls "my world." He
shares some of the strict rules of dress and deportment by which the members of
what he calls "the WASP Ascendancy" identified one another. He offers advice on
how to write a political column: "I believed then, and believe still, that if a
columnist bases his material solely on personal conviction, within six months
the problem of becoming repetitious raises its ugly head in an inflamed way."

And he describes such heady moments in his social life as when President
Kennedy, on the night of his inauguration, showed up at Mr. Alsop's house on
Dumbarton Avenue "for one last cup of unadulterated admiration, and the people
crowding my living room gave him that cup freely, filled to the brim."

Yet at the same time he keeps the reader outside. He repeatedly laments the
snobbery and exclusivity of his world, but he leaves considerable doubt that he
would have wanted it any other way. And while he seemingly presents the intimate
details of his life, at the same time he withholds them. For example, he
describes how as a fat, unathletic boy who read too much he won no popularity
contests at snobbish Groton and was therefore forced to go his own way. But such
independence led to "a desolate and lonely period; indeed, it was the only time
I'd ever thought seriously of taking my own life."

So he changed directions and set out to win friends. In the process he learned a
lesson "I would carry with me to college and on into my adult life." This was:
"In the main, sociability is a knack; but it is also partly a skill, to be
learned and cultivated like any other. Therefore, friendship returned is almost
invariably equal to friendship given. Over the years, assiduous attention to
this rule has been one of the happy constants of my life. It has provided me
with a long and rich vein of sustenance and security, not to mention, in my
later years, close to 30 godchildren."

Yet he never reveals what precisely he did to transform himself from a lonely,
suicidal misfit to the apparently beloved intimate to some of the most famous
people in the world. Ah, well. If you have to ask how much friendship costs, you
probably cannot afford it. So you have to content yourself with pressing your
nose against the window of Mr. Alsop's world, which in any case doesn't exist
anymore. As he writes of his travel experiences: "The world I was born into was,
quite simply, a beautiful place. The world I shall leave before long is
downright ugly, except in patches protected by their remoteness."

But he saw the best of it, and he shares a little of it with us.

NAME: Joseph W. Alsop

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph W. Alsop (The New York Times, 1984)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Georges Delerue, 67, a Composer On Truffaut and Stone Films, Dies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 22


Georges Delerue, the French composer who won an Oscar in 1979 and who wrote
soundtracks for "Platoon," "The Day of the Jackal" and a number of films by
Francois Truffaut, died here on Friday. He was 67 years old and lived in Los
Angeles.

He died after a short illness, Patricia Schoendoerffer, the wife of the director
Pierre Schoendoerffer, said on Sunday in Paris. She did not specify the cause of
death. Mr. Schoendoerffer directed "Dien Bien Phu," the most recent film Mr.
Delerue scored.

The composer won an Academy Award in 1979 for best original soundtrack for "A
Little Romance." Critics praised his work on Oliver Stone's "Platoon," a 1986
film about the Vietnam War that won an Oscar as best picture.

Mr. Delerue also received Oscar nominations for his scores for "Anne of the
Thousand Days" in 1969, "The Day of the Dolphin" in 1973 and "Julia" in 1977. He
won an Emmy in 1968 for the music for the television documentary "Our World."

In Demand Among Directors

A native of Roubaix, France, Mr. Delerue showed musical talent early and won a
scholarship to the prestigious Paris Conservatory, where professors encouraged
him to write music for films.

Truffaut used him extensively. Mr. Delerue composed the soundtracks for "Jules
and Jim," "Day for Night," "Shoot the Piano Player" and "The Last Metro."

Mr. Delerue scored Alain Resnais' "Hiroshima, Mon Amour," Philippe de Broca's
"Man from Rio" and Louis Malle's "Viva Maria." He also worked with Henri
Verneuil, Alain Cavalier and Jules Dassin.

As his reputation grew, he came into demand among American and British
directors. He wrote the soundtracks for Fred Zinnemann's "Behold a Pale Horse,"
"The Day of the Jackal" and "Julia"; Ken Russell's "Women in Love," and Mike
Nichols's "Silkwood" and "Biloxi Blues." Besides "Platoon," Mr. Delerue also
scored Mr. Stone's "Salvador" in 1985.

His more recent works included the scores for Bruce Beresford's "Mister
Johnson," John Hughes's "Curly Sue" and Bryan Gibson's "Josephine Baker Story."

He was a Commander of Arts and Letters, one of France's highest awards for an
artist.

Mr. Delerue married Micheline Gautron in 1959. The couple had one daughter,
Claire, and another child from Mrs. Delerue's previous marriage.


NAME: Georges Delerue

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Georges Delerue. (Agence France-Presse, 1990)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

METRO MATTERS;
Looking for the Democratic Vision

BYLINE: By Sam Roberts

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


NEW York's 1992 Democratic presidential primary campaign formally begins this
week with two factors, besides Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, missing.

So far, this year's abbreviated campaign in New York has been dominated by
electoral mechanics rather than by ideological jousting. No gut issue like the
war in Vietnam or the vivid symbolism of a vigorous black candidate divides
Democrats. Hungry after 12 years out of the White House, most want to win.

"Sensitive people," said Representative Thomas J. Manton, the Queens Democratic
leader, "are putting aside their litmus paper."

Since Mr. Manton has endorsed Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the chief
beneficiary of organizational support from New York's political and labor
leaders, his view may represent short-lived wishful thinking. Things could
change if the candidates challenge their rivals' access to the ballot and as
their philsophies become more defined.

Another factor that is still missing from the campaign was more predictable: few
candidates have focused on an urban agenda.

That was true, too, in previous presidential campaigns. Early primaries are in
predominantly rural states, the influence of big cities has declined and urban
problems seem so intractable that proposed solutions can represent political
liabilities.

Those excuses will be even less valid this year, though. Social and economic
woes have gotten worse and are no longer unique to big cities. By comparison,
security threats from overseas have largely evaporated.

This week, would-be delegates for the five surviving Democratic candidates begin
circulating their green petitions to get on the April 7 primary ballot.

Today, John A. Marino, the Democratic State Chairman, will submit 25 questions
to the candidates seeking to define their urban vision in the 12 weeks before
the New York primary: How would you cut taxes, invest in human capital and still
reduce the deficit? How would you reduce defense spending without harming
communities that are dependent on it? How would you increase access to health
care and housing? How would you define the Federal role in protecting a woman's
right to abortion, in reducing prison overcrowding and in fighting illegal
drugs? Should any drugs be legalized? Where do you stand on gun control?

Mr. Marino's questionnaire marks a good beginning, but only a beginning. Ask
these questions, too: Which positions do you hold that are regarded as
unpopular? What have you accomplished that would not have gotten done without
you?

How would you match job training and employment needs? Would you provide drug
treatment on demand? Should welfare mothers be required to work? What if they
refuse?

What is it about American society that precipitated the drug epidemic? What is
government's responsibility in dealing with the failings of family? How would
you handle homeless people with mental problems? How would you help people with
AIDS?

How would you encourage private developers to build affordable housing? How
would you reduce segregation in housing and schools and further bridge ethnic
and racial gaps?

And the question that Mr. Cuomo suggested in 1976, which provoked Jimmy Carter's
poorly worded pledge to preserve a community's "ethnic purity": Should
low-income housing be built in middle- or upper-income neighborhoods?

There are no easy solutions. There are not even easy answers. There will be no
answers at all, though, unless somebody asks the questions.

That the three candidates who are leading in early public opinion polls -- Mr.
Clinton and Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska -- represent
predominantly rural states near the center of the continental United States may
signal the nation's priorities.

Presidential candidates bred in a big city have rarely gotten elected. Rarely
have Democrats who win the New York primary gone on to win the nomination and
the presidency.

But even in New Hampshire, unemployment has tripled since 1988. And last week's
withdrawal of Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia may trigger a recognition among
the remaining candidates that vague slogans are no substitute for well-defined
vision.

Regardless of the outcome April 7, the Democratic nominee will be selected in
New York -- at the party's national convention in July. How he answers
compelling urban policy questions may determine whether the candidate runs away
from New York once the convention is over.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters;
HARKIN COURTING DISABLED VOTERS

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 692 words


Don Anderson has never worked for a Presidential candidate before. But this
year, Mr. Anderson, who is paralyzed from the chest down and has only partial
use of his arms, is enthusiastically supporting Senator Tom Harkin's drive for
the Presidency.

For Mr. Anderson, a 38-year-old resident of Lansing, Mich., what makes the Iowa
Democrat stand out from the pack is his stand on the disabled.

"He is someone who is carrying our issues forward and who can call attention to
our issues," said Mr. Anderson, who lost full use of his arms and legs in a
diving accident when he was a teen-ager. "Most people in the country are just
not aware of the issues of importance to us."

Getting Politically Involved

In the past, the closest Mr. Anderson came to getting politically involved was
in lobbying the Michigan Legislature for programs for people with mental or
physical disabilities. Now he is busy organizing disabled residents of Michigan
to help get Mr. Harkin into the White House.

In 1968, hordes of "Clean for Gene" students canvassed New Hampshire for Eugene
McCarthy. In 1976, the Georgia-based "Peanut Brigade" stumped for Jimmy Carter.
Four years ago, many people believed that Pat Robertson had an "invisible army"
of Christian fundamentalists to aid his campaign.

This year, Mr. Harkin hopes to be carried to the Democratic nomination partly on
the strength of support from people like Mr. Anderson who use wheelchairs or who
carry red-tipped white canes or who communicate with sign language.

While his rivals say they are committed to expanding the rights of the disabled,
and one, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who lost part of a leg in Vietnam, can
serve as a role model, no other Democrat has courted the disabled as vigorously
as Mr. Harkin.

He has hired a campaign staff member whose sole job is to organize disabled
voters. He has insisted that all his main campaign offices be accessible to
those with physical impairments. In addition, he has had special telephones
installed in his offices so that people with speech or hearing difficulties may
contact the campaign. On the stump he has a sign language interpreter close by,
and he reminds audiences that he was the prime Senate sponsor of the Americans
with Disabilities Act, a civil rights statute that became law in 1990. He
peppers his stump speech with politically correct metaphors, referring to
"ramps" as well as "ladders" of opportunity.

"There is a tremendous amount of excitement about this candidate," said Paul
Steven Miller, director of litigation for the Western Law Center for the
Handicapped, a Los Angeles public interest law firm.

Yet Mr. Harkin's effort to organize the disabled has been slow getting started.
So far, there is only a small number of disabled volunteers in New Hampshire,
which will hold the first primary election next month. Advocates for the
disabled have been contacted in 40 states, but state committees have been
established in only 19.

Mary Johnson, editor of The Disability Rag, a newspaper published every two
months, said she was "a little startled by the lack of attention to disability
issues" in Mr. Harkin's campaign literature. But Jennifer Rigger, the campaign
staff member responsible for organizing the disabled, said a new direct mail
brochure was being prepared that would focus on disability issues.

Mr. Harkin has often talked about the potential political power of the disabled,
a group estimated by a 1982 Library of Congress study to number 43 million
Americans.

"The issue of accessiblity and mainstreaming is the single most important issue
in their lives," Mr. Harkin said. "Now, every disabled person has a spouse,
brothers and sisters; they have family members. That's why it's more than 43
million people."

The civil rights law that Mr. Harkin fought for bars discrimination on the basis
of physical and mental disability in employment, transportation, public
accommodations and telecommunications services. Among its requirements are that
lifts be installed in all new public and private buses and that businesses
install wheelchair ramps and widen doors and aisles when feasible.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: While his rivals say they are committed to expanding the rights
of the disabled, no other Democrat has courted the disabled as assiduously as
Tom Harkin. Jennifer Rigger, shown in a campaign office in Bethesda, Md., is
national disability constituency coordinator for Mr. Harkin. (George Tames for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Company Settles Lawsuit Over Exposure to Dioxin

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Jan. 24


The Diamond Shamrock Company, which for years has fought claims that it
recklessly endangered the health of workers and residents near a former
herbicide plant by exposing them to dioxin, has agreed to a $1 million
settlement.

The settlement came unexpectedly Thursday during the seventh week of a trial
before Judge Leo Yanoff of Superior Court. Lawyers for the company and for 72
plaintiffs, including residents of the area, families of former workers and
contractors who worked at the site, said they were satisfied with the
settlement, even though the case fell short of proving a link between dioxin and
health problems among the workers.

In reaching the settlement, Diamond Shamrock did not admit to any liability.

"We feel very good" about the outcome, said George McCarter, a lawyer for the
company. He said that Melvin Belli, whose law firm was part of the team that
represented the plaintiffs, "had demanded $84 million in damages in 1988, so you
can draw your own conclusions about how we feel."

Rulings Against Plaintiffs

Michael Gordon, one of the lawyers representing the plaintiffs, called the
agreement "a decent settlement." He said the settlement was accepted in part
because Judge Yanoff barred lawsuits against Diamond Shamrock by workers who had
shared in a $1.6 million settlement against a doctor who had treated them.

But Mr. Gordon said he "was disappointed" that Judge Yanoff had said that he
would bar the jury from considering punitive damages against the company if the
plaintiffs had won.

Mr. McCarter said that although 72 plaintiffs were left in the case at its
close, about 100 people will share in the settlement. Some workers who still had
appeals pending in the courts will receive part of the settlement in return for
agreeing not to press their claims.

The dioxin contamination was a byproduct of Agent Orange, a defoliant used in
Vietnam that was manufactured at the Diamond Alkali plant in Newark from 1951 to
1969. The company later merged with the Shamrock Oil and Gas Company to form
Diamond Shamrock, which is now the Maxus Energy Corporation of Dallas.

When dioxin contamination was found at the site of the former plant at 80 Lister
Street in the city's industrial Ironbound section in 1983, Gov. Thomas H. Kean
declared a state of emergency and visited the area to calm residents' fears.

But those fears lingered, and later intensified after workers in protective
suits began digging up contaminated soil and vacuuming dirt from gutters and
around storm drains. Residents also became concerned over reports that during
the 1960's, some plant workers had been treated at the University of Medicine
and Dentistry of New Jersey for chloracne, a skin rash associated with dioxin.

Dioxin levels of up to 51,000 parts per billion were found at the site. At the
time, the Federal Environmental Protection Agency had established one part per
billion as a safe level of dioxin contamination in soil. Exposure to anything
higher over a lifetime could lead to one cancer death per million population,
according to the agency.

The issue of dioxin's toxicity is being re-examined by the agency in the wake of
claims by some experts that exposure to low levels of the chemical is not nearly
as dangerous as once believed.

Plan to Bury Barrels

Although no link was established between dioxin and the workers' health
problems, Mr. Gordon said that he was able to prove that the "company knew about
the dangers of dioxin in 1957 and what it could do to eliminate it from the
manufacturing process and it did nothing about it."

"And if it's so safe," he asked, "why has the company said the contaminated soil
that is contained in 900 barrels still sitting on the site can't be moved
anywhere in the world?"

The state plans to bury the barrels and build a slurry wall around the site to
prevent the chemical from leaching into the Passaic River.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. SHIFTS POLICY ON HAITIAN EXILES

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 30


In a shift in policy on Haitian exiles, the Bush Administration said today that
beginning immediately Haitians will be able to apply for refugee status at the
United States Embassy in Port-au-Prince for direct resettlement in the United
States.

The procedure, being used for the first time in peacetime for a non-Communist
country, makes Haitians who believe they are in danger of persecution eligible
for a new category of legal immigration. The United States has similar programs
only in Vietnam, Cuba and the former Soviet Union.

Administration officials declined to comment on the scope or intent of the
policy. But a sharp upsurge in the number of Haitians fleeing by boat in recent
weeks and a deteriorating political climate in Haiti have apparently convinced
the Administration that hopes for a political solution in Haiti have all but
disappeared, at least in the short term, and the Administration is having to
consider a whole new range of policy options.

The program, however, is not likely to benefit the thousands seeking to flee
Haiti. Refugee organizations and members of Congress have been told that the
program is intended to bring no more than 300 Haitians to the United States
initially. These places will be reserved for former political prisoners or
people in imminent danger of persecution, said Arthur C. Helton, who heads a
refugee program for the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights.

Those most in peril are assumed to be political figures or members of the
administration of the ousted President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide. Taking them out
of Haiti at this juncture appears to be "an admission that conditions have
deteriorated to perhaps an irrevocable point," Mr. Helton said in an interview.

Details Are Sketchy

No details were available on how the process would work, said Joseph Snyder, the
State Department spokesman who made the announcement. Some officials are fearful
that the American Embassy in Port-au-Prince, which is down to a skeleton staff,
will be overwhelmed by Haitians seeking refuge.

Jocelyn McCalla, executive director of the National Coalition for Haitian
Refugees, said that the policy will not help poor Haitians stranded far from the
capital. Public transportation is limited by a lack of fuel because of an
embargo against the military regime. In any case, Mr. McCalla said in an
interview, those trying to reach the embassy would be vulnerable, because their
intent would be obvious.

The decision creates a new status available to Haitians. Under a 1980 law,
refugees can proceed directly to the United States with legal standing that
requires no further petitions. Only those who reach American soil without legal
standing but with a stated fear of persecution may apply for asylum.

Haitians now at the United States naval base in Guantanamo, Cuba, who qualify
for temporary entry to the United States to apply for asylum may be turned down
and deported. Refugees, as defined legally in this instance, may not. This
process has been most recently applied to Vietnamese.

Thousands at Haiti's Shores

The new policy appears to be a response not only to increasing political
violence in Haiti but also to a concern that many thousands more may be
preparing to flee Haiti in unsafe boats.

A State Department spokesman said today that the Coast Guard had now picked up
more than 14,000 people at sea since the Sept. 30 military coup in Haiti and
that the temporary camps at Guantanamo are filled to capacity with more than
9,000 refugees.

In Atlanta, Administration officials told an appeals court this week that up to
20,000 Haitians may be gathering on the nation's coasts to embark for the United
States.

The Administration is asking the court to lift an injunction against the forced
repatriation of Haitian refugees picked up at sea who are not deemed to have a
plausible case for asylum.

The United States Ambassador to Haiti, Alvin P. Adams, Jr., was recalled this
week to discuss policy options after a political meeting called by the Prime
Minister-designate, Rene Theodore, was stormed by plainclothes policemen.
Washington strongly condemned the Haitian military Government.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than 14,000 Haitians have been picked up at sea since the
Sept. 30 military coup in Haiti, the State Department reported. Included were
these refugees rescued last week by the Coast Guard cutter Mohawk. (U.S. Coast
Guard via Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Warren Panel Findings Should Stir Outrage;
Intelligence Files

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


Yo the Editor:

"Get the Rest of the J.F.K. Story" (editorial, Jan. 16) suggests a partial
disclosure of files from the John F. Kennedy assassination investigation. I am
afraid the exclusion of the most sensitive Central Intelligence Agency and other
intelligence reports will only deepen the confusion.

For the most likely source of any conspiracy is not the military-industrial
complex. Baneful as its influence may be, any such conspiracy would have been
exposed by now. To release documents on this topic will only address a faded
issue.

A more plausible conspiracy would reflect international conflicts and intrigues.
If an example is needed, consider the family of President Ngo Dinh Diem of South
Vietnam. He was killed a few weeks before President Kennedy, reportedly as a
result of some measure or policy that Kennedy approved. The foreign service and
its policies would have been gravely embarrassed and imperiled by the loss of a
President as a result of those policies.

If a thorough search was made by the intelligence community and no conspiracy
was found, that should be clear from the totality of the documents. But if
possibilities were not checked, or if Congressional inquiries were answered by
evasions rooted in "national security," that would also be clear.

Among those best qualified to give one of these verdicts are present and retired
C.I.A. people. But neither they nor Americans in general are able to study the
reports and draw conclusions.

ARTHUR HARVEY
Canton, Me., Jan. 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Slogans, Stories and Strategy: The TV Campaign

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 6


For Bob Kerrey, politics is "a cause, not a career." (Subtext: He is not another
blue suit from inside the Capital Beltway, even if he did take the Senate
raise.)

Tom Harkin believes that "if you try to be all things to all people, you're
nothing to anybody." (Subtext: He might sound awfully liberal, but he will never
be accused of waffling -- like, oh, say, Bill Clinton.)

The "real story" of Bill Clinton is about a young man from a small town called
Hope, "the son of a widow who taught him that anything was possible with hard
work, faith and determination." (Subtext: Pay no attention to the tabloid Star.)

This is how most New Hampshire voters are meeting the five major candidates for
the Democratic Presidential nomination: in the often heroic, sometimes poignant,
occasionally cryptic images of their television advertising. The commercials on
the air in recent days are a snapshot of strategy, message and positioning as
the campaign enters the final stretch toward the first primary election.

Bob Kerrey

It is a mystery to many political professionals why the Nebraska Senator's
campaign has failed to catch fire when his life story intrigued so many of them
for so long.

The biographical commercial on the air in recent days tries, once again, to tell
this story: the man who "never ran from a fight," won the Medal of Honor in
Vietnam, rehabilitated himself from the loss of a leg to the point where he ran
a marathon.

It also casts him as an outsider who walked away from politics once, when he
declined to run for re-election as Governor of Nebraska despite his popularity
in the polls.

In another ad, Mr. Kerry reasserts his commitment to "forcing open Japanese
markets" to put America back to work.

Tom Harkin

The senator from Iowa is working with Ken Swope, a Boston media consultant who
managed to find some passion in Michael S. Dukakis in the 1988 primary campaign.
Mr. Harkin, the hottest speech-maker in the Democratic field, did not need a
passion transplant.

Instead, in a series of commercials produced in an old textile mill, Mr. Swope
found the visuals to match the emotional Harkin message: "You can look down this
hallway and hear the echoes of the people who once worked here," Mr. Harkin
says, as the camera wanders through empty shop floors, a ghostly scene broken
only by a huge American flag. "And what they're saying to us is, 'Don't forget,
don't give up, build it again.' "

In another ad made in the same mill, Mr. Harkin talks of his ability to beat
Republicans and tries to address the electability question: Can this unrepentant
voice of old-time Democratic religion beat George Bush? He also raises some
doubts about his rivals who seek a more centrist cast. "I'm not trying to be all
things to all people," Mr. Harkin says, although he mentions no names.

Bill Clinton

In news reports, Mr. Clinton has been forced to battle charges that he had a
12-year extramarital affair, and just today, new questions about his draft
status. In his advertising, he has surrounded himself with symbols of American
virtue: flag, family and a bootstraps rise from humble roots.

In one of the Clinton biographical ads being broadcast in recent days, it is
hard to find a scene without Old Glory in it.

The two Clinton commercials now on the air counter attacks on Mr. Clinton in two
areas: his record as Governor of Arkansas and his character. The ads tout him as
a Horatio Alger figure and promote his record as the Governor of Arkansas -- but
only so much, at a time when many still remember the exaggerated claims Mr.
Dukakis made for his "Massachusetts miracle." "It isn't a miracle," Mr.
Clinton's announcer says. "It's just progress and a bit of hope."

Paul E. Tsongas

The former senator from Massachusetts began a new commercial Wednesday night
that returns to his core message: Here is an economic Daddy for the Democrats, a
sober, grown-up candidate who offers "straight answers" instead of "gimmicks"
like a middle-class tax cut. Coins are thrown on a table while the announcer
declares, "Some candidates want to give you a tax cut of 97 cents a day. But
will that create jobs?"

The commercial adds, "One candidate knows it's gimmicks and bigger deficits that
got us into this mess."

Edmund G. Brown Jr.

The Brown campaign has broadcast a 30-minute paid program on local television
stations called "Take Back America." Featuring excerpts from speeches and
interviews with citizens, it drives home Mr. Brown's theme that politics has
become corrupted by the influence of special interest money and can only be
redeemed by a grassroots movement.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Television commercials for Democratic candidates are snapshots
of strategy, message and positioning as the campaign enters the final stretch
toward the first primary election. Clockwise from left were Paul E. Tsongas,
Edmund G. Brown Jr. and Senators Tom Harkin and Bob Kerrey.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Driven By Fear;
Crime and Its Amplified Echoes Are Rearranging People's Lives

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1496 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


Almost nightly, local television news shows here and in many other cities
announce the running total for the number of murders committed for the year and
compare the toll to the same time last year. Like body counts from the war in
Vietnam, the numbers are more important for the emotions they arouse than for
the information they convey.

In Houston, where 671 murders were committed in 1991, violent crime has become
an obsession, making home security systems a growth industry and handguns ever
more popular. The residents of the country's fourth-largest city are taking
their personal safety more into their own hands, and in this they are not alone.

Many analysts are convinced that fear of crime, a lurking feature of the
American psyche since the mid-1960's, is undergoing a metamorphosis. What was
once primarily a social issue, dealt with in the realm of public policy, has
increasingly become also a personal challenge requiring private action.

What was once a crisis that could be overcome with "law and order" or "drug
czars" has become an ever more permanent and unyielding source of anxiety as
people lose faith in the system to shield them from what they see as a growing
threat.

"People used to think that if they did certain things, that if they lived a
certain way, crime would somehow pass them by," said Cassandra Thomas, president
of the National Coalition Against Sexual Assault, a group that includes hundreds
of rape crisis centers. "But now they have instant access to all kinds of
information showing them that crime doesn't just happen to bad people, that it
happens to good people as well. And then they begin to feel that the world is
not a safe place."

From Everyday to Foolhardy

Crime statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation show that the
United States has indeed become a markedly less safe place in the last 30 years.
Between 1960 and 1990 the number of violent crimes per capita grew by 355
percent with only a few pauses in the upward swing. The number of rapes outpaced
the overall trend, multiplying more than four times. In 1990 the number of
murders nationwide jumped 9 percent over 1989, the largest year-to-year increase
since 1979.

In this climate, what used to be considered an everyday activity is now seen as
risky. Several people interviewed here in recent days said that they no longer
exercise outdoors, have given up wearing most jewelry, have forsaken after-dusk
visits to cash machines and were more selective about where they park at
shopping malls.

It is little comfort to the scared to be reminded that 50 percent more Americans
die by suicide than by murder and about twice as many die in motor vehicle
accidents. The terror of an attack by a stranger holds its own special dread.

In many ways, the search for a haven, where people could go to sleep at night
without having to worry about locked doors, contributed to the middle-class
exodus from city to suburb. Maybe such a cocoon existed once. But recent F.B.I.
statistics offer this reality: the growth rate for crime has increased in the
suburbs and it has slowed in the big cities.

While New Yorkers and other residents of densely populated, heterogeneous urban
areas have long seen crime as an ubiquitous fact, many Americans are just now
learning this lesson.

Their education is coming mostly by way of video messages. The local news
provides a steady diet of live footage from crime scenes. A growing number of
network shows seek to entertain with factual rather than fictional crime
stories. And politicians play the crime issue by graphically emphasizing the
threat, as the Bush campaign did with the Willie Horton ad.

"It is bad enough that we have the objective reality of crime to deal with, but
when that reality is exaggerated by the media and by political campaigns, we end
up with a perception of victimization that is probably greater than the actual
threat," said Dr. Richard Evans, a professor of psychology at the University of
Houston.

More than any other type of crime, the news media -- and the multiplying number
of television shows that recreate crime stories -- seem to relish those that can
be labeled as "senseless." These stories challenge the viewers' assumptions
about living in an orderly society. Indeed, when someone falls victim by utter
happenstance, assumptions about a moral order in the universe are subject to
challenge.

And of late there is no shortage of crimes with random victims. Every city has
its own cases that are given short-story titles and become part of the local
folklore, tragedies with characters that become intimately known.

Houston had a spate of crimes last year in which thieves selected victims at
shopping mall parking lots and then followed them home. Several shootings and at
least one murder resulted.

Some victims were chosen for their expensive wristwatches and those crimes were
popularized as the "Rolex Robberies." Austin, the Texan capital, has been
traumatized by the "Yogurt Murders" of four teen-aged girls who were shot and
then burned beyond recognition on Dec. 6 during the apparent robbery of a frozen
yogurt shop. New York City has had the "Central Park Jogger," "the Utah Tourist"
and others.

"Overblown as they are by television, these random crimes become a series of
stressful life events that feed on themselves and build up fears in people until
they begin changing their life styles regardless of whether the changes are
justified or not," said Dr. Evans.

The changes can be as simple as giving up evening walks. Sometimes they are more
dramatic, like the decision to purchase and learn to use a gun.

Since licensing and reporting requirements for gun sales vary by state, the
readiest measure of gun buying is in gun manufacturing. After declining in the
first half of the 1980's, handgun production in the United States increased by
nearly 19 percent between 1985 and 1990 to more than 1.8 million a year,
according to the National Association of Federally Licensed Firearms Dealers.

Fortified Homes



Increasingly, too, homes -- even modest ones -- are being fortified. Since 1986,
sales of alarm systems have increased by 80 percent, according to Joe Freeman,
chief executive officer of J. P. Freeman & Company, a Newtown, Conn., research
and consulting firm specializing in the home security industry.

"It used to be that home security lay in the province of the wealthy who
believed they were natural targets for burglars," he said, "but the idea has
worked its way into the social fabric to the point where it has become a keeping
up with the Joneses sort of thing."

For some the ultimate response to fear of crime has been deciding to use
violence in self-defense. "We operate in this world as if we were protected by a
glass bubble, and for some people panic is the first reaction to realizing there
is no bubble; and that's often when people buy guns," said Ms. Thomas.

Jan Selbst, a Houston travel agent, bought a gun last year after reports of
increasing crime in the suburbs and against women. She said, "Knowing and seeing
by publicity what they do to you if you don't protect yourself, well, I've
unfortunately decided that I'm going to shoot them so dead they won't get up."

Like many of the recently armed, Mrs. Selbst wanted to regain a sense of
personal liberty. "I was determined to go through with it, to take charge of my
daily life," she said.

Sue King, a firearms instructor who teaches self-defense classes for women, sees
many people seeking safety in guns because they no longer feel protected by
government. "The entire criminal justice system has cratered," she said, "and
you and I pay the price in lack of personal security because the criminal no
longer fears the system."

This disillusionment is in direct proportion to the importance of crime as a
political issue. "People have voted continually for law and order candidates and
have been waiting for decades to see any results," said Stephen L. Klineberg, a
sociologist at Rice University, "so by now people no longer believe that
government can do anything about crime."

Specifically, many Americans are skeptical that more law enforcement will cut
crime. In public-opinion surveys, Professor Klineberg found that when people are
asked what would be most effective in fighting crime, they wanted to spend large
sums on both prisons and poverty programs. But, when forced to choose, a
majority said they would be willing to spend the money to remedy the social
causes of crime by keeping young people in school longer so they wouldn't end up
behind bars later.

As Americans continue their private search for protection, escape from fear may
be the next step.

"People have to reorient themselves to this unsafe world and move along from
paranoia," Ms. Thomas said. "You've got to do everything you can to make your
world as safe as possible and then you have to take chances. Chances are part of
life. They're all we've got."

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At a handgun training class in Houston (F. Carter Smith for The
New York Times) (pg. 1); Sales of home security systems are rising, and some
neighborhoods, like Brooklyn's Park Slope, hire private security patrols.
(Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times) (pg. 4)

Graphs: "In violent crime, the trend is up," track murders, rapes, robberies,
aggravated assaults and burglaries, 1960-1990 (Source: Federal Bureau of
Investigation); residential security systems in use in the United States,
1986-1992 (1992, estimate) (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Hero Who Forced Neapolitans to Pay Bills

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words

DATELINE: NAPLES, Feb. 17


When people here dubbed Eduardo Ieno the Norman Schwarzkopf of Naples, it was
because, by this city's standards, he had achieved something as decisive, bold
and gutsy as the American general did in Kuwait: He forced Neapolitans to pay
their water bills.

Mr. Ieno, the head of the municipal water utility, conducted his uncompromising
offensive and press blitz in a city whose perils include organized crime and
general resistance to authority -- as hazardous a place, some northern Italians
might say, as the sands of Arabia's deserts.

This battle also seemed part of a wider war in Italy that sometimes seems
unwinnable as public services like health and sanitation crumble under the
weight of inefficiency, political manuevering, neglect and, many suspect,
penetration by the Mafia and other organized crime gangs.

The public-service conflict has preoccupied many Italians in recent days with
increasing reports of bungled medical cases that have caused unnecessary deaths.
In one case, no one could find thread for sutures, causing postponement of a
vital operation in a Naples hospital. The patient died.

Being in the emergency room of one big, publicly financed Rome hospital "is like
being in a trench in Vietnam, bombarded by napalm," Carlo Valenzi, the
institution's director of health, said in a published interview, arguing that
inadequate pay for paramedics and the lack of trained nurses lay at the root of
the problem.

In theory, all Italian citizens are entitled to free treatment at public
hospitals. But the public hospitals are so overcrowded and understaffed that the
biggest in Naples declared a state of emergency last month and closed its doors
to new patients. And Italians who can afford it take out private medical
insurance to avoid the public hospitals.

"I pay around $4,000 a year in contributions to the state medical insurance,"
said a civil servant who spoke on condition of anonymity. "But I have a separate
private insurance. If anything happens to me, I don't want to go to a public
hospital."

In one recent scandal at a public hospital, Giovanni Silvestri, a 35-year-old
heroin addict, died of an overdose in a hospital corridor in Rome and both
doctors on duty at the time told reporters that they had been too busy treating
other patients to tend to him.

The scandals have spread so far that the Vatican entered the controversy this
month, using its newspaper, L'Osservatore Romana, to criticize the low standard
of health care.

In response, Health Minister Franco de Lorenzo agreed with the newspaper and
said that without a new sense of humility among hospital staff, "no law on earth
can change the situation."

When it came to the city's water supplies here, Mr. Ieno decided things would be
different.

"There were 80,000 people who were not paying for their water," he said in an
interview. "And I'm not counting people who had only one or two reminders
outstanding. Some of the bills went back to 1975." The unpaid bills, he said,
totaled something like $110 million.

"People think that water is a gift of nature and should be free," he said. Last
month, he set out to show them the error of their ways.

First, he told newspapers and television stations that those who did not pay
their bills would have their water cut off. Then, he sent engineers from his
department to the homes and offices of errant Neapolitans in vans marked with
the sign "The Cutting Squad." And when the squads arrived, they severed water
pipes and sealed them off.

"After that," Mr. Ieno said, "a lot of people who had not paid decided to pay
up."

With some pride, he said his campaign had found an echo elsewhere, even among
northern Italians who look down superciliously on the south.

Mr. Ieno pointed to an editorial in the Milan newspaper Il Giornale that
declared, "Let's hope that the example of Naples will be followed in the rest of
the country, in the north as well as the south."

Unfortunately, he said, other public services remain so badly managed that the
costs involved in running them far outstripped the benefits they supplied.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Votes to Send 22,000 To Back Peace in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 28


The United Nations Security Council voted today to send one of the biggest
peacekeeping forces it has ever deployed to Cambodia at a cost of almost $2
billion to help the Southeast Asian nation resolve its civil war at the ballot
box.

The 15-member Council unanimously adopted a resolution dispatching a force of
about 22,000 soldiers, police officers and civilian administrators. It called on
Cambodia's four warring factions to demobilize their armed forces and cooperate
with the United Nations in organizing free and fair elections to choose a new
government.

The plan is intended to bring a lasting end to the nightmare of civil war,
foreign occupation, starvation and exile that has devastated Cambodia over two
decades. In October, the Cambodian factions signed a peace treaty in Paris
brokered by the United States, the Soviet Union and China that gave the United
Nations the central role in insuring that the accord is respected.

Three guerrilla factions have been pitted in a civil war against the Cambodian
Government since the end of 1978, when Vietnamese forces invaded and installed
Hun Sen as Prime Minister. Although a cease-fire has been in place since
October, officials say that disarming the Cambodian factions and confining them
to "cantonment areas" during the election campaign promises to be difficult and
dangerous.

Busy Time for Peacemaking

The Cambodian operation is getting under way just as the United Nations is
preparing to send a 14,000-member peacekeeping force to Yugoslavia at a cost of
$634 million. Preparations are being made for a similar operation to open the
way for a referendum on the future of the Western Sahara.

Under the peacekeeping plan for Cambodia, the United Nations will virtually take
over the administration of the country for up to 18 months, disarming rival
groups, confining fighters to cantonments, clearing mines, resettling refugees,
monitoring the police and civil administration to insure they do not interfere
in the election campaign, and supervising the balloting.

Some of the uncertainty about the peace plan has centered on the intentions of
the Khmer Rouge guerrilla faction, which governed the country from 1975 to 1978
before it was ousted by Vietnam. When it was in power, the Khmer Rouge presided
over the deaths of more than one million people in a brutal restructuring of
society.

The Khmer Rouge has told the United Nations that it has 27,000 armed fighters in
Cambodia. Prince Norodom Sihanouk claims to have 176,500 men under arms, while
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, the third guerrilla party, claims
27,800.

The Government of Mr. Hun Sen says it has 131,000 troops. Diplomats regard the
figures supplied by the groups with some skepticism.

U.S. Praises the Plan

The United States representative to the United Nations, Thomas R. Pickering,
welcomed the vote on the resolution. He said the deployment of peacekeepers
"offered the Cambodian people the right to choose their own leaders through free
and fair elections, and also the safeguarding of human rights in a country where
those rights have been so tragically abused."

Li Daoyu, the representative for China, which supported the Khmer Rouge in its
war against Mr. Hun Sen, warned that there would be "difficulties even at the
last stage" of such a complex political process. But he said the plan was
"irreversible" because it "represents the trend of the times and the desire of
the people."

Reminder of the Costs

France's representative on the Security Council, Jean-Bernard Merimee, drew
attention to the high cost of the operation, in which $1.9 billion is to be
spent on the peacekeeping force and $800 million on refugee resettlement. He
appealed for cost-effectiveness.

The core of the 15,900 peacekeeping troops will be 12 infantry battalions whose
members will be supplied by a number of countries. The force will be commanded
by Lieut. Gen. Satish Nambiar, a 55-year-old Indian Army officer whose last post
was Director General of Military Operations.

The United Nations will also send about 3,600 police monitors and about 2,400
civilian administrators.

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Making a Difference;
Saving 3,727 G.M. Jobs in Texas

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES

SECTION: Section 3; Page 10; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Tex.


General Motors gave few reasons for its decision last week to keep making cars
at its assembly plant here, and to close a similar plant in Ypsilanti, Mich. But
Arthur C. Hester, manager of the Arlington plant since 1989, said labor peace
contributed to whatever edge the Texans enjoyed at the hour of decision, which
resulted in the selection of 12 G.M. factories for closing.

Mr. Hester, a former Army officer with stints in Vietnam, Korea and Germany,
said he and union leaders began work last fall on a revised business plan to
rescue their plant, which currently employs 3,727 people.

"We knew that we would be under the ax," even before the competition with the
Willow Run plant in Ypsilanti became public in December, he said. Sales of
vehicle models made at the two plants were falling while costs per car were
climbing. "So we considered every possible, every conceivable, way to cut
costs," he said.

A key agreement was to offer a round-the-clock production schedule, using three
crews and three work shifts. American auto makers have not run three-shift
schedules for 20 years. Mr. Hester said the change addressed G.M.'s desperate
need to pare manufacturing costs per car.

Union members here were voting to approve the schedule changes on the same day
in December that Robert C. Stempel, G.M.'s chairman, announced the possible
plant closing. Union leaders at Willow Run did not counter with offers to change
work rules or schedules.

Stephen P. Yokich, a United Automobile Workers vice president, assailed the
Arlington local's willingness to adjust its work schedule, and he warned of the
possibility of selective strikes against G.M. plants if the company pressures
other locals for similar concessions.

City and state officials here also offered a variety of tax breaks and other
incentives potentially worth as much as $23 million over several years. But G.M.
said it based its choice on "internal business factors" and not on such
incentive packages.

Mr. Hester, who will turn 50 this week, was production manager at G.M.'s Fairfax
assembly plant near Kansas City before moving to Arlington. A West Point
graduate, he has a graduate degree in industrial engineering from Stanford
University and an M.B.A. from New York University. His 16 years in the Army
ended in 1981, when he joined G.M.

"Now, our tough job lies ahead of us," Mr. Hester said. "I want to get this
plant running and make it the paragon of car building in the world."

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arthur C. Hester, manager of the G.M. plant in Arlington, Tex.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Agrees to Hear Census Dispute

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 20


Granting an urgent request by the Federal Government, the Supreme Court agreed
today to review a lower court's ruling that the Census Bureau improperly
included Federal employees living abroad in calculating how to allocate
Congressional seats after the 1990 census.

At stake in the long-simmering dispute is the size of the Congressional
delegations of two states, Massachusetts and Washington. The Census Bureau's
count that included the 922,810 overseas American military and civilian
personnel cost Massachusetts one of its 11 Congressional seats and gave a new
ninth seat to Washington.

Under a ruling last month by a special Boston-based panel of three Federal
judges, ordering the exclusion of the overseas group from the calculation, both
states would retain their current representation.

Apportionment Formula

Massachusetts had filed suit last year, challenging its Congressional allocation
on several grounds. The fact that only Massachusetts and Washington are affected
by the issue is a chance result of the formula that the Census Bureau uses to
distribute the 435 seats in the House of Representatives among the states after
each census.

There is roughly one Congressional representative for every 570,000 residents.
But because each state gets at least one representative and Congressional
districts cannot cross state lines, there are wide variations in the size of
districts. The apportionment formula itself is before the Supreme Court in a
case from Montana that was argued earlier this month.

The Federal Government's appeal in the Massachusetts case reached the Justices
only on Wednesday. Solicitor General Kenneth W. Starr told the Court that in
ordering the Census Bureau to remove the overseas Americans from its count and
to reapportion the House, the three-judge Federal panel had "greatly exceeded
its authority" and had made an "unprecedented intrusion" into a matter that the
Constitution itself had left up to Congress. Congress, in turn, has delegated
the actual conduct of the census to the executive branch.

Acknowledging a need for fast action, the Justices set an April 21 argument date
and ordered that briefs be filed by April 13. That schedule should enable the
Court to decide the case, Franklin v. Massachusetts, No. 91-1502, by June.

How They Count

Most of the nearly 1 million overseas Americans included in the 1990 census are
military personnel and their dependents. Historically, the treatment of American
Government employees living abroad temporarily has varied greatly from census to
census. At times, they have been included in the total population count but
excluded from the state-by-state Congressional allocation. At other times they
have not been counted at all.

Only once before, in 1970, has the Census Bureau included the group for
Congressional apportionment purposes. There were many Americans in Vietnam at
the time of the 1970 census, and members of Congress urged the Census Bureau to
make sure the group was not overlooked. William H. Rehnquist, now the Chief
Justice, was then an assistant attorney general. In that capacity, he gave the
Census Bureau a legal opinion concluding that the bureau had the discretion to
include the group in the Congressional allocation if it chose to do so.

The practice was abandoned in 1980 but restored for the 1990 census at the
urging of both the Pentagon and members of Congress. The Census Bureau counted
overseas military personnel based on the "home of record," the address that each
service member provided at the time of enlistment.

This approach happened to benefit Washington, which has 1.96 percent of the
total population but 2.30 percent of the overseas Americans, and worked to the
disadvantage of Massachusetts, which has 2.42 percent of the total population
but only 1.37 percent of the overseas group.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lemon Grass in the Ragout? Asian Spices Enter French Cooking

BYLINE: By FLORENCE FABRICANT

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2644 words


A TANTALIZING revolution is transforming the formal bastions of French cuisine.
Armed with spice grinders, coconut graters and rice papers, classically trained
chefs are giving haute cuisine a decidedly Asian flavor.

Over the last year or so, there has been dramatic evidence of this change in New
York's French restaurants. It is also occurring elsewhere, in cities like
Chicago, Washington, Boston, Philadelphia and San Francisco, as a younger
generation of open-minded, well-traveled chefs, inspired by masters in France
who have spent time in Asia, takes a less reverent approach to French cooking.

In a market that has rejected buttery, creamy sauces, they are turning to the
richly aromatic herbs and deeply complex spice mixtures of Thailand, Vietnam,
India, Japan and China to impart more intense flavor than the usual tarragon,
chervil or pinch of nutmeg.

For years, American chefs like Barry Wine of the Quilted Giraffe, Wayne Nish of
March, Andrew D'Amico of Sign of the Dove and David Burke of Park Avenue Cafe
have incorporated Asian ingredients in their dishes without raising eyebrows.
For free-wheeling Americans it was the thing to do.

But until recently French food was judged by a more rigid standard. Hubert
Keller, the chef at Fleur de Lys in San Francisco, said: "Ten years ago with our
reputation as a traditional French restaurant, we might have been criticized for
blending cuisines if we added ingredients like ginger and coconut milk. Now
times have changed."

When Andre Jammet and his wife, Rita, became the owners of La Caravelle in New
York in 1989, this plush midtown French restaurant, which opened in 1960, was
more or less coasting on tradition. Last May they appointed as executive chef
Tadashi Ono, 29 years old, who was born and trained in Japan and had worked in
California and New York.

"We knew we had to move this place away from Escoffier, shake things up and
modernize the food," Mr. Jammet said. Mr. Ono seasons his seafood soup with
lemon grass, uses soy sauce and keffir lime leaves in the broth for pot-au-feu
of chicken, , and coats noisettes of lamb with ground spices that include
coriander, turmeric and anise.

"New York is the right place for mixing ideologies of cooking," Mr. Ono said.
"You can do more progressive things here than you can in Paris, Tokyo and
California. While California is easygoing, there is more substance and technical
mastery in New York." He also said that as formalized as French cuisine might
seem, it allowed more freedom than the Japanese cooking he had originally
learned.

Even more startling than the Far Eastern breeze billowing La Caravelle's sails
is the hint of sesame oil and ginger in the food at Le Bec Fin in Philadelphia.
The chef and owner, Georges Perrier, a classicist if there ever was one, said he
began using Asian ingredients just a few months ago to season shrimp and grilled
fish. "I'm changing my way, lightening the food," he said, "and without cream,
you go elsewhere for flavor."

Unlike most of the chefs who have become intrigued with Asian ingredients, Mr.
Perrier belongs to an older, long-established generation of French chefs. Le Bec
Fin has been in business for 23 years.

A similar culinary facelift is under way at Le Francais in the Chicago suburb of
Wheeling, Ill. Three years ago, Roland Liccioni, a classically trained chef who
is part Corsican and part Vietnamese, together with his wife, Mary Beth, an
American, bought Le Francais and began artfully modifying the rich, elaborate
fare for which the restaurant, founded by Jean Banchet, was known.

The food has a new delicacy and, reflecting Mr. Liccioni's background, is
infused with intriguing Asian seasonings like pickled ginger in the tuna tartar
and lemon grass in the ragout of seafood. Mrs. Liccioni adds tea and spice
flavorings to her superb French-style after-dinner chocolates.

At Lespinasse in the newly renovated St. Regis Hotel in New York, the chef, Gray
Kunz, was born in Singapore and worked in Switzerland and Hong Kong before
coming to New York. He has arranged a display of exotic spices in the lavishly
appointed dining room, the same spices he grinds to season grilled red snapper,
mignonettes of lamb and a coffee-cardamom souffle.

He speaks Chinese and does some of his shopping in Chinatown and in the Indian
stores on Lexington Avenue in the 20's. Not only do these ethnic enclaves carry
more ingredients than ever before, but other well-stocked markets are also
selling them, making it easier for chefs and home cooks to stock up. And there
are new ingredients showing up all the time. Among Mr. Kunz's finds is a sweet
little nut from India called charoli, which he toasts and chops to use for
coating salmon.

Philippe and Susan Boulot, who are the executive chef and pastry chef at Mark's
in the Mark Hotel in Manhattan, also shop in Chinatown for nuoc mam, the
Vietnamese fish sauce, and for Chinese oyster sauce, lemon grass, fermented
black beans, fresh litchis and the like.

New liberties are being taken with the seasonings at Le Bernardin, the French
seafood restaurant in New York where Eric Ripert replaced Eberhard Muller as
executive chef last summer. Dishes like black bass seasoned with lemon grass or
poached with ginger and scallions, monkfish tournedos with cardamom and
coriander, and grouper with soy sauce and ginger vinaigrette pepper the menu.
"America is less traditional than France so you can change things," Mr. Ripert
said.

The spice caravan is even affecting the most orthodox precincts of French
cooking, though the keepers of the flame are taking a cautious approach. At the
Ritz-Escoffier cooking school in Paris, the use of exotic spices is introduced
only in the most advanced courses. "In contemporary cooking in France, spices
are used, but with more parsimony than in the United States," said Gregory
Usher, the director. "The French have a better understanding of the word
moderation than Americans."

Other chefs working in America have had an impact, among them Sottha Khunn, the
sous-chef at Le Cirque who is a native of Cambodia; Christian Delouvrier, the
chef at Les Celebrites in the Essex House-Hotel Nikko New York who has worked in
Japan, and Yannick Cam, the chef at Yannick's in Alexandria, Va., who was a
consultant in Thailand.

Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the co-owner of Jo Jo in New York, is another French
chef who makes liberal use of Asian seasonings. He even plans to open a Thai
restaurant. Several of these chefs learned under Michelin three-star chefs in
France, notably Alain Senderens and Louis Outhier, who began to use Asian
ingredients many years ago after working in the Far East as restaurant
consultants. Mr. and Mrs. Boulot met in Mr. Senderens's kitchen in Paris. Mr.
Delouvrier is another disciple of Mr. Senderens, while Mr. Vongerichten's mentor
was Mr. Outhier.

These chefs have learned that many of the fresh and dried Asian seasonings like
star anise, tamarind, coriander and keffir lime have a penetrating perfume
making them especially appropriate to use in the lighter broths that are now
popular. Some of the spices and spice blends add a dimension of richness to a
dish, compensating for more limited use of fat.

In the final analysis, however, the chefs invariably look to France, and gloss
that puddle of soy-infused or ginger-flavored sauce or even a seemingly virtuous
vegetable juice with a satiny bit of butter.

Mr. Kunz warned of the danger of going overboard. "You have to make sense on the
plate," he said. "You have to respect techniques and make sure your flavors and
fragrances have integrity. The spices should tempt and intrigue but you can't
just use spice as camouflage for inferior ingredients or bad techniques."

Marc Haeberlin of the three-star Auberge de l'Ill in France, who began using
spices after trips to Thailand and the Philippines, found he had to tone down
vibrant flavors so they would not overwhelm fine wines. The rice flour batter
for shrimp beignets now on the menu at Julien in Boston, where he is the
consulting chef, is seasoned with an unmistakable yet delicate touch of curry.

The effect on wine is one important consideration. How regular patrons expecting
French food react to ribbons of lemon grass in their lobster bisque, crusted
spice blends on the rack of lamb or tart umeboshi plums alongside the magret de
canard is another. "It's no longer risky," Mr. Keller said. "More people travel
to the Far East and are used to these flavors."

At La Caravelle, Mrs. Jammet said some regular customers were intimidated when
they saw on the menu ingredients like yuzu lemons, fermented black bean sauce
and shiso, a meaty-textured mintlike herb. "So we simply revised the menu and
omitted these names," she said. "But Tadashi never changed his recipes. These
flavors are here to stay."

Clams with Chinese Black Bean Sauce
(Adapted from Philippe Boulot)
Total time: 25 minutes, plus overnight for soaking

2 tablespoons Chinese fermented black beans
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 medium-size shallot, peeled and minced
2 small cloves garlic, minced
2 sun-dried tomatoes, minced
2 teaspoons grated ginger
1 cup dry white wine, or to taste
2 pounds littleneck clams (about 3 dozen), scrubbed
1 tablespoon fresh coriander leaves.

 1. Rinse the beans and put them in a bowl. Cover with cold water and soak
overnight.

2. Heat the olive oil in a heavy 3- to 4-quart saucepan. Add the shallots and
saute over low heat until tender. Stir in the garlic, sun-dried tomatoes and
ginger. Drain the black beans and add them. Add the cup of wine, bring to a
simmer and add the clams.

3. Cover tightly and cook over medium heat until the clams open, about 10
minutes. Taste sauce and add a little water or wine if it is too salty. Transfer
to soup plates, garnish with coriander and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Shrimp in Spiced Carrot Juice
(Adapted from Jean-Georges Vongerichten)
Total time: 45 minutes

2 cups water
 1/2 carrot, peeled and diced
2 cups carrot juice
3 keffir lime leaves, chopped
 1/4 teaspoon minced Thai bird peppers, or to taste
2 tablespoons fresh lime juice
2 1/2 tablespoons butter
 1/2 tablespoon chopped fresh coriander leaves
 1/2 tablespoon chopped fresh mint leaves
24 medium to large shrimp (about 1 pound), peeled and deveined
Salt and cayenne pepper to taste.

 1. Bring water to a boil in a 2-quart saucepan, add the carrots and cook 2
minutes. Drain and set aside.

2. Place the carrot juice, lime leaves, Thai peppers, lime juice and 2
tablespoons of the butter in the saucepan. Bring to a simmer and cook, stirring,
until the butter blends in. Remove from heat and stir in the coriander, mint and
carrots. Set aside and keep warm.

3. Heat the remaining butter in a nonstick skillet, add the shrimp and brown
lightly, about a minute on each side. Divide the shrimp among 4 soup plates.
Reheat the carrot sauce, season with salt and cayenne pepper, pour it over the
shrimp and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Black Bass Poached With Ginger and Scallions
(Adapted from Eric Ripert)
Total time: 2 1/2 hours

1 1/2 cups dry white wine
 1/4 cup Champagne vinegar
1 medium carrot, coarsely chopped
1 medium leek, coarsely chopped
1 medium onion, coarsely chopped
1 rib celery, coarsely chopped
1 ripe tomato, coarsely chopped
 1/2 teaspoon coriander seeds
 1/2 teaspoon fennel seeds
 1/2 teaspoon whole white peppercorns
 1/2 bay leaf, crumbled
4cups of water
Salt to taste
1 sprig each fresh dill, basil and mint
8 scallions, split lengthwise
1 whole ripe tomato
1 1 1/2-inch piece of fresh ginger, peeled and sliced
4 six-ounce fillets of black bass, with skin
 1/2 lemon, peeled, seeded and diced fine
20 coriander leaves, cut in slivers.

 1. Place the wine, vinegar, coarsely chopped vegetables, coriander and fennel
seeds, peppercorns and bay leaf in a saucepan. Add water, bring to a boil,
season with salt, and simmer about a half hour. Remove from heat, add the dill,
basil and mint, and steep the herbs for an hour. Strain the broth and transfer
to a deep saute pan large enough to hold the fish in one layer.

2. Bring the broth to a simmer, add the scallions, tomato and ginger, cook about
a minute and remove with a slotted spoon, reserving the liquid. Peel, seed and
dice the tomato. Cut the ginger slices julienne style. Set the vegetables aside.

3. With a sharp knife, lightly score the skin side of the fillets in a
crisscross pattern to prevent them from curling. Bring the broth back to a very
gentle simmer, place the fish in the broth skin side down and poach until just
cooked through, about 5 minutes. Transfer the fish to soup plates.

4. Bring the broth to a simmer again, spoon some over the fish and top the fish
with the scallions, diced tomato, ginger and lemon pieces. Garnish with the
coriander and serve. Freeze any leftover liquid for future use.

Yield: 4 servings.

Noisettes of Lamb with Eight Spices
(Adapted from Tadashi Ono)
Total time: 40 minutes

1 tablespoon Oriental sesame oil
 1/2 teaspoon minced fresh ginger
 1/2 teaspoon minced garlic
 1/4 cup dry white wine
 1/2 cup lamb or beef stock
1 1/2 to 2 teaspoons black miso paste (soybean paste)
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
 1/2teaspoon each dried thyme, rosemary and bay leaf
 1/2 teaspoon each ground cinnamon, cardamom, turmeric and cumin
1 whole star anise
1 1/2 pounds boneless lamb loin cut in 12 noisettes
2 tablespoons peanut oil
1 tablespoon soft unsalted butter.

 1. Heat the sesame oil in a saucepan and cook the ginger and garlic over low
heat, covered, until they are tender but not brown. Stir in the wine and stock
and cook over medium heat about five minutes until the liquid is reduced by
about half. Strain the mixture and return it to the saucepan. Simmer, whisk in
the miso, adjusting the amount according to taste, and season with pepper. Set
aside.

2. Combine the dried herbs, the ground spices and the star anise in a spice
grinder and grind fine. Use this mixture to coat the lamb on both sides.

3. Heat the peanut oil in a heavy skillet and saute the lamb pieces over medium
heat on each side until cooked to the desired degree of doneness. Put three lamb
noisettes on each of four plates.

4. Reheat the sauce and whisk in the remaining butter. Spoon the sauce around
the lamb and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Espresso-Cardamom Souffle
(Adapted from Gray Kunz)
Total time: 40 minutes

 1/2 cup hot brewed espresso
1 teaspoon ground cardamom
1 cup less 2 tablespoons sugar
4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted and cooled
3 egg yolks
4 egg whites, at room temperature
Confectioners' sugar for garnish
Finely ground coffee for garnish.

 1. Mix the espresso with the ground cardamom and 2 tablespoons of the sugar.
When the sugar has dissolved, strain the mixture through a fine seive and set it
aside to cool to room temperature.

2. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Brush four 8-ounce ceramic ramekins with half
the melted butter and dust them with 2 tablespoons of the sugar.

3. Beat the egg yolks with 1/3 cup of the sugar in the top of a double boiler
over simmering water until they lighten and thicken. Remove from heat, transfer
to a large bowl and continue beating until cooled to room temperature, 3 to 5
minutes. Set aside.

4. Beat the remaining melted butter into the espresso mixture. Divide this
mixture among the 4 ramekins.

5. Beat the egg whites with the remaining sugar until stiff but not dry. Fold
this mixture into the egg yolk mixture and divide it among the 4 ramekins.

6. Place the souffles in the oven and bake 6 minutes, until the tops are golden
and firm to the touch. Remove from the oven, dust with confectioners' sugar and
coffee, and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "New York is the right place for mixing ideologies of cooking,"
said Tadashi Ono, chef at La Caravelle. (Suzanne De Chillo for The New York
Times); The chefs Susan and Phillipe Boulot, shown with their son, Francois, do
some of their shopping in Chinatown. (Angel Franco/The New York Times) (pg. C1);
Mary Beth and Roland Liccioni of Le Francais: he, part Corsican, part
Vietnamese, lightens dishes with Asian spices; she adds tea and spice flavors to
French-style chocolates. (Jonathan Kirn for The New York Times); Gray Kunz, the
chef at Lespinasse, was born in Singapore and has worked in Switzerland and Hong
Kong. (Suzanne DeChillo for The New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Crew of the Atlantis: 7 in the 46th Shuttle Flight

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 622 words



Charles F. Bolden Jr., Mission Commander

Colonel Bolden, 45 years old, is a Marine Corps pilot who is making his third
shuttle flight. He has been an astronaut since 1980.

He was born in Columbia, S.C., and received a bachelor's degree in electrical
science from the United States Naval Academy in 1968. He became a pilot in 1970
and flew more than 100 sorties in Vietnam. In 1978 he received a master's degree
in systems management from the University of Southern California.

He and his wife, Alexis, have two children -- Anthony, 20, and Kelly, 16.

Brian Duffy, Pilot

Brian Duffy, a 38-year-old lieutenant colonel in the Air Force, is making his
first shuttle flight.

Colonel Duffy received a bachelor's degree in mathematics from the Air Force
Academy in 1975. He completed his pilot training in 1976 and since then has
logged more than 3,000 flying hours.

In 1981 he received a master's degree in systems management from the University
of Southern California.  He graduated from Air Force Test Pilot School in 1982
and became an astronaut in 1985.

He and his wife, Janet, have two children -- Shaun, 11, and Shannon, 9.

Kathryn D. Sullivan, Mission Specialist

Dr. Sullivan, 40, is a lieutenant commander in the Naval Reserve. She has been
an astronaut for 14 years, and this is her third shuttle flight.

Dr. Sullivan, whose hometown is Woodland Hills, Calif., received a bachelor's
degree in earth sciences from the University of California at Santa Cruz in 1973
and a doctorate in geology from Dahousie University of Halifax, Nova Scotia, in
1978. She became an adjunct professor of geology at Rice University in Houston
in 1985.

She is a private pilot, licensed to fly both powered and glider aircraft.

David C. Leestma, Mission Specialist

Captain Leestma, 42, of the Navy, is making his third shuttle flight.

He received a bachelor's degree in aeronautical engineering from the United
States Naval Academy in 1971 and a master's degree in aeronautical engineering
from the Naval Postgraduate School in 1972. He has been a Navy pilot since 1973
and holds the Distinguished Flying Cross. He was selected as an astronaut in
1980.

Captain Leestma and his wife, Patti, have six children -- Benjamin, 11, Katie,
9, Emily, 8, Peter, 5, Mary, 4, and Caleb, 2.

Michael Foale, Mission Specialist

Dr. Foale, 35, is making his first shuttle flight since becoming an astronaut in
1987.

A native of England, he received a bachelor's degree in physics from Cambridge
University in 1978 and a doctorate in laboratory astrophysics from Cambridge in
1982. He is a licensed pilot.

Dr. Foale is married to the former Rhonda R. Butler of Louisville, Ky.

Byron K. Lichtenberg, Payload Specialist

Dr. Lichtenberg, 44, is a native of Stroudsburg, Pa. He has been a payload
specialist for 14 years and is making his second shuttle flight.

Dr. Lichtenberg holds a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from Brown
University, a master's degree from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
a doctorate in biomedical engineering from M.I.T.

He joined the Air Force in 1969 and has flown 138 combat missions. He is engaged
to Gay King of Virginia Beach.

Dirk D. Frimout, Payload Specialist

Dr. Frimout, 51, is a native of Belgium. This is his first shuttle flight.

Dr. Frimout, a staff member of the European Space Agency, has a bachelor's
degree in electrotechnical engineering from the State University of Ghent,
Belgium, and a doctorate in applied physics from the University of Ghent. In
1971 he did post-doctoral work at the University of Colorado Laboratory of
Atmospheric and Space Physics.

He and his wife, Laurence, have two children -- Barbara, 26, and Emmanuel, 23.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Atlantis crew heading for the spacecraft before its
launching yesterday morning. In front row, from the left, were Lieut. Comdr.
Kathryn D. Sullivan, Capt. David C. Leestma and Col. Charles F. Bolden Jr.
Behind them were, from the left, Dirk D. Frimout, Lieut. Col. Brian Duffy,
Michael Foale and Byron K. Lichtenberg. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

How to Turn Our Guns Into Their Butter;
Habit of Belligerence

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 343 words


To the Editor:

In "America Only" (editorial, March 10), you ask: "why on earth does the
Administration allow the Defense Department alone to define the terms of the
national debate on U.S. strategy after the cold war?" And, further, why don't
the State Department and the National Security Council also weigh in?

A large part of the answer is that all three institutions operate as a
well-oiled foreign policy machine that emphasizes military power over economic
and cultural influence. As a career diplomat and economist member of the
Secretary of State's policy planning and coordination staff during the false
detente of the early 1970's, I raised that issue to fellow diplomats. Young
diplomats sick of rationalizing Vietnam to disbelieving industrial democracies
were then more worried about losing Europe than Indochina.

President Nixon and Henry Kissinger had come up with a plan to normalize
economic and cultural relations with the Communist world. However, the State
Department was staffed and organized to wage economic and ideological war to
contain Communism. Its deeply imbedded world view was that of a policeman,
rather than a merchant. A departmental purge would have been necessary to
implement a new policy, followed by a reorganization along the lines of modern
European foreign ministries that stress economics and culture over war.

The Department of State was not made over but further militarized during the
stand-tall Reagan-Bush era. It is naive today to expect that Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d or his senior Foreign Service deputies will change the
institution that serves their careers so well. More likely would be their
recommendation for a well-orchestrated attack on Libya or Iraq to contain
terrorism, instead of Communism, and which could extend their collective reign
for at least another four years.

Our deepening economic and cultural crisis will someday sweep in a President and
Congress determined to fix our broken foreign policy apparatus.

CORD D. HANSEN-STURM
New York, March 10, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Peppered With Mines, Awash in Civil War, It Still Is Home for Cambodians

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: SITE 2, Thailand, March 29


Nearly 370,000 Cambodian refugees living in border camps in Thailand are
preparing to return home to a nation that seems ill-prepared to receive them.

On Monday, the first 600 refugees are to be placed on United Nations buses and
driven across the border into Cambodia, for many the first trip home since
Vietnam installed a revolutionary government 13 years ago.

But relief workers warn that myriad problems inside Cambodia -- land mines,
disease, unpassable roads, banditry, shortages of land and housing, the
continuing threat of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas -- may force them to halt the
repatriation almost as soon as it begins.

Government Attacks Rebels

Even though a peace settlement was reached last fall, there have been repeated
ceasefire violations, and heavy fighting was reported last week north of Phnom
Penh between troops of the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian government and the
Chinese-backed guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge.

[The Government began an army offensive against Khmer Rouge guerrillas in
northern-central Cambodia on Sunday, seeking to open a highway that is the only
link between Preah Vihear province and the rest of the country, The Associated
Press reported from Phnom Penh. But United Nations officials said the fighting
would not affect the repatriation effort, which is taking place in the western
part of the country, the A.P. said.]

"It's no secret that there are problems," said Daniel E. Conway, the Thailand
representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which is
overseeing the $116 million program to return the refugees.

In Site 2, the largest of the border camps, a makeshift city of thatch and
bamboo that is home to more than 200,000 Cambodians, the imminent return home
has created an anxious climate, a mix of euphoria and fear.

Many Are Homesick

Some refugees say that after so many years in a sealed camp in a foreign land,
they are unimaginably homesick, ready to go back to Cambodia whatever the
hazards.

"Cambodia is my home," said Chan Siyoun, a 46-year-old widow from Phnom Penh,
the Cambodian capital, who has lived in Site 2 since 1985. "This camp is not my
home.

"My life will begin again when I am back in Phnom Penh, and I want to go there
soon," she said, scanning a bulletin board on which the United Nations has
displayed photographs of the six new reception centers in Cambodia.

But for every refugee who wants to go home, there is another, it seems, who
wants to stay here, at least until the civil war is truly over.

Many refugees say that if they find conditions in Cambodia as bleak as rumored,
they will quickly try to return to Thailand.

'I Am Scared to Leave'

"Everybody I know wants to stay in the camp," said Jab Buth, 61, a seamstress
who has been told she must pack up her belongings -- three skirts, three
blouses, two cooking pots, a few photos of the Thai royal family -- and board a
bus on Tuesday. "I am scared to leave. There is still trouble in Cambodia."

Miss Jab Buth, who fled in 1979 to escape the starvation that nearly killed her
and took the lives of several neighbors in her tiny western Cambodian village,
is skeletal once again, her skin drawn tight against her tiny frame.

Now, she says, the explanation for her gaunt appearance is a chronic respiratory
disease.

In Site 2 there are three hospitals, and drugs and doctors' visits are provided
free by relief agencies working with the United Nations. Miss Jab Buth says the
doctors have kept her alive.

But in Cambodia, she knows, there is almost no medical care, free or otherwise.
"I think life will be very hard there," she said, clutching the all-important
United Nations pass with her photograph that will, for a time, allow her to
receive food and other rations.

Many Cambodians have lived in camps in Thailand since 1979, when the Vietnamese
invaded their country, ousting the Khmer Rouge and setting off yet another civil
war, in which the Khmer Rouge sought to retake power.

Thailand was host to Cambodian refugees long before then, however. Thousands
fled when the Maoist-inspired Khmer Rouge controlled the Government in a reign
of terror from 1975 to 1979. Most of those refugees were eventually resettled in
other countries.

But in recent years, the United States and other nations have refused to accept
any more Cambodians. And Thailand, seeing nowhere else to send them, is eager to
shut down the refugee settlements once and for all.

Large but Precarious Program

Beneath signs that read "Gratitude to Thailand" in Khmer, Thai and English, the
first 70 refugee families, about 600 people, are to board United Nations buses
on Monday to take them across the border to a center in Sisophon, where they are
to be greeted by Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state.

After two or three days, the refugees are to be transferred to areas where they
have asked to be resettled. In Cambodia, the United Nations plans to provide
them with building materials and food. The United Nations is responsible for
getting all the Cambodians home in time for elections next spring. Relief
officials say it will be the largest repatriation of war refugees since 1971,
when hundreds of thousands were uprooted in the Bangladesh war for independence.

"That is, if this comes off," said a United Nations official involved in the
resettlement. "There is so much that can go wrong. I think, yes, let's begin the
resettlement. But it may have to be stopped or curtailed very quickly."

Relief workers say that, under one widely discussed plan, the United Nations
will halt the repatriation in mid-April, after the first 10,000 to 15,000
refugees have returned home, and then regroup in hopes of restarting the
repatriation later in the year.

Mr. Conway, the United Nations official in Thailand, said he knew of no plan to
halt or curtail the repatriation after it begins on Monday. But he and other
United Nations officials readily concede there is not enough safe, arable land
in Cambodia for all the refugees, and few roads capable of transporting them to
areas of the country where the land is available.

After a generation of war and bloodshed, Cambodia is also seeded with land
mines, hundreds of thousands of them, perhaps millions. And despite a commitment
by the United Nations to provide five acres of unmined farm land to each family,
little of that land has been identified so far.

The peace treaty granted the refugees the right to choose where they wish to
resettle, in part to foil the Khmer Rouge in its plans to coerce some refugees
into territory it controls. But that promise created another problem: Nearly 60
percent of the 370,000 refugees have asked to settle in one province,
Battambang, directly across the border from Thailand.

Many refugees originally came from Battambang, but others acknowledge that they
requested resettlement in Battambang because it would, if necessary, offer them
the quickest route back to safety in Thailand.

While Battambang is among the most affluent provinces in Cambodia because of its
border trade and its rich farmland and gem trade, it almost certainly cannot
handle so many new residents.

Many of the refugees also fear that after so many years, they have forgotten the
basic farming skills that will allow them to provide for themselves after they
return home to Cambodia.

"I have not been a farmer for many years, and my children have never seen a
farm," said Eng Peo, 37, who has raised two children in the camp. "How do I
start again?"

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jab Buth, right, a 61-year-old Cambodian refugee, with her
niece, Rean Saru, in the Site 2 camp in Thailand, where they have lived for 13
years. While Miss Buth would prefer to stay in Thailand, she said she will
follow the direction of the United Nations and return home to Cambodia. (Kraipit
Phanvut for The New York Times)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Phnom Penh.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Both Kerreys Searching For Campaign Strategy

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Jan. 15


Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska strides out onto an empty ice rink, drapes his
elbow over a hockey net and gazes earnestly at the camera.

"What's happening in the world economy is like a hockey game," he says, "where
others guard their goal to keep our products out, while we leave our net open.

"We're becoming a low-wage nation, and all George Bush does is go to Japan and
beg for a few concessions," Mr. Kerrey continues. "I'm Bob Kerrey, and if I'm
President, the time for begging is through."

This is the new Bob Kerrey: direct, plain speaking, politely pugnacious. New
Hampshire voters are meeting this Bob Kerrey through a television advertising
campaign that started on Friday and has already, even advisers to other
candidates say, perceptibly lifted the Senator's standing.

This is not, however, the same Bob Kerrey whom New Hampshire voters are meeting
when they go to hear the candidate at a local high school. That Bob Kerrey is
still the old Bob Kerrey: quirky, indirect and diffident.

Earlier this month, Mr. Kerrey hired a new campaign director and a new media
team to impose a sense of direction on a campaign that seemed to be wandering.
Since then the campaign, as evidenced by the television spots, has indeed begun
to plot a new course. But the candidate, it seems, does not necessarily intend
to follow it. And with just five weeks to go before the New Hampshire primary,
Mr. Kerrey and his advisers still seem to be struggling to find a strategy they
all can live with.

"I like the fact that he's not some programmed Ken doll that you can just wind
up and send out there," one adviser to Mr. Kerrey said. "But living with the
consequences of that is tough."

The difficulty of reconciling who Mr. Kerrey is with the candidate his advisers
would like to project is a reflection of the same idiosyncrasies that have made
the Senator alternately the darling and the disappointment of the Democratic
primary season.

Mr. Kerrey did not set out to be a career politician; he was a businessman who
was elected Governor of Nebraska and then Senator without having served any of
the apprenticeships usually required for such posts. His biography, including
his heroic service in Vietnam, made him seem the perfect candidate for a country
openly disgusted with professional politics.

Not Afraid of Unpopular Stands

In the campaign, Mr. Kerrey has put his apparent ambivalence toward politics to
good use as a sign that he is not afraid to take unpopular stands for the good
of the country.

"I'm not concerned about Bob Kerrey's political career," he said in response to
questions about a recent poll. "I'm concerned about the economic status of the
United States of America.  We're going to have to be bold and we're going to
have to be courageous. We're going to have to come politically prepared to risk
having polling data show that we're flat."

But political analysts and even associates of Mr. Kerrey say that his
unconventional career has prompted him to place too much confidence in the
appeal of an independent personality. "That personal appeal has obviously been
at the core of his success so far," said Ann Lewis, a political consultant based
in Boston. "But it doesn't translate to the Presidential campaign."

At first, Ms. Lewis said, Mr. Kerrey was plagued by the perception that he had
not lived up to his resume. Now, she said, he faced the problem of being
measured against his television spots. "The question still is, can he in person
live up to what people know and hear about him?" she said.

Before arriving at the advertisements Mr. Kerrey now has on television, the
campaign's original media consultant, Joe Rothstein, shot almost a dozen
commercials, most of them showing the candidate talking with New Hampshire
voters. Several advisers saw the spots as too fuzzy for a campaign that was
already being criticized for a lack of focus, and they successfully urged Mr.
Kerrey to reject them.

Quoting From Ads

The new commercials were shot by Doak, Shrum, Harris, Sherman & Donilon, a media
consulting firm that Mr. Kerrey, after much agonizing, hired to replace Mr.
Rothstein. The new advertisements -- in addition to the hockey spot, there is
one on national health insurance -- were shot after Mr. Kerrey had met with his
new consultants for just a few hours. They were on the air within two days.

Mr. Kerrey seems genuinely enamored of his advertisements, so much so, in fact,
that he began to quote from them in a recent interview. "We've got to look Japan
in the eye and say what's going on in the world economy is like a hockey game,"
he told an interviewer on WMUR-TV, a Manchester station. "They're blocking their
markets while we've got ours wide open."

But in person, the Senator remains much more complicated and more distant than
the straightforward, aggressive politician who appears on television. Talking to
a group of workers here on Tuesday, Mr. Kerrey spoke not about getting tough
with Japan, but about "the urgent need in America to develop an industrial
policy that expresses a preference for high value-added jobs." His prescription
for the economy includes several new agencies with bureaucratic-sounding names,
like the Industrial Extension Service, and a five-year plan to support what he
calls "generic technologies."

At this point it is unclear how much Mr. Kerrey's new campaign team, including
his new manager, Tad Devine, will try to change the candidate's style on the
stump. So far, most of the candidate's top advisers have remained in Washington
while he has been traveling around New Hampshire. And those who have known Mr.
Kerrey for many years warn that he is not likely to submit to handlers who want
to tinker with his persona.

"What has worked for him politically is spontaneous combustion," one adviser
said. "He doesn't want to be slick."

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some political analysts say that Senator Bob Kerrey's
unconventional career has prompted him to place too much confidence in the
appeal of an independent personality. The Senator was followed by about 100
student volunteers after a rally last week in Manchester, N.H. (Associated
Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


The curse of Vietnam echoes anew through American politics. The war tore the
country apart a generation ago when the body bags were coming home. Now it
reverberates in the New Hampshire Presidential primary campaign with intimations
that Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas dodged the draft in some devious way.

Voters have good reason to examine this issue. Whether or not one accepts the
propriety of delving into Governor Clinton's private life, there can be no doubt
about the legitimacy of asking how a public official behaved during the Vietnam
years; the question provides an illuminating test.

On present evidence, Bill Clinton worked to avoid the draft, at times cleverly,
but in ways that accorded with accepted common practice among others of his
generation. Against that history, this Vietnam echo looks like an irrelevance
that ought not distract New Hampshire voters from judging Bill Clinton on his
merits.

The questioning centers on the fall of 1969 when Bill Clinton was headed back to
England to complete a Rhodes Scholarship. It seemed unlikely that his draft
board would defer him again. He tried and failed to win Navy or Air Force
commissions that might have sent him to Vietnam, though not as a grunt soldier.
Then he signed up for a Reserve Officer program that kept him out of the draft.

A few weeks later, on Oct. 31, his draft board, having learned he had changed
his mind about R.O.T.C., reclassified him 1-A, theoretically exposing him to
call-up. Only on Dec. 1, when his birth date came up 311 in the brand new draft
lottery, was he safe against worry.

He may have felt safe even during that exposed November. Draft calls had been
reduced and graduate-student deferments were about to be restored. Taken in
isolation, the Clinton record could thus be read to show manipulation and delay.
But in fairness, his behavior needs to be compared with that of his peers.

Vice President Dan Quayle provides an apposite example. He was able to join the
Indiana National Guard; otherwise he would have risked the draft. In the crazy
time of 1969, other young men found themselves suddenly drawn to divinity school
or defense industries. Desperate potential draftees drank their own blood to
feign ulcers and gorged on licorice stew because that was supposed to elevate
blood pressure. Still others sought refuge in Canada -- or went to prison.

Bill Clinton, who despised the Vietnam War "with a depth of feeling I had
reserved solely for racism," may or may not have exposed himself to actual risk
of induction. But to single him out as some sort of devious draft-dodger does
him, and the anguish of Vietnam, an injustice.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The South;
Clinton's Support Is Buffeted by Disclosures on Draft

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Feb. 13


Gov. Bill Clinton's supporters in the South stood by their man today in the wake
of a letter about his draft history. But they also acknowledged that in a region
where military traditions run strong and deep, his campaign faces a formidable
challenge.

Among those Democrats who are not yet backing a candidate in the Southern
primaries, the sentiment was that the 1969 letter would cause problems for the
Arkansas Governor's campaign in the South, considered his firmest base of
support.

"I think the letter will hurt him if for no other reason, because it will open
up a lot of feelings that this country went through during the Vietnam War,"
said Cathy Hart, president of the Democratic Executive Committee of Sarasota
County in Florida. "We haven't gotten over that and there is still a fresh scar
in America."

Asking People to Read Letter

Mr. Clinton's supporters say the letter, released Wednesday, shows a principled
young man grappling with the nation's torment during the Vietnam era. The
question is whether that is the view that will prevail in the South.

"I just want people to take the time to read the entire letter, and its
context," said Ted Brabham, a lawyer in West Palm Beach, Fla., and a prominent
Clinton supporter. "If they do, they'll see a man who laid out his heart and
soul on paper who said what he believed and that he decided to accept the draft
even though he personally was opposed to the war. Do I think it's going to hurt
him? Yes I do. How much? I don't know."

Throughout the South today Mr. Clinton's supporters were rallying to his
defense. He received endorsements from top officials in Texas, and several other
Clinton backers were sharply critical of the way they feel coverage of the
campaign has become focused on marginal issues.

"Right now, Bill Clinton is being subjected to dirty tricks, a media feeding
frenzy and the disgusting spectacle of a nation being served a menu of tabloid
trash, street gossip and malicious rumor," said Bob Slagle, chariman of the
Democratic Party in Texas.

But, in a region where Mr. Clinton has sewed up the support of nearly all the
political leadership, the biggest question was how much impact the controversy
would have and whether he would be able to get his campaign back on track. Mr.
Clinton's supporters concede that he has been seriously wounded by
unsubstantiated accusations of marital infidelity and maneuvering to avoid the
draft, but they say they do not believe the wound is fatal.

"I think he's still got a viable campaign," said Bill Paschall, a Little Rock,
Ark., political consultant. "He's lost ground in New Hampshire, but he's still
got the most money, the most endorsements lined up and the most support in the
South. I don't think he's on his death bed yet."

But few doubt the draft issue has explosive potential in the region.

"There's no question this is a problem in the South," said Thad Beyle, a
political science professor at the University of North Carolina. "My measure on
that is the problem the Southern senators got into in the Gulf war vote back in
January. You had people like Terry Sanford immediately put on the death watch
list. We've got so many retired military people or people who come to serve and
then stay down here, that I think it bodes ill for Clinton."

Even Mr. Clinton's backers admit he may have a hard time making his case for a
letter in which he thanked an Army colonel for "saving me" from the draft.

"Until people analyze the letter, analyze the point in time it was written and
fairly look at the situation and the context, I think they will be confused by
it," said former Gov. Dick Riley of South Carolina, who is now chairman of Mr.
Clinton's state committee there.

Some supporters of Mr. Clinton are not so sure how deep the damage will be.

John K. Griffin, a lawyer in Pensacola, Fla., and a veteran of the Persian Gulf
war said he was undecided until seeing Mr. Clinton on ABC's "Nightline"
Wednesday night and now supports him.

"People have a misconception of all of us in our age range -- young people of
draft age during Vietnam -- we've been given the label as something that is not
honorable," Mr. Griffin said. "I look at Bill Clinton as someone who is. I
consider myself an honorable person, and I identify with him because he objected
to the war."

Similarly Billie Carr, a Clinton backer in Houston, said she was surprised by
how how few negative telepohne calls local Democrats and Clinton backers have
received since the controversy broke open.

"Nearly all the calls I've had have been sympathetic," she said. I've had calls
from Harkin backers who wanted to know how they can help. People are sick of the
way people in politics can be ruined by any little bit of dirt the press can
dredge up on them. They can do it to Clinton. They can do it to anyone."

For Mr. Clinton the stakes in the South are enormous. He had hoped to build up a
commanding lead in his bid for the Democratic nomination by sweeping the key
primaries in Texas, Florida, Georgia and eight other Southern or border states
between March 3 and 10. He remains the only candidate in the region with
anything more than marginal support.

But backers of his opponents have been quick to jump on the draft issue.

Disgust at Media

"Particularly in the South, military service is lauded and respected regardless
of the war," said Georgia Secretary of State Max Cleland, a triple amputee from
Vietnam and a supporter of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who also lost a leg
in Vietnam. "We have over 600,000 veterans in Georgia, 350,000 of whom served in
the Vietnam era. When you run for the Presidency, part of your job is war and
peace. People want someone who's worn the uniform. Bob Kerrey's background is a
big plus and this has to be a minus for Clinton."

Mr. Clinton's supporters say that the race needs to return to the economic and
social issues facing the nation, and that the Governor must now move away from
constantly defending himself on the two character issues that are now plaguing
him. Some of Mr. Clinton's supporters have also bitterly lambasted the media
coverage of the draft issue as a distraction.

"I am amazed at how the media are concentrating their coverage on an incident
that occurred 22 years ago," said Gov. Zell Miller of Georgia, who is supporting
Mr. Clinton in the March 3 Georgia primary. "Millions of Americans are out of
work, others don't have an adequate health-care plan to pay for their medical
bills. And instead of reporting how Bill Clinton plans to address those
problems, we're harping on a letter that was written by a 23-year-old student
who had a deep and sincere conviction that the Vietnam War was wrong."

Most acknowledge that, whatever the merits of Mr. Clinton's explanation, the
longer the attention remains on the draft issue, the worse it is for him.

Charlie Hodge, the chairman of the Democratic Party in Spartanburg County in
South Carolina, said he was not particularly worried about tabloid allegations
about womanizing or the initial reports of his draft deferment. Today, he began
worrying.

"I read it, and it bothered, public perception-wise," he said. "This to me is a
harmful event. This could be a real problem. The South is extremely patriotic."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the South, considered a firm base of support for Bill
Clinton, the Arkansas governor's campaign may face a formidable challenge in the
wake of a letter about his draft history. Volunteers at work yesterday at the
candidate's headquarters in Atlanta were John Hutchins, left, and Joel Cope.
(Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Kerrey Moves to Reinvigorate Campaign

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 26


Senator Bob Kerrey has not been having as much fun running for President as he
thought he would.

Asked why not, as he sat the other night drinking a draft beer and eating
popcorn in an airport bar in Houston, the Democrat from Nebraska offered his
whimsical smile and replied, "Cosmic forces."

Later, he elaborated. "I mean that there are many things I don't control," he
said. "I'm just saying that I don't believe that there are people in the heavens
who are doing anything other than laughing at times at my foolishness."

Welcome to the first Presidential campaign with an air of Pirandello, an
absurdist adventure marked by ironic detachment, existential angst, black humor
and, believe it or not, a vow of celibacy.

How to Catch Up

"Cosmic Bob," as the Senator is known in political circles because of his
offbeat style, has been trying to figure out a way to catch up with "Slick
Willie," as Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas is known for his smooth patter.

With a more focused attitude and a new campaign team, Mr. Kerrey is hoping to
make the most of the fresh attention that will come his way as Mr. Clinton
struggles with questions about his personal life. Although Mr. Kerrey's
strategists have been careful not to gloat for the record over the rival camp's
stumble, they are clearly eager to profit from the fact that the Democratic race
once again seems fluid.

Hailed early by the press as a 48-year-old combination of Sir Lancelot and James
Dean, Mr. Kerrey faded through the fall with flat performances, a vague agenda,
except for his health insurance plan, and an overreliance on his war record.
Faced with a renewed opportunity, Mr. Kerrey's response so far is not to offer
the missing details of how he would govern but to try to persuade Democrats that
details are a trivial pursuit and that he is not their man unless they want to
make a leap of faith.

'You've Got to Fight for It'

"I am not a bookkeeper," he said, in an interview in Washington last week,
referring to Mr. Clinton's promotion of himself as a seasoned manager with an
economic plan. "I am not a person who has any desire to come forward and say,
'Here's a cabinet full of smooth-moving drawers.'

"I'm going to try to drive out the idea that this is just about nominating
someone who's electable. You either are or you are not in politics because you
want to change the world. I do not, in a very personal way, believe that good
all by itself conquers evil. You've got to fight for it."

Mr. Kerrey is trying to make a virtue of vagueness, arguing that his status as a
work in progress, an unfinished politician, could be a strength as President.

He said he carried with him a book by Albert Schweitzer that explained why it
was good not to have all the answers. "Schweitzer says that real learning
doesn't occur unless you are in an attitude of humility," Mr. Kerrey said. "And
that's extremely difficult as a politician.

Shines in Small Settings

By the standards of modern campaigning, Mr. Kerry can be amiable and witty in
small settings. On a trip to Berlin in northern New Hampshire, he charmed
hard-boiled reporters by talking excitedly about how his motel bed featured the
"Magic Fingers" massage machine and asking an aide to come up and check out the
shaking bed.

Mr. Kerrey was asked what he did for fun outside of politics with a warning that
Michael S. Dukakis had answered the question, "Black mulch," speaking of
fertilizing his tomato plants. Mr. Kerrey replied with a twinkle: "Black Mulch.
I have some of their albums."

While he affects the sing-song Kennedy cadences in speeches, Mr. Kerrey has not
shown the potent charisma of John F. Kennedy, which Democrats seek like the Holy
Grail. At one of Mr. Kerrey's appearances a large number of Dartmouth students
left a less-than-scintillating session early to go to a screening of "J. F. K."

Mr. Kerrey often seems more like wry observer than eager candidate. With large
blue eyes and a lightbulb-shaped head that give him the look of a bemused
extraterrestial, he continues to maintain an unusual Jamesian distance from his
campaign.

Even on an unscheduled stop at an American Legion Post in Manchester last week,
surrounded by admiring Vietnam veterans who greeted him as "a brother," Mr.
Kerrey did not seem to fit into the scene easily. With a military cap perched on
his head and a beer, Mr. Kerrey chatted rather awkwardly with some of the men
around the bar.

Learning How to Shout

He asked Bill Genesee, 38 years old, who was describing his job at the Raytheon
Corporation making missiles, "When you walk past sheet metal, wouldn't you like
to get out and bang it?"

Stung by criticism that he was too diffident, Mr. Kerrey has been trying to
convey urgency by adding a life-and-death message to his speeches and speaking
in a louder voice.

"People would come up and say, 'You just don't seem to want this badly enough,
because you're not shouting at us,' " So now I'm given to shouting, and it's not
my favorite voice," he said.

Mr. Kerrey's aides tend to watch him nervously, knowing that he sometimes says
things that are more Brecht than boilerplate.

In response to a question about Sidney Blumenthal's New Republic cover articles
on "The Politics of Self: Bob Kerrey's Shallow Campaign" and "The Anointed, Bill
Clinton, Party Favorite," Mr. Kerrey laughingly suggested that he would like to
"loosen one of his teeth," a move that he told others would wipe away Mr.
Blumenthal's "preppy little smile."

'Close to the Edge'

"He does skate close to the edge," a strategist for Mr. Kerrey, Michael McCurry,
said. "But sometimes I think he says things that provoke reactions just to
remind himself that he's not a conventional politician, to remind himself, 'If
you're not careful, you're going to wind up like Bill Clinton.' "

Mr. Kerrey's strategists see his problem as how to convince people that he is
different but reassure them that he is not too different. People may snicker at
Vice President Dan Quayle's reading Paul Johnson's "Modern Times," a history of
the 20th century, for three years, according to what he and his aides tell
reporters. But it may also make voters nervous when Mr. Kerrey says one of his
favorite books is Walker Percy's "Moviegoer," an anthem of alienation about a
Korean War veteran out of touch with the rest of America.

Mr. Kerrey agrees that sometimes his aides are right when they warn him with the
"time out" hand signal. "I can keep a little line on the reel," he said. "I
don't need to put it all out there."

Mr. Kerrey presents his character, shaped by war and wounds, as the reason why
voters should put faith in his leadership.

As a candidate, John F. Kennedy let Red Fay and other aides brag about his war
record as a fighter, while he discreetly avoided the topic. But Mr. Kerrey still
begins speeches with lines like this one to an A.F.L.-C.I.O. meeting in Austin
last week: "Let me start off by saying that in spite of the fact that I left a
little of myself over in Vietnam, there's a hell of a lot left to be able to
drive George Bush and Danforth Quayle out of that White House."

Mr. Kerrey suggested that some reporters who had criticized him for talking too
much about his war record were "feeling this enormous guilt themselves, because
they didn't do anything" in the war.

He said he did not mind that many men in his generation chose to avoid going to
war. "It doesn't bother me deeply," he said. "But when there's dishonesty, it
does. When Quayle first had his trouble in 1988, I defended him. But when he
asserted that he got into the National Guard in order to go to Vietnam, he lost
me completely. That was a lie. He didn't get into the Guard in order to get in
Vietnam.

"But what I do object to is now when they come and give this golden reason for
why they really wanted to go to Vietnam. Bill Clinton does that a little. I
mean, come on, there were a lot of us who didn't want to go to Vietnam."

In speeches, Mr. Kerrey obliquely scores Mr. Clinton for making "personal
responsibility" a campaign theme, implying that his own nine months in a Navy
hospital in Philadelphia learning how to walk again imbued him with moral
superiority.  "I understand the nature of personal responsibility," he tells
audiences. "I'm the one, since I was injured, that had to learn how to walk,
learn how to run, how to do the things I wanted to do."

In conversations with friends, he denigrates Mr. Clinton as lacking conscience,
complaining that the Governor of Arkansas had made too many political
compromises trying to make everyone happy.

"I have learned the necessity of developing a conscience and of letting that
conscience speak to you," Mr. Kerrey said. "The ground for my campaign isn't a
position paper or a policy institute. The ground is my conscience."

Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey had a tiff after Mr. Clinton had made a commercial
criticizing Mr. Kerrey for voting for the Congressional pay raise. Mr. Kerrey
noted that Mr. Clinton had the perquisites of the Governor's office. Mr. Clinton
shot back that Mr. Kerrey, too, had "lived in the Governor's mansion."

"There were a lot of stories written about it," Mr. Clinton.

Privately, Mr. Kerrey was furious at Mr. Clinton's apparent reference to his
relationship with Debra Winger, the actress. He told people that he was single
and free to do as he pleased and that Mr. Clinton had a nerve mentioning it.

Decision Not to Date

Even before reports about an extramarital affair by Mr. Clinton, Mr. Kerrey said
he had decided that he could not date during his campaign, even though he had
been divorced from his wife, Beverly Defnall, for 14 years. They had been
married for four years.

He said he believed that in a political season when voters quickly sketched in
portraits he could not take the risk. "People do not know who Bob Kerrey is, and
I don't want them to be reading stories about who it is that I'm dating and
trying to figure out who I am," he said.

Although Mr. Kerrey would like to present himself as the candidate of
conscience, the politician who embodies the idealism and skepticism of the 60's
and who hates expediency and trade-offs, that message keeps running into sharp
questions about own values, business practices and conflicting positions.

At the St. Paul's Academy in Concord, N.H., Mr. Kerrey received a bristling
reception from students who wanted to know how he could emphasize national
health insurance when the part-time workers in his restaurant chain did not have
health insurance.

On "Meet the Press" on NBC News Mr. Kerrey delivered a stumbling response on
abortion, as he tried to explain that his switch from opponent to proponent.

Questions on Death Penalty

In 1982 Mr. Kerrey said in a letter to Nebraska State Senator Bernice Labedz
that he believed "the unborn to be human life and entitled to all the
protections the state can legally offer for the preservation of life."

He added that the "death and destruction of young men that I led in battle" in
Vietnam had helped shape his decision.

But on Saturday, Mr. Kerrey was asked about the death penalty by former
Manhattan Borough President Percy E. Sutton, now an executive in Harlem. Mr.
Sutton, at a candidates' forum sponsored by the Rainbow Coalition in Washington,
asked how Mr. Kerrey could support the death penalty, in light of the fact that
he had talked about seeing young men die in Vietnam and that "so many people who
are poor are not given the opportunity to have proper representation."

"Death is final, isn't it?" Mr. Sutton asked Mr. Kerrey in just the sort of
question that the candidate of existential angst might have enjoyed in a
different setting.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey, speaking last week in Milford, N.H., is
hoping to make the most of the fresh attention that will come his way as Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas struggles with questions about his personal life. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Stance Says a Lot About Candidates

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


To the Editor:

I must take issue with the views of Prof. Michael Delli Carpini quoted in "When
'the War' Means Vietnam, Politics Gets Muddy" (The Week in Review, Feb. 9): "We
as a country have not really come to grips with how we feel about people who did
not support the war," and "when something brings it up, we don't really have a
set of rules or even a language to evaluate it."

The concept of personal honor provides me with rules and language for evaluating
responses to the Vietnam War. Those I consider honorable:

Conscientious objectors, who endured hardship rather than violate their code of
nonviolence; those who, grieving for a society they felt had lost its values,
withdrew and went elsewhere; those who, realizing that others would go in their
places if they did not, served in the military even if they had deep
reservations about the war; those who supported the war and served because they
felt it was their duty; others, men and women, who devoted much of their lives
to presenting rational and moral arguments against the war, and yet others who
felt an authentic call into the ministry or religious life and who have
faithfully served in that way.

All of these were operating from strong moral principles, doing what they felt
was right, whatever the sacrifices and risks to themselves. They do not all need
to agree with one another to be honorable people.

The position of others is more problematic. Many young men found themselves
unable to make a decision. They may have felt uneasy knowing that while their
college deferments protected them, others were being drafted. Others took their
chances on being drafted -- that if they were called up, they would somehow
avoid injury or death. Others took chances on not being drafted, refusing to
think the issue through.

Those who may never have had training in moral decision making are difficult to
evaluate. Some of them might now wish they had done better grappling with the
issues when they were younger. If they are now politicians, we might wish to ask
them what mistakes they made and what they learned.

But there is another group of men to consider, and it is their behavior and
rationalizations that destroy the social fabric. They felt, and feel, that they
have a right to consider only their own short-term preferences (which may or may
not be their best interests). They do not speak the language of personal honor,
but rather of being comfortable, of having the right to eliminate what makes
them uncomfortable or what threatens them.

They speak only the language of manipulation, management, damage control. During
the Vietnam War, some men felt it was their right, apart from moral principles,
the social contract or the risks that others might take on their behalf to
excuse themselves from risk or duty to serve or to protest, and to manipulate
the system for their immediate needs and wishes, with no consideration of
long-term effects, personal or social.

It is this last group whom we should emphatically reject as national leaders.
These people, unmotivated by any sense of personal honor, are crazy-makers in
our social life. Since in their thoughts and actions they appeal to no coherent
moral world view, their personalities are incoherent too, and their actions
unpredictable, however good a front they may have constructed to conceal their
real selves. They erode any social group's morale and values, and they disrupt
the search for acceptable goals.

As Christopher Lasch writes in "The Culture of Narcissism":

"When politicians and administrators have no other aim than to sell their
leadership to the public, they deprive themselves of intelligible standards by
which to define the goals of specific policies or to evaluate success or
failure."

That is why we need to know if candidates are faithful to their spouses or
misled their draft boards or ever put themselves on the line for their moral
convictions. We need to know if they have moral convictions, and whether or not
they are prepared to stand by them. We need, finally, to know if the candidates
themselves have any real idea of what they are doing.

ANNE TROWBRIDGE
Brant Lake, N.Y., Feb. 10, 1992

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
A Letter by Clinton on His Draft Deferment: 'A War I Opposed and Despised'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1261 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 12


Following is the letter that Bill Clinton, now the Governor of Arkansas, wrote
from Oxford, England, to Col. Eugene Holmes, director of the Reserve Officers
Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas, on Dec. 3, 1969:

I am sorry to be so long in writing. I know I promised to let you hear from me
at least once a month, and from now on you will, but I have had to have some
time to think about this first letter. Almost daily since my return to England I
have thought about writing, about what I want to and ought to say.

First, I want to thank you, not just for saving me from the draft, but for being
so kind and decent to me last summer, when I was as low as I have ever been. One
thing which made the bond we struck in good faith somewhat palatable to me was
my high regard for you personally. In retrospect, it seems that the admiration
might not have been mutual had you known a little more about me, about my
political beliefs and activities. At least you might have thought me more fit
for the draft than for R.O.T.C.

Let me try to explain. As you know, I worked for two years in a very minor
position on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. I did it for the experience
and the salary but also for the opportunity, however small, of working every day
against a war I opposed and despised with a depth of feeling I had reserved
solely for racism in America before Vietnam. I did not take the matter lightly
but studied it carefully, and there was a time when not many people had more
information about Vietnam at hand than I did.

I have written and spoken and marched against the war. One of the national
organizers of the Vietnam Moratorium is a close friend of mine. After I left
Arkansas last summer, I went to Washington to work in the national headquarters
of the Moratorium, then to England to organize the Americans here for
demonstrations Oct. 15 and Nov. 16.

Interlocked with the war is the draft issue, which I did not begin to consider
separately until early 1968. For a law seminar at Georgetown I wrote a paper on
the legal arguments for and against allowing, within the Selective Service
System, the classification of selective conscientious objection, for those
opposed to participation in a particular war, not simply to "participation in
war in any form."

From my work I came to believe that the draft system itself is illegitimate. No
government really rooted in limited, parliamentary democracy should have the
power to make its citizens fight and kill and die in a war they may oppose, a
war which even possibly may be wrong, a war which, in any case, does not involve
immediately the peace and freedom of the nation.

The draft was justified in World War II because the life of the people
collectively was at stake. Individuals had to fight, if the nation was to
survive, for the lives of their countrymen and their way of life. Vietnam is no
such case. Nor was Korea an example, where, in my opinion, certain military
action was justified but the draft was not, for the reasons stated above.

Because of my opposition to the draft and the war, I am in great sympathy with
those who are not willing to fight, kill, and maybe die for their country (i.e.,
the particular policy of a particular government) right or wrong. Two of my
friends at Oxford are conscientious objectors. I wrote a letter of
recommendation for one of them to his Mississippi draft board, a letter which I
am more proud of than anything else I wrote at Oxford last year. One of my
roommates is a draft resister who is possibly under indictment and may never be
able to go home again. He is one of the bravest, best men I know. His country
needs men like him more than they know. That he is considered a criminal is an
obscenity.

The decision not to be a resister and the related subsequent decisions were the
most difficult of my life. I decided to accept the draft in spite of my beliefs
for one reason: to maintain my political viability within the system. For years
I have worked to prepare myself for a political life characterized by both
practical political ability and concern for rapid social progress. It is a life
I still feel compelled to try to lead. I do not think our system of government
is by definition corrupt, however dangerous and inadequate it has been in recent
years. (The society may be corrupt, but that is not the same thing, and if that
is true we are all finished anyway.)

When the draft came, despite political convictions, I was having a hard time
facing the prospect of fighting a war I had been fighting against, and that is
why I contacted you. R.O.T.C. was the one way left in which I could possibly,
but not positively, avoid both Vietnam and resistance. Going on with my
education, even coming back to England, played no part in my decision to join
R.O.T.C. I am back here, and would have been at Arkansas Law School because
there is nothing else I can do. In fact, I would like to have been able to take
a year out perhaps to teach in a small college or work on some community action
project and in the process to decide whether to attend law school or graduate
school and how to begin putting what I have learned to use.

But the particulars of my personal life are not nearly as important to me as the
principles involved. After I signed the R.O.T.C. letter of intent I began to
wonder whether the compromise I had made with myself was not more objectionable
than the draft would have been, because I had no interest in the R.O.T.C.
program in itself and all I seemed to have done was to protect myself from
physical harm. Also, I began to think I had deceived you, not by lies -- there
were none -- but by failing to tell you all the things I'm writing now. I doubt
that I had the mental coherence to articulate them then.

At that time, after we had made our agreement and you had sent my 1-D deferment
to my draft board, the anguish and loss of my self-regard and self-confidence
really set in. I hardly slept for weeks and kept going by eating compulsively
and reading until exhaustion brought sleep. Finally, on Sept. 12 I stayed up all
night writing a letter to the chairman of my draft board, saying basically what
is in the preceding paragraph, thanking him for trying to help in a case where
he really couldn't, and stating that I couldn't do the R.O.T.C. after all and
would he please draft me as soon as possible.

I never mailed the letter, but I did carry it on me every day until I got on the
plane to return to England. I didn't mail the letter because I didn't see, in
the end, how my going in the army and maybe going to Vietnam would achieve
anything except a feeling that I had punished myself and gotten what I deserved.
So I came back to England to try to make something of this second year of my
Rhodes scholarship.

And that is where I am now, writing to you because you have been good to me and
have a right to know what I think and feel. I am writing too in the hope that my
telling this one story will help you to understand more clearly how so many fine
people have come to find themselves still loving their country but loathing the
military, to which you and other good men have devoted years, lifetimes, of the
best service you could give. To many of us, it is no longer clear what is
service and what is disservice, or if it is clear, the conclusion is likely to
be illegal.

Forgive the length of this letter. There was much to say. There is still a lot
to be said, but it can wait. Please say hello to Col. Jones for me.

Merry Christmas.

Sincerely,

Bill Clinton

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Vietnam War Draft Status Becomes Issue for Clinton

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 904 words

DATELINE: PORTSMOUTH, N.H., Feb. 6


Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas fended off questions today about his draft
deferment during the Vietnam War, denying that he deliberately sidestepped
military service by misleading his local draft board.

Mr. Clinton, who did not join the military and has said he opposed the war, said
he gave up his student deferment status in the fall of 1969 to make himself
available for military service rather than to avoid it.

The Governor, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, was
responding to an article today in The Wall Street Journal quoting a former draft
board official from Hot Springs, Ark., and an Army R.O.T.C. recruiter as saying
that Mr. Clinton manipulated the draft process. The article said that Mr.
Clinton avoided the draft by saying he would join the Reserve Officer Training
Corps after graduate school but that he never joined.

Mr. Clinton said that if he ever received special treatment from his draft board
he never asked for it or knew about it. "I certainly had no leverage to get it,"
he said.

A Time of Accusations

Reporters repeatedly asked Mr. Clinton about the assertions as he campaigned in
New Hampshire today. The questions came as his campaign has struggled with two
weeks of news reports about an Arkansas woman's accusations that she had had an
extramarital affair him. Similar accusations of draft evasion dogged Vice
President Dan Quayle in 1988, when he was accused of using the influence of his
Indiana family to stay out of combat.

Several of Mr. Clinton's Democratic opponents reacted quickly to the account in
The Journal, suggesting it might cause some problems with voters. Senator Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska, who received the Medal of Honor for his heroism in the
Vietnam War, seemed to believe that the contrast between his military record and
Governor Clinton's was striking enough that he did not need to raise his voice
in criticism of the Governor.

"I'm sympathetic to anyone who said I'm concerned about getting drafted," he
told reporters today in Nashua. "I was as well." But the Senator did suggest
that Mr. Clinton's explanation was less than credible.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa was asked about the article while speaking in Bedford
to the Air Line Pilots Association. Mr. Harkin, a former Navy pilot, mentioned
his experience growing up in a small town where anyone who shirked military
service would have been "run out of town."

At a news conference today, Mr. Clinton said, "You've got to understand that if
you look at the facts as they then existed, instead of some 23-year-later
rewrite, the facts are, I put myself into the draft, I didn't take it out."

In an interview in December, Mr. Clinton said he decided in the fall of 1969,
while he was in Arkansas after a year studying at Oxford University as a Rhodes
Scholar, that joining the R.O.T.C. "was sort of an illicit thing to do" because
he would have been protected from the draft during his second year at Oxford and
for three more years while he was in law school. By then, he said, "I had four
of my high school classmates killed in Vietnam, and I just didn't feel right
about it."

Even though President Richard M. Nixon asked Congress to institute a lottery in
May, Mr. Clinton said, it had not occurred to him that a lottery system might
improve his chances for staying out of the war. He said he had rejoined the
draft pool "under circumstances that any reasonable person would have thought
made it virtually 100 percent lock down certain that I would be drafted."

Congress approved the lottery on Nov. 26, 1969, and the lottery numbers, tied to
birthdates, were picked on Dec. 1. Mr. Clinton's number -- 311 -- was high
enough that he was never called.

No R.O.T.C. After All

Mr. Clinton, a 1968 graduate of Georgetown University, had his draft status
reclassified from 1-A to 1-D -- or deferred -- in August 1969 after he agreed to
join the R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas Law School when he
returned from Oxford. But after a second year at Oxford, he enrolled at Yale Law
School instead.

"You guys are reading this very differently from what I did at the time," Mr.
Clinton said today. "I had no way of knowing what my lottery number would be."

Opal Ellis, the executive secretary of the Hot Springs draft board, is quoted in
The Journal as saying that Mr. Clinton told her when he returned after his first
year at Oxford that "he was too well educated to go" to Vietnam and that he was
going to "pull every string he could think of" to avoid service.

Mr. Clinton said he never had such a conversation with Mrs. Ellis. "It certainly
wouldn't be something that a 22-year-old boy would have said to a draft board
secretary who was in no position to do anything about it anyway." Attempts to
reach Mrs. Ellis today were unsuccessful.

He also denied assertions by Col. Eugene Holmes, the Army R.O.T.C. recruiter,
who told The Journal that "Bill Clinton was able to manipulate things so that he
didn't have to go in."

Clinton aides today circulated copies of an article from The Arkansas
Democrat-Gazette last October in which Mr. Holmes was quoted as saying that Mr.
Clinton received no special treatment. "He was treated just like I would have
treated any other kid," the newspaper quoted Mr. Holmes as saying. "I was giving
a lot of kids exceptions."

Colonel Holmes did not respond to messages left on his answering machine today.

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
Clinton Thanked Colonel in '69 For 'Saving Me From the Draft'

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1849 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 12


Trying to prevent further damage to his Presidential campaign, Bill Clinton made
public today a 1969 letter in which he thanked an Army officer overseeing the
Reserve Officers Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas for
"saving me from the draft" and also apologized for misleading the officer about
the strength of his anti-war feelings.

At a news conference here, the Arkansas Governor said he was issuing the letter,
dated Dec. 3, 1969, because he knew it was to be disclosed later today by ABC
News.

The unexpected development came as Mr. Clinton, whose campaign has been
disrupted by accusations that he had an extended extramarital affair with a
cabaret singer and manipulated his draft status, was trying to shake free of
personal controversy and focus attention on his economic program.

Opponents on the Attack

With the voting in the New Hampshire primary set for Tuesday, Mr. Clinton's
Democratic opponents are shedding their reluctance to take advantage of his
trouble. Today they adopted the theme that whatever the truth of the
accusations, they created a cloud of doubt that detracts from Mr. Clinton's
value as a Democratic Presidential nominee.

Mr. Clinton wrote the 1969 letter to Col. Eugene Holmes of the Army to explain
why he had decided not to join the university's R.O.T.C. program.  When Mr.
Clinton agreed to join the program, Colonel Holmes requested that Mr. Clinton be
reclassified from 1-A, immediately eligible for the draft, to 1-D, the category
for men who joined the reserves or student R.O.T.C. units

In the letter, Mr. Clinton described what he said today was a snapshot of that
generation's feelings. The letter shows that the candidate, like thousands of
men in his generation, actually opposed both the war and the draft and viewed
the R.O.T.C. program mainly as a way of staying out of combat without breaking
the law. [Text of letter, page A25.]

In tones of moral anguish, Mr. Clinton wrote about his role in organizing
anti-war rallies in the United States and Britain, where he was studying in 1969
as a Rhodes Scholar. He stated that he admired friends who had defied the
Selective Service law, but did not want to break the law himself and damage his
career and "political viability."

"First, I want to thank you, not just for saving me from the draft, but for
being so kind and decent to me last summer, when I was as low as I have ever
been," Mr. Clinton wrote.

"One thing which made the bond we struck in good faith somewhat palatable to me
was my high regard for you personally," Mr. Clinton wrote. "In retrospect, it
seems that the admiration might not have been mutual had you known a little more
about me, about my political beliefs and activities. At least you might have
thought me more fit for the draft than for R.O.T.C."

Last week, fending off questions about his draft deferment, Mr. Clinton said,
"You've got to understand that if you look at the facts as they then existed,
instead of some 23-year-later rewrite, the facts are, I put myself into the
draft, I didn't take it out."

Issue Is Revived

The question of Mr. Clinton's draft status was revived as an issue last Thursday
when The Wall Street Journal reported that in 1969 Mr. Clinton secured a draft
deferment by promising to join the R.O.T.C. program supervised by Colonel Holmes
and enroll in the University of Arkansas Law School. Instead, he attended Oxford
University for a second year then went to law school at Yale University.

Mr. Clinton admitted last week that he had done that, but denied any intention
to mislead Colonel Holmes or the local draft board in his hometown, Hope, Ark.
He also insisted that he had acted in good faith and later asked to have his
R.O.T.C. deferment revoked because he felt a moral obligation to submit to the
draft. "I had four of my high school classmates killed in Vietnam," he explained
last week, "and I just didn't feel right about it."

The letter released today showed that Mr. Clinton actually signed a letter of
intent to join the R.O.T.C., rather than simply making a verbal promise.  It
also suggested that he knew he was misleading Colonel Holmes about true feelings
about the war and the Army when the two men had talked during the summer of
1969. In the letter he wrote of "loathing the military to which you and other
good man have devoted years." Colonel Holmes has not been available for comment
on the letter.

It was a time of growing discontent with the war, with President Nixon and, at
times, with authority. College students and many Democratic politicians worked
that year to fan such sentiments. A high point came on Oct. 16 when millions of
Americans across a broad spectrum of society wore black armbands, held prayer
vigils, chanted at rallies and stayed away from classes or jobs in a protest
they called the Vietnam Moratorium.

'No Interest in R.O.T.C.'

"After I signed the R.O.T.C. letter of intent," he continued in the letter, "I
began to wonder whether the compromise I had made with myself was not more
objectionable than the draft would have been, because I had no interest in the
R.O.T.C. program in itself and all I seemed to have done was to protect myself
from physical harm.

"Also, I began to think I had deceived you, not by lies -- there were none --
but by failing to tell you all the things I'm writing now. I doubt that I had
the mental coherence to articulate them then."

Mr. Clinton went on to describe how his moral torment kept him from sleeping and
how on Sept. 12, 1969, he wrote but never mailed a letter telling his draft
board to re-classify him as 1-A. He added, "I didn't mail the letter because I
didn't see, in the end, how my going in the Army and maybe going to Vietnam
would achieve anything except a feeling that I had punished myself and gotten
what I deserved."

On Oct. 31, 1969, Colonel Holmes had him re-classified after being told by Mr.
Clinton that he would not attend the University of Arkansas. But by that time,
Mr. Clinton had been exempted during September and October, when according to
The Wall Street Journal he had been informed by the local draft board that he
faced the greatest chance of being drafted.

Sequence Seen as Chance

On Sept. 19, 1969, President Nixon announced a 50,000-man reduction in the draft
call for the rest of the year and ruled that the October draft call of 29,000
would be spaced out over the final three months of the year. On Dec. 1, 1969,
the draft lottery was held and Mr. Clinton drew the number 311, meaning he was
no longer in jeopardy. Mr. Clinton said today that he "presumed" he must have
known about the lottery drawing when he wrote the letter to Colonel Holmes.

Appearing on the ABC News program "Nightline," tonight, Mr. Clinton acknowledged
that his draft lottery number had been drawn on Dec. 1, that he had sent in an
application to law school at Yale University on Dec. 2 and that he had written
the letter to Colonel Holmes on Dec. 3.

But he denied that the sequence of his actions implied that he was by then
confident that he had escaped the draft. Mr. Clinton also emphasized that at his
deferment had been revoked and that he had been returned to the draft pool
several weeks before the December actions. He added that the two people most
directly involved in the change of his deferment were his stepfather and the
head of his draft board, both now dead.

Also on "Nightline," Mr. Clinton added that he was seeking to get past the
"cloud" which has all but obscured the economic message he said he was trying to
send to New Hampshire voters.

"For three weeks, of course I've had some problems in the polls," he said. "All
I've been asked about by the press is a woman I didn't sleep with and a draft I
didn't dodge."

Trying to Broaden Question

Mr. Clinton also sought to broaden the question of character that has been
raised by the accusations by noting that Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense
had not served in the military and assailing President Bush for advocating a cut
in the capital gains tax.

"If we're going to talk about 22 years ago, let's talk about my whole record as
Governor, my demonsrations of character, my fitness to lead and compare to that
kind of issue I think is very important too," he said.

The Clinton campaign also unveiled a new television commercial in New Hampshire
tonight in which they seek to undermine the credibility of all the accusations
against him by saying that the cabaret singer, Gennifer Flowers, was paid for
her story and by blaming Republicans for the series of damaging disclosures.

At New Hampshire appearances earlier in the day in Claremont and Dover and on
the ABC appearance last night, Mr. Clinton vowed to "fight like hell" to
continue his campaign.

But the renewal of the questions about how Mr. Clinton handled his draft status
added to the confused state of the contest in the nation's first Presidential
primary.

"Jeez, another one," said Mr. Harkin, a former Navy pilot, in reference to the
latest controversy. "I think voters should be concerned about his veracity and
character. Listen, if someone wanted to serve in the military at that time, they
could have served."

"Oh, God, please, not another one," said Senator Bob Kerrey, who lost part of a
leg and won the Medal of Honor in combat in Vietnam. He has previously
questioned the honesty of Mr. Clinton's dealings with the draft, but said he had
no direct comment today.

But Mr. Clinton said today: "We've heard a lot in this campaign about the
character issue. Well, character is an important issue, and so is patriotism.
But this is not about my patriotism. I supported the Persian Gulf war because I
thought it was right and in our national interest, just as I opposed the Vietnam
War because I thought it was wrong and not in our national interest. And I still
think I was right. The real character issue and the real patriotism issue in
this election is who has a vision for the country, a plan for the future, and
the ability to get it done."

Mr. Clinton also said today he letter had come to his attention again when his
campaign director got a call from Ted Koppel, the host of "Nightline." "Ted
Koppel told my campaign manager, David Wilhelm, the letter came from the
Pentagon," said Mr. Clinton. Mr. Clinton said he obtained the text of the letter
from ABC News.

The Pentagon denied a role in the disclosure. "It clearly was not the Pentagon
that provided the letter in question," said Maj. Stephen Little of the Marine
Corps, a Defense Department spokesman.

Mr. Koppel also said the source had contacted his program today to deny being
connected with the Pentagon.  The evening news program reported the letter
tonight and said one of the program's sources was Col. Clinton Jones, a former
Arkansas R.O.T.C. officer.

In response to the accusations from the Clinton campaign that there was a
political motivation to the disclosure, Victoria Clarke, press secretary to the
Bush campaign, said, "Every time they have a problem, they start whining, they
start crying, they start blaming us."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton discussing his 1969 letter on the draft
yesterday in Manchester, N.H. (Edward Keating/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Military Service

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


To the Editor:

In "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17), Walter A. McDougall, referring
to himself and other Vietnam veterans he served with, asserts: "We just hoped to
get home in one piece. We weren't heroes, but we were citizens, and if one of us
becomes President, he will have the right to ask other citizens to take the same
risk. Mr. Clinton, in my view, does not."

Of the seven United States wars that lasted more than a few months, only one
began under a President who had had previous active military service: the Korean
War under Harry S. Truman.

In writing of Gov. Bill Clinton, Mr. McDougall has in effect divided draft-age
men from the Vietnam War era into three wounded companies: those who were
physically or psychologically maimed in battle; those who served and still nurse
a sense of injury against those who did not, and those who avoided military
service and are to be politically disabled from seeking national leadership.

This reluctance of a veteran to let old grievances heal after two decades is far
more destructive of civic feeling than the reluctance of young adults to face
the draft for a controversial war.

If one takes Mr. McDougall seriously, the Vietnam War was morally suspect
because it was promoted by Lyndon B. Johnson, whose only military service was as
an aerial hitchhiker for a few months in World War II. To the contrary, the
dubiousness of the Vietnam War was neither established by the dubiousness of
Lyndon Johnson's war record, nor overcome by the stronger war records of the
members of Congress who voted to support the war.

The significance of a President's military service, including any testing, agony
or self-definition that he experienced in battle, is that it supplies one source
of wisdom in considering the relative severity and effectiveness of war,
diplomacy and other tools of foreign policy. Military experience, however,
cannot supply pragmatic or moral authority for the policy itself.

JONATHAN S. GELLMAN
New York, Feb. 20, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Opinions Considered: A Talk With Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1710 words


TOM WICKER, whose "In the Nation" began appearing in this newspaper in 1966,
wrote his final column under that title last Sunday and took off for a
well-earned rest -- a week or so -- before getting on with other writing
projects including three books and various assignments for The Times.

On New Year's Eve Mr. Wicker talked by phone with R.W. Apple Jr., chief
Washington correspondent of The Times, and editors of The Week in Review about
questions and people that have engaged him through a life in journalism that
began as editor of a small-town newspaper in the South. Here are excerpts from
the conversation.

How Politics Went From Soapbox to the Tube



Q. You've been at The Times for 30-something years as a reporter and Washington
bureau chief and columnist, and in all you've been in journalism since 1949.
What changes in the politics and the governing of the country have you seen?
A. Television has worked enormous changes, in politics and in the governing of
the country, as in life generally. It's my view that those changes have been so
great that we don't yet fully realize exactly what they are; until we do, we're
not really going to know how to cope.

Television has made national politics more accessible, in the sense that a
viewer in the smallest town knows the President of the United States better than
he knows his governor or his congressman or perhaps even his mayor, depending on
where he lives.
Q. More accessible but less participatory?
A. Clearly less participatory. For example, the subsidies the Government now
provides for Presidential candidates go very heavily into television and very
little into things like bumper stickers or front-yard placards or having people
stuff envelopes. What used to be -- I would say well into the 60's -- what used
to be the absolute essence of politics, the participation of individuals, has
been greatly lessened.
Q. Has that in turn weakened the ability of politics to take up problems that
the people care about? Is it such a one-way street that Presidents are more cut
off than they were 20 or 30 years ago?
A. I'm not absolutely certain of that, because I think a President could, if he
would, be better informed than I regard President Bush as being. But because
television is so powerful and its reach is so broad it's much easier for a
President, or a governor or a senator, to try to avoid the issue that is on
people's minds, like the recession, and to try to create some other issue.

The major problem the country faces in 1992, at least it would seem now, is the
economic recession and the long-term economic problem. I don't believe that
President Bush could absolutely take the country's mind off of that by something
like the Willie Horton ad. But he could more nearly do that now, because of
television, than he might have been able to do in the past.
Q. Newspapers have changed too, of course, since you began as the editor of The
Sandhill Citizen in Aberdeen, N.C.
A. You really can't get away from the influence of television on newspapers,
either. But to the extent you can, the major changes I've seen have been
cyclical or, one might say, circular. Following the war in Vietnam and on into
the 70's with Watergate, journalists became much more skeptical and inquiring
than they had been. They began to go behind things more clearly, to challenge
political candidates, because they had been burned by too great a willingness to
acquiesce in the views of politicians. Unfortunately, that lesson didn't last
too long and by now journalism has lapsed too nearly back into acquiescence.

J.F.K. (and 'J.F.K.') and Vietnam



Q. There's been a lot of speculation over the last 25 years about what John
Kennedy would have done about Vietnam. In an ancillary way, this has come up
again because of the Oliver Stone movie. What's your view -- where was Kennedy
really going before 1963 and what sort of policy would he have followed in
Vietnam?
A. Well, in my book "J.F.K. and L.B.J.," I speculated on that -- and I think my
evidence has grown since then -- it's entirely possible that Kennedy, if he
wouldn't actually have withdrawn from Vietnam, would never have carried us as
far into it as President Johnson did. This is one of the very few things I agree
with Oliver Stone about in his new film.

I base that primarily on the rather subjective judgment that all Presidents feel
the need to prove themselves as tough guys. Kennedy had already done that, if
not at the Bay of Pigs, certainly in the Cuban missile crisis. And I think he
didn't feel that necessity anymore. President Johnson did when he took over. And
it's true, I think, that Kennedy had looked at that situation in Southeast Asia
and seen it as one that could lead us into great difficulties.

It's possible that he would have over the years eased us out. I hasten to add
that I do not think that that's established as fact.

The fact of which Oliver Stone makes a great deal -- that they were going to
withdraw 1,000 troops at the end of 1963 -- I don't think is tremendously
significant. I've always regarded that as being much more nearly a political
manifestation for 1964.

On Playing the Race Card



Q. Relations between the races: this is an abiding concern of yours. Where do we
stand today? Are we making progress or not?
A. I think the attitudes between the races, the fear and the animosity that
exist today, are greater than, let us say, at the time of the Brown case, the
famous school desegregation decision in 1954. Now that's a judgment that's very
difficult to make, and I'm sure if you were living in the worst parts of Alabama
or Mississippi at that time, you wouldn't agree.

The great triumph of the civil rights movement, in fact, is the progress in the
South. A great deal needed to be done. And, of course, that's why so much has
been done: segregation was obvious and it was state-supported; it could be
attacked in the courts; it was, and it was ended.

But even there, the attitudes have not necessarily been changed. And the
attitudes meanwhile in New York City and Boston and other places -- my own
feeling is that racial animosities and fears in New York City are far greater
than anything I ever knew growing up in the segregated South.

Where have we gone wrong? In the approach to legal segregation and
discrimination problems, we've done rather well. In the greater problem of
reconciling people and causing them to live peacefully together and to accord
respect to each other, we've not done so well.
Q. Why should George Bush who, after all, grew up in an environment where he met
a lot of right-thinking people about civil rights, have been willing to play the
Willie Horton card and in general move as he has?
A. I don't want to comment on what George Bush's motives may be; I don't know
him that well. But I would certainly say that he is impressed by the power of
the right wing within the Republican Party. And the right wing of the Republican
party is not the most advanced in liberal thinking on the race question.

I also think, and this is a guess, that he simply doesn't fully understand the
conditions that exist. After three -- or is it four? -- major civil rights laws
have been passed and a number of things have happened, a lot of Americans feel:
"Well, we've done all of that. The civil rights revolution is over. We were
confronted with a crisis; we solved it; and now here these people are -- they
want more." George Bush may be one of them. But I emphasize that that is a
supposition.
Q. You have been identified with a number of other issues that aren't what most
people would call light entertainment -- criminal justice, nuclear weapons, the
global environment, to name some. Does a columnist choose topics like that, or
do they choose him?
A. Some of these things come about circumstantially. I've written a great deal
since 1971 about criminal justice issues, primarily because of my almost
accidental involvement in the Attica prison revolt in 1971. I was called in
there as a sort of an observer to -- as I thought at least -- to observe
whatever agreement was being worked out and to give it some validity, to see to
it that the state would keep its part of the bargain. That wasn't the case at
all; those of us who went to Attica, we turned out to be the negotiators, which
is a rather odd role for journalists and one in which I was uncomfortable.

But that whole thing awakened my interest in criminal justice matters, and since
then I have devoted a great many of my columns and of my thought and concern to
those issues, which are really important to American life.

In the same way I almost never wrote anything about nuclear weapons which, of
course, were a major issue of the time, but it just wasn't something that
engaged me. And then the SALT II treaty failed in the late 70's, failed in the
Senate. And that struck me with such force -- that an arms limitation treaty
would fail -- that I began to get into that subject. And in the 80's, I suppose
I wrote about nuclear weapons and nuclear arms negotiations as much as any other
single issue. And I'm glad I did.

As far as environmental questions are concerned, it's almost the same way. Just
as the years passed, it began to be clear to me that these were issues of
enormous importance. Back in the 60's I used to write about clean water and
clean air because I was a fisherman and I was interested in those things, but I
wasn't thinking about it in any great cosmic, global sense, you know.

The Measure of Greatness



Q. You've had a close-up view of so many extraordinary people over the years. Do
you have any heroes out of all that?
A. I think it tends to work the other way. Which doesn't mean that I look at all
those people with contempt -- quite the opposite. But the journalist's
perspective makes you see the feet of clay and the warts, and that's a good
thing. I found them in many cases to be truly engaging human beings and
admirable persons but not really, in the long run, impeccable heroes, or even
just heroes without the "impeccable."

We should try to see people as clearly as we can. Then if a hero does come into
view, why, we can give him his due.
Q. Happy New Year, Tom.
A. Same to you. Bye.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Wicker at his farm in Vermont last week. (Paul O. Boisvert
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Tsongas Surges as Voters Focus on Economics

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 9


The New Hampshire Democratic primary enters its final week with all the
ingredients of a political cliffhanger: Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas is
pulling even with Gov. Bill Clinton in the public opinion polls and experts say
the race is still very much up for grabs.

Even a veteran of the New Hampshire primary wars like Joseph Grandmaison, a
former state Democratic chairman and a supporter of Mr. Clinton, confesses,
"I've had a terrible time figuring out the dynamics of this race."

One of the few certainties here: The voters of New Hampshire are acutely focused
on the economy and hungry for detailed plans and programs that are intended to
heal it. At one candidate forum after another, New Hampshire residents rose to
ask what candidates will do about home foreclosures, lost jobs, shaky health
care and competition from abroad.

The Challenge for Clinton

Political experts say this hunger for candidates with "comprehensive plans" and
the relentless emphasis on jobs has much to do with Mr. Clinton's success so
far, and is one reason Mr. Tsongas has emerged as the principal Clinton
alternative.

The latest Boston Globe and WBZ-TV poll suggests that Mr. Tsongas may be moving
into a virtual tie with Mr. Clinton, whose campaign has been buffeted for two
weeks by tabloid newspaper accusations of extramarital affairs and by questions
about his draft status during the Vietnam War.

The challenge for Mr. Clinton is how to force the spotlight back to his message
and away from the character questions that have dominated his news coverage in
recent weeks.

With a promise to restore the "forgotten middle class," Mr. Clinton advances
"strategies" for health care, education and economic development, sweetened with
promises of a tax cut for the middle class.

Mr. Tsongas, meanwhile, says he plans to stick to his stern appeal for an
economic program to rebuild the nation's manufacturing base. Styling himself as
a pro-business liberal, he parts with many in his party by rejecting a
middle-class tax cut as poor policy, and championing a cut in the tax on capital
gains, targeted to encourage long-term investment.

Tsongas Takes Off

Mr. Tsongas, considered the most improbable of long shots when he announced his
campaign a year ago, was happily, almost giddily, proclaiming that his campaign
had finally gained critical mass this weekend. "I lived without it for 10
months," he said in an interview, "So I know it when I see it."

The Boston Globe poll made public tonight showed Mr. Clinton at 26 percent, Mr.
Tsongas at 26 percent, Mr. Kerrey at 11 percent, Mr. Harkin at 7 percent and
former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California at 5 percent, with the proportion
of undecided voters growing to 18 percent. The poll, based on interviews
conducted Saturday and today, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4
percentage points and included interviews with 560 people considered likely to
vote in the Democratic primary.

The Los Angeles Times today published the results of its latest New Hampshire
poll, conducted Monday through Friday, showing Mr. Clinton with a slim lead,
within the margin of sampling error.

Many political professionals here say that much of the electorate is undecided
or only loosely committed to a candidate, and predict a roller coaster of a
final week, capped by a final, nationally televised debate on CNN Sunday night.

The Globe reported that the movement toward Mr. Tsongas was particularly strong
Saturday and suggested it was fed by doubts about Mr. Clinton's character after
reports last week that he had sought to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.
Mr. Clinton denied those reports, as he denied earlier accusations in the
tabloid Star that he had a 12-year affair.

The men long expected to be the principal beneficiaries if Mr. Clinton falters
-- Mr. Harkin and Mr. Kerrey -- are still trying to ignite their campaigns. Mr.
Harkin was, by necessity, in Iowa this weekend, where that state's caucuses will
officially begin the nominating season on Monday.

The self-declared "Real Democrat" in the race was on television here, however,
with a tough commercial blasting policies that force "American workers to
compete against slave labor."

Mr. Kerrey, meanwhile, continues to emphasize his plan for national health
insurance, but is sharpening his focus on the economy; television commercials
now present him as a proven job-creator as Governor of Nebraska and as an
entrepreneur. "I believe Americans understand we're in the economic fight of our
lives," he said on ABC's "This Week" with David Brinkley. "And we're ready to do
battle."

The draft issue has also highlighted, once again, Mr. Kerrey's record as a Medal
of Honor winner who lost part of his leg in Vietnam. The contrast was heightened
when his campaign this weekend brought in Max Cleland, former head of the
Veterans Administration and now Secretary of State for Georgia. Mr. Cleland lost
both legs and an arm in Vietnam, and when he and Mr. Kerrey embraced they
produced one of the most powerful visuals of the campaign.

Next Stop, the South

While this drama plays out, Democrats around the country are straining to read
the murky mind of New Hampshire. The Iowa caucuses on Monday have been treated
almost as an afterthought by the party and the various campaigns, which have
ceded the state to Mr. Harkin, the state's junior Senator. New Hampshire is the
big game, and the stakes are huge.

If Mr. Clinton wins on Feb. 18, then rolls into the primaries March 3 and 10 in
the friendly South, many Democrats believe that he will wrap up the nomination
fast. The concern among some in the party is that New Hampshire will produce a
false positive for Mr. Clinton, that his showing here is as much a reflection of
the weakness of the opposition as his own political strength.

Has he truly prevailed over the accusations of infidelity, or would he carry
that baggage into a fall campaign where the Republicans would know how to use
it? Mr. Clinton gained considerable support because many Democrats considered
him the strongest contender for the fall election; Mr. Kerrey's allies are now
trying to turn the "electability" argument against the Arkansas Governor.

Conversely, a victory here by Mr. Tsongas raises its own questions; when the
race moves South, the former Massachusetts Senator will not have the leisure of
ten months of painstaking, voter-by-voter campaigning that he had here in New
Hampshire, nor will he have the advantage of coming from a neighboring state.
Super Tuesday is a tarmac, satellite-dish and 30-second-commercial campaign that
demands money and media savvy -- not Mr. Tsongas's strong points so far.

These questions keep stirring the anxious talk in Washington and elsewhere in
the country about another candidate entering the race.

Mr. Tsongas, keenly aware that many in his party still cannot accept him as the
"Clinton alternative," says he will raise "the 50 percent courage gap" with any
late entering candidate: Where were they when Mr. Bush, whose approval rating is
now in the 40's, was close to 90 percent in the polls? Still, the buzz
continues, and the write-in effort mounted last week for Governor Mario M. Cuomo
(although not endorsed by the Governor) only feeds it.

Mr. Cuomo himself lurks on the border, quite literally. He will speak at Harvard
Wednesday night on the state of the economy, and will doubtless draw
considerable press attention and will doubtlesss protest that the press misreads
his intentions.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, written off as a long shot when
he entered the race a year ago, has used his just-the-facts-ma'am economic
campaign to become the most competitive Clinton alternative. Well-wishers
greeted him yesterday as he arrived for a town meeting in Nashua, N.H. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times); The only opportunity for Iowans to be heard above
the din of New Hampshire will be tonight, when approximately 2,166 precincts
will tally votes in the first electoral test of the 1992 campaign. Senator Tom
Harkin, clearly Iowa's favorite son, signed an autograph yesterday for Andy
Siegal in Ottumwa. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
More Than Just a Tale of the Sea

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 969 words



Outerbridge Reach
By Robert Stone
409 pages. Ticknor & Fields. $21.95.

"To the destructive element submit yourself," the character Stein advises Jim in
Joseph Conrad's "Lord Jim." And that is what Owen Browne does in Robert Stone's
powerfully Conradian new novel, "Outerbridge Reach."

Owen is a man adrift, a Vietnam veteran who, having graduated from Annapolis in
1968, had been one of "the last good children" of his time.  Now he works for a
yacht brokerage that is part of the financial empire of an entrepreneur named
Matthew Hylan. But though Owen makes a good living and lives comfortably on
Connecticut's Gold Coast with his wife, Anne, and their 15-year-old daughter,
Maggie, he feels beset by "old rages and regrets" and "in rebellion against
things."

So when sudden financial problems force Matthew Hylan to withdraw from a solo
round-the-world race, Owen volunteers to take his place.  Though Anne protests,
he is determined. As he tells her: "I think most of us spend our lives without
ever having to find out what we're made of. . . . The sea is the bottom line.
Out there you have the elementals. You have day and night. You have ocean and
the sky. Your boat and yourself.  It's a situation of ultimate self-reliance."

It's also a situation that makes the reader vaguely uneasy at the prospect of
plunging into so much prose alone at sea with Owen. But in his four previous
novels, "A Hall of Mirrors," "Dog Soldiers," "A Flag for Sunrise" and "Children
of Light," which have won him a wide audience and a considerable literary
reputation, Mr. Stone has never written more enthrallingly than he does in the
too brief chapters describing Owen in the race.

Eventually the destructive element gets the best of him. He loses interest in
the race, decides to falsify his positions to make himself look as if he is
winning and puts in at an uncharted island near the Antarctic Circle, where
hallucinatory visions draw him into a world of terror and beauty.  Ashore, he
finds an abandoned shack.  "He opened the door to see an empty window open to
the sea. Framed in it was the half-disk of the same setting sun that he was
certain he had watched on the horizon hours before.  It was impossible, he
thought, as though the sun hung out of time.  Browne grew frightened. He drew
his breath carefully."

Still, it is not Owen's harrowing struggle to maintain his sanity that absorbs
one most in "Outerbridge Reach." Early in the novel, as a counterweight to Owen,
we are introduced to Ron Strickland, a film maker who has made prize-winning
documentaries about the Vietnam War and New York lowlife. Ron has been hired by
Matthew Hylan's people to make a film about the sailing race. He clearly means
to expose Owen's heroic pretensions. He also intends to seduce Anne Browne.

Unlike Owen, Ron is a familiar character in Mr. Stone's work, an echo of
Rheinhardt in "The Hall of Mirrors" and John Converse in "Dog Soldiers." Ron is
a cynic and anti-ideologue, a man of the left who sees through everyone's
political motives, a hipster to Owen's square, an artist to his Babbitt, a Shem
the Penman to his Shaun the Postman. It is the implicit contest between Ron and
Owen that is the dramatic backbone of "Outerbridge Reach." Anne Browne is the
prize, though far from a passive one. As things turn out, she is as strong a
force in the novel as anyone.

Speaking personally, I prefer Owen to Ron, as interesting as the latter is, yet
I felt certain that I was going to be on the losing side and that Ron's values
were going to prevail. But it soon becomes apparent that where Mr. Stone stands
is not so obvious as it might at first seem. He is as fascinated by the old
heroic side of American life as he is by the countercultural reaction. In a
scene of striking irony, Owen tries to draw out the carpenter who is doing the
cabinet work on the boat he will be racing and finds him to be more quixotic in
his opposition to the Vietnam War than those who were for it and thought they
could win. When Owen accuses him of not understanding what went on in Vietnam,
the carpenter tears out the work he has done, refunds Owen's money and
disappears.

Though the true appeal of reading "Outerbridge Reach" lies in the texture of its
prose and the harsh realism of its characters, the outcome of the contest of
values will not be revealed here. Let it only be said that by deciding to fake
his race, Owen has moved into Ron's realm, and in trying to win Anne, Ron
invades Owen's.  How each will survive in the other's world remains to be seen.

As always in his fiction, Mr. Stone tells an intensely dramatic story yet counts
on the reader to be sensitive to his book's ineffable literary values.  Take the
title, for instance: "Outerbridge Reach." It sounds like an invocation of the
limits to which Owen aspires. Yet it also refers to a section of the Arthur
Kill, the channel that divides Staten Island from New Jersey.

Owen visits Outerbridge Reach one night early in the novel and thinks about it
as a dog barks in the dark nearby. "He remembered scraps of the place's history.
Thousands of immigrants had died there, in shanties, of cholera, in winter far
from home. It had been a place of loneliness, violence and terrible labor. It
seemed to Browne that there was something about the channel he recognized but
could not call to mind. On the dark shore, the junkyard hound kept barking as
though it would go on forever."

This passage is strong enough in the context of the book's dramatic development.
But it is also faintly obscure and precious. It has an almost academic quality
about it. One can imagine that someday soon students will be writing term papers
about the book in a course on sea literature. If this is a slight put-down of
"Outerbridge Reach," it is also high praise.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Stone (Michael A. Smith/Ticknor & Fields)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPUS LIFE: Syracuse;
Language Project Joins Veterans With Students

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 41; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: SYRACUSE


A Citizen Solider Project has led Syracuse University students to help Vietnam
War veterans talk about their wartime experiences, to teach honors classes and
to write a nationally prominent paper.

Prof. Peter Goldman started the project after reading a United States Government
text that called on Central American nationals to engage in terrorism against
their governments.

Professor Goldman, who teaches Spanish and liberal arts courses for the
university honors program, was surprised to find at least a third of the text
was devoted to the use of language in wartime.

"The Government was adopting the position, 'You can kill with words. Words are
weapons,' " he said.

The document explained how to use gestures, slogans and buzzwords to sway
opinions, Professor Goldman said. "For example, using the phrase 'Christian
crusade' as opposed to 'territorial war' was mentioned," he said. "It makes a
difference in people's minds."

With his interest piqued, the professor enlisted students in the honors program
to help analyze wartime use of language. The project was enlarged to encompass
not only conflicts in Central America but also World War II and the Vietnam War.

To supplement research books, Professor Goldman and the students began meeting
with Vietnam veterans at the federally run Veterans Center in Syracuse. The
veterans disussed their opinions on wartime use of language.

One example was the phrase "collateral damage," used to refer to civilian deaths
or damage to nonmilitary structures, Professor Goldman said.

"We decided merchandise is damaged, not an old woman killed in an artillery
barrage," he said. "Flowers get damaged, people don't."

Students say the meetings with the veterans changed their outlooks on war. "My
dad was a Korea vet, and the military had been a very positive experience for
him," said Mary Mooney, a junior from Yonkers majoring in journalism and
Spanish. "Because of that, I didn't think I could relate to these vets at all."

But the openness of the veterans surprised her. "The vets made war seem real,"
she said. "They're great guys, and they took us into their confidence and their
hearts."

Jeremy Ehrenreich, a journalism major from Albany, said: "Interacting on a
personal level with the vets, seeing history firsthand and hearing about war
from those who lived it has definitely changed my outlook. I've gotten so much
knowledge out of it, but it's more than just words."

As the experience has changed the students, it has also changed the veterans.
"They opened up to the students," said Mary Fear, a team leader at the center.
"It's very refreshing to see the veterans share themselves and their
experiences."

Ms. Fear said the students' ages provided a "healing component" to counseling
the veterans. "These people are the age the veterans were when they went to war,
and the students are willing to listen to them," she said. "I think that is very
important."

Although Ms. Fear and Professor Goldman are pleased with the unexpected benefits
for the veterans, the project remains centered on the students. Three students
are teaching an honors program course in public affairs based on their
experience with the project.

Mr. Ehrenreich and Kirsten Weidemier, a senior voice-performance major from
Wethersfield, Conn., presented a paper on the project at the national meeting of
the Modern Language Association last December.

Only 4 papers were selected out of about 40 submissions ro be presented,
Professor Goldman said, and the other three were prepared by professionals, not
students.

"We're getting an incredible education," the professor said. "I can only call it
magic."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Stance Says a Lot About Candidates;
Clinton's Principle

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


To the Editor:

Gov. Bill Clinton's anguished letter to his Reserve Officer Training Corps
director, written 22 years ago (news article, Feb. 13), reminds us of a time of
pain and torment for thousands of young Americans. Even those who lived through
those years subject to the same pressures as young Bill Clinton may prefer not
to remember the terrible moral and practical choices his generation faced.

Many have forgotten -- or never knew -- that the system of "draft deferments"
was consciously designed to encourage young men into careers and occupational
tracks, and not coincidentally to defuse antimilitary sentiment by making the
articulate middle class safe from the draft. The publication in 1967 of the
famous "Channeling" memo by Gen. Lew Hershey, the Selective Service director,
made college students aware of their intimate involvement in the prosecution of
the war through complicity in the draft deferment system.

The "easy" way -- chosen by many who had the advantage of money -- was to enroll
in graduate school, enter divinity school or medical school, seek a rare
occupational deferment or obtain a psychiatric or medical exemption. Others
could enlist in "safe" programs such as R.O.T.C. or the National Guard, in
noncombat services or in military training programs with low Vietnam
probabilities. One sad consequence of the draft was a generation's sense of
guilt for pursuing normal career paths.

There were other, more tragic consequences of the war. The names of more than
50,000 of these tragedies are written on the Vietnam Memorial; four are on a
plaque at Kent State University. Hundreds of thousands suffer physical and
mental wounds from which they will never recover.

Many, like Bill Clinton, who took a principled position against the war, were
faced by implicitly condoning a war they opposed by passively participating in
the Selective Service system that supported it. His letter shows a young man
struggling -- imperfectly, sleeplessly -- and earnestly trying to explain his
deepest feelings, and those of his generation, to his R.O.T.C. commander!

If Bill Clinton had been born 25 years earlier, he would have volunteered, like
most of his generation, to serve in World War II. That was the right thing to do
in 1944.

Bill Clinton did the right thing in 1969 -- his values and judgments were
basically correct. No one affected by the draft had a perfect response. That Mr.
Clinton's understanding of the relationship of the draft system to the war
emerged from legal studies, that his interest in R.O.T.C. was influenced by a
long-term desire to effect social progress through the political system and that
he considered giving up his draft deferment and offering himself for immediate
induction show the re-evaluation of accepted views of many of his thoughtful
contemporaries.

That he confronted -- did not ignore, repress or avoid -- the major moral issue
of his time, that he worked to fashion a principled position consistent with his
beliefs and acted upon it (at some risk to himself) is something to admire.
These are qualities we need in our political leaders.

PHILLIP SINGERMAN
Narberth, Pa., Feb. 14, 1992

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Shaken Town Wonders What Led to 4 Killings

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 995 words

DATELINE: CALIFORNIA, Mo.


Until the grisly events that terrorized this little town two weeks before
Christmas, James R. Johnson was "an ordinary man living an ordinary life in an
ordinary town," as his lawyer put it -- a man who liked tinkering with cars and
was friendly and helpful to his neighbors.

Now he is in a ward for the criminally insane at a state mental hospital,
awaiting trial in the fatal shootings of three law-enforcement officers and the
wife of the sheriff. The prosecution is seeking the death penalty.

It was the fourth in a widely publicized succession of mass killings in the
space of two months: four people shot to death in Ridgewood, N.J., on Oct. 10;
23 in Killeen, Tex. on Oct. 16; five in Birmingham, Mich., on Nov. 14, and the
four here on Dec. 9 and 10. The gunmen in Texas and Michigan took their own
lives; the suspect in New Jersey awaits trial.

National Guard Mechanic

As Mr. Johnson, a 42-year-old helicopter mechanic for the Missouri National
Guard, awaits his own trial -- the date has not been set -- his lawyers and
others involved in the case are providing hints of what might have led to the
killings here: disorientation and rage rooted in his Vietnam experiences two
decades ago and brought to the surface by stress in his current life.

The killings here began hours after a memorial plaque was hung at Mr. Johnson's
workplace in honor of his close friend and co-worker, Dallas Cooper, who along
with two other members of the National Guard was killed in a helicopter crash in
Texas while shipping out for the Persian Gulf in December 1990. The day before
the shooting spree had been the first anniversary of Mr. Johnson's third
marriage, which apparently was going sour.

"He experienced some disruption in sleep patterns and was having thoughts about
his Vietnam experiences," said Daniel Gralike, a lawyer in the Office of State
Public Defender, which is representing Mr. Johnson. "There is reason to believe
that his capacity to deliberate may have been absent at the time."

'Psychological Aftershock'

Post-traumatic stress disorder, the syndrome characterized by disorientation and
violence that can strike a person years after the trauma that is its source, has
been used successfully by defense lawyers in winning new trials, lighter
sentences and even acquittals for war veterans charged with violent crimes.

Dr. Donald Dossey, founder of the Stress Management Centers of Southern
California and a frequent expert witness on post-traumatic stress disorder, said
it was common for individuals to suffer severe effects of trauma long after the
fact. "If a person becomes excessively stressed for any reason, that can trigger
what I call psychological aftershock," said Dr. Dossey, who is not involved in
this case. "It's like the aftershock of an earthquake -- it can happen 20
minutes after the original trauma, 20 hours later, even 20 years later."

Mr. Johnson never talked about his time in Vietnam, acquaintances said, and his
lawyers would not say what trauma he might have suffered there. His Army record
shows that he was never wounded. After his discharge in January 1971, he
received an Army Commendation Medal for meritorious service. Mr. Johnson joined
the Missouri National Guard in 1977 and within five years was working full time
as a helicopter mechanic.

When war broke out in the Persian Gulf, Mr. Johnson was worried about being sent
there, co-workers said. Pat Sherwood, a fellow National Guard mechanic, said a
co-worker called Mr. Johnson as a prank and told him he was being called up.
"Jimmy was extremely upset there for a little bit, but when he found out it was
a joke he just laughed it off," Mr. Sherwood said. "Everybody around here
thought it was really funny."

Mr. Johnson was married for the third time in December 1990, and he and his
wife, Jerri, lived with her 17-year-old daughter in a small gray house several
miles north of here. People who knew him said he was friendly and helpful. "I
couldn't say one bad thing about him," said a neighbor, Lloyd Grotjan.

But the couple was having problems with Mrs. Johnson's daughter, Mr.  Gralike
said.

Mrs. Johnson has filed for divorce. In the petition, she says her husband
assaulted her on Dec. 9, the day the killings began, breaking her wrist and
holding a loaded shotgun to her head as he repeatedly threatened to kill her.
Neither she nor her daughter would speak to a reporter seeking comment.

The first victim on Dec. 9 was a reserve deputy who was fatally shot at the
Johnson home while responding to a report of a domestic disturbance.  Shortly
after being called to the Johnson home after the deputy was killed, Sheriff
Kenneth Jones was told that his wife had been gunned down in their country home
four miles west of town. Sheriff Jones's wife, Pam, 38, was reading to about a
dozen women at a pre-Christmas gathering when she was shot several times in the
head. The shots were fired through a window.

One of the couple's four children, 9-year-old Lacey, was sitting at Mrs. Jones's
side when she was shot. She died within a few hours.

From there, the prosecution says, Mr. Johnson stalked and ambushed his other
victims -- "lying in wait," in the words of Prosecutor John T. Kay, "shooting
people when they were unaware they were even being shot at." After a daylong
manhunt he was found hiding and was persuaded to surrender.

Mr. Cooper's widow, Diana, said Mr. Johnson was like a brother to her husband.
"After Dallas was killed, Jimmy was the shoulder I needed," she said, adding
that he had seemed "very high-strung and upset" following her husband's
accident.

Those who know Mr. Johnson say they cannot believe what happened. "This was not
the Jimmy we know," Mrs. Cooper said. "I'd say something drastic had to happen
to put this man over the edge, this man who'd give you the shirt off his back
and not ask for anything in return.

"Everybody's got a breaking point, and I guess he reached his."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Missouri showing location of town of California.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


To the Editor:

In "What We Do for Our Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17), Walter McDougall, despite a
backward glance at civil disobedience, seems to conclude: My country, right or
wrong, is the highest patriotism. I would suggest a re-reading of the
Declaration of Independence, the Nuremberg trials and the Vietnam War itself.

Lyndon B. Johnson was elected President in 1968 on his promise to end the war.
He betrayed that promise. Without the efforts of the thinking people of the
1960's, who did not all find it necessary to risk prison, we might still be
grubbing for that light at the end of the tunnel, as without the similar actions
of the people of the 1760's, we might still be saluting the Union Jack.

Gov. Bill Clinton might do better for his Presidential chances, as well as for
his country, by defending his original position. By refusing to follow his
Government blindly, he contributed to the most significant message the American
people ever sent to Washington: Vietnam is wrong. Get out.

HAROLD FOWLER
Mercer Island, Wash., Feb. 19, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Nixon's Vietnam Vow

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 100 words


To the Editor:

In "Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit" (letter, March 4), Harold Fowler
writes that "Lyndon B. Johnson was elected President in 1968 on his promise to
end the war."

It was Richard M. Nixon, not Johnson, who was elected on that promise in 1968.
Johnson got beat in the New Hampshire primary, panicked and dropped out of the
race. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, despite being tied to Johnson's Vietnam
policies, came up with a late surge, and many said that if the campaign had
lasted two more weeks, Humphrey would have won.

CARL FAITH
Princeton, N.J., March 4, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

An Eye for Danger

BYLINE: By Bruce Weber;  Bruce Weber, a former articles editor of this magazine,
is a reporter for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5184 words


Long Island Sound is glassy this morning, the breeze a steady whisper, and Bruce
Kirby's two-masted, 26-foot coastal cruiser is cutting the waters just off
Rowayton, Conn. Kirby, who helped design Canadian challengers for the America's
Cup, is out on the Sound for no other reason than simple pleasure on a pretty
fall day. On board with him is the novelist Robert Stone.

Stone, who lives in nearby Westport, has just completed a new book, "Outerbridge
Reach," which takes as its central plot a solo sailor's attempt to
circumnavigate the globe, and Kirby was an early reader of the manuscript, an
adviser on technical matters. Fittingly then, the two men are trading sea
stories.

Kirby is something of a gentleman salt, and his stories today are funny, a
little scandalous -- tales of rogue sailors and captains taking outrageous
chances to win races. Stone, on the other hand, even on this sparkling morning
in a safe harbor, is drawn to more ominous matters. Big-shouldered, bearded,
red-faced, with an aspect of the weather-beaten about him, the 54-year-old
Stone, an ex-Navy man, cuts a fine captain's figure. It's only his small hands,
pudgy and soft, that give him away as a more cerebral sort -- the hands and the
stories he tells, which are frightful, resonant tragedies.

First he recounts a horrible event of a few years back in the waters nearby: a
man out with his family for an evening sail ill-advisedly crossed between a
tugboat and a barge, and caught his keel on the tug's towline. Lifted out of the
water, the sailboat slid back along the towline; when it crashed into the barge,
reducing it to splinters, everyone on board but the captain was killed.

Out loud, Stone mulls over the plight of the man whose mistake cost the lives of
those he loved, and what might possibly redeem his life after that. Then he
reminds Kirby of a story Kirby told him years ago, one that has haunted him
since then, he says. Kirby remembers it: four people on an unanchored sailboat
in the Mediterranean Sea on a placid day like this one. A swim seemed
reasonable. But all four leaped from the deck at the same time, and the boat was
riding too high in the water for any of them to get back on. They all drowned.

"The ultimate 'oops,' " Stone says.

Both stories echo with the kinds of philosophical concerns -- the porous
divisions between life and death, good and evil, God and godlessness -- that
Stone's new book finds in the sea and that his other work has found elsewhere.
You can't help recognizing that all of Stone's novels have characters like
these, men and women who are fatefully, unluckily, inexorably drawn to
threatening circumstances and who confront, both physically and spiritually,
only the dimmest prospect of salvation.

Indeed, the way he tells these stories, with a there-but-for-the-grace-of-God
implication, it's clear that, for Stone, these are issues not simply of
literature but of life. There is no lengthy conversation with Stone that doesn't
leave one with the sense of a man who has stopped to get his bearings in the
midst of a long and perilous journey, and it often sounds as though he's
resigned to facing his own horrible moment of truth one of these days.

"I see this enormous empty space from which God has absented himself," Stone
says later, safely back on shore. "I see this enormous mystery that I can't
penetrate, a mystery before which I'm silent and uncomprehending. This, in any
case, is where I find myself in my sixth decade."

Both by literary ambition and literary reputation, Stone is a big novelist, the
kind of writer that other novelists admire, that serious critics take seriously,
whose books win prizes and comparisons to the classics. "There has always been a
strain of American fiction that seems to grow directly from Melville and
Conrad," the novelist Mona Simpson wrote in The New York Times Book Review last
February. "The foremost voice of this sensibility in our time is Robert Stone."

A habitual traveler since dropping out of high school and joining the Navy,
Stone has followed a demanding and idiosyncratic path -- from the military to
Perry Lane, in Palo Alto, Calif., that landmark of psychedelia, center of
operations for Ken Kesey and the Merry Pranksters; to Southeast Asia, Central
America, the halls of academia and Hollywood -- often going where danger is,
sometimes treading the precarious line between living hard and self-immolating.
His four previous novels -- "A Hall of Mirrors," a jambalaya of love, sex,
booze, violence, racial politics and evangelism on skid-row New Orleans, which
received the Faulkner Award for the best first novel of 1967; "Dog Soldiers"
(1974), a harrowing tale of a naive and feckless journalist mixed up in a
heroin-smuggling operation between Vietnam and California that won a National
Book Award; "A Flag for Sunrise" (1981), about Americans wandering in a Central
American nation very much like Nicaragua on the eve of the Sandinista
revolution, and "Children of Light" (1986), a depiction of fear and loathing in
Hollywood -- have mapped an itinerary of the American cultural and political
bonfires of the last quarter-century.

Indeed, literary critics have long cited Stone's work as antithetical to the
narrow, self-involved, "minimalist" fiction in vogue through the 1980's.
Populous, intricately plotted, rich in both high-minded and vernacular dialogue,
written largely in what Stone likes to call "the realistic mode" and yet with
climactic moments of hallucinatory or surreal drama, the books are,
collectively, the work of a lifelong eclectic, a restless autodidact with a
capacious mind.

Stone is habitually described by those who know him as dark -- "very dark, very
black," says Jane Burton, a friend from the 1960's, now a lawyer in San Jose --
but always in the sense of serious, not grim; yearning, not desolate, a man as
much at the mercy as in command of a large intelligence.

"Great company and one of the smartest people on the planet," says the writer
Michael Herr, who met Stone in the mid-1970's. "He's got this fabulous,
bent-headed way of looking at the world. He's like this huge, walking, talking
moral barometer."

"Bob and I recently talked about the difference between depression and despair,"
Ken Kesey says. "Bob despairs, and there's something noble about the way he does
it. Bob used to get high, stand naked in broken glass and stare at the sky and
shout. Someone who does that has to be on the job or they'd strike him down.
He's a warrior, and not just as a writer. With his whole life he's battling
Moloch."

Not surprisingly, perhaps, Stone admits to bouts of depression during which he
can't work: "I suffer. Usually it passes." He is nonetheless generally amiable,
an inventive talker. His work is not without its verbal wit and situational
comedy, and if he sees the world with an ultimate bleakness, it's fitting that
he reveres Samuel Beckett above all other writers. "For his humor," Stone says,
"in the primal situation in which we all find ourselves."

This "primal situation" -- the sense that there's a shared human experience that
is meaningful but cruel -- is clearly Stone's own subject. It's best set out,
perhaps, in "A Flag for Sunrise," a dense, detailed, hardly Beckett-like book
that is nonetheless infused with the buzz of sinister fate. The novel, which
grew out of a spontaneous detour Stone made to Central America after giving a
reading at the University of Alabama in 1974, is set largely in the fictional
nation of Tecan, a banana republic beneath whose restrictive dictatorship is a
festering revolutionary movement that is being monitored by American
intelligence. Early in the book, Frank Holliwell, an anthropologist with ties to
the United States Government dating to Vietnam, is tapped by one of his former
intelligence colleagues to take advantage of a lecture he's scheduled to give in
Central America and make a fact-finding side trip to Tecan. Holliwell declines,
but in the serendipitously fateful way of many of Stone's characters, he ends up
in Tecan anyway, at the mercy of the reigning malevolence there.

In one passage that critics have cited as a kind of metaphorical centerpiece for
all of Stone's work, Holliwell goes scuba diving hoping to relax, only to come
across an unnamed, unnameable threat:

"Some 50 feet away, he caught clear sight of a school of bonito racing toward
the shallows over the reef. Wherever he looked, he saw what appeared to be a
shower of blue-gray arrows. And then it was as if the ocean itself had begun to
tremble. The angels and wrasse, the parrots and tangs which had been passing
lazily around him suddenly hung in place, without forward motion, quivering like
mobile sculpture. Turning full circle, he saw the same shudder pass over all the
living things around him -- a terror had struck the sea, an invisible shadow, a
silence within a silence. . . .

"Then Holliwell thought: It's out there. Fear overcame him; a chemical taste, a
cold stone on the heart."

OUTERBRIDGE REACH," for which the publisher Ticknor & Fields paid Stone
$600,000, will have an initial printing of 75,000, the largest of Stone's
career. It is something of a pivotal book for Stone, following, as it does,
"Children of Light," which is generally conceded to be his least successful
work.

The new novel, like all of Stone's books, is a construct of intersecting
narrative lines. There are three central characters, whose stories begin at a
moment when their lives, unbeknownst to them, are headed toward entanglement.
The effect is of several separate beginnings, several separate books that
eventually become one. "The sense you want to bring is that these lives are in
progress," Stone says. "It's the metaphysical view, the God's-eye view that you
see these people about to collide."

The triangular focus is on Owen Browne, an ex-Navy officer who has made a career
working as a publicity man for a manufacturer of racing boats and yachts; his
wife, Anne, a magazine writer, and a cynical, hedonistic documentary film maker
named Ron Strickland. Strickland has been hired by Matty Altan, a
playboy-entrepreneur of the Donald Trump-Ted Turner variety, to make a film
about a solo sailing race around the globe in which he is to be a contestant.
Shortly before the race, however, Altan disappears under mysterious
circumstances, and Owen Browne, whose company is owned by Altan, volunteers to
take his place.

Browne, who, as the book opens is in the midst of what might commonly be called
a midlife crisis, is an invention -- "I don't do life portraits, though I'll
equip my people with characteristics of somebody I've known," Stone says -- but
it is also true that the author is locatable in the book. The Brownes live in a
place that seems a lot like Westport, for instance, and Strickland is given a
slight stammer, something that occasionally shows up in Stone's speech as well.

More important, Owen Browne, an Annapolis cadet during the turbulence of the
1960's and a Vietnam veteran, seems haunted by the values he has taken on as a
postwar American. The source of his discomfort has much to do with what Stone
sees as a national malaise that dates from the war, the sense that for
Americans, the idea of America is no longer consistent with virtue. And though
this notion is not new in Stone's work, this is his first effort to explore it
from the point of view of a man who is more sad than cynical about his
disillusionment.

Also for the first time, in "Outerbridge Reach," Stone has borrowed a
predicament from history. Browne's plight is taken from the actual case of a
British sailor named Donald Crowhurst, who entered a solo circumnavigation
competition in 1969. Stone has borrowed the physical and emotional stress of
solitude in the remote ocean evident from the logs of Crowhurst's journey and
foisted them upon Browne, who eventually suffers from hallucinations and
delusions. And a journey that began, for Browne, as an attempt to validate his
life serves to do the opposite. Meanwhile, back on the shores of Connecticut,
the bond, initially irritating but ultimately passionate, between Strickland and
Anne Browne transforms their lives as well. The novel manages to communicate a
strange spiritual link among the three, as if their need for self-examination
were an illness, infectious and cruel.

"The Crowhurst story really grabbed me," Stone says. "I've been telling people
about it for 20 years. Having had a real event to build on, I then went back to
my usual mode, which is to imagine the characters and set them in motion. I
believe that in fiction, character is literally fate. But when I began to think
about the sailor and his wife, there wasn't enough there."

In terms of structure, the self-involved, shrewdly observant, libidinous and
profligate Strickland was the key, not only because he represented familiar
territory for Stone -- "Strickland was easy," he says -- but also because he
offered a perspective on the story that Stone had previously been unable to
imagine. It was on a research trip, crewing on a sailboat in the Virgin Islands,
that the idea of a documentary film maker came to him. "I knew at once he had to
be there. The examining sensibility outside the story, who could view the story
with absolutely merciless scrutiny, who could be wryly, diabolically
undermining."

Still, the agony of writing this book had to do with character, particularly
that of Browne, who Stone says was the most difficult creation of his career.
"He's a householder, a solid citizen, the kind of person I don't write about
much," Stone says. "My people have been spoiled intellectuals, down-and-outers,
druggies. You really have to invent a kind of music for a character. You've got
to get the sound of their cerebration. The writing should take on a sense of
personage. And I could not get the sound of Browne.

"I've never sailed alone," he continues, "but it wasn't that. It was getting
into his head, understanding his predicament the way it looked to him, dividing
it from the way it would look to Anne and the way it would look to Strickland.
If you really imagine your way into a character, you find yourself in your
dreams being that character, literally in your characters' circumstances, and I
really identified, in the case of Browne, with trying to pull off more than he
could chew. The experience was very deep, and heavy, and, for lack of a better
word, profound. I often thought of Ferlinghetti's poem about the artist
'constantly risking absurdity and death.' Writing 'Outerbridge Reach,' I felt I
was constantly risking absurdity and death."

UNTIL "OUTERBRIDGE Reach," in which New York City appears as a setting
periodically, Stone had never written at length about his hometown. He was born
in Brooklyn in 1937 and raised, under somewhat colorful circumstances, in
Manhattan. His parents were separated when Stone was still an infant, and his
father, who worked for the New Haven Railroad, was, Stone says, "out of the
picture" after that. His mother, a schoolteacher, was schizophrenic and in and
out of hospitals. He lived at a Catholic boarding school until he was 9. For the
next eight years he lived with his mother in rooming houses and S.R.O. hotels,
mostly on the Upper West Side.

"It was odd, but I didn't experience it as unpleasant, particularly," Stone says
of his early life. "My mother was a little strange. She said inappropriate
things. She engaged, but on kind of a wacky level. I used to tell my friends she
was deaf. But I was not really unhappy, and did not experience any kind of
privation." Indeed, encouraged by his mother, he became a reader as a child and
a writer of childish tales.

He attended a high school run by the Marist Brothers, where he learned Latin
well enough "to have a literary experience in the language." But he was at odds
with the brothers. "I didn't like them, they didn't like me. Whether they threw
me out or whether I quit, I stopped showing up, and as soon as I could get in, I
joined the Navy."

In retrospect, Stone says he was reacting against the school's dogmatic approach
to religion. "It was a kind of backward, primitive Catholicism that the Marist
Brothers literally beat into me. It was the blind-obedience belief, the Roman
Catholic Church as the world's only thoroughgoing moral reference point. I left
religion with a great deal of enthusiasm at the age of 15 or 16, felt completely
liberated and glad to be out from under it, but of course I was to learn that I
wasn't out from under it at all. It's not something you get out from under."

In the Navy, Stone got his high school equivalency diploma. And of course there
was the education of travel. His most notable journey was to Antarctica in 1958,
the memories of which served him in writing the remotest south-sea scenes in
"Outerbridge Reach."

As a sailor, Stone read, haphazardly but seriously and voluminously -- he
remembers plowing through "Ulysses" on the Antarctica trip -- and he also
submitted his first story to Esquire, which rejected it. Without telling him,
his mother had sent another story to The New Yorker, also rejected. When he left
the Navy in the summer of 1958, he returned to New York and went to work nights
as a copy boy at The Daily News. During the day he attended N.Y.U. There, in a
writing class, he met Janice Burr, to whom he has been married now for 32 years.

"She was a guidette at the RCA building," Stone recalls. "She'd take off her
uniform and go to this espresso bar where she waited tables. So she'd get out of
her straight job, and I'd get out of my straight job at The News, and we'd go be
beatniks together. She wore black. She wore Egyptian eye makeup. We hung out for
a while. And then we decided we'd quit our jobs and have an adventure. So we
went to New Orleans. Why New Orleans? I don't know."

Thus the 60's began for Robert Stone -- with a new wife, little money and a job
as a census taker in "what has got to be one of the weird est cities on God's
earth." That set of circumstances would become both the spur and the setting for
his first book.

A HALL OF MIRRORS," youthful in its earnest sprawl yet hugely accomplished in
its management of a large cast of characters, sophisticated dialogue and
ambitious themes, bears many of the qualities that have become Stone signatures.
For one thing, its evocation of New Orleans as a seething, cacophonous place
where evildoing breeds naturally and stealthily, prefigures the Vietnam, the
Central America, even the Hollywood of his later books. Its climactic scene is
an almost mythic conflagration during a stadium rally sponsored by a right-wing
radio station, an event that mingles politics, religion and images of hell.

It took Stone five years to write the book, which he says contained the sum
total of "everything I had experienced, felt or suspected." He wrote it mostly
at Stanford University, where he applied at the suggestion of M. L. Rosenthal,
his writing teacher at N.Y.U., and where, on the basis of the opening chapters,
he'd been granted a Wallace Stegner fellowship. "What was waiting for Janice and
me when we got to California, which we little suspected," Stone says, "was 'The
Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test.' "

The reference, of course, is to Tom Wolfe's famous new-journalism foray into the
world of the novelist and social renegade Ken Kesey, whose collection of
cohorts, hippie precursors, became known as the Merry Pranksters and were the
noisiest, if not the first, advocates of LSD and other mind-expanding drugs.

"We were there on Perry Lane, and Bob Stone came in with a face lit with whiskey
and anarchism," Kesey recalls. "And he said, 'I hear you're the bull goose
looney writer in this neck of the woods.' I took it as a challenge. What
impressed me about Bob was his ability to riff. This is what made him a
Prankster."

Stone remembers that period with fondness for his friends and their collective
friskiness, and with a nostalgia for the times. "We were the most dangerous
thing around," he says, laughing. Today he regrets that the persistent partying,
the drinking and drug taking, stole from him a lot of work time -- "Time is
really the only commodity a novelist has," he says. But the hallucinatory way of
looking at the world that he experienced frequently in those years -- he tells
one story about watching a performance by the late saxophonist John Coltrane and
"being able to see the music" -- has found its way into all his books, beginning
with "A Hall of Mirrors."

"I had started out to write this more or less traditionally realistic novel," he
says, "but weekend after weekend, glomming acid and staggering through the
redwoods began to change the fix I had on reality. My realism underwent a
certain transformation."

Stone stopped taking drugs in the early 70's. "Everyone comes to the point where
you have a bad trip and you stop doing it," he says. He rarely drinks hard
liquor anymore; his drinking, he says, was far more threatening to his health.
And seven years ago, he gave up his three-pack-a-day smoking habit. According to
acquaintances, he was at one time rather withered by his own dissoluteness, but
he appears robust today. It's presumptuous, perhaps, to suggest that such a
cycle -- from near self-destruction to revival -- has played a role in Stone's
spiritual evolution, but he himself offers the following:

"While rationality is my main means of coping with the world, there was a
tremendous religious sensibility that I had, which I think came naturally to me.
I was born with it, and in my hassles with Catholicism I kind of suppressed it.
I think the drugs reminded me that even though I required reason and the
rational, I also had to have elements in my life that went beyond reason and the
rational. This hallucinatory reality that I get into, however much its form may
be conditioned by the drugs, it comes out of the part of me that's religious."

It's also worth mentioning one other event in Stone's life during the 60's, a
startling occurrence that he doesn't volunteer. Asked what he remembered about
Stone from that time, Vic Lovell, now a psychotherapist in Palo Alto, Calif.,
mentions that in 1963, Stone was diagnosed as having a brain tumor. "Here was a
man who was facing what might be his last days on earth," Lovell says. "I could
not believe his courage. Of all the people I've seen face death -- and he was a
young man at the time -- I was very impressed by his strength. It touches me to
remember it even now."

"Vic was one of the very few people I told," Stone says, confronted by the
story. What happened, he says, was this: Having developed a line across his
vision and thinking there was an eyelash stubbornly lodged in his eye, he went
to the doctor, only to be kept in the hospital for a battery of tests.
Eventually, Stone actually had exploratory surgery, which found not a tumor,
merely a condition that Stone identifies as "benign intercranial hypertension,"
a minor neurological disorder that still occasionally affects his vision and
that he believes stems from a case of scarlet fever he had as a child.

"For a couple of months, I really thought I was going to die," Stone says. "It
got me in kind of an elegiac mood. It may be I was too young to realize there
was such a thing as death. I realize it now."

IN THE LATE 1960'S, STONE moved to London, where, by his account, he was mostly
wasting time, commuting between there and Los Angeles to work on the screenplay
for "A Hall of Mirrors." The movie, titled "WUSA," starred Paul Newman, who is
still a friend and a fellow Westport denizen. "It is, alas, no one's idea of a
good movie," Stone says, "certainly not mine, and I don't think even Paul's."

His trip to Vietnam in 1971, as a correspondent for a fledgling and short-lived
weekly newspaper in London called Ink, was spurred by his own restlessness, a
feeling, he says, that "I had lost my way. I was in need of an experience."

Stone's six-week sojourn in Southeast Asia, which served to skewer many of his
ideals as an American, imprinted itself on his work in much the same way that
the war made its mark on the nation. Stone saw little fighting; he spent most of
his time in Saigon, "with the fringies of the press corps, and presently I knew
much more than I wanted to about the dope scene over there." It was a knowledge
that he put to use in the novel "Dog Soldiers," which is about an
intercontinental drug deal that goes nightmarishly haywire.

"Saigon -- it was Babylon. I was seeing incredible things," Stone says. "I
remember there was a guy, he lived with a bunch of these Australians and their
Vietnamese girlfriends in an apartment with an enormous balcony on Tu Do Street.
This guy took me around to these incredible joints, like existentialist caves,
full of Vietnamese students, scenes of draft dodgers, cowboys, rooms beyond
rooms, wheels within wheels. And everybody was stoned morning, noon and night.
It was extraordinary. Stories of the most unimaginably baroque nature came out
of the war, and my feeling is you can't discount any of them."

"Dog Soldiers" is an ugly and uncompromising book, whose main characters are
swept into a maelstrom of crazed brutality, and their plight becomes something
of a metaphor for the ways that America became both wager and victim of the war.
"You just had to stand in the middle of Constitution Square in Saigon and look
around and you could see how wrong, wrong, wrong this was," Stone says. "It was
this enormous, endless, boundless, topless, bottomless mistake, something I was
not used to seeing the United States do. It gave everybody a sense of vertigo,
right down to the lowliest grunt, the lowliest clerk in the barracks far out of
the sound of shot and shell. I discharged a lot of negative energy, as they used
to say, into that book. All that sort of dissipation of the high hopes of the
60's. I put the bad spirits of the times into the book."

STONE WROTE MUCH OF "Dog Soldiers" at Princeton, the first of several
writer-in-residence sinecures that provide the reward of stability for many
writers who have earned a success through early wandering and struggle.
"Princeton was a kind of dropout's revenge for me," he says.

Over the next decade, he taught at the University of Hawaii, the University of
California at Irvine and Amherst College, where he and Janice settled with their
family, two children who were by then teen-agers. And "A Flag for Sunrise"
reflects, in some respects, that academic quietude. Not only is Frank Holliwell,
the novel's main protagonist, a college professor, but the novel itself is
Stone's most complex and carefully constructed, his most allusive and most
suggestive of the large-scale 19th-century novels he most wishes to emulate.

Stone followed "A Flag for Sunrise" with "Children of Light," his Hollywood
book, about a doomed love affair between a dissolute screenwriter-actor and a
beautiful actress who suffers from delusions and hallucinations. A part-comic,
part-tragic and occasionally vicious sendup of the movie world and its
self-destructive and self-important icons, the novel grew out of Stone's
less-than-happy experiences turning his own books into films. He was
particularly irritated by the studio treatment of "Who'll Stop the Rain," the
dopily retitled adaptation of "Dog Soldiers." Poorly marketed and distributed,
the movie floundered and sank.

"Children of Light" was an odd step in a career of mounting formidability. It
had many Stone trademarks -- literary allusion, surrealistic cataclysm and human
beings unable to shake the specter of undermining bad karma -- but many readers
and critics felt that the subject matter was not serious enough to support
Stone's characteristic concerns. "He should stifle his tendency toward godly
musings and carryings on," wrote V. S. Pritchett in The New Yorker, "and let his
comic ear go where it will."

"Outerbridge Reach" has its share of godly musings, but in going to sea, Stone
is, as it were, back on solid ground. In a decisive moment late in the book,
when Browne realizes he cannot win the race and that he cannot, according to the
desperate plan he had hatched as his predicament on the water grew dicier, cheat
in order to prevail, he lives through a moment of terrifying clarity, and
welcomes it: "God, he thought, it's truth I love and always have. The truth's my
bride, my first and greatest love. What a misunderstanding it had all been. He
could no more take a prize by subterfuge than he could sail to the white port
city of his dreams."

JANICE STONE, A PRETTY, brown-haired woman, was born in the Bronx, but she has
the manner of a country wife, an aura of calmness and intelligence and secret
rebelliousness. She holds a master's degree in counseling, and she has been a
nursery school teacher, a prison counselor, a social worker. But for a number of
years, she has been a full-time editorial assistant to her husband. "Man, she's
the patron saint of writer's wives," says Michael Herr.

"I'm Bob's secretary, proofreader, cook, chauffeur. I answer the phone and do
the filing. Believe me, it takes up my time," she says, with reasonable good
cheer. Asked if she feels she has given up too much, she says: "One always has
regrets about the lives one doesn't live. But how many lives can you live?"

Janice is, in her husband's words, "a fine writer," though he adds, "it's
confined mostly to letters now." Like Owen Browne in the novel, he worries about
what marriage has cost his wife.

Stone's Westport house is on the water. He and Janice spend much of the year in
a second home on Block Island off the coast of Rhode Island, and they also own a
condominium in Key West, Fla. In a way he cohabits with the sea, a peculiar
relationship; there's a longstanding admiration there, a kind of fearful
attraction.

This is especially apparent as he speaks about the book one day on the beach on
Block Island, wistfully recalling the exhaustion brought on by his effort.
Sitting on a boulder, peering out at the ocean, he gives the impression he'd
been waiting a long time to write about the sea, as if it were a subject he
needed many years of practice for.

"The situation of a man who reduced his life to a diagram of the ocean and the
sky, and took everything else out of it," Stone says. "I really found it of
enormous existential weight."

As he wrote, he says, one thing stuck in his mind from his Navy days: the
gravely portentous first sentence of the old Bluejackets' Manual, the handbook
he was given on the day he enlisted in 1956. "It said, 'The sea isn't inherently
dangerous,' " Stone recalls. " 'But it is unforgiving.' "

Why does Browne feel compelled to test it? It's a spiritual quest, like the
search for God. Or like writing novels.

"Man is, I wouldn't say perverse," Stone says. "But man is only man and in a
state of great perplexity, and without much sound guidance it's difficult to
determine what the right thing to do is. And having determined what it is, it's
difficult to do it. This, in a way, is what I've been writing about all my
life."

NAME: Robert Stone

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 2, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article in The Times Magazine on Jan. 19 about the novelist Robert Stone
misattributed a review of his novel "Children of Light" in The New Yorker. The
reviewer was Whitney Balliett.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Stone, left, near his waterfront house in Westport,
Conn. The ex-Navy man's new novel, "Outerbridge Reach," is his first about the
sea. (pg. 18)(Photograph by Michael O'Brien for The New York Times); Stone at
Stanford University in 1963, during his days as one of Ken Kesey's Merry
Pranksters. "We were the most dangerous thing around," Stone says. (Ron Bevirt);
With Kesey (left) in 1979. (pg. 20); Stone and his wife of 32 years, Janice, in
1991. She holds a master's degree in counseling but is now her husband's
full-time editorial assistant. "She's the patron saint of writers' wives," says
the writer Michael Herr. (Photograph by Michael O'Brien for The New York Times);
The Stones with one of their two children, Deidre, in California, 1969. (Ed
McClenahan)(pg. 21)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 932 words



International A2-12

BUSH CAUTIONS SOUTH KOREANS

President Bush arrived in South Korea and quietly warned its leaders against
moving too fast in dealing with the Communist North before there is evidence
that the North is not producing nuclear weapons.  A1

JAPANESE TRADE AND U.S. CARS

News Analysis: The trade concessions that Japan is expected to offer President
Bush may add up to Government orders to buy more American cars and parts -- not
exactly what Washington says it wants.  A1

IS DETROIT TO BLAME?

The Big Three auto makers complain about being shut out of the Japanese car
market, but the Japanese say the American companies do not make concessions to
their tastes, habits or the width of their roads.  A12

U.N. TO DISCUSS YUGOSLAV TRUCE

Secretary General Boutros Ghali will ask the United Nations Security Council to
send about 50 military observers to Yugoslavia as quickly as possible to
encourage adherence to the current cease-fire.  A1

BATTLE OVER A JERUSALEM DISTRICT

The legal battle for the neighborhood called Silwan is a microcosm of
antagonisms over Jerusalem's present and its future, with delicate religious,
ethnic and political considerations hanging in the balance.  A1

NEW FOCUS ON VIETNAM P.O.W.'S

Expectations that the United States and Vietnam will soon establish diplomatic
ties may be set back by a resurgence of interest in the fate of missing
Americans.  A3

ISRAELIS TO ARRIVE FOR TALKS

Israeli negotiators headed for another round of Middle East peace talks in
Washington as Arab delegations decide whether to join in.  A8
John Cardinal O'Connor visited two of Israel's top leaders.  A8

LONDON STATUE DISTURBS GERMANS

Plans for a statue in London of the commander who led air raids on German cities
in World War II have disturbed some German officials, and they have begun a
quiet but fervent campaign of protest.  A6

GEORGIAN CALLS FOR REFERENDUM

The President of Georgia, besieged by rebels, proposed a United
Nations-supervised referendum on their demands that he resign.  A6

Diplomats from Eritrea are trying to end fighting in Somalia.  A2

A panel said to urge a 50 percent cut in the U.S. atomic arms.  A6

Cairo Journal: Egypt's Islamic fundamentalist movement is weak.  A4

National A14, B8-9

LAWS CREATE BIGGER DUMPS

New Federal rules meant to protect the environment are forcing thousands of
community garbage dumps to close and giving rise to immense regional landfills
owned by just a few companies. A1

VOLUNTEERISM ON THE RISE

Moved and alarmed by persistent social problems, Americans young and old are
volunteering in greater numbers to work with the poor and the sick, charity
groups report. A1

FIRE IN AN UNDERGROUND WORLD

A stubborn fire burned underneath a hill outside Kansas City, in one of the
converted limestone mines that make up a subterranean world right out of a
Batman movie.  A14

FAREWELL TO THE REVOLUTION

German Pompa Gonzalez said he felt tremendously calm as he and 33 others made a
daring helicopter escape from Cuba, because "one way or another, it would soon
be over." Now he is wondering how to begin life in America, a wanted man back in
his homeland but a hero to thousands of Cuban exiles here.  A1

HOLY MAN OR TERRORIST?

Yahweh ben Yahweh once presided over a multimillion-dollar business and thriving
religious sect, but a Federal jury prepared to hear accusations that his reign
was one of murder, arson, extortion, racist rhetoric and sexual exploitation.
A14

KEEPING HOME PLATE IN SEATTLE

After towering as losers, the Seattle Mariners baseball team finally earned a
winning season and the loyalty of two million fans. But unless those fans come
up with $10 million, the Mariners may call somewhere else home.  A14

Clinton and Kerrey criticize Bush's health-care proposals.  B9

Metropolitan Digest, B1

Business Digest, D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-18
Rap returns to the Garden.  C11
Creating the Pasha of "The Ghosts of Versailles." C11
Music: Opera from Shanghai.  C12
New Bolcom concerto.  C16
Dance: Dance in Review C13
Word and Image: "The Edmund Perry Story." C11
"Fugitive Spring," a memoir.  C16
"Education on Trial." C16

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials A16
Don't seek jobs in Japan.  A16
Frightening consumers.  A16
Topics: Passing Go.  A16
Letters A16
Leslie H. Gelb: Kennedy and Vietnam.  A17
William Safire: Redskins' revenge.  A17
John R. MacArthur: Remember Nayirah, witness for Kuwait?  A17
Charles Brecher, Raymond D. Horton: New York needs 3 heroes.  A17

Obituaries B10

Muhammad Kenyatta, professor and civil rights leader
John Elliott, reporter who saw the rise of Hitler

Sports C1-9

Baseball: Tartabull agrees to terms with Yanks.  C1
Basketball: Knicks edge Suns C3
Coleman hurt again.  C3
UMass stuns Oklahoma.  C3
Colleges: Focus on classroom for N.C.A.A.  C4
Column: Berkow on Lions' quarterback.  C5
Anderson on Bills' pledge.  C6
Features: Sidelines.  C2
Question Box C9
Football: Bills defeat Chiefs.  C1
Lions top Cowboys.  C1
No gimmicks for Redskins.  C6
Marveling at Elway's heroics.  C6
49er aide a top candidate for Packer post.  C6
Satisfaction for Norwood.  C7
Golf: Outlook for '92.  C9
Hockey: Devils' midseason report.  C2
Devils savor victory over Rangers.  C2
Yachting: Russian crews still feuding.  C4
New Zealand yacht looks strong C4

Neediest Cases B9

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Monument to Bomber Harris wakes ghost. A6. (Farnham Castle
Newspapers)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Economists Cite Benefits Of Arms Cuts

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


The military spending cuts that President Bush proposed last week would
certainly hurt workers who make submarines in Connecticut and fighter aircraft
in California. But, economists say, if the $50 billion is used instead to
increase growth by, say, increasing investment, the short-term pain would be
outweighed by the long-term gain.

Lawrence R. Klein, an economist at the University of Pennsylvania and recipient
of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science, says this new "peace dividend"
can, if not frittered away, raise economic output in the long term in two ways.
One would be to move resources into the civilian sector, making it more
competitive. Another would be to reduce the Federal budget deficit, which would
help push down interest rates and spur investment in the private sector.

Professor Klein said his studies of Pentagon spending cuts after the Vietnam War
showed that if a cutback eliminated 100,000 jobs in the short run, the
redirection of the money saved would ultimately create more than 100,000
permanent jobs to replace them.

Substituting civilian spending for military spending would expand the nation's
production potential, Professor Klein said, because "a weapon doesn't produce
goods for the next 20 years, but a new building or piece of equipment produces
output for the length of its life."

Deeper Cuts Sought

Many Democrats in Congress are eager to cut even more deeply into the military
budget than the $50 billion over five years proposed by the President. That
push, combined with the more than $100 billion in cuts already in the pipeline,
has led many economists to fear a drastic drain from the Government's pool of
research and development money. They were heartened that the Administration
would increase spending for civilian research and development by 7 percent.
Supercomputers would get $803 million, a 23 percent increase.

"If we can turn our research capacities and scientific talent to something other
than weapons, then what's the big problem about defense cuts?" said Herbert
Stein, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute who was a chairman of
the Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R.
Ford.

Certainly, there will be a big problem for the workers at the General Dynamics
Electric Boat division in Groton, Conn., who were shocked to learn that the
Pentagon would like to reduce its orders for the Seawolf submarine to one, down
from three, if Congress, in election years particularly sensitive to job losses,
permits it to. Similarly, workers at the Hughes Aircraft Company in Southern
California were unhappy to learn that the Pentagon proposed ordering 20 B-2
bombers instead of 75. No one is sure how many layoffs will result from the
newest round of cuts in the Pentagon budgets, but many economists say it will
reach the tens of thousands.

"In terms of macroeconomics, it is not the national level but the local level we
have to worry about regarding these cuts," said John Tepper Marlin, director of
the conversion information center at the Council of Economic Priorities, a
public policy institute in New York.

Retraining Is Needed

The trauma can be reduced if local and state governments aggressively plan to
help such workers adapt to a nonmilitary future, economic development officials
say. Economists point to success stories like St. Louis, where St. Louis
Community College worked with the McDonnell Douglas Corporation to retrain and
find jobs for laid-off workers.

David Wyss, research director at DRI/McGraw-Hill Inc., an economics consulting
group, said his research team had done studies showing that if military spending
cuts were used to reduce the ballooning budget deficit, "in the long term it
helps you because it will allow interest rates to drop, investment to recover
and more stimulus long term."

Mr. Wyss said every dollar spent on military production generated $2.30 extra in
gross national product from auxiliary industries, but public investment, like
building roads or bridges, would generate a larger kick: an extra $2.50 in gross
national product.

The multiplier effect was greater for public investment because in
pothole-filling or bridge-building, Mr. Wyss said, little money goes overseas to
buy raw materials or components. Other economist noted that such spending would
also help increase productivity by reducing transportation delays and costs.

For some economists, the Pentagon's heavy research and development spending was
good for the overall economy because it helped develop important technologies,
like semiconductors and light aircraft frames, that were spun off to help
civilian industry. These economists worried that reducing the Pentagon's budget
would hurt the nation's research and development efforts.

In its proposed budget, the Administration took pains to say it was increasing
outlays for the nonmilitary research budget even as it cut military spending.

Gordon Adams, director of the Defense Budget Project, a public policy institute
in Washington, said the proposed military spending cuts would be far smaller
proportionally than those after World War II and the Vietnam War. After Vietnam,
military spending was cut from slightly under 10 percent of G.N.P. to just under
5 percent. President Bush's proposals would reduce military spending by 1.8
percent of G.N.P., to 3.4 percent from 5.2 percent.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 6, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

White House Race Is Recast: No Kremlin to Run Against

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2436 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 5


With the cold war's end, the whole terrain of American politics is undergoing
fundamental change, from the kinds of issues that preoccupy voters and
candidates to the balance between Congress and the White House to the relative
strength of the Republican and Democratic parties.

The evidence is just beginning to come in. But it seems probable that the
Presidency will lose some of the clout it has won at the expense of Capitol Hill
over the last four decades, that domestic affairs will resume their normal place
at the center of American politics and that the Republican Party will have
difficulty sustaining its recent surge.

All that and more probably lies ahead, even though for all but the oldest
Americans it is hard to imagine American politics without the cold war.

Leftist Views Eclipsed

"It was the defining issue in our political discourse and public policy from
1947 until last year," said Richard Holbrooke, a former Assistant Secretary of
State. "It made 'national security' the justification for everything -- the
interstate highway system, the National Defense Education Act, the Vietnam War,
the foreign aid program.

"J. William Fulbright used it to sell his scholarships and J. Edgar Hoover used
it to sell his wiretaps."

As the nation turned virulently anti-Communist, socialism in all its forms was
shunned like the plague. Programs such as national health care and broader
trade-union rights nearly vanished from the screen of American politics. With
rare exceptions, almost every successful national politician stood in the center
or the right.

Every President from Harry Truman to George Bush -- Democrats like Lyndon B.
Johnson and Jimmy Carter as well as Republicans like Richard M. Nixon and Ronald
Reagan -- sought to toe the hard line. The hard anti-Communist stance became as
institutionalized at the White House as "Hail to the Chief" and the officer
carrying the briefcase holding the nuclear-weapons codes.

But now all that has changed, and there could be no better evidence than the
opening weeks of the 1992 Presidential campaign. Except for President Bush, none
of the candidates have any significant foreign-policy credentials, and the rest
of them are attacking the President for his. A governor, a former governor, two
senators, a former senator and a newspaper columnist constitute the field of
challengers. For the first time in decades, knowledge of the rest of the world
seems to count for very little. In some ways provincialism may even be an asset.

In other years, hopefuls like Michael S. Dukakis or Jimmy Carter who had spent
their careers on domestic questions surrounded themselves with prominent
foreign-policy advisers and called foreign-policy conferences to show they
cared. But this time, no one is even bothering. Indeed, the President's
challengers are trying, with varying degrees of emphasis, to turn Mr. Bush's
lifelong fascination with foreign affairs into a liability, a sign of his
indifference to America's everyday concerns.

Stephen Hess of the Brookings Institution, an experienced analyst of campaigns,
sees Mr. Bush, a man whose attitudes were formed in the cold war years, as "the
only candidate who is really trying to hold back the tide from the left and the
right that is turning the country rapidly inward."

The Policies
Jobs, Jobs, Jobs? That's Right

The emphasis on domestic affairs developed even as the world went through its
most convulsive changes since the 1950's. And it developed within a year of the
allied triumph in the Persian Gulf -- a reminder, it might have been thought,
that a President's foreign-policy skills can be useful, even in the post-postwar
era.

Less than a year ago, America's resounding military victory in Kuwait and Iraq
sent President Bush's national approval ratings to record highs and led many
politicians to conclude that he would be unbeatable this year. Now all that
seems irrelevant, and the President, in his State of the Union address last week
and in his campaign commercials, is struggling to demonstrate that foreign
affairs are not his only interest.

Senator Tom Harkin, the Iowa Democrat, echoed a significant segment of national
opinion with a remark he made at the very beginning of his Presidential campaign
last September.

"If you want to continue to spend $160 billion of your money to defend Europe
from the Soviet Union, or whatever it's called now, take your ballot and put it
in the Bush box," he said. "But if you believe that Europe is strong enough and
rich enough and powerful enough to defend itself if it wants, then take your
ballot and put it in the Democrats' box."

How It Was in '88

Four years ago, neither Mr. Harkin nor any other major Democrat would have said
that kind of thing. Mr. Dukakis rode around in a tank with a helmet on to show
he wasn't soft. With the Soviet threat still intact, or thought to be,
solidarity with the European allies was considered absolutely central. Almost
every President made a pilgrimage to the Berlin wall.

This year, several Democrats have put out detailed foreign policy position
papers, and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the early leader, made a point of
warning against "retreating from the world or discounting its dangers."

But the only foreign policy topic on which the Democratic candidates have spent
much time so far has been trade, especially trade with Japan. Some bash Japan
and some don't. But all, like Mr. Bush, have tried to turn that global issue
into a domestic challenge. If the President's trip to Japan was about "jobs,
jobs, jobs" in the United States, the Democrats talk about the same thing in
hard-hit New Hampshire.

Little is said about China or Croatia or Cuba. And Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr.
Bush's main Republican rival, unashamedly reaches back to the 1930's for the key
phrase of his insurgent nationalist campaign -- "America First," with its
isolationist overtones.

All through the Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Bush years, the glue that bonded
Republican to Republican was opposition to Communism and to higher taxes. Now
one is moot and the other, at least in Mr. Buchanan's view, has been discarded
by the President in his decision to increase taxes last year.

Republican Struggle Resumes

No one expects Mr. Buchanan to defeat Mr. Bush. But his candidacy is evidence
that the old, divisive struggle between the two wings of the Republican Party is
resuming. In 1952, that struggle pitted the isolationists against the
internationalists, the Taft forces against the Eisenhower forces. At the
tumultuous San Francisco convention in 1964, it was the Goldwater wing versus
the Rockefeller wing. But in the 24 years that followed,it has been the
Republicans' ability to remain unified, in part around cold war themes, that has
been a major element in the party's success.

Paul Weyrich, a prominent conservative organizer, remarked that now "there's at
least a real danger that in 1992 conservative Republicans may go their own way,
and if that's the case the Republicans may be in real trouble."

George Christian, a Texas political consultant who worked in the Johnson White
House, asserted that the Republicans would be in deep difficulty already if the
Democrats were in a stronger position. If Congress, long controlled by the
Democrats, "didn't have such an awful reputation, and if the Democrats had some
heavy hitters running for President, all the people ready to vote against Bush
would have someplace to go, which they don't have now."

The Presidency
For Want of a Foe, Focus Is Lost

The public is apparently not eager to turn back to the isolationism of the
1920's and 30's. A New York Times/CBS News poll last October showed that while
many Americans thought Mr. Bush should pay more attention to the economy, most
were by no means ready to revert to the classic American isolationism of Hiram
Johnson and William Borah.

About two-thirds of those surveyed agreed that the United States needed a strong
military, despite the end of the cold war, and that it should keep playing as
active a role in the world as ever.

In any event, American disengagement from the world in an era of instantaneous
communication and international markets and investments is widely considered
impractical. In the heyday of isolationism, few Americans bought many foreign
products and even fewer traveled abroad.

Isolationism isn't really possible in the modern world, and some Americans are
leaning that way now only because of the recession, in the view of John Bibby, a
professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin.

"My own notion is that the slow pace of the economic recovery has exacerbated
domestic problems and concerns in the public's mind," he said. "But if and when
the economy rights itself, this will change."

Still, the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, who in recent years has developed a
cyclical theory of American politics, sees the 1990's, like the 1930's and the
1960's, as an era of domestic-policy prominence. In a sense, he said, "the cold
war distorted our politics, and foreign policy became the obsessive concern of
our Presidents, and that is going to return to normal now."

If he is correct, argues Representative Jim Leach, a Republican from Iowa,
Congress is likely to be strengthened in its endless tug-of-war with the White
House for policy dominance.

"We all understand," he said, "that Presidents are more dominant in moments of
crisis, when we feel threatened as a nation. In matters of domestic policy,
where there is less urgency, Congress has the upper hand -- which raises real
questions about whether our legislatures in Washington and the state capitals
are capable of providing the leadership we need."

But William E. Leuchtenberg, a historian at the University of North Carolina,
contends that while the rivalry with Moscow may be a thing of the past, other
foreign-policy crises will arise and strengthen the President, even if only
temporarily.

"Look at the mass fervor generated by the Persian Gulf war," he said. "The
decision to fight Saddam Hussein was essentially made in the White House, with
major Congressional figures like Sam Nunn left dangling."

A principal Presidential asset in foreign policy, unmatched in domestic policy,
is the ability to act at once and answer questions later. An armed response to
the supposed provocation in the Gulf of Tonkin in 1964 contrasts sharply with
the need to build a national consensus on, say, education policy before an
attack can be launched.

In the Name of Security

In moments of conflict with Congress, Presidents have also been able to appeal
successfully to what one former White House chief of staff called "the great god
national security." He added, "You tell 'em that they're helping no one but
Brezhnev by their stubbornness, and they cave fast."

That has led America into a number of adventures over the last 45 years.

Concerns about the spread of Communism were the explanations for the Korean War,
the C.I.A-directed coup in Guatemala, the military occuption of the Dominican
Republic and the invasion of Grenada, among other episodes. Cold war competition
using proxies in Israel and the Arab world fed the Middle East conflict for 40
years and provided the means for three wars.

And, of course, cold war concern about the "domino theory" and American
credibility as a deterrent to Communist expansion led to the Vietnam War and the
devastating social and political turmoil at home that came with its loss.

But the national security card is no longer available. Nor are some of the
symbols of Presidential power, like that bag with the nuclear-weapons codes,
quite so persuasive now that the specter of nuclear annihilation is receding.

"It is built into our system that a President doesn't get his way very easily on
domestic policy unless there is an emergency like the Depression," said Steven
A. Ambrose, biographer of Dwight D. Eisenhower and Richard M. Nixon. "So you're
bound to see some diminution in the Presidency in the years ahead. It's hard to
lead a country without a recognized enemy, because there is no agreed focus."

The cold war provided that focus and that mission.

The Parties
With the New Order, New Challenges

Generally speaking, since Harry S. Truman's Administration the Republicans have
been regarded as the ones better able to handle foreign policy problems -- even
though it was the Truman Administration, with George C. Marshall and Dean
Acheson playing central roles, that developed the main themes of American cold
war policy. The Persian Gulf victory and arms control success seem to have
reinforced the Republicans' image as the party most likely "to keep us out of
World War III," to use Gallup's phrase.

At the same time, many voters saw the Democrats as the party of choice on
economic issues, largely because of Franklin D. Roosevelt. During and after the
Reagan years, when the New Deal was a fading memory, the advantage here shifted
to the Republicans, though recent polls suggest it is shifting back. This is
forcing Mr. Bush to spend more time on the economy and creating a crucial
partisan battleground.

But Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the leader of the Democratic
majority in the House, says the political fallout from the Soviet Union's
disappearance from the world equation is actually far more complex.

"It has the potential to change the partisan balance, probably in our favor,
because one of the themes they raised, especially in Presidential campaigns and
often with considerable success, is that they were better able to deal with the
Kremlin," he said. "But what we face now is a world with economics and foreign
policy intertwined, where our embassies will have to deal with economics more
than geopolitical questions, and where politicians will have to help in
organizing here for economic success worldwide. That's a profound change, a
challenge to anyone in public life."

Former Senator Howard H. Baker of Tennessee, a Republican who is also a former
White House chief of staff, said, "There's an opportunity in all this bedlam as
we move out of the warm glow of stability and walk the edge of anarchy, with
dozens of small problems instead of one big confrontation."

"I see a major opportunity for some party to seize the advantage with clearly
understood, well-stated policies," he said. "But I'm not seeing it yet, in the
Congress or the White House, from the Republicans or the Democrats. Nobody's
talking fundamentals; nobody's laying out goals."


NEXT: The new priorities of American foreign policy.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: After the Cold War -- Fifth of six articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Former Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr., Governor Bill Clinton,
Senator Tom Harkin, Senator Bob Kerrey, Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Patrick
J. Buchanan (pg. A8)

Chart: "Foreign Policy Credentials: Six Candidates' Resumes

The New York Times asked each of the Presidential challengers to cite the
experience he believes qualifies him to handle the nation's foreign policy. Here
are summaries of their responses.

Former Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr.: Two terms as California Governor, handling
one of the world's largest economies . . . Has traveled to Mexico, China, the
Soviet Union . . . Spent six weeks in India and six months in Japan and met with
those nations' leaders . . . Continuous study of foreign policy.

Governor Bill Clinton: Graduated from Georgetown University School of Froeign
Service . . . Studied at Oxford University in England and received a law degree
form Yale . . . Staff member, Senate Foreign Relations Committee . . . As
Governor, led numerous trade missions to foreign countries.

Senator Tom Harkin: Fromer Navy pilot . . . Member of Senate Foreign Operations
Subcommittee, responsibile for some aspects of foreign aid, and Senate defense
subcommittee on appropriations . . . Met with foreign leaders on official
travels abroad . . . Led a Congressional delegation to Moscow in 1990 and met
with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev . . . Author or sponsor of several bills on
foreign policy matters.

Senator Bob Kerrey: Served in Vietnam and sent troops into combat . . . Has
discussed economic and security matters with many world leaders . . . Served on
the Senate Intelligence Committee.

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas: Served as a Peace Corps volunteer in Ethiopia in
1962 and a training coordinator in 1967 and 1968 . . . Was a member of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee for four years . . . Headed the committee
that drafted the foreign relations platform for the Democrats' mide-term
convention in 1982 . . . Author or sponsor of several bills on foreign policy
matters . . . Co-founded the South Africa Political Prisoner Adoption Project .
. . Served as a mediator in Salvadoran peace talks in 1984.

Patrick J. Buchanan: senior adviser to three Presidents . . . Attended three
summit meetings . . . Accompanied Richard M. Nixon to China . . . Believes the
best qualification is the determination to keep America's interests first in
foreign affairs. (pg. A8)

Graph: "Problems at Home and Abroad: American's Views Through the Cold War"
shows the results from Gallup polls from 1946-1991 and a New York Times/CBS News
Poll in 1992 of what adults nationwide thought was the most important problem
facing the country. (pg. A8)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 12, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Democratic Race Grows Fiercer In Last Days in New Hampshire

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 946 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 11


Elbows were flying in the Democratic primary race today.

In a rough new phase of the New Hampshire campaign, there were sharp attacks,
emotional radio and television ads, last-minute image shaping and in every camp
a keen recognition that unpredictable New Hampshire was living up to its
reputation as the days ticked down to the Feb. 18 primary.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has watched his lead in the polls evaporate
in the last four days amid accusations of marital infidelity in a supermarket
tabloid and questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, mounted a
new television campaign intended to capitalize on his wounds by presenting him
as populist martyr.

Drawing on a powerful theme in Southern politics, Mr. Clinton's advertisements
plead with the voters, "Send a message to Washington and Wall Street and to the
tabloids."

Looking straight into the camera, Mr. Clinton concludes: "This is your election,
your economy, your country. Take it back."

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, meanwhile, was glowing with his
new status as having an edge over Mr. Clinton in the New Hampshire polls. But he
took the opportunity to reiterate his against-the-grain economic message, as the
Democrat who calls for a cut in the tax on capital gains to encourage long-term
investment and rejects tax cuts for the middle class.

"My economic views are different," he said, campaigning here today, "not only
from Governor Clinton's but from every other Democrat and from George Bush."

Harkin Uses Iowa Boost

All of the candidates were scrambling to adjust to a shifting political reality:
an electorate that seems to skitter among the candidates, searching for an
answer to their recessionary woes, but still uneasy with a field of men who
arrived late and are still trying to close the sale. "It's become a classic New
Hampshire primary," said George Bruno, a former state Democratic chairman who is
a supporter of Mr. Clinton. "In the end, it always tightens up, and the outcome
is always unpredictable."

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, for instance, was touting the mandate from his
native state as he flew back to New Hampshire today. Mr. Harkin captured 76.5
percent of the vote in Monday's caucuses, based on returns from 97 percent of
the precincts. After brandishing hometown headlines about his success, and
brushing aside the fact that his rivals largely ceded him the contest in his
native state, Mr. Harkin immediately sought to reassert his theme that he is the
unashamed, true-believing, orthodox Democrat in the race.

He did so, in part, with an attack on Mr. Tsongas. Mr. Harkin asserted that Mr.
Tsongas was esssentially preaching Reaganomics. "I think his mindset is right
where Reagan and Bush are," the Iowan said.

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who is running close to Mr. Harkin in the polls
in New Hampshire, was concentrating on boosting his Presidential image -- and
the President he most preferred to be compared to was John F. Kennedy. Mr.
Kerrey is trying to convert what many poll takers say is an undeveloped
foundation of personal popularity into Presidential support. Today, he was
campaigning on the steps of the Nashua City Hall, where Kennedy made his first
campaign stop of the 1960 race and where a bust of the slain President was
conveniently available for the television camera crews.

Week to Go, Work to Do

Each candidate enters this final week with work to do. Mr. Clinton, who just a
few weeks ago seemed to be on a glide path to the nomination, is struggling to
steady his candidacy. He denied the accusations that he conducted a 12-year
affair with a cabaret singer, and he denied other reports that he sought to
avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. But amid the denials he lost control of
his message that as a moderate Southerner he would restore "the forgotten middle
class" and lead an economic revival.

This week, he plans a broadcast counterattack: In addition to the 30-second
spots, the Clinton campaign is buying half-hour slots on Manchester and Boston
television stations for a call-in show in which viewers can ask the Governor
questions. The campaign is also running radio commercials in which a Vietnam
veteran defends Mr. Clinton's record."

Showing Tougher Sides

Mr. Harkin reveled in the chance today to look like a winner; one of his
challenges is to persuade many Democrats that his plea to return to traditional
party values is a message that can win. Trying to capitalize on whatever life he
could get from the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Harkin argued that they showed the
resounding approval of "the people who know me the best."

In a sign of the sharpening tone of this campaign, Mr. Harkin, perhaps the most
aggressive campaigner in the field, came back tough when a reporter asked about
Mr. Clinton's "latest problem." Mr. Harkin replied, "What's the latest one? I've
been out in Iowa; I might have missed it."

And Mr. Kerrey's campaign has been urging people to focus on a candidate's
ability to be elected, arguing that this is no longer Mr. Clinton's strong
point.

Still, Mr. Kerrey was trying to float above the fray -- not a bad place to be
when a multi-candidate field is fully engaged. The Senator from Nebraska, who is
trying to cross the bridge from interesting politician to potential President,
returned to the theme of generational change today -- a theme that Gary Hart
worked with considerable success here in 1984.

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, meanwhile, was on television
tonight with a 30-minute program urging voters to back a grassroots movement to
rid politics of the influence special-interest money.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday about Senator Tom Harkin's arrival in New Hampshire
from Iowa misidentified the woman with him. She was State Representative Mary
Chambers of New Hampshire, not Mr. Harkin's wife. The reference to Mrs. Harkin
was also incorrect; her name is Ruth, not Judy.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa flew back to New Hampshire yesterday
claiming a mandate from his native state. After brandishing hometown headlines
about his success, Mr. Harkin immediately sought to reassert his market position
here as the unashamed, true-believing, orthodox Democrat in the race. He arrived
at Concord Airport with his wife, Judy, at right rear, and his entourage. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 15, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
CLINTON STRESSING HIS ECONOMIC PLAN

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 14


Gov. Bill Clinton took his extraordinary last-ditch effort to revive his
flagging Presidential campaign to a live New Hampshire audience tonight for the
second night in a row, appealing to voters to trust him to put the country back
on the right track.

During the 30-minute live call-in show that was televised during prime time on a
Manchester station, Mr. Clinton fielded only one question about his draft status
during the Vietnam War, an issue that has raised new questions about the
Arkansas Governor's credibility in recent days.

The rest of the time, New Hampshire residents who telephoned a toll-free number
or made up a sedate studio audience asked about unemployment compensation,
health care, the environment and energy policy. The program originated in
Durham, across the state from Manchester.

In many ways, the questions resembled the sort that Mr. Clinton gets at campaign
rallies, where he is seldom asked about rumors of extramarital affairs or the
issues of patriotism that have eroded his New Hampshire support, according to
recent polls.

His television appearance came at the end of a day in which he sought to refocus
his attacks on President Bush and move beyond the problems that have threatened
his campaign.

Only one questioner, a man from Hampton who identified himself as an undecided
voter, asked Mr. Clinton if "in retrospect" Mr. Clinton should have said he
simply did not want to go to Vietnam "rather than lying" and saying that he had
genuinely made himself available for the draft in 1969.

"First of all, I didn't lie," Mr. Clinton said. "The facts have always been
clear, and I'm the only person who's been telling the same sory in this for 13
years." Mr. Clinton's campaign has released an affidavit from a Republican
member of the Hot Springs, Ark., draft board who stated that no undue influence
was applied to allow Mr. Clinton to receive a deferment by promising to join the
Reserve Officers Training Corps at the University of Arkansas.

Mr. Clinton has acknowledged that he wrote a letter in 1969 to an Army colonel
supervising the R.O.T.C. program at the university and thanked him for "saving
me from the draft." In the letter, Mr. Clinton, then 23 years old, conceded that
he had been misleading when he said he intended to join R.O.T.C.

"I put myself back into the draft," Mr. Clinton said. "If I had gotten lottery
Number 1, you wouldn't be calling me to ask this question."

When he did finally relinquish his deferment, Mr. Clinton was able to avoid the
draft because he drew Number 311 in the first lottery, held on Dec. 1, 1969.

Mr. Clinton's audience, seemed more concerned about policy and their own lives
than about the candidate's personal life. One woman asked him what he could do
about getting a new train line built between Portsmouth and Boston.

Earlier in the day, Mr. Clinton vowed to return the campaign to talking about
the issues.

"There's been a lot of falsehood out there," Mr. Clinton told a crowd of
reporters at the supermarket stop. "I want the facts out there. The main thing
I'm trying to do is give this election back to the people. You all are trying to
stop me from doing it. I'm going to try to run this election on issues from here
on in."

Mr. Clinton continued his general policy of ignoring his Democratic rivals, even
as Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa held a news conference at a toxic cleanup site in
Nashua to denounce Mr. Clinton for "sweeping environmental problems under the
rug in Arkansas for more than a decade."

Two other Democratic candidates, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts
and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, also declined the opportunity to attack
other Democrats by name. Instead, they reserved their criticism for policy
issues like health-care reform and proposals for tax cuts for the proposals.

Mr. Kerrey, who has made national health insurance the centerpiece of his
campaign, said today that he was "a bit of an underdog at the moment," but he
insisted that he was not discouraged by public opinion polls showing him in a
close constest for third place with Mr. Harkin.

Even as he aimed an occasional barb at a rival, Senator Kerrey continued to
insist today that his first concern was not his own future, but the country's.
"This is not just about electing a new President," he said. "It's about trying
to take America in a new direction."

But Mr. Clinton's recent troubles continued to hurt his best efforts to conduct
business as usual. At the supermarket, the tabloid newspapers at the checkout
stands featured him on the cover, and after he passed shoppers at the mall, some
of them murmured about him in his wake.

Looking Back in Empathy

David Barker, a 44-year-old sales manager from Merrimack, and Richard Seyfried,
45, a locksmith from Salem, said they both drew high draft lottery numbers
during the Vietnam War and thought no less of Mr. Clinton because of reports of
his efforts to avoid the draft in 1969.

But neither man said they think that Mr. Clinton can now be elected.

"I think Bill Clinton's got a credibility problem," Mr. Seyfried said after
shaking the Arkansas Governor's hand in a Sears, Roebuck store. "It's just the
whole air of how the press has played up the problem makes it an issue, whether
there is any realism behind it or not," said Mr. Barker. .

Nevertheless, Clinton campaign aides said that the Governor's slippage in polls
had bottomed out, and that their private polling showed him regaining some
ground on Mr. Tsongas.

Good News for Tsongas

Three independent polling organizations, conducting continuous surveys that keep
track of changing voter sentiments, showed Mr. Tsongas leading Mr. Clinton by at
least eight percentage points through Thursday. The American Research Group,
Gallup and KRC Communications Research are each interviewing 150 to 200 likely
Democratic primary voters nightly, and are issuing each day the combined results
of the previous two or three nights.

Late today, Mr. Clinton's campaign workers issued figures showing that they had
raised $1 million in the last two weeks at the height of Mr. Clinton's problems.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton's campaign aides said that the candidate's
slippage in public opinion polls had bottomed out and that their private polling
showed him to be regaining some ground on Paul E. Tsongas. Mr. Clinton talked
yesterday with shoppers at Alexander's Shop and Save supermarket in Manchester,
N.H., where he bought the groceries in the cart at bottom left for a local
charity. (Reuters)(pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sailing Over The Edge

BYLINE: By William H. Pritchard;  William H. Pritchard is the Henry Clay Folger
Professor of English at Amherst College and the author, most recently, of
"Randall Jarrell: A Literary Life."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1981 words



OUTERBRIDGE REACH
By Robert Stone.
409 pp. New York:
Ticknor & Fields. $21.95.

ROBERT STONE'S fiction has always been preoccupied with the unlovely underside
of American life. Eighteen years ago, soon after the conclusion of the Vietnam
War, he published his second novel, "Dog Soldiers," a book that made connections
between folly and violence in Southeast Asia and countercultural disorders back
home in the Age of Aquarius. "Dog Soldiers" won the National Book Award, and
with good reason. It spoke to American disenchantment, it was a compellingly
executed tale of action, and the witty brilliance of its prose created a dark
comedy of disaster -- of attempted heroic gestures that were also, as its
unheroic hero, John Converse, observed, "peculiar and stupid."

Nothing in the novels that followed it -- "A Flag for Sunrise" (1981) and
"Children of Light" (1986) -- suggested that Mr. Stone had embraced a more
"balanced" view of the world; indeed, when talking about his vision of things,
balance seemed hardly the word to use. But his latest novel, "Outerbridge Reach"
-- which, like "Dog Soldiers," centers on a triangle of husband, wife and friend
who is also betrayer, and which frequently alludes to Vietnam as a gathering
focus of troubled memories -- also brings a new possibility into the novelist's
work: that not to believe in anything, to see through everything, may be a
peculiarly stupid way to cheat oneself of life.

In "Outerbridge Reach" the Converse figure, much cleaned up, is a handsome
fortyish husband and father named Owen Browne. A 1968 graduate of the Naval
Academy who served in Vietnam, Browne uses no drugs and drinks very sparingly,
reads, keeps himself fit and tries to be a good man around the house. Soon after
we meet him, he thinks about the morning he left Penn Station bound for
Annapolis and wonders how the Owen Browne of those days might have imagined
himself 20 years later: "The image would have been a romantic one, but romantic
in the postwar modernist style. Its heroic quality would have been salted in
stoicism and ennobled by alienation. As an uncritical reader of Hemingway, he
would have imagined his future self suitably disillusioned and world-weary." The
trouble is that Browne has become an unsatisfactory parody of that disillusioned
figure, since his work consists of writing advertising copy for Altan Marine, a
yacht brokerage firm in Connecticut. (One thinks of lines from Robert Lowell's
poem about his father, "Commander Lowell": " 'Anchors aweigh,' Daddy boomed in
his bathtub. . . . When Lever Brothers offered to pay / him double what the Navy
paid.")

The Hylan Corporation, the parent company of Browne's firm, has planned to
advertise its boats by having its head man, Matty Hylan, sail one of them around
the world by himself in a highly publicized race. When Hylan, a buccaneering
entrepreneur, disappears amid evidence of financial disarray, Browne decides
that he will enter the race in Hylan's place, even though his solo sailing
experience is limited. His wife, Anne (who works for a sailing magazine, is
handsome and tends to drink too much), perceives that her husband has been
mourning an unrealized dream and sees the race as an opportunity to move their
marriage onto a new track -- so she resists her fears that the venture is really
a desperate one. For all their self-doubts, both she and Browne are idealists,
unwilling to believe that the advice Browne later enters into his log of the
race -- "Be true to the dreams of your youth" -- is really a fool's counsel.

INTO their orbit comes a documentary film maker named Ron Strickland, hired by
the Hylan Corporation to make a movie about its entry in the race. Strickland
prides himself on his lack of illusions, his way of penetrating to the false
heart of every plausible or pretentious human affirmation; his business is to
expose ideals as trumpery, to exploit "the difference between what people say
they're doing and what's really going on." In what he sees as the All-American
marriage of the Brownes, Strickland finds a rich subject for exposure; and since
"almost all the attractive women Strickland knew had been to bed with him," Anne
Browne is of special interest.

The novel divides almost exactly in half, with its first part patiently
interweaving the narratives of Browne, Anne and Strickland, placing these
principals in relation to a number of strongly presented subsidiary characters
-- particularly Strickland's sometime companion, Pamela, a prostitute ("ho" as
she calls herself) and drug user who starred in one of his earlier
documentaries: "Her eyes were a caution, warning away the faint of loin, the
troubled and the poor." In Part Two, the race begins and we move back and forth
between the tumultuous course of Browne's voyage and the equally vivid and
self-destructive course of Anne's affair with Strickland.

The novel's movement is leisurely, but the narrative has shapeliness and great
cumulative power. The source of that power -- and pleasure -- is, of course, Mr.
Stone's language as it creates a style. On every page something verbally
interesting happens: the insolent voice of a Hylan executive "suggested gulls
over India Wharf"; Strickland's 1963 Porsche has rusty fittings, "but the engine
reported like a Prussian soldier on the first turn of the key." Captain
Riggs-Bowen, club secretary of the Southchester Yacht Club (where a publicity
party for the race is held) "had a brick-red blood-pressure mask around his
eyes, which resembled those of a raptor." Anne's father, who disapproves of
Browne, calls the sea a desert ("Nothing out there but social cripples and the
odd Filipino"), while his 60-year-old secretary, Antoinette Lamattina, looks "as
though she thrived on chaste bereavement, frequent communion and the occasional
excursion to Roseland Ballroom." As with Mr. Stone's earlier books, there's an
edge to the gritty idiom of description and dialogue that makes us think of
Hemingway, certainly, but also of Raymond Chandler. In fact, "Outerbridge Reach"
is like a thriller in that we're made to care intensely about what happens next
and who's going to get hurt.

Mr. Stone's novels are always heavily allusive, to previous books and styles as
well as to places and their names. This one about the sea contains, among many
others, references to "Moby-Dick" and "Billy Budd" (Browne is the Handsome
Sailor, thinks Strickland ironically); moments from "Richard III" ("What
dreadful noise of waters in mine ears! What ugly sights of death," thinks
Browne), as well as "Henry V" and "Romeo and Juliet"; lines from Marlowe's
"Doctor Faustus," Henley's "Invictus," Hart Crane's poem "The Bridge" and even
John Gillespie Magee's "High Flight" ("I have slipped the surly bonds of earth /
And danced the skies on laughter-silvered wings").

The allusion needn't be explicit and isn't inevitably ironic or parodic. When
Browne, on the voyage, recovers from what at first looked like a case of
tetanus, he cooks himself a cheese omelet with fried ham that tastes
"marvelous," "as things did at sea" -- and as those canned pork and beans and
canned apricots tasted to Nick Adams on the fishing trip in "Big Two-Hearted
River." As for the spirit of places, the novel is full of New York City (Mr.
Stone grew up there, but New York has been largely absent from his books), from
Penn Station to Staten Island to the Brooklyn Bridge, as well as more exotic
neighboring spots like Atlantic City, Bayonne, Port Newark, the Arthur Kill and
the Outerbridge Reach of the title.

AT a key moment early in the book, Browne, on an impulse, takes out the Parsifal
II, a boat from the Altan repair yard on Staten Island, and comes upon a salvage
yard where the hulks of old tugs and ferries rot in ominous peace. (The moment
recalls an eerily memorable one in "The Best Years of Our Lives" when Dana
Andrews walks among disused aircraft.) The yard belongs to Anne's father and is
an unlikely scene for a quest:

"On Browne's left, the hulks lay scattered in a geometry of shadows. The busy
sheer and curve of their shapes and the perfect stillness of the water made them
appear held fast in some phantom disaster. Across the Kill, bulbous storage
tanks, generators and floodlit power lines stretched to the end of darkness. The
place was marked on the charts as Outerbridge Reach."

My reading of the novel says that the phantom disaster in which Browne later
involves himself also involves a discovery -- which his wife and Strickland also
make -- that Outerbridge Reach reaches further and deeper than anyone could have
thought. So when, deep in the Southern Hemisphere, he sees an iceberg, it
appears to him as a steam tug, "like the ones his father-in-law owned at
Outerbridge Reach." And as, in relentless succession, he confronts high winds,
freezing rain and the second-rate qualities of his unworthily built boat --
"plastic unmaking itself" -- Browne understands at last that he is "about to
experience the true dimensions of the situation in which he had placed himself."

At any rate, it's impossible to read the final, dazzling hundred pages of the
novel without feeling that something terrible has happened for which nobody is
to blame. Alone at sea, Browne muses that "it was necessary to experience life
correctly but at the same time compose it into something acceptable." (Melville
may have had a similar notion when he attached the motto "Keep True to the
Dreams of Thy Youth" to his writing desk.) Robert Stone's blend of heroic
aspiration and mordantly deflationary irony results in something like
tragicomedy -- maybe even something like Shakespeare, our best tragic comedian.
But whatever you call it, "Outerbridge Reach" seems to me a triumph -- a
beautifully and painstakingly composed piece of literary art.



MISERY COMES ABOARD

In midafternoon, he sighted an island off his starboard bow that was black but
inlaid with a deep delicious green, a festive sight in the glare. A hill rose
from it to a height he reckoned at four hundred meters. Referring to the
Admiralty sailing guide, he decided it was the Cape Verdean island of Boa Vista.
Later, a little boat painted in violent African colors went across his bow at a
distance of a mile or so. Through binoculars he could make out a shirtless brown
man with a red bandana across his head standing behind the wheelhouse. The boat
seemed top-heavy and tossed alarmingly in the mild sea. The name Sao Martin da
Porres was stenciled across its stern.

At four o'clock, the marine operator broadcast a roll call of the entries. The
stars of the race, the big boats, were already closing on Cape Agulhas. Browne's
competition was spread westward over several hundred miles. Of the lot, only
Preston Fowler was ahead of him, clearing the equatorial doldrums at about
latitude 11 south. When the broadcast ended, a weather fax arrived announcing a
tropical depression off the horn of Brazil.

Boa Vista passed out of sight before sunset. The moment the sun was down,
equatorial darkness closed around him, black on black under the cold stars.
Worried about the current and his proximity to land, he stayed late on deck. His
mind's eye refused to give up the image of the black and green island. Finally
he played the game of refusing the image, trying to force it from his
imagination. Eventually he nodded off to sleep. Awakening with an odd but
familiar sensation, he discovered himself in tears. The same thing had been
happening all the way across the Atlantic. It was strange because his easting
had been a particularly invigorating run, spinnaker set and westerlies across
the port quarter at 17 knots. Brilliant autumn weather. But night after night he
would go to sleep in perfectly good spirits and wake to feel some old misery
slinking away with an unremembered dream. -- From "Outerbridge Reach."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Stone. (Nancy Crampton)(pg. 22)

Drawing (pg. 1)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Quayle Denies Bush Violated His 'No New Taxes' Pledge

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Vice President Dan Quayle denied today that President Bush violated his 1988
campaign pledge of "no new taxes" when he agreed with Congress two years ago to
raise the top personal income tax rate.

On the NBC News program "Meet the Press," the Vice President also denied that
the most controversial television commercial of Mr. Bush's 1988 campaign, which
featured a convicted murder, Willie Horton, was an example of negative political
advertising.

Mr. Quayle also defended his decision to enlist in the National Guard after
graduating from law school 20 years ago.

Mr. Quayle's six-year stint in the National Guard was an issue in Mr. Bush's
1988 race for the Presidency. The Vice President has said lately that it is a
legitimate political issue to raise questions about the efforts by Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas, a Democratic candidate, to avoid Vietnam service. Asked why
he joined the National Guard, he said, "It wasn't to avoid going to Vietnam."

Tax Increase 'a Compromise'

Mr. Quayle said Mr. Bush accepted the tax increase because the likelihood of war
in the Persian Gulf then limited his ability to wage a domestic battle with
Congress.

"He made a choice; the choice was a budget or no budget, and to get a budget, he
had to give the Democrats in Congress a tax increase," Mr. Quayle said. "It was
a compromise with Congress, and it was not going back on a campaign pledge."

Asked whether Mr. Bush would employ negative advertising to counter the attacks
by his challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan, the Vice President replied that "it
depends on what you call a negative ad." The "Willie Horton ad" of the 1988
campaign, which was made by supporters of Mr. Bush, does not fit that
description, he said.

The advertisement suggested that Mr. Bush's Democratic opponent, Gov. Michael S.
Dukakis of Massachusetts, was soft on crime because a convicted murderer from
the state was given a weekend pass from prison and committed a second murder.

"You can debate whether Willie Horton was a negative ad or not," Mr. Quayle
said. "I don't view it in the negative category that you all do and furthermore
I don't think the Willie Horton ad was a significant contribution to George
Bush's victory."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Kerrey and Clinton See Their Roles Reversing

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: ST. PAUL, Feb. 28


Gallant visits the sick in hospitals and talks to fifth-graders about patriotism
and friendship.

Goofus calls Jesse Jackson a backstabber on an open microphone.

Gallant says he fought for his country.

Goofus has to explain why he did not.

As readers of the children's magazine Highlights know all too well, Gallant did
everything right, and his clumsy twin, Goofus, did everything wrong.

In a brief moment of role reversal, which he would dearly like to prolong,
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska seems to have traded campaign personas with Gov.
Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

For the past few days, it has been Mr. Clinton who looked grumpy and uncertain,
while Mr. Kerrey, after weeks in walkabout mode, seemed at least to be paying
attention to where he was and sometimes to enjoy being there.

Even so, it is not clear whether Mr. Kerrey's new attentiveness will give him
the lift he needs in the March 3 primary in Colorado, a Western state that he
needs to win to show he cannot be shellacked in his own part of the country.

Talking Tough to Bush

In recent polls in Colorado, he trailed Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas. Even Edmund
G. Brown Jr., the former Governor of California, was a few points ahead. On
Friday, Mr. Kerrey's campaign televised two commercials in Colorado, a
biographical sketch and another about his concern for the environment.

Today, Mr. Kerrey reached for Mr. Clinton's cloak of electability and gave a
dress rehearsal of how he would talk tough to George Bush if he were the
nominee.

At Macalester College here, he called Mr. Bush's economic policies "obscene" and
said that "like most smut, it is the disgusting substitute for the real thing."
Mr. Bush, he said, was a "shill for the rich and a patsy for the powerful."

Admitting to Being 'Awful'

Before the New Hampshire primary, it was clear who was Gallant and who was
Goofus. Governor Clinton charmed crowds, racked up endorsements, raised money,
sold himself on "electability" and became a front-runner before the first vote
was cast. Senator Kerrey made a joke about lesbians into an open microphone,
kept changing advisers and advertisements and did so poorly selling his plan for
national health insurance he now calls his own performance "awful." Moreover, he
seemed to lack the stomach for basic political engagement.

Something, perhaps the prospect of having his campaign end, helped Mr. Kerrey
overcome his qualms. A Vietnam veteran who won the Medal of Honor, he sharply
attacked Mr. Clinton in the South for the way in which he avoided the draft in
the Vietnam war, warning that he should not be nominated because Republicans
would seize the issue and "open him up like a soft peanut."

Mr. Clinton, who dealt with accusations of marital infidelity with a calculated
and measured response -- an appearance with his wife on the CBS News program "60
Minutes" -- responded to these recent attacks on his draft record with reflexive
counterpunches. His campaign was also thrown into a tizzy after Mr. Clinton,
normally the most sure-footed of campaigners, vented his rage about the Rev.
Jesse Jackson into an open microphone after believing, mistakenly, that Mr.
Jackson planned to endorse Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa.

Midwestern Reserve

Is Mr. Kerrey beginning to display a little of the political charm that Mr.
Clinton has tried to claim as his monopoly?

In public, Mr. Kerrey is not usually as warm and polished as Mr. Clinton. He
seems held back by a veneer of Midwestern reserve, a reverse pride in not
showing off. It melted a little in a small rally in Tampa, where after a
powerfully delivered speech, Mr. Kerrey stepped under the police security ropes
and threw himself into an enthusiastic pool of supporters, happily shaking hands
and ruffling children's heads. (In New Hampshire, by contrast, Mr. Kerrey's
speeches were occasionaly so dry and uninspiring that audience members would not
linger to meet the candidate. Marvin Rosen, a co-chairman of Mr. Kerrey's
finance committee, joked that "there were times when if I didn't have to stay,
I'd have left the room.")

Before attacking Mr. Clinton, Mr. Kerrey even did some good deeds. He took a
private tour of Grady Hospital in Atlanta, talking to mothers who are recovering
drug addicts about their babies. He sat before a group of fifth graders in
Tallahassee and asked so many questions the principal had to interrupt him to
send the children back to classes.

More Care in Interviews

In his interviews with reporters, the candid and whimsical candidate whose
sponanteous musings drove advisers to despair, has grown more cautious, avoiding
introspection and instead reciting passages from his standard speech to
reporters over the din of his airplane's engine.

And the candidate who wavered between bringing up Mr. Clinton's performance
during the war and saying in troubled, thoughtful tones that he did not want to
make an "issue" of Vietnam, now raises it with old-fashioned gusto as the March
10 "Super Tuesday" primaries draw near.

He also seems to revel in his broadsides against the President and his family.
Among other things, Mr. Kerrey today attacked Mr. Bush's personal financial
dealings, those of his sons, Marvin and Neil, and one of his brothers, who Mr.
Kerrey said was "building a golf course" in China for the "butcher of Tienanmen
Square." Mr. Bush, Mr. Kerrey said, made economic policy that "is pretty closely
tied to his own family interests."

Later, Mr. Kerrey dismissed questions about whether he had been a little harsh.
"This isn't the Dartmouth debating club," he said. "This is the rough-and-tumble
of the campaign."

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton answering questions yesterday while visiting
an American government class at Seattle Central Community College. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
The Road Not Taken

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 215 words


To the Editor:

Thanks for putting some perspective back in "Bill Clinton's Vietnam Test"
(editorial, Feb. 14). I knew Bill and his fellow Rhodes Scholar housemates at
Oxford: Strobe Talbott, who has gone on to become a journalist with Time
magazine, and Frank Aller, whom you have probably never heard of. Frank was
drafted and out of his convictions against the war became a draft resister.

From that time on his life took a drastic turn, away from the A student,
all-round successful guy who achieved a Rhodes, and onto a path that led him
into activism, controversy, exile and eventually suicide.

Bill, through whatever means, did not have to make such a choice, and continued
living the American dream with success after success. I believe he knew even
then that his ultimate success might be the Presidency.

Therefore, he did what any astute achiever would have done, assessing the
political process.

It is also just possible that, having gone from candidate to elected official,
he has performed his job well, even excellently; but it is difficult to assess
this from what scraps of hard information have found their way into the news.
Let us know, not who the candidate has been, but who the President might be.

JANA BRENNING
Rhinebeck, N.Y., Feb. 21, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out;
SHORT ON MONEY, KERREY QUITS RACE

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 5


As expected, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska ended his campaign for the
Democratic Presidential nomination today, explaining that he did not have the
money to go on.

"We were ready to go full throttle," he said at a news conference, "but
unfortunately we ran out of gas."

Surrounded by Senate colleagues and cheering campaign staff members at the Hart
Senate Office Building, Mr. Kerrey spoke with grace and good humor, saying
ruefully that after Tuesday's primaries and caucuses in seven states, "I felt a
little like the Jamaican bobsled team -- a lot of spirit but unfortunately not a
lot of medals."

Time to Mend Fences

Looking calm and relieved after a frustrating five-month campaign, Mr. Kerrey
used the occasion not just to thank supporters but also to patch up his
differences with the remaining Democratic candidates.

And the man who had complained after doing poorly in the New Hampshire primary
that he felt "eclipsed," also used his 15 minutes in the spotlight today to
expand on his campaign themes. He did so with greater clarity and effect than he
had as a candidate.

Mr. Kerrey, who had labeled his campaign a crusade for "fundamental change,"
turned up his anti-establishment oratory a few notches.

"Perhaps the strongest message of this campaign," Mr. Kerrey said, "is that job
security in Washington, D.C., must be reduced if we are ever to reverse the
uncertainty everywhere else."

Standing behind Mr. Kerrey, Senators Wendell H. Ford of Kentucky and Harry M.
Reid of Nevada, whose terms expire in 1992, listened with the expressionless
gaze of police officers at a rock concert.

"America's leaders need to wake up. As leaders, we need to awaken to the new
world and the new possibilities in it. In the old era we contained a clear
enemy." Mr. Kerrey said. "Now we must contain the more elusive enemies of
hatred, violence, bitterness, selfishness, intolerance and ignorance."

Mr. Kerrey, who had said during the campaign that other Democrats could not win
the general election, dismissed such statements as "hyperbole."

In remarks to reporters afterward, Mr. Kerrey insisted that his attacks on how
Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas dealt with his draft status during the Vietnam War
would not keep him from supporting Mr. Clinton. "If he is the nominee, I will
campaign feverishly to help get him elected in November," he said.

In his thanks to staff members and supporters, Mr. Kerrey, a former Navy SEAL
who was awarded the Medal of Honor, made special mention of the Vietnam veterans
who campaigned on his behalf.

"I take it as a sign of hope that my campaign has awakened in thousands of
Vietnam veterans the realization that their government is no longer an enemy,"
he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Panel's Top G.O.P. Staff Is Dismissed by Helms

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


After months of internal strife, Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, the
senior Republican on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, has discharged
nearly all the panel's top Republican staff members.

The dismissals, carried out Monday, were part of larger changes intended to
increase the staff's effectiveness, said Bud Nance, a retired Navy admiral whom
Mr. Helms brought in as staff director two months ago.

Others familiar with the dismissals said they had resulted from Mr. Helms's
feeling that his minority staff was pursuing an independent agenda, isolating
him from the Bush Administration and other Senate Republicans.

"I felt we had too much overhead and not enough operators," said Mr. Nance,
whose ties to Mr. Helms date from their school days in Monroe, N.C. "It was
difficult for me to see exactly who was doing what."

Among the casualties was James Lucier, Mr. Nance's predecessor as minority staff
director, who was a legislative aide to Mr. Helms for 24 years. Mr. Lucier could
not be reached for comment.

Others dismissed were Cliff Kiracofe, an expert on Europe; Bruce Rickerson, who
handled State Department budget matters, and Tracy Usry, a specialist on issues
involving American prisoners of war. Five other aides and two consultants also
were let go, committee officials said.

Republican 'Squabbling'

Republicans with knowledge of the development said the changes had been brought
on by Mr. Helms's realization that some of his aides had become too independent
and were pursuing their own policy goals.

"There was little communication or effort to cooperate," said one senior
Republican. "They had gotten Helms isolated."

Republican senators who serve on the committee complained to Mr. Helms last
spring that the staff did little to meet their needs for information and
analysis. "We were squabbling among ourselves more often than with the
Democrats," said one Republican, who like most spoke only on condition of
anonymity.

Senators have also been frustrated because the committee, once a plum
assignment, is now seen by many critics as an irrelevant backwater, unable to
complete action on important legislation. Congress in 1991 failed for the sixth
straight year to enact a foreign aid authorization bill, relying instead on a
stopgap financing bill to meet aid obligations to allies around the world.

Another factor in the dismissals was conflict over the P.O.W. issue. Without
consulting other Republican senators on the committee, Mr. Helms's staff last
year issued a report that raised questions about the fate of thousands of
American P.O.W.'s after World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. The
report contended that there was a possibility that some were taken to the Soviet
Union and never returned. The Soviet Union and its successor governments have
denied the accusation.

One Republican Senator, Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas, took exception to the
report at a public hearing late last year. At the same hearing, Tracy Usry, one
of the staff members dismissed Monday, engaged in a verbal sparring match with
Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Jesse Helms (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report
Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost;
The Healing: Pain and Images For a Lifetime

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: AURORA, Colo., Jan. 14


As other troops paraded last year through the confetti and basked in the
thunderous roar of gratitude, Jon Price watched the triumphant scene on a
television from his hospital bed.

Mr. Price, a 23-year-old Army specialist who stepped on a land mine one February
afternoon in Iraq, now walks with a cane.

"I'll never run again," said the Iowa native, a burly one-time farm boy who
starred in high school as a football player and wrestler. "It stinks."

He has lost the hearing in his left ear. Bits of shrapnel remain lodged from his
hips to his feet. He has no feeling in his right foot, and he suffers from
severe arthritis.

Mr. Price, the son of a Vietnam veteran, said he has "no regrets" about his
wartime service, which he called "something that had to be done."

Hurt by Friendly Fire

He sat in the lobby at the Fitzsimmons Army Medical Center here in suburban
Denver, alongside Hilbert Potter, a 31-year-old Army sergeant who lost his right
leg from the knee down. He was injured by shots mistakenly fired from an
American tank.

"I don't think people have forgotten us," said Mr. Potter. "When people hear my
name, they think, 'Hero.' "

The enduring injuries of these two young soldiers underscores the limits of a
nation's good will. The applause and parades and bumper stickers of support
cannot heal all wounds.

In the war's wake, many Americans vowed that these returning veterans, unlike
those who served in Vietnam, would not be forgotten. And despite the recession,
at least some of those promises have been kept.

As the troops headed home, Frank Capilla, a plumbing contractor in Pleasonton,
Calif., rounded up pledges of more than two dozen jobs from business people in
his region. The effort has indeed placed 12 returning veterans in jobs, and
awarded $1,000 college scholarships to 12 others.

"I hired a returning marine as an apprentice last May," said Mr. Capilla, whose
business has been hurt by the slumping construction industry. "But if I had to
hire somebody today, I couldn't do it."

'Can You Help Me?'

Mark Bishop, who served as a flight engineer in the Air Force, was one of the
lucky ones. After a long job hunt, he heard about the pledges.

"I basically told Mr. Capilla: 'I'm an out-of-work vet from Desert Storm. Can
you help me?' " Mr. Bishop, 30, recalled.

The plumbing contractor helped Mr. Bishop write a cover letter and a resume and
land an interview with the Seaman's Corporation, in neighboring Concord. He got
a job as a service engineer.

"A lot of guys I've talked to can't find anything," Mr. Bishop said. "It's the
recession, you know."

Mr. Capilla said his business friends have done their best to honor their
pledges of jobs. But he said he worries that the nation's support has waned a
bit.

"As soon as the war went to the back pages of the newspapers, there just wasn't
the enthusiasm anymore," he said. "But then, the war only lasted 100 hours. And
the American people have a short attention span."

Bonds Forged in Terror

But for Mr. Price and many others, the memories of the war will never fade.
Along with the day the land mine exploded, he said, he will never forget the
bonds cemented in the moments and hours of terror.

Before the accident, Mr. Price, who loves country music, often passed the time
singing the Garth Brooks song, "I've Got Friends in Low Places."

The day before his accident, he said, he had gotten into an argument with
another soldier, a young black man who chided Mr. Price about being a "redneck."
But when the land mine exploded, and Mr. Price lay motionless, someone ran to
his side, held his hand and implored him to stay alive. It was the young black
soldier.

"Sing, Price, sing," the soldier pleaded, as tears streamed down his cheeks.
"Sing 'Low Places.' "

Months later, as he lay in the Denver hospital, the telephone rang for Mr.
Price. "My name is Garth Brooks," said the voice at the other end of the line.
"I want you to come and have dinner with me."

Mr. Price spent the day with the country band. Mr. Brooks brought him on stage
at a concert, and led the applause for him.

Mr. Price, who hopes to be released from the hospital in April, said he intends
to go back to school. His disability pay will cover part of the tuition, but he
said it will probably not be enough, and added, "I guess I'll get a job flipping
burgers."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hilbert Potter, a 31-year-old Army sergeant from Easton, Md.,
lost his right leg from the knee down when he was hit by errant shot from an
American tank. (Eric Lars Bakke for The New York Times)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- Inside: 4 special reports.;
A Year After Victory, Joy Is a Ghost

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: SAVANNAH, Ga., Jan. 15


The yellow ribbons, now frayed and faded, are still wrapped around the oak trees
near the Hunter Army Air Field here where horn-honking, flag-waving crowds lined
the streets in the early morning hours last March to greet the first troops
returning from the Persian Gulf war.

But here as elsewhere, the war seems like something from another era these days,
and the talk is of other things: the sluggish economy, the dreary stretch of
empty buildings on Broughton Street downtown, the record-breaking local murder
rate.

A year after it began in fear and ambiguity and ended in relief and jubilation,
the Persian Gulf war has receded to a degree that few people expected, replaced
by fears about the economy and doubts about the country's ability to handle
problems at home as easily as it dispatched Saddam Hussein's overmatched
military forces.

Layoff Worries at Raytheon

At the Raytheon plant in Andover, Mass., where the Patriot missiles that helped
decide the war are manufactured, the talk is of possible layoffs.

For Charlie Bryant, a 51-year-old Transit Authority bus driver in New York,
memories of service in the Persian Gulf are overshadowed by the 65-hour weeks he
works to make up for the pension he lost while he was overseas.

When war burst across America's television screens on Jan. 16, 1991, Betsy
Hoit-Thetford was putting together a newsletter called The Tunnel for the
families of military officials overseas. Now, she's wondering if her husband,
Richard, an Apache helicopter pilot attached to Hunter Field, will be able to
stay in the military amid the huge cutbacks.

"This seems to be the Andy Warhol war," said John Shy, a history professor at
the University of Michigan. "A quarter-hour of fame and maximum attention and,
in retrospect, horrendous losses of life on the other side, but remarkably
trivial in its consequences otherwise."

A Pall Over a City

Of course, for those who fought the war and for people in the region it ravaged,
the war is anything but forgotten. It lingers like a pall over Monessen, Pa.,
where people mourn 13 Army reservists who died in a Scud missile explosion in
the war's final days. It will live forever for Hilbert Potter, a 31-year-old
Army sergeant from Easton, Md., who lost his right leg from the knee down when
he was hit by an errant shot from an American tank.

And some say the war had a lasting effect at home in a new-found respect for the
military and the healing of some of the wounds at home from Vietnam.

"I think the war altered people's perception sufficiently that they will never
again think of the American military the way they did before it," said Adrian
Cronauer, a communications lawyer in Washington, who as an Armed Forces Radio
announcer in Vietnam was the model for the Robin Williams character in "Good
Morning, Vietnam."

But the sense of the war as a turning point for the nation has all but
evaporated, as evidenced by President Bush's descent from triumphant commander
in chief to beleaguered steward of a sagging economy.

Something Is Missing

"I can't believe where this country is going," said Fran Calvani of Norwell,
Mass., whose husband, Jim, served in the gulf region as a sergeant 1st class
with the Massachusetts National Guard. "The loss of jobs is unbelievable, and
finding jobs is even worse.

Donna Lane of Atlanta, who made up about 3,500 patriotic buttons to support the
troops and has 2,200 left, added, "It seems like last year never happened, and
whatever was pulling everyone together is gone."

Still, many people distinguish the reasons for fighting from the impact at home.
With Saddam Hussein still in power in Iraq, peace still elusive in the Middle
East, horrible environmental costs and questions about Iraq's nuclear
intentions, some second thoughts can be heard on whether the war ended too
quickly, or whether it should have been fought at all. But there have been few
signs that the nation has changed its mind about the war. About two-thirds of
the people surveyed in a recent Associated Press poll say they still agree with
Mr. Bush's decision to begin the war, just as many say the war was ended too
soon. A week after the war began, 74 percent approved of the action.

"It was not Saddam Hussein as a person but Saddam Hussein's nuclear capability
that posed a clear and present danger," said Ann F. Lewis of Brookline, Mass.,
long a prominent Democrat who was active in the coalition supporting the war.
"Ironically, the controversy at the time was whether we were exaggerating the
threat. Now it looks like we may have understated it."

What Was Accomplished?

But even many enthusiastic supporters of the war now find it hard to say what it
produced.

"Gee, I couldn't really answer that," said Karen Stoddard, who helped organize
several demonstrations in support of the troops in the San Francisco Bay Area.
"If you're talking about people having good feelings, about the camaraderie,
that was there."

In the flush of victory, some commentators hailed it as a show of America's
pre-eminence and a rebuke to those who saw a nation going down hill. "This is
the end of the decline," said Michael Novak of the American Enterprise Institute
as the war ended. "For years, people are going to cite the lessons of the
Persian Gulf."

But an editorial cartoon in The Savannah Morning News today portrays a more
current foreign affairs metaphor for America's world role. It showed four
goofy-eyed clowns emerging from a Honda identified as "Bush & Co. Asian Trip."
The copy above reads: "Home The Conquering Heroes."

It is quite possible the gloom today is as exaggerated as the giddy triumphalism
of the war's end. And some see the war's evanescence as indicative of a national
culture in which events go from national sensations to hazy recollections with
dizzying speed.

But many experts say the war has receded primarily because its success says
little about the nation's real challenges in a world transformed by the end of
the cold war.

"The threats we face now aren't primarily military threats, they're economic
ones," said Alan Brinkley, a history professor at Columbia University. "In the
long run, this wasn't the kind of thing that could transform America's political
outlook. That's why it just seems to be vanishing into the mist."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Personal Approach To Cold War History

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 860 words



The Cruel Peace
Everyday Life in the Cold War
By Fred Inglis
492 pages. Illustrated. Basic Books. $28.

In a wonderfully readable and opinionated book that infuses new life into the
people and events of nearly a half-century of cold war, Fred Inglis in "The
Cruel Peace" approaches history through personality. He builds upon the edifice
of Lytton Strachey's influential "Eminent Victorians," which emphasized
biography as selective art and not simply as cumulative fact. The two British
authors are kin in another way: both come across as literary iconoclasts.

Mr. Inglis, a professor of education at the University of Warwick, England, has
a number of heroic people in his book and an even larger number of villainous
personalities in high places. His greatest rancor is reserved for the cold
warriors, in the Soviet Union and the United States, who contributed to the
incessant small wars that killed the dream of peace and progress after the
euphoria at the end of World War II. As a popular historian, he prefers kind
hearts to coronets.

"The Cruel Peace" is clearly and cleverly constructed. It alternates between
events -- including the Berlin blockade, the Korean war, the Cuban missile
crisis, the Vietnam war, the Prague Spring, the 1968 Democratic convention in
Chicago, the invasion of Afghanistan, the peace movements, Central American
conflicts, Mikhail S. Gorbachev's achievements -- and small biographies of those
who made a difference through their actions or writings, among them George
Kennan, Willy Brandt, Freeman Dyson, Philip Agee, Neil Sheehan, Joan Didion and
Joan Ruddock.

To his credit as a social historian, Mr. Inglis devotes as much praise to the
relatively unknown as to national leaders. "Joan Ruddock became one of the key
spokeswomen for the generation that would finally refuse to ratify the
declarations of cold war adhered to for 45 years," he writes. Ms. Ruddock led
the sit-in campaign against cruise missiles at Greenham Common in England; in
1980, she became chairman of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, whose
influence spread around the world.

Mr. Inglis is less impressed by a former Prime Minister and a former President.

He writes: "Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan -- both of them narrow, even
bigoted, each blessed with luck, money and a strong will -- by the accidents of
electoral systems were brought to power at the same moment and with the same
vision. They returned with a noisy to-do to the lessons they had learned in the
early 1950's, when the machine of Stalinism far exceeded in reach and power the
mad old despot's grasp on reality. By invoking these lessons, they reawoke
anti-socialist fear and loathing for 10 years, and in a lot of people."

To learn about the role of intelligence and counterintelligence on both sides
during the cold war, Mr. Inglis much prefers the novels of John le Carre to the
derring-do of the Central Intelligence Agency. He says that the C.I.A.
contributed to President John F. Kennedy's disastrous decision to invade the Bay
of Pigs with Cuban mercenaries, as well as to the Chilean coup that led to the
death of President Salvador Allende. The agency belongs more to ("the history of
publicity," he writes, "than the history of foreign policy."

The anger that lies just below the surface of the author's sentences is often
tempered by dazzling writing:

"Taken as an amiable parody, the cold war turns out to have been both high jinks
and grand opera. The audience went onstage only at key moments and when invited
by the actors, usually just to vote. In an odd corner of the action, now and
then, some of the audience joined in so heartily that they got killed. The last
casualty of the cold war, its loss obscured by the real heroes as well as by the
mock-heroics of the actor-politicians going through their repertory, was that
unspectacular and much mentioned agency, democracy."

Despite the author's pyrotechnical language, it should be noted that post-cold
war events have shown that democracy, with all its disorderly conduct, is not a
casualty and remains alive. Mr. Inglis writes from a British left-liberal
perspective. He properly adds up the body count of the shooting wars in Korea,
Vietnam, Cambodia, Afghanistan and Central America into the millions. But he
says that only tens of thousands died in the Soviet Gulag after 1946 and that
only a few thousand were killed by Soviet arms, omitting the living and actual
deaths endured by millions under Stalinist rule in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.

Mr. Inglis does add that one of the casualties of the cold war was "the promise
of happiness held out by the visionaries of socialism." Another casualty of the
cold war was "the idea, and the realization, of civil society." He concludes,
approvingly, that the cold war destroyed the illusion of "the absolute power of
superpowers."

In his challenging book, Mr. Inglis looks ahead to a time when there will be "a
more cooperative world," without "the more repellent aspects of capitalism," in
which "power is mitigated by minimum justice and a touch of mercy." He sets no
timetable for that millennium.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1059 words



International A3-12

SLASHING 2 BIG ARSENALS

In advancing proposals to slash their nuclear arsenals, the United States and
Russia envision eliminating a class of missiles viewed as the biggest threat to
peace. But President Bush is asking President Yeltsin to give up an advantage in
land-based missiles in exchange for a concession that is not quite parallel. A1

President Yeltsin outlined sharp cutbacks in arms spending. A8

K.G.B. AND THE VIETNAM WAR

The head of a Russian panel overseeing K.G.B. archives says he is prepared to
let a few American historians search for evidence that could shed light on the
fate of Americans taken prisoner during the Vietnam war. But he says he has not
found such documents himself. A8

 MIDEAST TALKS END IN PLEDGE

A round of Middle East peace talks ended in Moscow with a pall cast by the
question of who will speak for the Palestinians, but with a sense that the
negotiations have a future. A1

ISRAELI ELECTION IN JUNE

Israel's main political parties indicated that they were close to agreement on
holding elections in June, but differed on the date. A10

SAUDI WARNS FUNDAMENTALISTS

King Fahd of Saudi Arabia has warned fundamentalists that they will get harsher
treatment if they persist in challenging Saudi foreign and domestic policies. A3


BUSH TO MEET CHINA PREMIER

President Bush is to meet China's Prime Minister, Li Peng, in New York on Friday
in their first encounter since the 1989 crackdown in Tiananmen Square. A3

RIFT IN U.N. COUNCIL

As the United Nations Security Council prepares to hold its first summit
meeting, its 15 members are arguing over how much emphasis should be given to
human rights, democracy and disarmament in a declaration to be issued Friday.
China and India want to avoid any ringing endorsements of those goals. A3

VIOLENT CLASHES IN ALGERIA

Security forces clashed with crowds in a Muslim fundamentalist neighborhood in
the Algerian capital, leaving at least one person dead and 11 injured. It was
the worst day of violence since the Algerian military seized power on Jan. 11.
A5

RECESSION CLOUDS BRITISH VOTE
Like President Bush, Prime Minister John Major of Britain has to face an
election this year in almost the worst possible economic circumstances: a
recession whose end is not yet in sight. A6

Berlin Journal: The guilty become accusers, and accusers victims. A4

National A14-19, B8

BUDGET KEEPS STEADY COURSE

The President's $1.52 trillion budget called for modest increases in popular
domestic programs but few major changes in spending priorities to fight the
recession. A1

DOCUMENT DISPLAYS DIFFERENCES

News analysis: The budget illustrates how starkly the President's views differ
from those of his Democratic opponents. A1

TAX TRAP FOR THE UNWARY

A reduction in taxes withheld from paychecks could leave many people scrambling
for money to make up underpayments next year, Treasury figures indicate. A17

MIXED MESSAGE ON MILITARY

The proposed military budget offers deep cuts in long-range nuclear arms but
stops short of fundamental changes in response to the Soviet Union's collapse.
A18

The Seawolf program ends, and so do jobs in Groton, Conn. A18

BUSH WINS ONE AUDIENCE . . .

A crowd of skeptical New Hampshire Republicans said the President's speech
contained some ideas that would appeal to people of the hard-pressed state. A15

. . . BUT LOSES ANOTHER

When the President talks about changes in tax law, the affluent residents of Oak
Park, Ill., listen, and many were not impressed with what they heard Tuesday
night. A15

SELLING POLLUTION RIGHTS

Southern California air-quality regulators want to give some companies the right
to pollute. But they have to be willing to pay to do so. A1

SHIFT IN KERREY TACTICS

Senator Kerrey took on a more agressive tone as he criticized Governor Clinton
for once saying Governor Cuomo acted like a member of the Mafia. A14

CUOMO, OFFENDED, ON OFFENSE

Political Memo: Governor Clinton's Cuomo-Mafia comparison got him into trouble
in New York, and Governor Cuomo seemed determined to make it worse. A14

Pat Buchanan called on the President to debate him. A15

QUESTIONS ON 1978 KILLINGS

Investigators are looking into whether Puerto Rico or United States officials
were involved in killing two members of a pro-independence group 14 years ago.
A18

RESEARCH INQUIRY WIDENED

House investigators have widened their inquiry into overcharging for research to
include other universities, contractors and officials who let the contracts. B8

WHAT COLD WAR THAW?

U.S.S. Kentucky Journal: As the rest of the world adjusts to momentous changes,
it is business as usual aboard one of America's missile-packing submarines. B8

A balloon is found ready to try to circle the globe. B8

Scientists have found that sperm may use smell to find an egg. A19

The maker of implants hired Griffin Bell for its investigation. B8

Metropolitan  ?  Digest, B1

A SENTENCE AND CRITICISM

Sharply assailing a jury's verdict, a judge sentenced an Egyptian immigrant to
the maximum sentence for gun possession, assault and coercion charges arising
from the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane. A1

RESPONSE TO CONDOM PROGRAM

New York City's experiment in condom distribution, operating in 16 schools,
appears to be drawing a modest response, which some students and teachers say
may reflect students' discomfort in asking teachers for condoms. A1

Neediest Cases B3

Business     Digest, D1

The Home Section C1-12


The shame of decorating, and how to hide it. C1

As couture ponders its future, Saint Laurent finds approval now. C1

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Film rating dispute over a violent melodrama. C15


Sports B10-18

Basketball: Knicks make Bullets their latest victim. B11

Boxing: Tyson's lawyers raise an objection on evidence. B11

Obituaries B9

Big Willie Dixon, blues singer.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials A20

The tinkerer.
The big store.
Haiti: tighten the embargo.

Letters A20

William Safire: Yeltsin-Bush summit. A21

Anthony Lewis: Victims in Gaza. A21

Ted Van Dyk: Clinton's middle-class hang-up. A21

Theodore R. Sizer: A test of democracy. A21

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A change in withholding puts more in the paycheck.

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
A Front-Runner in Trouble, Clinton Portrays Himself as a Victim of Attacks

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Feb. 9


Meet Bill Clinton, front-runner. In seven days, he has encountered delirious
crowds from Maine to South Carolina, raised hundreds of thousands of dollars and
attracted nonstop news coverage.

Meet Bill Clinton, doomed candidate. His formidable lead among New Hampshire
voters is contracting, according to the most recent polls. Every new day holds
the threat of yet another damaging story that could deliver a killing blow. He
is damaged goods. All the Washington commentators say so.

It is a slippery slope that the Governor of Arkansas is on these days. As his
campaign frantically conducts surveys to gauge the state of play, he has devised
a stay-above-the-fray strategy that portrays him as the victim of a feeding
frenzy and follows these rules: ignore attacks from Democrats; play up the
attacks from Republicans.

This strategy was on display in recent days as Mr. Clinton traveled around New
Hampshire delivering a sober message of economic revival before returning to the
South, where he spent the weekend seeking physical and political replenishment.

"People ask me sometimes during the course of the last three weeks how I've
sustained all these obviously very well-planned and coordinated negative hits,"
Mr. Clinton said in Jonesboro, Ark., to supporters who had paid $100 each to
hear him speak on Saturday. "And I said, 'Oh, this is just an ordinary election
week in Arkansas.' "

Focusing on Republicans

But in recent days Senators Tom Harkin and Bob Kerrey have seized on reports
about how Mr. Clinton escaped the Vietnam War draft to raise new questions about
his candidacy. On Monday, Mr. Clinton planned to huddle with his campaign
consultants on a plane trip back to New Hampshire from which reporters were
barred.

His advisers have been saying there is little to be gained by responding to
either of the Democratic Senators because Mr. Clinton remains far ahead of them
in the polls. And he has boxed himself out of attacking former Senator Paul E.
Tsongas of Massachusetts, who has most benefited from his latest weaknesses,
because until recently Mr. Clinton had been praising him profusely on the
campaign trail.

So there is little left to attack but the Republicans, most of them unnamed, who
he said are undermining his candidacy. This approach, his advisers hope, has the
added advantage of allowing Mr. Clinton to look Presidential by focusing his
sights on the general election rather than the primaries.

"New Hampshire voters are very sophisticated," said Stan Greenberg, Mr.
Clinton's poll taker. "They already have a front-runner rationalization for any
garbage that materializes."

Behind on Repairs

This may be so, but the Clinton campaign has so far done little to patch up the
paper cuts that have reinforced the impression of a bleeding campaign. Senator
Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Senate Armed Services Committee,
for instance, endorsed Mr. Clinton in December, and a word of support from him
could have aided the campaign's effort on the draft question. But the Governor
never contacted him, and Mr. Nunn was left instead to express his doubts about
whether Mr. Clinton was telling the truth.

That important supporters like Mr. Nunn are left untended exposes a weakness in
a campaign that has had little opportunity to sink its organizational roots
after first being swept into front-runner status by early polls and then knocked
about by questions of credibility. It has been left instead to Clinton
organizers at the state level around the country to do the bulk of the damage
control.

But so far, the campaign's problems have had little measurable effect on fund
raising. Mr. Clinton's New York organizers hope an event Monday night in
Manhattan will raise $500,000.

Frustration on Draft Question

Lately, Mr. Clinton has begun expressing puzzlement and frustration that it has
fallen to him to prove that his explanations about issues like the draft
deferment he received in the Vietnam War era are true.

A former executive secretary of the Hot Springs, Ark., draft board and the
Reserve Officers Training Corps recruiter who dealt with Mr. Clinton have both
said recently in published reports that Mr. Clinton attempted to pull strings to
avoid being drafted.

Mr. Clinton has responded by saying that although he received the R.O.T.C.
deferment for two months in 1969, he had a change of heart and asked to be
reclassified as draft-eligible shortly before a draft lottery was passed by
Congress. He never served because the number he drew was never called.

If he survives the furor about his draft status, Mr. Clinton and his advisers
say, they expect future attacks. They also say they are convinced, for the
moment at least, that the public will recoil from anything that begins to
resemble what Mr. Clinton describes as "piling on."

"The people are very angry about anybody's attempt to make this election about
anything but them," Mr. Clinton said after his appearance in Jonesboro this
weekend. "They don't want this election to be another standard negative election
where they're asked to vote against somebody who's been drug through the mud."

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The 1992 Campaign;
In One 'Base' of Support, Clinton Is Tottering

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 29; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: COVINGTON, Ga., Feb. 15


No matter what they think about whether Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas dodged the
draft when he was a college student in the 1960's, the people in this small
middle Georgia city generally concede that his appeal to fellow Southerners and
what they term his "electability"have now pretty much evaporated.

For some, this is a sad state of affairs, highlighting the hypocrisy associated
with the Vietnam War years. For others, the fading gleam of Mr.  Clinton's image
is a simple case of reaping what one has sown.

The South, where the main focus of the Presidential campaign will turn after the
New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, is "a narrow-minded and unforgiving region
when it comes to things like that," said Bill Stokes, a 38-year-old resident of
this city of about 14,000, 45 miles from Atlanta. Stopping to talk as he left a
drug store, he noted that the region was full of veterans, retired military
personnel and was liberally dotted with military bases.

"I was just a little too young for the draft, but I remember that time, and
people would do almost anything to stay out of the service," Mr. Stokes said.
"Some just chose more excusable ways out, such as the Reserves and National
Guards."

Mr. Stokes said he believed that voters in the Georgia primary on March 3 should
not judge Mr. Clinton harshly for something that happened 20 years ago in
connection with an unpopular war. But he also said he sensed that others here
would not feel the same. This seemed to be borne out in about two dozen
interviews today with residents as they ran errands, shopped and relaxed.

The perception of Mr. Clinton in the South is important to his candidacy because
the region is his natural base of support, and Southern states will hold seven
more primaries a week after the Georgia vote.

"I ain't got no use for him," said Mike Stapp, 31. "If he's not man enough to
serve his country in the Army, he's not man enough to be President."

Other people suggested that military service should be a given for any
Presidential nominee.

"If you are going to be Commander in Chief, you ought to spend some time in the
military," said Sgt. Robert Wade, the 42-year-old Army recruiter here who has
been in the service for 23 years. "What he did is coming back to haunt him, and
I just don't think he is electable now."

Gene Gaillard, 41, the assistant manager of Cohen's Department store, termed the
furor over Mr. Clinton's draft status "much ado about nothing." He said he had
read Mr. Clinton's letter about his personal debate over being drafted and it
was a poignant reminder of the times and his own "struggle and ambivalence."

He said, "It brought back memories of how we all were being pulled and tugged,
and anybody who went through that can't hold it against Clinton."

Perhaps the draft question will prove to be a "generational thing," said David
Dodd, co-owner of Mayfair Hardware, a 58-year-old veteran of the Korean War.

"We're all opposed to war, but you have to rise above your personal feelings,"
he said. "I went because this is my country and I was going to protect it, and
that's how my generation felt. I don't think Clinton can win her now."

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
CANDIDATES TAKE THEIR LAST SHOTS IN NEW HAMPSHIRE

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1827 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 17


The New Hampshire primary contest rolled into its final, frantic hours today
with candidates in both parties hanging on the whims, anxieties and passions of
perhaps 265,000 voters.

President Bush fought to stave off an embarrassingly strong showing by his
conservative challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan. "Don't worry about trying to send
some message," Mr. Bush said in an interview from the White House on WMUR-TV in
Manchester tonight, reflecting the underlying concern of his campaign about this
recession-racked state.

On the Democratic side, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who is
leading in the polls here, tried to swell his support and follow a New Hampshire
tradition: galvanizing an underdog's campaign in this first primary state.
Dismissing the notion that his support comes largely from his status as a
regional favorite, Mr. Tsongas told a rally in Concord, "Feel it, enjoy it,
savor it -- and let's go get 'em."

Storming the State

All five of the major Democratic candidates stormed New Hampshire today, hoping
to elbow their way far enough up the rankings on Tuesday to give them some
credibility in the scramble of primaries and caucuses that follow.

The test is particularly important for Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, with New
Hampshire giving the first verdict from the voters on the extent of the damage
to his candidacy after three weeks largely dominated by reports about his
Vietnam-era draft status and the accusations, published in a supermarket
tabloid, that he had a 12-year extramarital affair.

"I think we have survived remarkably, and I think the energy in this campaign is
plainly with us," Mr. Clinton said today, when he made a ritualistic stop at
Nashua City Hall, where John F. Kennedy stopped in his 1960 campaign. The
Clinton campaign, however, was trying to play down expectations for Tuesday,
with Mr. Clinton asserting that there was a "world of primaries to go." He
clearly hopes to mend his campaign when the race moves to the flurry of
primaries, March 3 and March 10, in his native South.

Most of the final New Hampshire polls showed Mr. Tsongas in the lead, followed
by Mr. Clinton, with Senators Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Tom Harkin of Iowa neck
and neck for third place, and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
lagging at the back.

Among the wild cards here is the strength of the write-in campaign for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who continued to send mixed signals today to
volunteers in New Hampshire. He said he regarded every write-in vote as "an
embrace and a kiss from a stranger" but predicted that he would not do well
because voters might think he was being "cute."

He also said he regretted not being able to run, "particularly now because there
is ambiguity."

On this final day in New Hampshire, the undecided voter was king, but a confused
king. Peter O'Neill, a 49-year-old program manager for the Raytheon Corporation
who talked with Mr. Clinton at a coffee shop in Hudson, said he was torn between
Mr. Clinton, Mr. Brown and Mr. Kerrey. "I'm in a dilemma," he said, as his
breakfast omelette grew cold.

What the voters of New Hampshire have already done, however, is remind Mr. Bush
of the short tether of elective office. The President was back in Washington
today after a weekend of campaigning here, but his wife was working the state on
his behalf and Mr. Bush himself was wooing New Hampshire Republicans
long-distance via drive-time radio shows, television commercials and interviews
on the Manchester evening news.

"I've been under fire from newspapers and then watched the news this morning,
and apparently every single one of them was attacking me all day, and so was the
other guy," Mr. Bush told WFEA radio in Manchester, reflecting a final stretch
when he was, indeed, under heavy fire from both parties, and from voters
outraged at the depth of the recession here.

"I don't know how to sort it out, but I am content that people in the final
analysis will say we're not looking for slogans," the President said. The stakes
for Mr. Bush here could hardly be higher: New Hampshire Republicans will
essentially decide whether he gets to turn his sights to the general election
and the Democrats, or leaves here limping and embarrassed, forced to contend
with Mr. Buchanan in states down the road.

An Economic Anger

Mr. Buchanan kept hammering away at the President as a man who abandoned his
promises. "It is George Bush himself that's taxing and spending your future
away," one of the Buchanan commercials asserted on this final day.

Mr. Buchanan himself spent his 44th day of campaigning in New Hampshire with a
231-mile bus tour that took him to 12 cities, where he thanked his supporters
for showing the "courage" to stand up to a President in their own party. With
many final polls showing him with the backing of just under 30 percent of New
Hampshire Republicans, Mr. Buchanan refused to predict how well he would do, but
said he would remain in the race until the Republican convention in Houston in
August. As his bus sped between Exeter and Portsmouth, Mr. Buchanan described
his campaign as a fight for "the heart and soul of the Republican Party."

In the view of many analysts, however, the real power of Mr. Buchanan's
candidacy here comes from economic anger; the Bush campaign felt compelled to
run television advertising, in these final days, urging voters to "send Congress
a message" to "pass my plan for economic growth."

For the Democrats, Tuesday will be the first sorting-out of a field of five
major contenders who entered the race late, stumbled often and left some in
their party hungry for other candidates to join the fray.

"One of the dramas out of New Hampshire for the Democrats is whether something
happens in the results that entices another Democrat in, sooner rather than
later," said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker who is not committed to any
of the candidates. "A good Clinton second-place finish may slow down the
momentum for a new entry, or at least make it harder."

Mr. Garin reflects an attitude among many Democrats that Mr. Tsongas has yet to
demonstrate that his campaign will travel well. They wonder how much of his
appeal is due to his regional roots and 10 months of patient grass-roots
politics here, and how much is due to his personal appeal and his message of
stern economic truth-telling. Mr. Tsongas took on those critics today,
asserting, "The pundits who wrote me off are going to have to explain why." He
added, "I'm a regional candidate -- North, South, East and West."

'I'm Still Standing'

Echoing the themes he has sounded throughout this campaign, Mr. Tsongas said the
Democratic Party would continue its "fierce embrace" of human, social and
enviornmental values, but would also become a pro-business party. "Some
Democrats will find this very hard to take," said Mr. Tsongas, who endorses a
cut in the tax on capital gains to encourage investment, a position that many
fellow Democrats reject. "So be it. Tomorrow it happens."

Mr. Clinton, for his part, told reporters today that after the three weeks he
has endured, "I think the greatest success is I'm still standing." The Arkansas
Governor, who at one point led in the polls in New Hampshire and seemed on a
glide path to the nomination, but has been struggling to steady his candidacy in
recent days, said, "When I had more dumped on me in less time in a very
organized, calculated way than any other politician in living history, we didn't
lose a single living soul that was here fighting for what I believed in."

Mr. Kerrey, for his part, seemed genuinely upbeat today after receiving good
reviews in many quarters for his performance in Sunday night's debate.  The
Nebraska Senator spent his final day of campaigning with the elderly in Concord,
college students in Durham, veterans in Nashua and points between. Often faulted
for over-emphasizing the health care issue, he said today that voters were
beginning to understand that "national health insurance is just a beginning."

"Unless we have the courage to do this," he said, the nation will not muster the
political courage to resolve a host of other problems.

Mr. Harkin was also hitting his basic message today, arguing, "Putting America
back to work -- creating jobs -- will be the No. 1 priority of the Harkin
Administration." Like other candidates, he, too, said he was in the race for the
long haul. "We have a national campaign ready to roll right after tomorrow."

And while the announced candidates scrambled around New Hampshire, the rumbles
of Cuomo continued, this time from a news conference in Manhattan. Once again he
cited New York's budget difficulties as keeping him on the sidelines. He also
said that even if he did well in New Hampshire and resolved his budget problems,
a Presidential campaign at this point "probably would be academic."

What's Next?

"I honestly believe there is no intelligence, no logic, to giving any
credibility, any real import to the write-in results in New Hampshire, which
will be a tiny infinitesimal proportion of all the votes you have to get in this
country. It shouldn't be relevant." He added that he believed that at least one
of the current candidates would demonstrate that he was electable by April and
would become the party's nominee.

After the voting on Tuesday, the contest for the Democratic nomination spreads
out across the country. The Maine caucuses will be held on Sunday, and if Mr.
Tsongas wins here, he will be well-positioned to ride to another victory in that
neighboring state; he has been organizing there for months, state party
officials say.

Then, next Tuesday, comes the South Dakota primary. The two Midwesterners in the
race, Mr. Harkin and Mr. Kerrey, are looking for a boost there, but a state
party official said that interest in Mr. Tsongas was picking up in recent days
as he began his television advertising there.

The next defining battle after New Hampshire, however, is on March 3, when
primaries or caucuses will be held in Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota,
Idaho, Utah and Washington. This is when Mr. Tsongas hopes to show he can win a
major victory outside his region, and thus win the credibility and, more
importantly, the money, to go the distance. Dennis Kanin, his campaign manager,
said Mr. Tsongas would be particularly emphasizing Maryland, Colorado and
Washington.

"I think we have to win Maryland," Mr. Kanin said. Mr. Tsongas's political
imperatives are reflected in his schedule on the day after New Hampshire's
voting: He will fly to Baltimore for a rally and then on to New York City for a
series of major fund-raising events.

On March 3, Mr. Clinton will be counting on his strong political support in
Georgia, which includes Gov. Zell Miller, to put him over the top there, and
prepare the way for the round of Southern primaries and caucuses that follow on
March 10, known as Super Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 19, 1992, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday about Paul E. Tsongas and his wife, Nikki, arriving
for a town meeting in Exeter, N.H., misidentified the site in some copies. It
was Phillips Exeter Academy, not Phillips Academy, which is in Andover, Mass.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The candidates tried for one last day to win over the voters of
New Hampshire. At Kay's Coffee Shop in Hudson, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
spoke to Nelson Houle, who said he was uncommitted. (Edward Keating/The New York
Times) (pg. A1); "I'm a regional candidate -- North, South, East and West," said
former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who is leading the polls in New
Hampshire. He and his wife, Nikki, arrived for a town meeting yesterday at
Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, N.H. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg.
A16)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Week;
New Hampshire Brings Tough Lessons Home

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 17


Even before the first votes were cast, let alone counted, New Hampshire had
taught the candidates and the nation some home truths about 1992.

Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator-turned-candidate, may take a
big bite out of President Bush's hide or he may take a small one. Much will be
made of the exact figures, without a lot of justification; in his 10-week
campaign here Mr. Buchanan has clearly demonstrated the President's political
vulnerability. What will become evident on Tuesday night is the extent of Mr.
Bush's problem.

Mr. Buchanan's effort has also exposed the ineptitude of the White House
political operation, at least in the eyes of the political professionals of both
parties gathered here. With near unanimity, it has been faulted for poor advance
work, pedestrian advertising and unimaginative themes.

Clearly, the storied Bush luck was missing this year. No incumbent would relish
coming to New Hampshire to ask for renewal of his mandate in the midst of a
devastating recession. But the President "ought to be able to take and hold the
initiative against a neophyte," as a Republican consultant said, "and this
President hasn't quite been able to bring that off."

The Bush campaign is stocked with skilled, experienced political operators, like
Robert M. Teeter, the poll taker, who heads the team, and Richard N. Bond, the
chairman of the Republican National Committee. So what is the matter? Some say
Mr. Bush does not listen to them. Some say they have lost their touch. And some
suggest, perhaps more persuasively, that techniques developed in the service of
the master communicator, Ronald Reagan, simply do not work in the campaign of
George Bush, a mangler of message.

Even if he goes no further than New Hampshire, Mr. Buchanan has already softened
the President up for the Democrats by suggesting two avenues of attack: Mr. Bush
is rich, indifferent and out of touch with the harsh economic realities of
ordinary people; Mr. Bush has no core of beliefs.

In 1972, when the Vietnam War was highly controversial and Watergate was
becoming so, President Richard M. Nixon sought re-election. He seemed vulnerable
in February, and a pair of Republican Representatives challenged him in New
Hampshire -- John Ashbrook of Ohio, a conservative, and Paul N. McCloskey of
California, a liberal. Between them, they took 30 percent of the vote.

But Mr. Nixon went on to a landslide victory over Senator George S. McGovern of
South Dakota in November. The Democrats had torn themselves apart in a
nominating battle that went down to a procedural vote on the convention floor,
never really rallied around their candidate and then were forced to replace
their Vice Presidential nominee.

Whether the Democrats will be able to exploit the openings Mr. Buchanan has
shown depends heavily on whom they nominate and how they do it.

None of this year's Democratic candidates is as divisive a figure as Mr.
McGovern was, and the party is not split the way it was in 1972 over Vietnam.
Things are always easiest for post-Franklin D. Roosevelt Democrats when hard
times are the problem, as they are at the moment, because Democrats agree, in
general terms, on what to do.

The party's biggest problem this time is that its best-known figures are not in
the race. That may change, though the odds are still probably less than 50-50.
But whoever is confirmed as the front-runner by Tuesday's results -- there
cannot really be a front-runner until some votes have been cast -- will develop
a lot of name recognition. Unknown when he started out, Jimmy Carter found
himself hailed after Iowa and New Hampshire by hard-hat construction workers in
New York City who had just seen him on television.

Probing questions and muckraking investigations follow notoriety, but so does
money. Ask Bill Clinton.

That doesn't mean that he who wins New Hampshire wins the Democratic nomination.
Estes Kefauver (1952) and Edmund S. Muskie (1972) and Gary Hart (1984) all found
it impossible to transfer their popularity here to other states. Former Senator
Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts obviously faces difficult problems in doing
that, even if he wins a commanding victory here, because he will remain a New
Englander who has never won elsewhere.

This week many questions will be asked. Can any of the candidates develop an
effective appeal to blacks and other minority groups, who play no role at all in
New Hampshire? Which ones will be able to find new, sharply drawn issues to set
them apart from their rivals? Who will get the best start on raising the huge
amounts of money needed on Super Tuesday, March 10, when 11 states vote,
including dollar-draining places like Florida and Texas?

Whoever finishes first among the Democrats will have his work cut out, because
none of the candidates and none of their organizations seem as fully developed
as is usually the case by this stage of the race. The campaign started late, and
so far it has not produced a candidate with a demonstrable capacity for growth
or its share of backroom wizards like Eugene Pokorny and Richard Stearns in 1972
and 1976. But then there are still months left.

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Finances;
Donors Emerge After Tsongas's Victory

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 21


Until recently, the room at the end of Paul E. Tsongas's fifth-floor
headquarters here served as a storage area for boxes filled with campaign
booklets. These days the room is used by three volunteers who sit on the floor
and sort the sacks of mail that come in throughout the day, a good portion of
them bearing donations to the Tsongas campaign.

The once-anemic fund-raising efforts of the campaign have suddenly gained
strength. The surge began, Mr. Tsongas's aides say, in the days leading up to
the New Hampshire primary when public opinion polls first showed the former
Massachusetts Senator overtaking Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. It gained speed
when Mr. Tsongas won the New Hampshire balloting on Tuesday, although Governor
Clinton remains the leader in raising money.

The Tsongas campaign was receiving less than $20,000 a day in donations in the
first two weeks in February, according to records filed with the Federal
Election Commission. Christine Naylor, the campaign's national finance director,
said the average day's receipts since the primary had risen to about $70,000.
The Tsongas campaign is expected to raise about $1.3 million in February, more
than it did in all of 1991 and January 1992 combined, she said.

More striking yet is how Greek-Americans have mobilized in the last few weeks to
raise money for Mr. Tsongas, after holding back and reflecting on whether they
wanted to risk courting heartbreak again only four years after the defeat of
Michael S. Dukakis.

'Traumatized' Supporters

Mr. Tsongas himself said his fellow Greek-Americans were "traumatized" by the
ultimate futility of their efforts to propel Mr. Dukakis, then the Governor of
Massachusetts, into the White House. In seeking their support, he compared
himself to a struggling family's second son asking for college tuition after the
first son flunked out.

He said in an interview that they eventually came around because the
Greek-Americans who have access to the kind of money that could prove valuable
to his campaign are typically businessmen. "They didn't know at first that I was
more pro-business, more simpatico with them than Michael," he said.

The other reason they came around after initially shunning him, he said, was
simple guilt. "They'd left me hanging out there in the wind," he said,
displaying a hint of pique at being forsaken by his own clan, even temporarily.

Yet by no means has Mr. Tsongas overtaken the Clinton campaign in raising money.
Donations to Mr. Clinton remained strong even when he was fighting off charges
about marital infidelity and his draft history during the Vietnam War.

The respective first- and second-place finishes of Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton
in the New Hampshire primary may transform the fund-raising efforts in the
Democratic field. It may become harder for the other three major candidates --
former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California and Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa
and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska -- to attract contributions as potential donors
question whether they can win.

That may help explain why Governor Clinton's fund-raising efforts have not
lagged, even in the face of unfavorable publicity. Just a few days after The
Wall Street Journal first reported how Mr. Clinton sought to avoid the draft
during the Vietnam War, and at a time when he was already fighting off
accusations about an extramarital affair, the Governor raised $690,000 at an
event in New York City, which may have been a record for a single event so far
this election season.

A New York lawyer involved in Democratic politics said he donated the maximum
allowed for an individual, $1,000, because although he believed Mr. Clinton was
wounded, there was no one else in the race he thought might win the nomination
or challenge President Bush in the fall.

He was not alone. The lawyer, who spoke only on condition of anonymity, said
much of the money that night was "walk-in" money, from people who showed up at
the last minute and wereseemingly undeterred by the barrage of bad publicity.

Amy Zisook, a finance chairwoman for Mr. Clinton, said this week that
"fund-raising has been strong throughout the campaign." She added that Governor
Clinton was "still perceived as the candidate who is most electable."

Ms. Zisook said Mr. Clinton had raised about $1.2 million so far in February,
just about what Mr. Tsongas expects to raise for the full month.

As Mr. Tsongas relies heavily on a Greek-American network as a base, Mr. Clinton
is continuing to receive a large portion of his money from his home state,
Arkansas. On the night of the New Hampshire primary, he raised more than
$200,000 from small house parties around the state.

The turning point for Mr. Tsongas in reawakening Greek-Americans was on Jan. 9,
aides said, when he appeared before a group known as Leadership 100 at a meeting
in Tarpon Springs, Fla.

Leadership 100 is a group of more than 200 Greek Orthodox men, mostly wealthy
businessmen, who donate money to charity. Nicholas P. Flevaris, a Chicago
entrepreneur who is helping Mr. Tsongas solicit money from Greek-Americans, said
the group represents the source of the potential political money available from
the Greek-American community.

The Tarpon Springs event, Mr. Tsongas said, was the first time many of those
present had heard his pro-business message. He said several speakers told the
audience they were morally obligated to do for him what they had done for
Governor Dukakis. He said a Greek Orthodox priest took him aside and said, "They
feel guilty not doing for you what they did for Michael."

Mr. Flevaris said of the Greek-American businessmen, "They are proud people who
wanted to be excited by Paul, but they don't want to be disappointed again."
Other ethnic groups with more experience in national politics may understand
that they win some and they lose some, he said, "but for them it was a one-shot
deal with Michael and it broke their hearts."

Mr. Flevaris, who raised money for Mr. Dukakis four years ago, often speaks
Greek on the telephone when soliciting donations. Mr. Tsongas, he said, is not
fluent, but will season his conversations with Greek-American donors with a few
Greek words.

In a sign of the campaign's increased hopes for fund-raising, Mr. Flevaris said
that he had just this week changed a planned $25-a-ticket event in Houston at
the home of a Greek-American doctor to $250 a ticket.

Studies done after the last Presidential election showed that Mr. Dukakis
received nearly a fifth of his campaign money from Greek-Americans. That
reliable source of donations proved an important factor in his staying power
during the primaries as donations flagged for his opponents.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 24, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South;
Support for Clinton Appears Firm in Home Base

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1368 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, Feb. 23


Mildred Bryson, who sells fruit from the back of her truck in the nearby town of
Social Circle, is not an expert on politics, but she can sense a politician she
likes, and she likes Bill Clinton.

"I don't think his character is a problem," she said. "He seems like a good man
to me. He doesn't brag like some of the other candidates."

In other words, Mr. Clinton as soft-spoken, Dixie-inflected, yes-ma'am, no-ma'am
son of the South counts for more than Bill Clinton as tabloid target.

Interviews with a number of voters and public officials throughout the South
suggest that sentiment for Mr. Clinton is holding firm in spite of reports in a
supermarket tabloid of marital infidelity and assertions that he had tried to
avoid the draft in the Vietnam era. Many analysts had wondered whether the
accusations would erode support in his conservative home base.

A strong showing in the Southern primaries culminating on March 10, Super
Tuesday, in which he has long been expected to do well, could provide the
Arkansas Governor with a significant lift in his quest for the Democratic
Presidential nomination.

There is no question that some Southern voters have been put off by the reports
about Mr. Clinton. At the least, the questions have erased the sense of Mr.
Clinton's invincibility in the region.

"I think he's got problems," said Larry James, a painter who works at Newton
General Hospital in nearby Covington. "People pick up on that, particularly his
marital problems. We're just not like people up North. There are things they
don't care about there that make a difference to us."

Mr. James said he was leaning toward President Bush, regardless of what happened
with the Democrats.

But among Southern Democratic officials, Mr. Clinton retains the support of the
overwhelming majority.

He has resources and an organization that dwarf those of his rivals, and his
main opponent seems to be a heretofore little-known former Senator from
Massachusetts with no real organization in any Southern state.

Thus, when Paul E. Tsongas, the top vote getter in the New Hampshire primary
last week, and Mr. Clinton arrived here on Friday to address the annual
gathering of Georgia Democrats, the front page of The Atlanta Journal featured a
large color picture of Mr. Clinton with a quote above it from Lieut Gov. Pierre
Howard reading: "Tsongas is not Greek for Bubba."

Representative John Lewis, the Georgia Congressman and civil rights pioneer, who
endorsed the Arkansan on Friday, said Mr. Clinton would "win the Southern
primaries in a sweep and will be the nominee of the party."

'Referendum on the Future'

"The rank-and-file voters here in the South are not going to be concerned with
the draft issue," Mr. Lewis said. "They want to get good health care, to send
their children to good schools, to get a job. This election is a referendum on
the future, not the past."

One of the important Super Tuesday primaries will be in Texas, and a poll there
reported in The Houston Chronicle today showed Mr. Clinton with the support of
40 percent of the state's likely Democratic primary voters. Mr. Tsongas was
backed by 9 percent, and 42 percent remained undecided. The poll of 400
Democrats had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus five percentage
points.

In the full poll of 835 likely voters of both parties, conducted Feb. 12-19,
two-thirds said the press had paid too much attention to Mr. Clinton's personal
life, and more than half said the personal issues would have no effect on their
voting. But 3 in 10 said they would be much less or somewhat less likely to vote
for Mr. Clinton because of the questions. These figures had a four-point margin
of error.

'What the Democrats Need'

Few Southerners seem willing to say Mr. Clinton is home free, and additional
damaging publicity could transform the campaign, which includes primaries in
Georgia on March 3 and South Carolina on March 7, followed by Super Tuesday
balloting on March 10 in Texas, Florida, Mississippi, Tennessee and Louisiana.
But for now, Mr. Clinton seems to have weathered the storms that set back his
campaign for weeks.

"He's a Southerner, who can get the support of blacks and whites," said John
Corbett, pastor of Springfield Baptist Church in Greenville, S.C. "He's what the
Democrats need. He's moderate, mainstream, a decent man."

Asked about accusations of infidelity, he said: "I do believe in forgiviness and
grace, and I'm just not willing to cut somebody's neck off because they've done
something in the past."

Of 14 people interviewed in South Carolina last week, only one cited the marital
and draft questions as a reason for voting against Mr. Clinton

Many See Problems

Other Southerners, however, do see fundamental problems.

When Mr. Clinton campaigned Thursday in Savannah, his audience included John
Siebert, an unemployed disabled veteran from nearby Hinesville who came with six
other disabled veterans to protest the appearance.

"A lot of people served their country, and he ran off to England," said Mr.
Siebert, who carried a sign reading, "No draft dodger or playboy for President."

Similarly, the Rev. Joe Lovelady, pastor of the East Edgewater Baptist Church in
New Orleans, said he was troubled by both questions and thought Mr. Clinton had
been seriously damaged in the South.

"There is a strong streak of Puritanism, in this country," he said, adding that
although people talk about a liberal approach, "when we close the curtain to the
voting booth, we find the Puritanism creeping in."

But even in Hinesville, Ga., with an economy heavily dependent on the military
operations at Fort Stewart, there is sympathy for Mr. Clinton and doubt about
the validity or relevance of the accusations against him.

'Reached a Saturation Point'

"Every time, somebody runs for office, whether it's in the White House or here
in Hinesville, they're going to dig up dirt, whether it's true or not," said
Sheila Bowdle, manager of Leroy's, a pawn shop.

And, even among conservative voters, Mr. Clinton may be benefiting from a kind
of scandal fatigue and a backlash against what some see as the constant drumbeat
of stories about the private affairs of public people.

"I think people have just reached a saturation point," said Ida Vaughn, a
66-year-old grandmother who owns a feed store in Simpsonville, S.C. "First there
was that Supreme Court deal and the Kennedy affair and by the time we got to
this, people were sick of it. This was just a lot of stirring."

Still, Mrs. Vaughn, who describes herself as a Democrat who voted in 1988 for
George Bush, said she was not overly impressed with any of the Democrats and
hoped someone else ran.

In fact, most people interviewed said they had not made up their minds about how
they would vote.

But Mr. Clinton's advantages in the region appear enormous. With endorsements
from powerful black leaders like Mr. Lewis and Representative Mike Espy of
Mississippi and most of the influential Hispanic politicians in Texas, he is the
only candidate with a base in the minority populations that are critical in
Southern Democratic primaries.

The Rev. Zebadee Bridges, pastor of the Asia Baptist Church in New Orleans and
president of the Inter-Denominational Alliance of more than 300 black churches
in the New Orleans area, said he and many of his colleagues were praising Mr.
Clinton.

"This is politics," he said of the questions about Mr. Clinton. "These are
issues that were brought up to destroy this man. We're not concerned about those
issues. We're concerned about this country."

Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia, a Clinton supporter, said Friday that he did not
think the accusations would damage Mr. Clinton unless another candidate made a
concerted effort to emphasize them. He conceded that whether or not the other
Democrats tried to exploit the issues, the Republicans certainly would. Others
agreed.

"I think Clinton will do very well in the Southern primaries," said Hastings
Wyman, editor of the Southern Political Report, a newsletter. "I don't think the
draft issue will hurt Clinton much in the primaries. I think when it will be an
issue is November."

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mildred Bryson, of Monroe, Ga., likes Bill Clinton. "He seems
like a good man to me. He doesn't brag like some of the other candidates," she
said; "I think he's got problems," said Larry James, speaking about Mr. Clinton.
Mr. James works as a painter at Newton General Hospital in Covington, Ga.
(Photographs by Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Clinton Seeks to Regain His Agenda

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Feb. 27


The Clinton campaign, still jittery from weeks of bad news, is moving to take
the reins of Presidential campaign dialogue back from the four other Democrats
who have managed to tarnish the Arkansas Governor in the most effective possible
way.

They have each won -- or nearly won -- a primary or a caucus.

Mr. Clinton is still favored to gather a significant number of delegates within
the next 10 days as the primary contest moves to his home base in the South, but
he must still turn aside his newly emboldened foes while dealing almost every
day with a new mini-crisis.

Today it was the astonishingly familiar problem of unwise comments made into an
open microphone, these about the supposed backstabbing tendencies of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson. The drama began yesterday when Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska
abruptly abandoned his hands-off approach to criticizing Mr. Clinton on the
issue of his Vietnam-era draft status, and opened an all-out attack in Atlanta.

And in a time of rampant uncertainty in the Democratic race for President, it
seems a certainty in the Clinton campaign that some new problem will occur
tomorrow.

From Inevitability to Stall

Within a matter of weeks, the Arkansas Governor's resilient Presidential
campaign has moved from charmed inevitability to stubborn stall. The money and
endorsements are still coming in, and few believe other Democrats can beat Mr.
Clinton in his native South, but Mr. Clinton desperately needs to win something
to restore some of his campaign's former confidence.

Mr. Clinton has taken over much of his campaign's decision-making, scolding his
aides when they fail to do his bidding and strolling back on his campaign plane
between stops to offer reporters his own view of the political landscape.

"You can't have an election where people can't tell the difference between you,"
he said today as he flew from Denver, where he made a speech critical of former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, to Atlanta, where he planned to hold
an airport news conference at which he would criticize Mr. Kerrey. "Paul Tsongas
had a free ride for a month," Mr. Clintin said. "He's not the only one who has
the right to define himself in the field."

The Governor, who was off the campaign trail for three days in Little Rock this
week on state government business, had spent much of the time leading up to the
hiatus fretting that he should be out campaigning instead. Even while he was
here, he did satellite interviews broadcast in several primary states, hopped
over to neighboring Tennessee for a conference of church leaders and made a day
trip to Colorado for a radio call-in show.

His speaking voice, rendered hoarse by cold and allergies, shows little sign of
returning. And his aides long for a convincing victory in Georgia on Tuesday, in
part to show he can win and in part to offset what they fear will be another
disappointing showing in the Maryland primary that same day. And public opinion
polls also show Mr. Clinton trailing Mr. Tsongas in Colorado, which also holds a
primary on Tuesday.

"I'm the only major candidate that hasn't had a primary on the border of his
state," Mr. Clinton said on the night he placed third in the South Dakota
primary. "I think it's interesting that I'm the only major candidate that's
gotten delegates outside his own region."

Now the Clinton campaign is convinced that it can begin to regain control over
its agenda by taking the offensive whenever possible. Today the campaign
presented Jim Wiggins, a district attorney and Vietnam War veteran from Georgia,
to counter Mr. Kerrey's charges that Mr. Clinton is unelectable because of the
draft issue and what it shows about his character.

"I would have to question Bill Clinton's qualifications to be President if he
had in fact wanted to go to Vietnam and fight in that war in 1969," Mr. Wiggins
said. "It was a war that divided our country."

Aides to Mr. Clinton have also shared a series of statements made by Mr. Kerrey
in the past about the war and his vow not to use it as a campaign issue.
Convinced that they can face down the draft issue and defuse the potential for
an explosive debate about patriotism in the patriotic South, the Clinton
campaign is simply knocking aside all criticism in an effort to return to the
issues they choose.

"I still think that when you get back to the ideas, I've got the most compelling
message," Mr. Clinton told reporters traveling on his campaign plane last
weekend. "I think the only down side coming out of the New Hampshire thing was
that I didn't come out of there where I was based on the power of my ideas."

As Mr. Clinton continues to raise money and wrap up endorsements in states
across the South, he casts himself as the Democratic Party's best hope to beat a
weakened George Bush this year. Some of the desperation that colored his
speeches during the final days of the New Hampshire primary has faded, but he is
no less insistent in his appeal for support.

Mr. Clinton's aides have already begun saying they would be satisfied with
second-place finishes and a share of the delegates in Maryland and Colorado next
Tuesday. The real test, they say will come the following Tuesday, when 11 states
hold Super Tuesday primaries.

"You can ask me if I'm frustrated after the 10th," Mr. Clinton said today. "This
is what I thought would happen."

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Wars Enough for All

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

Walter McDougall confuses leadership skills with machismo in "What We Do for Our
Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17). He believes only those who have served in active duty
in the armed forces during wartime "have the right to ask other citizens to take
the same risk." I guess we'd better schedule one good bloody war every
generation to keep up our pool of Presidential candidates.

And what about that bothersome woman question? Will we draft women into active
duty to be fair or simply ban them from top leadership positions in Government?
Which route would Mr. McDougall find more honorable?

BARBARA GRABER
Hicksville, L.I., Feb. 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters;
Clinton Draft Issue Doesn't Sway Most in Georgia

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, March 3


Four of five Georgia voters said their opinion of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
was not adversely affected by questions about his draft status during the
Vietnam War, but more than a third of those who voted against him said the issue
had a negative impact on their view of him, according to interviews with voters
leaving polling places today.

On the Republican side, the interviews with voters conducted by Voter Research
and Surveys showed that Patrick J. Buchanan's challenge to President Bush drew
most of its support from voters with the most negative views of both the
national economy and their own financial status.

Both factors could loom large as the campaign moves toward next week's "Super
Tuesday" showdown, which includes primaries in Texas, Florida and five other
Southern states or states that border the South.

Mr. Clinton's strong showing in Georgia indicated that questions about his
personal life and character were apparently a factor, but not a critical one,
with voters in the most conservative, pro-military part of the nation.

Varying on Draft Issue

About two-thirds of the voters said accusations that Mr. Clinton tried to avoid
the Vietnam draft did not affect their vote. One in 10 said it even made them
look on him more favorably. The findings bode well for his hopes in other
conservative Southern states.

But about half of those who said the issue made them look less favorably on Mr.
Clinton voted for his closest rival, Paul E. Tsongas, indicating that the issue
could be important for a significant minority of the electorate and could hurt
Mr. Clinton in a close contest.

The interviews showed a stark breakdown in education and economic status between
supporters of Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, who
finished second in the Georgia voting. Mr. Tsongas's support was higher among
voters with more education and wealth.

Eight of 10 voters without a high school diploma voted for Mr. Clinton, and
about 1 in 10 of those voted for Mr. Tsongas. Among high school graduates, 7 of
10 voted for Mr. Clinton and about 1 in 10 voted for Mr. Tsongas. At the other
extreme, about one in three voters with post graduate education voted for Mr.
Clinton while two in five of those voted for Mr. Tsongas.

Part of the breakdown probably reflects Mr. Clinton's overwhelming success with
black voters, but the pattern also held among white voters.

With the Rev. Jesse Jackson absent from the race, blacks dropped from 36 percent
of the Democratic primary vote in 1988 to 29 percent today. Almost three of four
black voters backed Mr. Clinton. Black support could leave him well positioned
in South Carolina, where blacks are expected to make up about 40 percent of the
primary vote on Saturday as well as in some Super Tuesday states like Louisiana
and Mississippi.

Older Voters for Clinton

Mr. Clinton also fared best with older voters and those who said they were
Democrats, indicating the degree to which support from party officials probably
worked in his behalf. He has the support of most of the established party
leadership in the region.

In the Republican contest, the interviews with voters underscored the degree to
which Mr. Buchanan's campaign is feeding off economic frustrations.

One in five voters rated the national economy as good. Of those, 8 in 10 voted
for President Bush. Just over one in five rated the economy poor, and 7 in 10 of
those voters backed Mr. Buchanan.

Similarly, 3 in 10 Republican voters said the finances of their own family had
improved over the last four years. Of those, about 8 in 10 voted for President
Bush.

About a quarter of the voters said their own finances had got worse during that
period. Of those, almost 7 out of 10 voted for Mr. Buchanan.

Economics could be particularly important in Louisiana, the most hard-hit state
in the South and one where Mr. Buchanan is hoping to score an outright victory
over Mr. Bush next week.

The Republican vote also showed a stark gap between men and women. Mr. Buchanan
almost matched Mr. Bush's vote among men, getting just under half of their
votes. But more than 7 in 10 women who voted in the Republican primary voted for
Mr. Bush.

For all its fury, the Buchanan vote seems to be more an attempt to send a
message than to replace Mr. Bush. About 6 in 10 Buchanan voters said they had
voted for him to send a message, rather than because they thought he would make
the best President.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Georgia Voters: Democrats"

% of
Voted for
Total                                             Clinton   Tsongas     Brown

Race

70      Whites                                         52        27         7
29      Blacks                                         72        14         5


Education

10      Less than high school                          80        13         2
27      High school graduate                           71        11         3
24      Some college                                   54        23         9
19      College graduate                               49        31         9
19      Post graduate study                            36        42         7


Political Identification

66      Democrats                                      65        20         4
29      Independents                                   44        28        11
5       Republicans                                    28        52        10


Family Financial Situation

14      Better today than four years ago               43        38         9
37      About the same as four years ago               59        24         5
47      Worse today than four years ago                60        19         7


Issues that mattered

52      Economy, jobs                                  55        28         5
31      Health care                                    57        23         5


"Georgia Voters: Democrats" (cont'd)

% of
Voted for
Total                                              Kerrey    Harkin    Uncom-
                                                                       mitted

Race

70      Whites                                          6         2         6
29      Blacks                                          3         1         5


Education

10      Less than high school                           1         1         4
27      High school graduate                            6         1         7
24      Some college                                    6         3         6
19      College graduate                                5         2         4
19      Post graduate study                             8         3         4


Political Identification

66      Democrats                                       6         1         4
29      Independents                                    4         3         8
5       Republicans                                     2         3         5


Family Financial Situation

14      Better today than four years ago                5         1         3
37      About the same as four years ago                5         1         6
47      Worse today than four years ago                 6         3         5


Issues that mattered

52      Economy, jobs                                   5         2         4
31      Health care                                     7         2         5

(Based on a poll conducted by Voter Research and Surveys of 1,525 Democratic
primary voters leaving 40 polling places throughout Georgia on Tuesday.)

Table: "Georgia Voters: Republicans"

% of
Voted for
Total                                                       Bush  Buchanan

Sex

54        Men                                                 53        47
46        Women                                               72        28


Political Identification

58        Republicans                                         69        31
33        Independents                                        54        46
9         Democrats                                           37        63


Family Financial Situation

30        Better today than four years ago                    79        21
43        About the same as four years ago                    65        35
26        Worse today than four years ago                     35        65


Main reason for voting for a candidate

72        Because he would make the
          best President                                      79        21
25        To send a message                                   12        88


Issues that mattered most:
34        Economy, jobs                                       60        40
24        Taxes                                               48        52
22        U.S. ability to compete economically                67        33


Candidate qualities that mattered most:
39        Experience                                          96         4
19        Will uphold family values                           56        44


George Bush breaking his no new taxes pledge . . .
35        Was a very important factor                         23        77
62        Not a very important factor                         83        17

(Based on a poll conducted by Voter Research and Surveys of 1,400 Republican
primary voters leaving 40 polling places throughout Georgia on Tuesday.)

How the Poll Was Conducted

The Election Day poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters as they
left voting stations throughout Georgia on Tuesday.

The poll was conducted by Voter Research and Surveys, an organization created in
1990 by ABC News, CBS News, CNN, and NBC News.

The results are based on 1,525 voters in the Democratic primary, and 1,400
voters in the Republican primary, located in 40 randomly selected precincts
across the state.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by
only a few percentage points in either direction from what would have been
obtained by seeking to interview all primary election voters who turned out in
Georgia on Tuesday. The sampling error was 4 percentage points in each of the
primaries for Democrats and Republicans.

Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error.  In
addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey
of voter opinion on Election Day may introduce other sources of error into the
poll.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Wars Enough for All

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


To the Editor:

Walter McDougall confuses leadership skills with machismo in "What We Do for Our
Country" (Op-Ed, Feb. 17). He believes only those who have served in active duty
in the armed forces during wartime "have the right to ask other citizens to take
the same risk." I guess we'd better schedule one good bloody war every
generation to keep up our pool of Presidential candidates.

And what about that bothersome woman question? Will we draft women into active
duty to be fair or simply ban them from top leadership positions in Government?
Which route would Mr. McDougall find more honorable?

BARBARA GRABER
Hicksville, L.I., Feb. 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Draft Unconstitutional

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


To the Editor:

Murray Polner in "Draft Registration Is Dumb. End It" (Op-Ed, Feb. 13) gives
many practical reasons for ending draft registration, but fails to say that
military conscription is unconstitutional and should never have been imposed in
the first place.

Section 1 of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution reads:

"Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime
whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United
States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction."

The term "involuntary servitude" was chosen deliberately to insure that our
Government never again could resort to forcing men to serve in the armed forces.
That the Supreme Court has since upheld the draft only shows that the Court is
guided by political expediency, not the Constitution.

WILLIAM VANDERSTEEL
Alpine, N.J., Feb. 18, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries and Caucuses;
CITING CHARACTER, TSONGAS STEPS UP ATTACK ON CLINTON

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 2046 words


With his back against the wall after crushing losses to Gov. Bill Clinton in
most of the Super Tuesday contests, Paul E. Tsongas flew to the Midwest
yesterday and began pummeling him on questions of character that refuse to
subside.

If Mr. Clinton wins next Tuesday's showdowns in Illinois and Michigan and goes
on to take the Democratic Presidential nomination, Mr. Tsongas said, "we're
going to put up our most vulnerable candidate, whom Republicans will have no
hesitancy in investigating in great detail."

"Whatever vulnerabilities I have on the issues," he added, "they're not
vulnerabilities of character and judgment."

Agreement on the Stakes

In the upper echelons of his party, there was widespread agreement that losses
next week would finish Mr. Tsongas as a viable contender. Several senators,
speaking on condition of anonymity, said they thought that Mr. Clinton had
"already won this thing," as one put it, though all expressed worry about the
chance of more charges against the Arkansas Governor like the accusations of an
extramarital affair and efforts to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

President Bush, the easy victor in all eight Republican primaries on Tuesday,
said yesterday that voters "feel I have the experience and leadership." Having
reached or exceeded 70 percent of the vote in four of the Tuesday primaries and
held Patrick J. Buchanan, his main challenger, to a third or less everywhere,
Mr. Bush said he intended to cut back his frenetic cross-country campaigning.

Mr. Buchanan acknowledged that the President held "a prohibitive lead" but said
he would not drop out of the campaign. He said he would press on to the
California primary on June 2, though he raised the prospect of abandoning
negative tactics there and concentrating on explaining his conservative
philosophy.

Big Lead by Bush

"If the time comes to exit," Mr. Buchanan said, sounding calmer and less
pugnacious than usual, "we will do it gracefully. I would not do anything
consciously to damage the chances of the Republican nominee."

But later he changed tack and resumed his usual attack mode.

With Mr. Bush's slightly stronger showings in Tuesday's contests than in past
weeks, especially in Tennessee and Mississippi, he gathered a cornucopia of 376
delegates, giving him a total of 582, more than half the number needed for
nomination, according to a tabulation by The New York Times. Mr. Buchanan won 26
delegates on Tuesday, giving him a total of 46. One new uncommitted delegate was
chosen, for a total of 6.

Mr. Clinton added 430 delegates, for a total of 728, including the Democratic
National Committee members, governors and former elected officials, or super
delegates, who have declared their support for him. Benefiting from the
Democrats' proportional-representation rules, Mr. Tsongas picked up nearly half
as many, 199, and now has 343. Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
gained 32, for a total of 89; there are 468 uncommitted delegates. Mr. Clinton
is a third of the way to the number he needs for nomination.

Aides to Mr. Tsongas conceded that they had failed to put their message across
in the South, where much of Tuesday's voting was concentrated, and had allowed
themselves to be put on the defensive. To avoid a repetition, the former
Massachusetts Senator began yesterday by questioning Mr. Clinton's business
dealings with a man linked to the nation's savings and loan scandal.

When he heard of Mr. Tsongas's remarks, Mr. Clinton said: "I'm disappointed to
see him doing something like that, without regard to the facts. He plays a
little loose with the facts now and then."

'They Saw the Best'

Other prominent Democrats, including several in Michigan, spoke anew of
accusations, denied by Mr. Clinton, that he had a long affair with a nightclub
singer and tried to manipulate his draft status during the Vietnam War.

On Tuesday night, after winning six primaries and two caucuses to two and one
for Mr. Tsongas -- and winning most of them by a country mile -- Mr. Clinton
tried to take himself out of the line of fire. "The people of the South heard
the worst about me, but they saw the best," he said, and went on to talk in
lofty terms of his future plans.

But yesterday he seemed determined to deliver a knockout punch next week,
inaugurating a new, brass-knuckle television attack against Mr. Tsongas. The
commercial calls the former Senator an advocate of reduced Social Security
benefits, lower taxes for the rich, higher gasoline taxes and more nuclear power
plants.

"Isn't it time we closed the book on the 1980's?" the announcer concludes.
"Paul Tsongas. More of the same."

The Tsongas campaign plans to retaliate beginning today with its own new
commercial. "This is Paul Tsongas," the announcer says. "He's not pretty. He's
not very polished. He's not the guy with all the endorsements from politicians
because he doesn't just make promises."

The advertisement continues: "He's no Bill Clinton, that's for sure. He's the
exact opposite. Paul Tsongas. He's not afraid of the truth."

Looking to the Unions

Both Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Brown appeared to be focusing mainly on Michigan, where
the auto industry has dragged down the economy.

In the Republican race, Mr. Buchanan will also spend most of the next week
there, hoping to attract the backing of voters jittery about their long-term job
prospects. He might also find support in Macomb County, north of Detroit, to
which many white workers moved when blacks began to settle in their
neighborhoods.

Though unemployment is high in both states, 9 percent in Michigan and 7.3
percent in Illinois, the political situation in Michigan is far more fluid
because many union leaders there had favored Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who has
withdrawn, and are now seeking someone else to support.

Frank Garrison, head of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O., said most of the unions,
including the big United Automobile Workers, would probably end up endorsing no
candidate and telling their members to do as they liked. A surprising number, he
said, may support Mr. Brown, who was endorsed last night by the U.A.W. local at
Willow Run, the General Motors plant whose closing has been announced.

Urging an Alternative

Mr. Garrison was one of those who expressed doubts about Mr. Clinton's
electability in November.

"He's a battleship that's taken about a dozen torpedoes below the waterline,"
the union official said. "He's sailing on, but one more bimbo and I think he'll
sink."

Representative John Conyers Jr. of Detroit criticized all the active Democratic
candidates and said he has urged his largely black constituents to write in his
name as a protest. And Representative John D. Dingell, also from the Detroit
area, told The Detroit Free Press that he doubted that Mr. Clinton could survive
any more accusations in the news media.

On Super Tuesday, segments of the Democratic electorate ranging from 15 percent
(in Louisiana) to 34 percent (in Rhode Island and Massachusetts) said Mr.
Clinton's draft record made their opinion of him less favorable.

Here are details of the results on a state-by-state basis:

DELAWARE: Democratic caucuses in this small mid-Atlantic state defied tradition.
As usual, party leaders urged support for an uncommitted slate, but Tsongas
supporters, concentrating on the Wilmington suburbs, narrowly beat the
organization slate. Mr. Tsongas got five delegates, Mr. Clinton three, Mr. Brown
three and uncommitted three. There was no Republican contest.

FLORIDA: This was the place Mr. Tsongas chose to stage his most determined fight
in the South. With a week to go, he appeared to stand a chance, but Mr. Clinton
put him on the defensive on Israel and Social Security. Mr. Tsongas ran weakly
among blocs like blacks and the elderly and carried only two counties, one in
the affluent suburbs of Orlando and the other dominated by the University of
Florida. Mr. Clinton won 51 percent of the vote and 87 delegates. Mr. Tsongas
won 58 delegates and Mr. Brown 3. On the Republican side, Mr. Bush took 68
percent and all 97 delegates, despite the state's serious economic problems,
like 8.7 percent unemployment.

HAWAII: In this overwhelmingly Democratic state, party leaders' wishes are
usually heeded. Gov. John Waihee 3d supported his fellow Governor, Mr. Clinton,
who won 11 delegates in caucuses, with 8 uncommitted and 1 for Mr. Brown, in one
of two states where Mr. Tsongas was shut out. Republicans did not vote here.

LOUISIANA: Mr. Clinton won 59 of 60 delegates in a state where Mr. Tsongas, who
got the other delegate, did not campaign. Mr. Buchanan got no delegates, with
Mr. Bush taking all 32, but he exulted in having "buried in a bayou" the
candidacy of David Duke, a native son who pulled only 9 percent of the vote as
against 27 percent for Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Duke, a former leader of the Ku Klux
Klan, won a majority of the white vote in his campaign for governor last year,
but much of that came from conservative Democrats.  No crossover voting was
allowed in Tuesday's primary.

MASSACHUSETTS: Mr. Tsongas put on a show of strength in his home state, winning
two-thirds of the vote and shutting Mr. Clinton out of the delegate count, even
though the Arkansan had strong support from state lawmakers. Mr. Clinton's local
manager said, nonetheless, that the Governor had laid a strong foundation for
November. Mr. Brown finished second, picking up 13 delegates, mostly in Boston,
to Mr. Tsongas's 81. Massachusetts was one of Mr. Buchanan's best Super Tuesday
states, giving him 28 percent of the vote and 11 delegates, with 26 delegates
for the President and 1 uncommitted.

MISSISSIPPI: This was Mr. Clinton's best state of the day, at 74 percent, and
one of Mr. Bush's two best, at 72 percent. Mr. Buchanan, Mr. Tsongas and Mr.
Brown were all shut out of the delegates, with the President getting all 33 of
the Republicans and Mr. Clinton all 39 Democrats. The Democratic primary
electorate is heavily black, which aided Mr. Clinton.

MISSOURI: The only caucus state among the six Super Tuesday states that border
Mr. Clinton's Arkansas, Missouri chose 36 Clinton supporters, 39 uncommitted
delegates and 2 Tsongas supporters. Mr. Tsongas started late and suffered from
poor organization. There was no Republican contest.

OKLAHOMA: Mr. Tsongas's name was not on the ballot because of mistakes by his
staff, enabling Mr. Clinton to pile up 38 delegates to 7 for Mr. Brown.
Paradoxically, Mr. Tsongas had the help here of one of his few big-name backers,
Senator David L. Boren. Mr. Bush won all 34 Republican delegates with 70 percent
of the vote.

RHODE ISLAND: Mr. Tsongas barely managed a majority in the second New England
primary of the day. He won 12 delegates, Mr. Clinton 6 and Mr. Brown 4. Mr.
Clinton supported continued financing for the canceled Seawolf submarine, which
was built by the state's largest employer, the General Dynamics Corporation. Mr.
Buchanan got a third of the vote and 5 delegates; Mr. Bush got 10 delegates.

TENNESSEE: Mr. Clinton carried every county, with Mr. Tsongas competitive only
in the Nashville and Knoxville areas, which are traditionally more liberal than
the rest of the state. Mr. Brown finished a weak third, although the Rev. Jesse
Jackson campaigned with him here. Mr. Clinton won Memphis 11 to 1 and collected
56 delegates over all to Mr. Tsongas's 12. Former Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.
helped Mr. Bush to his strongest showing of Super Tuesday. The President picked
up 73 percent of the vote and 23 of the 33 delegates, the rest going to Mr.
Buchanan.

TEXAS: Results were a major disappointment to Mr. Tsongas, who had hoped to
carry the Austin area and make a respectable showing elsewhere. He lost Austin
to Mr. Clinton, 2 to 1, with Mr. Brown close behind. In Beaumont, the most
blue-collar industrial city in Texas, not unlike some Illinois and Michigan
cities, Mr. Clinton won by 5 to 1. Mr. Tsongas did best in the largely white
suburbs of Dallas, Houston and Austin. Mr. Clinton won 95 delegates, Mr. Tsongas
28, Mr. Brown 1, with delegate distribution for one Congressional districts
still undecided.  Among the Republicans, Mr. Bush got 70 percent of the popular
vote and swept all 121 delegates.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul E. Tsongas leaving his home yesterday in Lowell, Mass. Mr.
Tsongas flew to the Midwest, where he began campaigning for next Tuesday's
primary showdowns in Illinois and Michigan. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)
(A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 17, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Trying to Tickle the Liberal Pulse of America

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1031 words



The L Word
An Unapologetic, Thoroughly
Biased, Long-Overdue
Explication and Celebration
of Liberalism
By David P. Barash
233 pages. William Morrow & Company. $21.

God and Other
Famous Liberals
Reclaiming the Politics of America

By F. Forrester Church
167 pages. Simon & Schuster. $19.

Two current books on the nature of liberalism in this Presidential election year
owe a debt of gratitude -- albeit one that is dripping with sarcasm and despair
-- to Presidents Reagan and Bush. "The L Word," by David P. Barash, a professor
of psychology at the University of Washington in Seattle, and "God and Other
Famous Liberals" by F. Forrester Church, the Unitarian pastor of All Souls
Church in New York City, may not revive the liberal impulse in this country, but
it won't be for lack of trying. Opposing the anti-liberal sound bites that have
played so well in middle America, they want to remind the Democratic candidates
of the party's proud liberal past.

At the Republican national convention in 1988, Mr. Reagan said that the
"masquerade" was over and that it was time to mention "the dreaded L word, to
say the policies of our opposition" were "liberal, liberal, liberal." The phrase
by the former Great Communicator stuck; it doesn't seem to be heard too loudly
on the Democratic hustings in 1992. Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who espoused
some of the old liberal New Deal ideas early in the primaries, has since dropped
out of the race.

Picking up the L-word theme in his first Presidential campaign, Mr. Bush
attacked the liberals as "remnants of the 1960's, the New Left, campus radicals
grown old, the peace marchers and the nuclear-freeze activists." In response,
Gov. Michael S.  Dukakis, the Democratic standard-bearer, retreated from
identifying himself as a liberal, saying the election was about competence, not
ideology.

Professor Barash writes that by denying his liberal political heritage, Governor
Dukakis caused many voters to question their own liberalism.  "The L Word"
wanders all over the place as the author offers his "unapologetic, thoroughly
biased, long-overdue explication and celebration of liberalism." He writes in an
anecdotal style that must go over well in the classroom, but given the complex
history of liberalism on the American scene is not always compelling on paper.

His book is sprinkled with familiar aphorisms by Ambrose Bierce (a conservative
is "a statesman who is enamored of existing evils, as distinguished from the
liberal, who wishes to replace them with others"), by Will Rogers ("I don't
belong to any organized political party. I'm a Democrat") and by a number of
modern journalists and historians.

Professor Barash is most original when writing about the "cold-war liberalism"
practiced by Democrats, which matched the Republicans in jingoism and military
adventurism.  He reminds readers of the split personalities of some liberals in
domestic and foreign affairs and deplores the fact that "it was J. F. K. and
Lyndon Johnson -- two notable liberals -- who got us most deeply involved" in
Vietnam.

"Cold-war liberalism has been, in part, an effort to give the lie to Heywood
Broun's criticism that a liberal is someone who leaves the room whenever a fight
begins," he writes. "In its origins, cold-war liberalism was also energized by
the Keynesian recognition that Federal spending was good for the economy."

For the 1990's, Professor Barash suggests that liberals don't need new ideas
nearly as much as they need faith and confidence in their old ones.  The future
of liberalism, he says, is essentially to put "old wine in new bottles, so long
as the wine is of good vintage."

In "God and Other Famous Liberals," Dr. Church arrives at his liberalism from a
different direction.  Rooted in personal experiences, his book is a compelling
blend of religion, humanism and, yes, politics. Like his father, the late Frank
Church, who was an outstanding liberal Senator from Idaho, Dr. Church was an
early opponent of the Vietnam War and of keeping secrets from the American
people. Like many students who lived through the 1960's, Vietnam was a turning
point in the author's thinking.

The reader learns that Dr. Church's political and religious heritage fortify his
liberal stands. He challenges military and religious icons with equal fervor.
For instance, he criticizes Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North for his hawkish
flag-waving during the Iran-contra hearings and scorns Jerry Falwell, the
evangelist, for writing that God is in favor of "property ownership,
competition, diligence, work and acquisition."

The author wonders whether he and the evangelist are reading the same Bible,
"the one in which the last worker to arrive in the vineyard receives the same
pay as the first, and the rich man is told to give away everything he has to the
poor if he wants to go to heaven." As for the flag, he wonders whether Colonel
North and he are "talking about the same country, when he (convicted felon or
not) calls on us to 'be faithful to those ideas and values that made this
country what it is.' "

At the heart of both books is President Franklin D. Roosevelt. Dr. Church writes
that anyone looking for a new liberal agenda need look no further than his
Presidential papers and, specifically, the conclusion of his message to Congress
on Jan. 6, 1941.

In that address, Roosevelt said there was nothing mysterious about the
foundations of a healthy and strong democracy. The basic things expected by the
American people were simple. He said those included equality of opportunity for
youth and others; jobs for those who can work; security for those who need it;
the ending of special privilege for the few; the preservation of civil liberties
for all, and the enjoyment of the fruits of scientific progress in a wider and
constantly rising standard of living.

Dr. Church's "God and Other Famous Liberals" leaves the distinct impression that
a half-century after F. D. R. expressed these thoughts, neither liberals nor
conservatives would dare to speak this openly during the 1992 Presidential
campaign.

Any candidate who did so might be accused of using the "dangerous" L word.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David P. Barash (Jaguar); F. Forrester Church (Simon &
Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Maris Cakars Is Dead; Magazine Editor, 49

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


Maris Cakars, an editor who was a leader in the movement against the Vietnam
War, died on Saturday at Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn. He was 49 years old and
lived in Brooklyn.

He died of internal hemorrhaging, his family said.

For 12 years he worked for Win, a small but influential magazine that opposed
the Vietnam War and expanded to other social issues. It encouraged radical
change but nonviolent tactics. He was the editor for about six years. Among
those associated with Win were Abbie Hoffman, A. J. Muste and Hendrik Hertzberg.

Mr. Cakars helped organize demonstrations, including one at the Pentagon and
another at a military induction site in Manhattan at which Dr. Benjamin Spock
was arrested. The organizations he worked with included the Committee for
Non-Violent Action and the War Resisters League.

Born in Riga, Latvia, he left with his parents in 1944 to escape Soviet
occupation. The family came to America in 1949, and Mr. Cakars grew up in
Oceanside, L.I.

He studied at Lafayette College and Columbia University.

Surviving are his wife of nearly 25 years, the former Susan Kent; a daughter,
Andrea, of Brooklyn; a son, Janis, of Manhattan; his mother, Vera, of
Huntington, L.I., and an adopted brother, Egils Melbardis of Mill Valley, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For Pilot, 2 Events Led to Life in Cockpit

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


The years that Capt. Wallace J. Majure 2d spent in the cockpit, and the years
that he spent out of it, were governed by two events over which he had no
control: the Vietnam War and airline deregulation.

Captain Majure, who died when USAir Flight 405 crashed at La Guardia Airport on
Sunday night, quit the Navy in the mid-1970's after flying cargo runs in Italy
because there were too many Vietnam-era pilots and too few flying jobs.

He was laid off by two struggling regional airlines that eventually went out of
business, and later flew short hops for a commuter carrier. Later still, he was
hired by Piedmont Airlines, the one he had always dreamed of flying for, but
Piedmont went through a merger with USAir that put him back on short-to-medium
runs.

Sunday had been a day of that kind of post-deregulation flying: a quick stop at
a regional hub and trips to smaller cities where passengers were trying to make
connections.

He picked up the plane, a Fokker F28, at the Tri-City Airport in Tennessee and
stopped in Charlotte, N.C., Jacksonville, Fla., and at La Guardia. The flight
plan called for an 80-minute trip from there to Cleveland.

His former wife, Charlotte Osborn, said he had doubts about the
eye-on-the-clock, can't-afford-to-be-late routine.

"His concern was there was so much pressure on the employees, meaning him, to
have an on-time schedule and get the job done," she said.

His fiancee, Beth Stevens, said he valued the protection the union offered
because it could safeguard pilots who put a premium on safety against the
pressures of scheduling.

"He liked it because it backed him up if he felt there was a situation where he
had to make a judgment call," she said. "But I don't remember him ever saying he
felt forced to do anything."

Captain Majure, who was 44 years old, was not one of those pilots who always
knew they wanted a career at the controls. At the University of Georgia he
majored in forestry. But one day a Navy recruiter visited the campus in Athens,
Ga., and brought along a single-engine training plane.

"He got in line and went for a ride," Mrs. Osborn said. "The guy did a barrel
roll. Wally threw up in the plane but he loved it. He decided then that's what
he wanted to do."

Captain Majure joined the Navy after graduating with honors, and after training
in Pensacola, Fla., and Corpus Christi, Tex., he was assigned to Naples, Italy,
where he ferried supplies to aircraft carriers.

After three years he was transferred to the Great Lakes Naval Training Center in
Waukegan, Ill., and a desk job. "He didn't like it," Mrs. Osborn said. "He
wasn't flying. He just wanted to hurry up and get out of the Navy."

Hughes Air West hired him, and he moved to Las Vegas. But soon Hughes Air West
failed.

Job-hunting, he flew tours through the Grand Canyon in a Cessna 402, a
twin-engine prop plane with a microphone that he could switch on and play tour
guide.

Then he signed on with Western Airlines and duty as flight engineer or pilot on
DC-9's and as flight engineer on 727's. But Western, struggling to stay in
business, laid him off along with more than 1,000 other pilots. "That was
another blow, to be laid off a second time, so he went back to flying tours
through the Grand Canyon," Mrs. Osborn said.

His Partner Survives

But he always dreamed of flying for Piedmont, Mrs. Osborn said, because he
thought it was a class operation and because it was the first airline he had
flown as a passenger. Finally he got an interview and a job.

"He was one of these careful, methodical people," she said. "Everything in his
life was. He really took it seriously. He loved to fly, but he wasn't a
fly-by-the-seat-of-your-pants ace. He enjoyed flying the little workhorse
airplanes."

In the cockpit with Captain Majure on Sunday was First Officer John J. Rachuba,
30, of Charlotte, N.C. He had been hired by USAir two years ago and has 3,500
hours flying experience. He survived the crash and was in stable condition
yesterday at Booth Memorial Hospital in Queens.

One passenger, Yasser Morsi, 22, of Huntington, L.I., climbed out of the burning
wreckage, swam ashore after the crash and came upon Mr. Rachuba, who he said was
trying to help survivors before the fire engines and emergency vehicles arrived.

"He was trying to get us blankets," Mr. Morsi said.

Later, in a USAir van that drove them to the terminal to be treated for their
injuries, the co-pilot looked angry, Mr. Morsi said. Mr. Rachuba said nothing
about the plane or the pilot, but "he was hitting the dashboard of the van."

NAME: Wallace J. Majure

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. Wallace J. Majure 2d, who died in the La Guardia crash,
posed in a cockpit in this undated photo. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRO FOOTBALL;
MIA-POW Flag to Remain

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 8; Page 5; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, Jan. 4


The National Football League, bowing to pressure from veterans' groups and
others, won't take down the MIA-POW flag hanging from the roof inside the
Metrodome.

A league spokesman said Friday that the flag amounts to a political statement,
which could prompt other groups to demand equal treatment. "We get endless
requests, whether it's the American Cancer Society or someone else," said Jim
Steeg, director of special events for the N.F.L. "We don't want to egg on more
requests."

But the N.F.L. backed down after learning Friday that veterans' groups and
others who helped put up the 18-by-28-foot black and white flag were angry over
the possible action. "We've basically decided to leave everything alone," Steeg
said. "It's just not worth doing anything that causes an uproar."

The N.F.L. has exclusive control of the Metrodome for the Super Bowl on Jan. 26
and the two weeks leading up to it, according to Bill Lester, executive director
of the Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission, which owns the dome. If the
N.F.L. wanted to take down the flag, which went up in July 1987, the commission
could not stop it, Lester said.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Exit From Manila: Making of a Hasty Retreat

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1452 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Seven months ago, the Bush Administration was on the brink of a deal with the
Philippine Government to extend by seven years its lease on two huge military
bases in the Philippines.

Today, the United States military is packing up ships, supplies and ammunition,
and preparing to leave the Philippines by the end of the year, closing out an
American military presence in the country that has lasted nearly a century.

One small American naval operation will be transferred from the Philippines to
Singapore, President Bush announced there early today. Mr. Bush, on the second
stop of a four-nation Asian and Pacific trip, said the Seventh Fleet's logistics
operations will be based in Singapore.

How the Administration's expectations of a long, phased Philippine withdrawal
collapsed into a hasty retreat from two of its largest and oldest overseas bases
is the result of an unusual combination of events, including the eruption of a
volcano, the demise of the Soviet Union, an assertion of Philippine nationalism,
and shrinking Pentagon budgets.

Slow Pullout Planned

Closing the sprawling Subic Bay naval base, coupled with the abandoning of Clark
Air Base this past summer after the eruption of Mount Pinatubo, forces the
largest reduction to date of United States forces in the western Pacific.

American negotiators, who opened talks in Manila in May 1990 on the future of
the bases, say they braced themselves for months of intense bargaining in a
political climate that emphasized Philippine sovereignty interests. Indeed,
Washington planned to gradually withdraw its forces over the life of a new
lease. But the Administration's final decisions were largely driven by events
outside the negotiators' control.

American negotiators and senior Navy officers say they also considered the risks
and advantages of staying or leaving. For all its highly touted ship-repair
yards, supply depots and training centers, how much was Subic Bay really worth
to the United States? If Manila's asking price was too steep, what was the
political risk of browbeating the Philippine Government into accepting less?
What were the costs of alternate sites in the Pacific region?

"We wanted an agreement, but not at any price," said Richard L. Armitage, a
former Assistant Secretary of Defense who was the chief American negotiator in
the talks with Manila.

Lost Training Ranges

Mr. Armitage and current Pentagon officials said that a review of the
installations' security value, made before the negotiations, downgraded them
from vital to important.

Collapsing into 12 months what, under a previous proposal, was essentially a
10-year withdrawal has forced the American military to scramble. Pacific
commanders say the greatest loss will be the prized Philippine naval, marine and
air force training ranges -- especially a bombing range near Clark. But
replacing Subic Bay will be less costly than expected, they say, partly because
its functions will be parceled out to other bases rather than moved in whole.
The Navy had estimated in the late 1980's that it would cost more than $3
billion to duplicate Subic Bay at a single site elsewhere in the region.

"It's not going to be as bad as we originally thought," Adm. Charles R. Larson,
head of American forces in the Pacific, said in a telephone interview. "We've
found that most functions can be disestablished or relocated without significant
construction costs."

The Air Force has moved to a new bombing range in Alaska. The Navy has started
shipping tons of ammunition to Hawaii, and plans to spread depots and
ship-repair work to installations in Guam, Japan and Singapore. Training areas
in Japan and South Korea are being readied for Marines and special-operations
forces.

Countering the Soviets

Subic Bay, in particular, has been important to the Navy since Commodore George
Dewey sailed into Manila Bay to vanquish the occupying Spanish fleet in 1898.
After the Philippines gained independence in 1946, Clark, Subic Bay and several
smaller installations remained under a series of negotiated pacts.

The importance of Clark and Subic Bay increased after the Vietnam War, when the
Soviet Navy began operating from the Cam Ranh Bay naval base in Vietnam, an
installation on one of the world's finest harbors.

Subic Bay employs 29,000 Filipinos and pumps more than $300 million into the
Philippine economy. But bases have been increasingly unpopular with Philippine
nationalists, for whom the bases were a symbol of colonialism and dependency.

In simplest terms, Manila's decision last month to evict the United States
stemmed from an impasse in tense, 20-month-long negotiations about extending the
1947 base agreement.

During that time, the value of the bases eroded under the combined weight of the
decline of the Soviet Union, Mount Pinatubo's continuing eruptions, growing
frustration in Congress with the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino, and
lawmakers' opposition to financing bases overseas when installations at home
were closing.

Negotiators were under marching orders from Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and
Secretary of States James A. Baker 3d to avoid striking what Mr. Armitage called
a "straight real-estate deal." Rather, they were to seek a broader, regional
security partnership with Manila that called for a reduction in American troops
at the bases.

Narrowing Differences

As the first of eight rounds of discussions opened in May 1990, Mrs. Aquino
served American negotiators with notice that her Government was canceling the
existing base agreement, effective in September 1991.

The Philippine negotiating team, headed by Foreign Secretary Raul Manglapus,
demanded $825 million a year in cash and aid to extend the lease for seven
years. The United States countered with an offer of $363 million a year for a
decade. By May, the two sides had narrowed their differences. Only a few
technical details remained on a tentative seven-year pact of $363 million in
annual aid.

Then came the act of God no one predicted: the eruption of Mount Pinatubo in
June. The value of Clark, buried under tons of volcanic ash, plummeted, and the
base was abandoned. Washington was willing to pay $203 million a year for just
Subic, and for at least 10 years -- terms the Aquino Government agreed to on
Aug. 27.

But that smaller aid offer insulted many fervent Philippine nationalists, some
of whom had spokesmen in the country's Senate. Many of the nationalists were
upset that their dreams of converting Clark into a commercial airport were no
longer possible.

'We'll Pactk Up and Leave'

"No amount of bases money can take the place of sovereignty, independence and
the well-being of future generations of Filipinos," Senator Agapito Aquino,
President Aquino's brother-in-law, said at the time.

With a Sept. 16 ratification vote planned in the Philippine Senate, senior
American officials dug in their heels in the hope that "shock therapy" would
sway undecided legislators.

"We've made our best offer," said President Bush a week before the vote. "There
will be no change on the part of the United States."

The same day, Defense Secretary Cheney said that while a treaty rejection would
be a "a real tragedy for the Philippines, we'll pack up and leave -- that's it."

Treaty supporters in the 23-member Senate fell 5 votes short of the two-thirds
margin -- 16 votes -- that was needed for approval.



U.S FORCES IN THE PACIFIC REGION



Forces: 383,000, including those in the western U.S. (about 17 percent of
Americans on active duty).

HAWAII: Pacific Command headquarters at Pearl Harbor. 45,100 military personnel.
41 ships, including cruisers, destroyers and submarines. 15th Air Base Wing at
Hickam and Wheeler Air Force Bases. Marine bases at Camp Smith and Kaneohe.

JAPAN: 40,500 military personnel. One carrier group. The 5th Air Force at Yokota
Air Base, Misawa Air Base and Kaden Air Base on Okinawa. Marine Corps Camp
Butler on Okinawa.

SOUTH KOREA: 39,500 military personnel. The 7th Air Force at Osan Air Base,
other units at Kunsan and three Korean bases. Two Army units.

THE PHILIPPINES: 5,900 military personnel. Subic Bay naval base. Clark was
handed over to the Philippine Government in November.

GUAM: 10,800 military personnel.

SINGAPORE: 200 military personnel and families. Refuling and repair services.

ABOARD SHIP: 117,600 military personnel, including those in Indian Ocean. Navy
and Marine air, sea and amphibious forces.

OTHERS: 2,500 military personnel. Includes communications stations in Australia,
weapons stored in Thailand and posts on Midway, the Marshall Islands, Palau and
the Johnston Atoll.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of world indicating location of U.S armed forces. (Sources: U.S.
Pacific Command, General Accounting Office)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
A Battle Looms for Bush On Another Asian Front

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN President Bush returns to Washington this week, he is likely to find that
many members of Congress are at least as disturbed by his policy toward China,
which is not included on his Asian trip, as they are about his policy toward
Japan. A common lament on Capitol Hill is that the President does not have a
consistent or credible policy for dealing with Beijing, whose human rights
record is flawed, whose support of authoritarian regimes in Asia is expanding,
and whose role in the international arms market is a cause of concern worldwide.

The perception that China policy -- or the lack of it -- is a weak point in Mr.
Bush's handling of foreign affairs stands out all the more because he has more
personal knowledge of the Chinese than did any of his predecessors. In 1974-75
he headed the United States Liaison Office in Beijing, the precursor to the
embassy.

Criticisms have been growing since Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d visited
China in mid-November and returned with very little to show for the trip, apart
from Chinese agreement to adhere to the Missile Technology Control Regime, an
international accord designed to restrict the export of missiles and missile
technology.  China said it would adhere to the agreement but asked the United
States to lift sanctions that bar some high-speed computer sales and the
transfer of satellite parts.

A Quiet Approach

Last week the State Department said that only a few details remained to be put
in place in order to remove those sanctions; meanwhile, the Administration's
good will toward the Chinese appeared likely to be further boosted by a recent
vote in China's legislature in favor of signing the Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty, a signal that Beijing may be ready to deliver in the next few months on
promises that it will adhere to the accord.

It is on such signals that the Administration bases its argument for its
approach to China -- the assertion that a quiet approach is the most effective.
"It has now been two and a half years since the tragedy of Tiananmen," Mr. Baker
said at a news conference in Beijing during the November visit. "Unless we were
to keep United States-China relations in the deep freeze forever, we had to
start talking."

But Nancy Pelosi, the California Democrat who heads the Congressional Working
Group on China, characterized the moves to lift the sanctions as an unnecessary
capitulation to a nation that has enjoyed most-favored-nation trade status while
other countries with centralized economies, including the former Soviet Union,
did not. Representative Pelosi is the author of a bill that would require
President Bush to show in his legally mandated annual review of China's trade
status that Beijing was freeing political prisoners, refraining from selling
missiles to Syria or Iran in contravention of the new agreement and making
progress in other areas of human rights and trade. Her bill, having won wide
Republican support, passed the House in November by a vote of 409 to 21. The
Senate is to take it up this month.

"One of the first countries Bush visited as President was China," Mrs. Pelosi
said in an interview. "Since his visit, we have run up a $30 billion trade
deficit with the Chinese, most of it since Tiananmen Square in 1989. I don't
think that most members of Congress want to isolate China any more than the
President does. The disagreement between the President and Congress is that our
relationship with China or any other country should be one that makes trade
fairer, the political climate freer and the world safer. Our relations with
China meet none of those tests now."

While the Communist governments of Europe have been collapsing, Communism in
Asia is retrenching, with China in the lead. Vietnam has dramatically improved
relations with Beijing, and China, North Korea and Vietnam share the view that
there can be economic development without political pluralism in Asia. These
societies are different, a Vietnamese official said recently, arguing that
consensus there is more acceptable than combative multiparty politics.

China has also given its blessing to some of Asia's anti-Communist military
regimes; it is a major arms supplier to the Orwellian junta that rules Myanmar,
formerly Burma, and it is a friend of Thailand, where a military coup overthrew
an elected government almost a year ago. In Cambodia, Beijing still supports the
Khmer Rouge as the country attempts to rebuild itself, more than 15 years after
Chinese-Vietnamese-Khmer Rouge cooperation helped Pol Pot to capture the country
in 1975 and to try to remake its society in a fanatical leftist reign of terror
that left more than a million people dead.

Ben Kiernan, professor of Southeast Asian history at Yale, said in an interview
that it was China that "brought the Khmer Rouge back to center stage" as
negotiations on a peace settlement for Cambodia dragged on through the late
1980's. And Representative Chester G. Atkins, a Massachusetts Democrat who is a
member of the House Appropriations Committee, accuses Washington of playing down
opposition to the Khmer Rouge to placate the Chinese.

The Administration argues that the accord signed in Paris last fall to end the
Cambodian civil war would have been impossible without cooperation from China.
But whether that agreement will be enough to prevent a Khmer Rouge return to
power is another question. One Democratic Congressman who agrees with the
Administration on the need to accept the Khmer Rouge into the government -- if
only to lessen the chances that it would become a very dangerous wrecker outside
the system -- is Stephen J. Solarz of New York. But Mr. Solarz also is calling
for more urgent pressure from the United States on China and the United Nations
to insure a quick transition to democracy in Cambodia. "The Khmer Rouge," he
said last week, "are already out there in the villages booting out local
officials."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Bush Administration would argue that last week's vote by the
Chinese legislature to approve a proposal to sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation
Treaty reflects the success of Washington's quiet diplomacy. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mining Unhappiness in a Changed New Hampshire

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1190 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Jan. 11


Facing their first primary election in a state that is home to some of the
nation's most economically alienated voters, this year's candidates for
President have begun a battle to define themselves that could set the course of
the 1992 election.

For the Democrats as well as the Republicans campaigning in New Hampshire, it is
no longer enough to politely introduce themselves to voters at house parties and
coffee shops. The compressed campaign season leading to the Feb. 18 primary,
coupled with a recession that has tripled the number of unemployed New Hampshire
residents since 1988, has forced a different approach this year.

Each candidate must now prove, through radio and television advertisements and
in appearances at plant gates and shuttered stores, that he is tough enough to
end the bad times.

Campaign strategists are trying to cut through the economic malaise to appeal to
voters like Lou Marchand, who stood alone in her rural Hillsborough restaurant
during a nonexistent lunch hour rush one day this week. Mrs. Marchand cared
little that Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska was campaigning nearby.

Noting that Hillsborough had lost a vegetable wholesaler, a lumber company and a
coin laundry in the last six months, she said business was so bad that she hoped
for nighttime snowstorms so road crews would drop by for breakfast. She said she
and her husband, Ron, strain to pay their monthly $250 health insurance premium
and keep their business afloat.

"It's been pretty tough around here," she said with the New Englander's gift for
understatement.

More Pragmatic

To reach people like Mrs. Marchand, who sees little difference among the
Presidential hopefuls so far, the candidates have abandoned the customary warm
and fuzzy biographical advertisements. Instead, the first spate of television
spots, which began appearing here this week, illustrate the new, more pragmatic
manner in which the candidates are choosing to make themselves known to voters.

In Gov. Bill Clinton's 60-second effort, Mr. Clinton is in front of a flag in
his Arkansas State House office. Gazing into the camera, he talks about the
"forgotten middle class" and his plan to rescue its members.

In Paul E. Tsongas's commercial, the second he has put on the air in New
Hampshire, he boasts of his accomplishments as a United States Senator from
Massachusetts, including his role in winning Congressional approval for a
bailout of the Chrysler Corporation and in pushing for the passage of the Alaska
Lands Act. As with his first advertisement, which featured Mr. Tsongas swimming
laps, the spot emphasized the former Senator's toughness and his recovery from a
bout with cancer.

Senator Kerrey, who began attacking Mr. Clinton on the stump earlier this week,
joined the advertising fray on Friday. He abandons the recitation of his record
in the Vietnam War to discuss health care and to chide President Bush for going
to Japan to "beg for a few concessions."

In his advertisement, Mr. Kerrey strides across an ice rink and likens the trade
imbalance to a hockey game. "Fight back, America," an announcer intones at the
end of the commercial.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa shot his own New Hampshire advertisements on a visit
here last week, but they have yet to appear. Former Gov. Edmund G.  Brown Jr. of
California, who spent much of last week campaigning in Iowa, has also not
broadcast television advertisements here.

The Democrats have not been alone in the candidate-definition derby. Vice
President Dan Quayle's two-day visit to the state this week marked the Bush
campaign's first foray into a race made competitive, in New Hampshire at least,
by the presence of Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative commentator.

Mr. Quayle warned Republicans unhappy with Mr. Bush for backtracking on his 1988
no-new-taxes pledge that they should not use Mr. Buchanan's candidacy to send a
message. "When times are difficult, don't you want and deserve the very best?"
Mr. Quayle asked his New Hampshire audiences.

Mr. Buchanan took out a full-page advertisement in The Union Leader, the
influential Manchester newspaper, while Mr. Quayle was visiting. It began, "Hey
Dan! Where's George?" while the slogan at the bottom of the page promised,
"He'll keep the promises George Bush broke."

But the most vociferous early squabbling has taken place among the Democrats,
particularly between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey. After Mr. Clinton's advertising
hit the airwaves this week, Mr. Kerrey said his health-care plan was "more
revolting than it is revolutionary," the latest in a series of jibes he has
aimed at Mr. Clinton.

"Voters up here have a very short window to not just figure out who these guys
are, but how they're different from each other," said Bill Shore, an adviser to
Mr. Kerrey.

It is difficult to determine how much of the jockeying between Mr. Kerrey and
Mr. Clinton is merely political choreography. "It's my strategy to come and
argue," Mr. Kerrey cheerfully acknowledged this week.

Weak Voter Interest

Most political professionals here acknowledge that voter interest and support
for particular candidates remain soft, in spite of early polls showing some
popularity for Mr. Tsongas, who lives in neighboring Massachusetts.

Mr. Tsongas's advertising, intended in part to leaven his serious image -- "He's
no movie star," his new advertisement begins -- sends the same can-do message
the other Democrats are striving for. "This is someone who gets things done in
Washington," said Mike Shea, a media adviser to Mr. Tsongas. "And that's a
significant point."

Similarly, Mr. Clinton's advisers are seeking to tap into the anger of the
economically depressed by appealing to the middle-class frustrations they
detected when they conducted interviewed groups of New Hampshire voters. "They
are demanding that politicians answer their questions and tell them what you
want to do," said Mitchell Schwartz, who runs Mr. Clinton's New Hampshire
campaign.

Mr. Kerrey's advertisements, filmed just this week, appeared little more than a
day later. In them, he assails President Bush and, by implication, any Democrat
who would do less than he would. "You've got an obligation to be explicit about
it, not just to put yur ideas out there, but to say how they're different from
the others," said Mr. Shore, Mr. Kerrey's adviser.

Mr. Harkin, who appeals to the party's left wing, is probably the most clearly
defined of the five remaining major candidates, although he has not appeared on
paid television. "Tom Harkin hasn't really changed what he has been saying from
the very beginning," said Kathi Rogers, Mr. Harkin's New Hampshire campaign
director. "He's saying, ' "If you want real substantial change, I'm the one to
vote for.' "

Each of these candidates must find a way to appeal to skeptical and economically
preoccupied voters like Helena Caldwell, who has worked at an electrical plant
in Hillsborough for 20 years.

"I don't really know the fellow," she said as Bob Kerrey ambled by. "Hey,
they're all alike. I'd like to see them talk about the economy. It's getting bad
and people are worried."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton's advisers are seeking to tap into the anger
of the economically depressed by appealing to the middle-class frustrations they
detected when they conducted interviews. The Arkansas Governor spoke last week
during a visit at the state capitol in Oklahoma City (Associated Press);
Advertisements for Senator Bob Kerrey's New Hampshire campaign discuss health
care and chide President Bush for going to Japan to "beg for a few concessions."
The candidate talked with Tom McNally during a visit Thursday to the Sylvania
GTE plant in Hillsborough (Associated Press); Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa made
his own New Hampshire advertisements last week, but they have yet to appear. He
traveled to Mason City, Iowa, for a stop last week. (Edward Keating/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Russia and Ukraine Try to Settle Military Dispute

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Jan. 11


Russian and Ukrainian delegations, meeting today in the Ukrainian capital, Kiev,
moved to defuse a tense standoff between the two former Soviet republics over
the status of the Black Sea fleet. They pledged to avoid taking further
unilateral steps.

The two sides issued a joint statement tonight that provided a framework for
negotiations by experts later this month. These specialists will discuss
dividing the fleet into strategic and conventional components.

Both sides agreed to abide by existing agreements, which say that strategic
forces will fall under the joint command of the Commonwealth of Independent
States.

But a Ukrainian Government informant said the republic was insisting on the
right to take control of some portion of the fleet's conventional forces to
protect its Black Sea coast.

Atmosphere of Compromise

Despite the heated exchanges of the last few days, the meeting between
delegations headed by Deputy Prime Minister Sergei Shakrai of Russia and the
Ukrainian Minister of Defense Conversion, Viktor Antonov, took place in an
atmosphere of compromise, a Ukrainian official said.

"Ukraine is not insisting on all the fleet," he said, "and the Russians
understand that Ukraine, as an independent nation, needs its own fleet.".

Still, the talks added to growing doubts about whether the new Commonwealth of
Independent States can handle disputes between its members, or produce a
collective leadership for its joint military forces.

In another Slavic republic, Belarus, the Parliament, following in Ukraine's
footsteps, moved today toward creating a republic army. It said it assumed
control of all the former Soviet forces on its territory, except strategic
forces.

Ukraine Sought Loyalty Oath

The dispute over the Black Sea fleet was kindled by Ukraine's decision to seek a
loyalty oath from all service personnel serving on Ukrainian territory --
including the fleet, off the Crimean peninsula. Russia argues that the Ukrainian
oath violates early commonwealth agreements to put strategic forces under joint
command.

Some of the disagreement stems from differences between Russia and Ukraine over
just what "strategic" means. The term, used in international arms-control
parlance to distinguish long-range weapons -- strategic -- from shorter-range
ones -- tactical -- gets more complicated in this situation.

Russia says the fleet is indeed strategic and that the Crimean peninsula and
other Black Sea ports that now form part of Ukraine are historically Russian
territory.

Ukraine disregards such historical arguments and says that the Black Sea fleet
cannot be considered strategic because its ships are not currently armed with
strategic nuclear weapons, and that because its home port, Sevastopol, is in
Ukrainian territory, the force is subject to Ukrainian control.

Military officials, including the fleet's commander, insist that its position --
guarding the gateway to the Mediterranean -- make it strategically important for
all members of the commonwealth, not just Ukraine.

Yeltsin Fuels the Dispute

Two days ago, President Boris N. Yeltsin added fuel to the dispute by declaring
in a speech to workers in a central Russian city, Ulyanovsk, that the fleet
"was, is and will always be Russian." But the Russian delegation in Kiev today
apparently backed away from that assertion, agreeing with the Ukrainians to
re-emphasize that as a strategic force, the fleet will come under commonwealth
command.

Another sign of Russian assertiveness came when Marshal Yevgeny I. Shaposhnikov,
the former Soviet Defense Minister who is now the commander of the joint forces,
last week distributed an oath to former Soviet forces asking them to pledge
allegiance to the Russian republic.

And today the newspaper Nezavisimaya Gazeta reported that Mr. Yeltsin has
prepared the draft of a decree to take over the whole of the Soviet military
until a joint commonwealth command was ready to assume charge. It did not say
when -- or even if -- Mr. Yeltsin would issue the decree.

In Sevastopol, the Black Sea fleet's commander in chief, Adm. Igor Kasatonov,
said on Friday that so far, not one sailor had agreed to swear loyalty to
Ukraine. The fleet has 70,000 sailors, of whom 30 percent are Ukrainians.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Asians' Turn in Silicon Valley

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1782 words

DATELINE: SANTA CLARA, Calif.


Asian immigrants have long made up a large proportion of the engineers in
Silicon Valley. Now, a growing number are starting high-technology enterprises,
eager for more responsibility and frustated by opportunities for advancement at
many companies.

These entrepreneurs, particularly those of Chinese descent, are setting up
networks of contacts and forging business links to East Asia. In some cases,
they are creating companies that successfully compete in areas dominated by
foreign companies, like making computer monitors.

In going from engineering to entrepreneurship, the immigrants are among the
first Asians to run publicly traded American companies, and they confront
stereotypes that have pegged them as excellent technicians but weak managers.

The 'New Gold Rush'

"The senior software or senior hardware guy in an astonishing proportion of our
companies is Chinese," said Bruce Dunlevie, who invests in new companies for
Merrill Pickard Anderson & Eyre, a venture capital firm.

Peter T. Mok, a vice president at the Silicon Valley Bank, which counts many
start-up companies among its customers, estimates that Asians are involved in
starting a quarter to a third of all new electronics companies in the region. In
doing so they are attracting substantial investments from Taiwan and Hong Kong
and creating jobs.

Shao-Hung (Gerry) Liu, who moved to Illinois from Taiwan to earn his master's
degree in electrical engineering, is typical of the new entrepreneurs. He moved
to Silicon Valley in 1982 in search of what he called the "new gold rush," and
worked full time at a semiconductor company while earning his Ph.D. at the
University of California at Berkeley. Now, Dr. Liu and some friends, also from
Taiwan, have formed Knights Technology Inc., which makes equipment for testing
computer chips.

Silicon Valley, which is near San Jose, has always owed part of its success to
the brilliant technicians and driven entrepreneurs who flocked here from around
the world. Philippe Kahn, a Frenchman, was living in the United States as an
illegal alien when he started Borland International, one of the most successful
software companies. Andrew Grove, president of the Intel Corporation, a giant
semiconductor maker, escaped from Hungary in 1956. The Momenta Corporation, a
new company that makes pen-based computers, has a president born in Iran, an
engineering director born in Tanzania and a software chief from Cuba.

Now, immigrants from Taiwan, Hong Kong and China are taking their turn. Among
the Silicon Valley companies they have started are Everex Systems, which makes
personal computers; Komag, which makes data storage disks; Wyse Technology, a
terminal and computer maker; Qume, a printer company, and Solectron, which
assembles products for other companies and was awarded the Government's Malcolm
Baldrige Award for quality.

Not Only in Silicon Valley

Not all the companies started by Chinese immigrants are in Silicon Valley. The
oldest and best known is WangLaboratories in Lowell, Mass., founded in 1951 by
An Wang. Others include Computer Associates International in Garden City, L.I.,
one of the largest software companies in the nation, and AST Research and
Advanced Logic Research, two successful personal computer makers in Irvine, in
Southern California.

Behind these companies are more than two dozen younger, smaller companies, like
Integrated Information Technology and C-Cube Microsystems, both of which have
staked out leading positions in a hot new market for video computer chips.
Gemstar Development has had wild success with its VCR Plus device for
programming videocassette recorders. A few biotechnology companies, like
Genelabs, are also being started by immigrants of Chinese descent.

In addition to Chinese, people from India are also starting companies. But few
Japanese are, probably because most Japanese executives and engineers are
transferred to the United States by Japanese companies and stay with those
companies.

Behind the rise in entrepreneurship is both personal ambition and a feeling of
frustration, these immigrants say. Many Asians who came to study in American
colleges and stayed on are now at a point where they want greater responsibility
or financial rewards. And some say another factor is that it is difficult for
Asians to advance within established companies.

"Many Asian engineers are not being looked at as having management talent," said
David K. Lam, one of the earliest Chinese entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley. "They
are looked upon as good work horses, and not race horses."

Dr. Lam, who grew up in China, Vietnam and Hong Kong and holds a Ph.D. from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, speaks bitterly of a time in 1979 when he
was the de facto manager of a technical group at the Hewlett-Packard Company.
But when it came time to award the formal management title, the company chose an
American whom Dr. Lam had hired out of college 11 months earlier. "I was very
disappointed and disillusioned, so I quit," he said.

Robert A. Grimm, who had been the director of Dr. Lam's division at
Hewlett-Packard and is now retired, said the decision to pass over Dr. Lam for
the management job had been made on merit and "had zero to do with his being
Asian."

Dr. Lam founded Lam Research, now a publicly traded company that makes equipment
used in chip making, then left in 1985. He now runs Expert Edge, a software
company he started with backing from Hong Kong investors.

There is little doubt that Asians, who make up as much as a third of the
engineering work force in Silicon Valley, are not well represented in upper
management at the larger companies. At Hewlett-Packard's Silicon Valley
operations, Asians account for 26 percent of the engineers, 20 percent of all
professional workers and 12 percent of managers, according to the company's
figures. In the very highest executive ranks, there are no Asians at
Hewlett-Packard, Apple Computer, Advanced Micro Devices and some other large
companies.

Some Asian executives say Asian engineers do not do enough to learn about
management or surmount the language barrier. "If Asians want to be successful,
they have to address the issue," said Winston Chen, chief executive of
Solectron.

Even when they start their own companies, many Asian entrepreneurs bring in a
more experienced manager, usually a white male born in the United States, to
serve as chief executive. Dr. Liu, for instance, holds the title of president at
Knights Technology. But a seasoned semiconductor industry executive, Thomas
Sherby, is the chairman and chief executive.

Financing Is Available

The availability of financing is another reason for the spurt in companies
started by Chinese immigrants. In recent years, companies and wealthy
individuals in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore have been investing in American
technology. Taiwan investors in particular have shown a preference for companies
started by immigrants from Taiwan.

Many Asian entrepreneurs also get financing from American venture capitalists.
But others, lacking a track record or the proper contacts, do not. "Some have
knocked on U.S. venture capitalists' doors until their knuckles are raw," said
Nelson Dong, a lawyer in Palo Alto, Calif., who advises entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists.

Yen-son (Paul) Huang could not find investors when he started a company in 1982,
after earning a Ph.D. and working at two Silicon Valley companies. "We thought
if we made a product sale we could survive two to three months," he said.

The company, known as Ecad, not only survived but thrived. It sold stock to the
public, then merged with another company to form Cadence Design Systems, a
leader in producing software to design electronic circuitry. Dr. Huang and seven
colleagues have now started PIE Design Systems and, this time, have found no
shortage of investors.

Tend to Frugality

Even when they can raise money, the immigrants tend to be very frugal. At Sigma
Designs Inc., which makes computer monitors, revenues were cut in half last year
because it lost a big contract. But the company stayed profitable and avoided
layoffs, something that would be unimaginable for most companies.

Some companies started by immigrants have managers from many other
nationalities. But in others, almost all the top executives are Chinese. At PIE
Design, all eight founders are Chinese and all the top positions except for head
of sales are held by Asians.

"There is a high tendency to surround themselves with people they are
comfortable with," said Pauline Lo Alker, president of Network Peripherals Inc.
and also president of the Asian American Manufacturers Association, a local
trade group.

Some industry executives say a lack of diversity in management, combined with a
tendency to try to keep tight control and to raise too little money, could put
such companies at a competitive disadvantage.  "I wish they would open up a lot
more," said Mr. Mok of the Silicon Valley Bank.

At Everex almost all the top executives were engineers from Hong Kong. The
company grew rapidly through low-cost manufacturing and rapid product design,
but it paid little attention to marketing, and some employees thought the top
officials did not delegate enough authority. For a while, the company had only
one facsimile machine, which was controlled by top managers.

But about a year ago Everex began losing money. It recruited new managers with
diverse backgrounds and is now returning to profitability.

Networking Established

To help compensate for their position outside the Silicon Valley establishment,
some Asian executives have formed their own network, through organizations like
the Asian American Manufacturers Association, the Chinese Institute of Engineers
and the Chinese Software Professional Association.

"If you talk to Chinese engineers you can find everything cooking in the
valley," said Daniel Hu, president of Elite Microelectronics, which makes chips
for personal computers.

Another organization, the Mount Jade Association, made up of high-level
executives from both the United States and Taiwan, tries to foster business
relationships between the nations.

Even when they retain ties to Taiwan, the Silicon Valley entrepreneurs say their
loyalties lie with the United States. Some entrepreneurs hope their success in
creating companies and jobs will dispel complaints from some American-born
engineers that foreigners are stealing jobs by agreeing to work for low salaries
in order to remain in the country.

"I've helped create more than 20 jobs," Dr. Liu said. "I don't think I've taken
anything away."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Many Asian engineers are not being looked at as having
management talent," said David K. Lam, a Chinese entrepreneur in Silicon Valley.
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. D1)

Chart: "A Growing Sphere of Influence"

Publicly traded electronics companies founded by immigrants of Chinese descent,
listed in order of revenues for the last full fiscal year reported.

Company: Wang Laboratories, Lowell, Mass.
Founder: An Wang
From: China
Revenues: $2.1 billion
Business: Computers

Company: Computer Associates, Garden City, N.Y.
Founder: Charles B. Wang
From: China
Revenues: $1.35 billion
Business: Software

Company: AST Research, Irvine, Calif.
Founder: Safi Qureshey, Thomas C. K. Yuen, Albert Wong
From: Pakistan, Hong Kong, Hong Kong (respectively)
Revenues: $688 million
Business: Personal computers

Company: Everex Systems, Fremont, Calif.
Founder: Steve Hui
From: Hong Kong
Revenues: $425 million
Business: Personal computer, peripherals

Company: Solectron Corporation, San Jose, Calif.
Founder: Winston Chen
From: Taiwan
Revenues: $265 million
Business: Contract manufacturing of electronics products

Company: Cadence Design Systems, San Jose, Calif.
Founder: Yen-son (Paul) Huang and others*
From: Taiwan
Revenues: $231 million
Business: Electronic design automation software

Company: Advanced Logic Research, Irvine, Calif.
Founder: Gene Lu
From: Taiwan
Revenues: $228 million
Business: Personal computers

Company: Qume Corporation, Milpitas, Calif.
Founder: David S. Lee
From: Taiwan
Revenues: $217 million
Business: Terminals, monitors and printers

Company: Komag Inc., Milpitas, Calif.
Founder: Tu Chen, Scott Chen, Ching-Cheng Shir
From: Taiwan, Taiwan, Taiwan
Revenues: $149 million
Business: Data storage disks

Company: Lam Research, Fremont, Calif.
Founder: David K. Lam
From: China
Revenues: $138 million
Business: Semiconductor production equipment

Company: Weitek Corporation, Sunnyvale, Calif.
Founder: Chi-Shin Wang, Edmund Sun, Godfrey Fong
From: Taiwan, Taiwan, China (respectively)
Revenues: $58 million
Business: Semiconductors

Company: Sigma Designs Inc., Fremont, Calif.
Founder: Thinh Tran, Jimmy Chan, Jason Chen, Steve Winegarden
From: Vietnam, Hong Kong, Taiwan, United States (respectively)
Revenues: $36 million
Business: Monitors

Company: Communication Intelligence Corporation, Redwood Shored, Calif.
Founder: James Dao
From: China
Revenues: $123,000
Business: Handwriting recognition software and hardware

*Dr. Huang founded Ecad, which merged with SDA Systems to form Cadence.

(Source: Company reports) (pg. D5)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

GAINS SEEN IN FIGHT TO CUT DRUG TRADE

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 646 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Jan. 10


Marking moderate progress in the fight against drugs, security forces in Central
and South America seized 143 tons of cocaine in 1991, about 15 percent of world
production, the region's top American military official says.

New radar, spy planes and information sharing between historically hostile
nations like Peru and Ecuador increased seizures, the official, Gen. George A.
Joulwan of the Army, said in an interview here on Friday.

[Three Americans and one Peruvian were killed on Sunday when their
American-supplied UH-1H helicopter crashed in the Upper Huallaga Valley of Peru,
a major coca-growing region that is largely controlled by left-wing guerrillas.

[On Monday, Peruvian police officials in Lima said the helicopter was shot down
while providing security and illumination for the nighttime rescue of occupants
of a helicopter that had made an emergency landing. American Embassy officials
said they could not confirm that shots had been fired].

No Americans in Combat

General Joulwan, commander of the United States Southern Command, said a
priority in Latin America's drug war was "that United States forces not get
involved in actual combat field."

On Friday, for example, about 200 American military personnel were stationed in
South America on duties related to Washington's 1991 military antidrug aid
budget of $150 million. Usually on short-term assignments, this floating
population of American military personnel trains Latin American police and
military forces, maintains American-supplied equipment, and in the case of
Bolivia provides engineering aid for road construction.

Americans staff a half-completed network of ground radar stations that track the
movements of small aircraft across the Caribbean. In a risky new assignment,
Americans man two new radar posts installed in December in the Huallaga Valley
of Peru.

Noting that Shining Path guerrillas are building a war chest by taxing drug
flights from the Huallaga, General Joulwan suggested that the American public
should start debating the pros and cons of extending counterinsurgency aid to
Peru.

"Peru is critical," the general said of the threat from the Maoist group. "If it
goes down the tubes, I don't think that is in our best interest."

Measures Called Misleading

Critics of American military aid to Latin America say that local militaries
routinely divert equipment supplied for countering narcotics to
counterinsurgency operations.

In reply, General Joulwan said that in Colombia and in Peru the line between
traffickers and guerrillas sometimes blurred.

"It's impossible to keep track of every hour of how the helicopters are used,"
he said.

Critics also assert that seizure statistics obscure the expansion of coca leaf
cultivation in South America.

"Washington's measures of efficiency are as misleading in assessing genuine
progress in the Andean drug war as 'body counts' were in measuring U.S. success
in the Vietnam War," an article in the current issue of Foreign Policy magazine,
titled "Dead-End Drug Wars," asserts.

"There is a tendency to emphasize the numbers of crops eradicated and not the
amount of new coca planted," say the authors, Peter J. Andreas, Eva C. Bertram,
Morris J. Blachman and Kenneth E. Sharpe. "The number of seizures and not the
totals being shipped; the number of arrests and not the continued effectiveness
of the trafficking network."

Record Seizures in Colombia

In 1991, Colombia's police seized 70 tons of cocaine, a record and well over the
45 tons seized in 1990. In addition, American agents operating in the United
States and in international waters seized nearly 23 tons of Colombian cocaine in
four raids over the last two months.

But traffickers are believed to account for seizures in their pricing structure.
The flow from Colombia appears to have continued largely unimpeded.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

No. 2 C.I.A. Official Quits Post

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 14


Richard J. Kerr, the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, announced his
resignation today, and President Bush is expected to appoint Rear Adm. William
O. Studeman as Mr. Kerr's replacement, Administration officials said.

Admiral Studeman, who will be 52 years old on Thursday, is the director of the
National Security Agency, which is responsible for global eavesdropping and the
security of America's secret communciations around the world.

The appointment of Admiral Studeman to the nation's No. 2 intelligence post was
intended in part to give Robert M. Gates more influence over the Pentagon's
intelligence activities.

Even though Mr. Gates, as Director of Central Intelligence, is technically
responsible for the Central Intelligence Agency and the various related agencies
throughout the Government, the Defense Department controls about 85 percent of
the estimated $30 billion budgeted annually for intelligence. In his
confirmation hearings last fall, Mr. Gates vowed to curb unnecessary duplication
among the intelligence agencies, and said the C.I.A.'s relationships with the
military "must be improved."

Admiral Studeman, a highly decorated veteran of the Vietnam War, has spent
nearly his entire career in intelligence posts. From 1985 to 1988 he was
Director of Naval Intelligence.

Mr. Kerr, 56, assumed the post of the nation's No. 2 intelligence officer in
March 1989 and served briefly as Acting Director of Central Intelligence last
fall, after the resignation of William H. Webster and before Mr. Gates's
confirmation. He has worked at the C.I.A. for 32 years.

In testimony during the Senate confirmation hearings Mr. Kerr challenged Mr.
Gates's memory, saying that in August 1986 he suggested to Mr. Gates the
possibility that the White House might have been using profits from illegal arms
sales to Iran to funnel money to the Nicaraguan rebels.

Mr. Gates insisted that he did not learn about the Iran-contra scheme until
shortly before it became public in November 1986.

Mr. Kerr's resignation will take effect on March 2. It had not been decided who
woudl replace Admiral Studeman, Administration officials said.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Faded Glory: Looking Back at the Gulf War -- A Special Report
Year After Gulf War, Joy Is a Ghost;
The Families: For One Woman, A Big Test Met

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 636 words


Carmen Laver wanted to be a mother, wife and soldier. If men could go to war,
leaving spouses, babies and household chores behind, she thought, why not women?

So, in August 1990, when the Navy ship Mercy set sail for the Persian Gulf, with
it went Petty Officer Laver on her personal challenge. She said goodbye to her
two small children and her husband in San Leandro, Calif., near Oakland. It was
the hardest thing she had ever done, she said.

"I'd been in the Navy for five years," she said, "and I thought to myself, 'This
is it, this is the big test. It's now or never."

Women made up more than 35,000, or 6 percent of the 541,425 American soldiers
sent to the Persian Gulf. They piloted helicopters, drove ammunition trucks,
loaded weapons, ran supply depots and prepared to treat the wounded. During the
Vietnam War, less than 3 percent of the armed forces, or slightly more than
7,000 people, were women. Women are barred from active combat.

Among those designated to be sent to the gulf, single parents and couples in
which both spouses were in the service were required to fill out forms outlining
their plans for child care. Of 18,700 people in that category, 260 were
discharged because their family plans were turned down.

Although Ms. Laver, 25 years old, was an operating room technician, she was not
out of danger during the war. Saddam Hussein said hospital ships could be
targets for missiles.

"It hit home as soon as we got there because we had a couple of Scud scares and
mines to dodge," Ms. Laver said.

She steeled herself for the blood and horror of treating the wounded on a
floating hospital. But the ground war was quick and relatively painless.

Conflict on Home Front

Another conflict loomed at home. Eric Laver had accepted his wife's decision to
go to the gulf with some initial doubts. An accountant, he used to come home to
find a ready meal and fresh-bathed children. At first, he thought his wife had
gone to war because she had no choice.

"About three weeks after she left, I got a letter from Carmen saying she had
volunteered for gulf duty," Mr. Laver said. "I took that awful hard."

But he relished his new role. The Lavers' son, David, was almost 6 months old
and their daughter, Tara Lynn, was 3 years old, when Petty Officer Laver left.
She was gone for nearly eight months.

"It turned out to be one of the best things I've ever done," Mr. Laver said. "My
son used to cling to his mom. But now the bond between us is very strong."

Mr. Laver hired a baby sitter while he worked in the day, then came home to
change diapers, prepare meals, read stories, shop for food and mend hurt
feelings.

"I have come to appreciate, more than I ever could before, everything that
working mothers have to go through," he said. "You have no idea how hard it is
until you try it."

At the same time, Ms. Laver was going through feelings of guilt and
exhilaration.  "When I was at home, and my girl would ask me to read her a
story, I'd sometimes brush her off," she recalled. "But when I was on the ship I
thought, 'God, if I could only get the chance to read to her again." '

A Son Who Turns Away

When Ms. Laver returned, her daughter rushed to hug her, but 1-year-old David
turned away, crying.

"I had left this little baby, and here was this walking, talking toddler who
didn't know me," she said.

She has some doubts about whether she would make the same decision again. "I
think the military needs to think of parents, men and women, as the same," she
said. "But this whole idea of women trying to do it all is not ideal. It's
hard."

There remains a new testing ground for the couple. "When I came home, my husband
asked me if I wanted to have another baby," Ms. Laver recalled. "I said, 'Hell
no!'

"Guess what? I'm five months' pregnant."

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Gulf War Tallies" shows the number of casualties of men and
women, and how they were killed, number of wounded, and the approximate cost for
the allies and the U.S. (Source: Defense Department)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media;
Democrats Press TV Campaigns to Reach New Hampshire Voters

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


The Democratic candidates are stepping up their campaigns to woo the voters of
New Hampshire, battling it out on the airwaves with advertisements that hammer
at the Republicans' management of the economy.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas continued his theme of help for the "forgotten
middle class" with a second commercial that began appearing on television in New
Hampshire today.

In the 30-second advertisement, newspapers bearing headlines about the pay
increase for Senators and tax breaks for the wealthy are superimposed on a
photograph of the White House at night. The image is a reminder of the vote by
Congress for a $23,200-a-year pay raise for senators in the dead of night last
July, and it sends a subtle message that the White House supported it.

Hitting Hard on Taxes

Then comes Governor Clinton talking directly into the camera: "For 12 years the
politicians in Washington have raised their pay, cut taxes on the rich and
raised taxes on the middle class. That's wrong."

And he is not the only Democratic candidate with whom television viewers in New
Hampshire are becoming acquainted.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa also began appearing in New Hamsphire today in one of
two commercials his campaign has produced. The second is to be broadcast on
Friday.

Mr. Harkin's commercials, produced by Ken Swope, a media consultant who worked
on some of the advertisements for Michael S. Dukakis in the 1988 primary
campaign, blend patriotic images and a sharp partisan edge.

One features Mr. Harkin in shirt sleeves at a rally, American flags flapping
behind him. "Let's put this country to work," he tells the audience. And in
contrast to the Republican message of trickle-down economics, Mr. Harkin
suggests: "Let's put it in at the bottom, let it percolate up for a while."

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska joined the advertising fray last Friday. He
shifts from talking about his record in the Vietnam War to a discussion of
health care and he assails President Bush for his recent trip to Japan to "beg
for a few concessions."

Paul E. Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts, has appeared in two
commercials. The first shows him swimming laps, with an announcer saying that
Mr. Tsongas has confounded the naysayers throughout his political career.

In the second, Mr. Tsongas talks of his accomplishments as a Senator, including
his role in winning Congressional approval for a bailout of the Chrysler
Corporation.

No political commercials have appeared for Edmund G. Brown Jr., the former
Governor of California. He is relying on radio and on an "800" telephone number
to carry his message and to raise money.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas continued his theme of help for
the "forgotten middle class" with a second commercial that began appearing on
television in New Hampshire yesterday.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Middle Riddle

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


It is typical of the mental gimcrackery that passes for a public philosophy
these days that our rulers are suddenly frantic to grant boons to the middle
class. And what is it, this middle class, which all statesmen from President to
Congressional doorkeeper now yearn to pelt with blessings?

It is an abstraction, a fragment of a campaign slogan, a piety on a demagogue's
tongue, an insoluble calculus problem for demographers, a verbal crutch for
economists and political writers required by the cruel nature of their trades to
sound eloquent while waiting for an idea to pull into the station.

To whom or what in this imponderable vagueness shall political sweets be given?
(Ah, sweet tax breaks!) It is a mystery, and there will be high comedy for the
next few months watching politicians argue about where to ladle out the gravy.

The term "middle class" used to summon up good thoughts about American society.
"Middle class" went with words like "hard-working," "salt of the earth,"
"patriotic," and "backbone of America."

For a long time politicians took it for granted that there was indeed a middle
class, that it was the American majority, and that it was the constituency that
elected them. Not surprisingly, government in this age tended to be one glorious
boon for this good, hard-working, salt-of-the-earth, patriotic group of people.

If there was once some validity to this vast human oversimplification it pretty
well ended during the 1970's when the amazing wealth of post-World-War-II
America began to evaporate. Now two incomes became necessary to maintain the
family living standard; now, two fewer children; now, an extortionate rental
instead of an own-your-own for $2,000 down and a 4 1/2 percent mortgage.

Termites seemed to be eating the standard of living. With this silent
impoverishment came dizzying inflation. (Thanks to the Vietnam War and to Middle
East war and oil politics.) This, along with the collapse of party politics and
resulting corruption of the tax structure, left a scene where lip service was
still paid to middle-class uprightness but the law said, "Every man for himself
and Devil take the hindmost."

The Saturday Evening Post, classic tribune of the middle class, was dead. The
magazine for whatever the middle class had become was Tax Shelter Digest.

The conclusive proof that the old-style middle class had passed over was the
landslide election of the Great Communicator with his trickle-down philosophy
for redistributing the wealth. Millions who must have once thought themselves
middle-class obviously felt sufficiently risen by 1980 to require a President
dedicated to the notion that making the rich richer would be a blessing to all.

Four years later when the rich were definitely richer, the Communicator's
landslide re-election suggested that most of the old middle class -- "Couldn't
have done it without you, folks!" -- felt as one with the rich.

Now, an unbrave new world: ruin, debt, unemployment, Japanophobia, Milkenism in
the ashes, Buchanan amok, and whining, whining everywhere. And yet . . . out of
the ruins . . . what is this we see being reborn? Is it the Phoenix? Is it the
Great Communicator? Is it Mario Cuomo at last?

No. It is the middle class. Politicians galore declare it risen. The class that
made America great is back! Something must be done for it quickly. And please,
don't ask what has made it stop feeling as one with the rich and start feeling
middle-class again. No ham-handed sarcasm with this splendid class. This is the
class that votes, remember. Salt of the earth. Honest as the day is long. It
votes. Remember that. Votes.

But how to tell who is middle-class, hence boon-deserving, and who not? There
are telltale signs. A car telephone, for example, is not middle class. Has a
secretary? Definitely not middle class. Drives a $30,000 German or Japanese car?
Not middle class. Summer house? Nosirree. Gets by on one income? Not middle
class.

Have to borrow Thursday night to make it to the pay window Friday? All right,
middle class, provided they don't subscribe to Tax Shelter Digest.

My Jan. 11 column incorrectly described the Duesenberg as a car of German make.
As many correspondents have pointed out with considerable wit and kindness, it
was made in America. Sorry, car fans.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

BYLINE: By Marilyn Stasio

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words


Part police procedural, part Big Boys' Adventure Book, THE BLACK ECHO (Little,
Brown, $19.95), a first novel by Michael Connelly, a Los Angeles Times reporter,
is one of those books you read with your knuckles -- just hanging on until it's
over. The moody opening introduces the Los Angeles homicide detective Hieronymus
(Harry) Bosch, a hard-nosed, methodical cop whose only flaw is romantic
self-dramatization. ("I am the loner," goes his mournful mantra. "I am the
nighthawk.") Harry gets the case of his career when a heroin addict whose body
is found stuffed into a pipe at the Mulholland Dam turns out to be a marine from
his own unit of Vietnam "tunnel rats." Haunted by the war memories resurrected
by the corpse, Harry obsessively pursues his investigation, even when it is
turned over to the F.B.I. for its links to a spectacular bank robbery executed
by thieves who tunneled into a vault through city storm drains.

The story burrows into dangerous foreign territory for a procedural -- the
Vietnam background alone yields a tortuous subplot about war profiteering -- but
the force of the narrative keeps shooting it around these tricky bends. Even at
their most implausible moments, Mr. Connelly's claustrophobic scenes of
robberies and manhunts in airless underground chambers are good and thrilling.

Here's one English detective you won't find taking tea at the vicarage or
composing villanelles between cases. Detective Chief Superintendent Colin
Harpur, who works out of a small provincial city south of London, is no
gentleman; at times, this hard-boiled hero is not even a good cop. In Bill
James's "You'd Better Believe It," he dawdled with a junior officer's wife while
her husband was being murdered in the line of duty. In "The Lolita Man," seamy
office politics turned his mind from a serial killer who was stalking pubescent
girls. Now, in HALO PARADE (Foul Play/Countryman, $17.95), he commits an error
in judgment that contributes to the death of an undercover policeman.

Despite the tarnish, Harpur projects the powerful appeal of a flawed man doing
his best in a crummy job. When one of his young officers is killed by drug
dealers, he resorts to the same cynical and deadly tactics established early in
the series. "It was a fair town to have in your care," the author once wrote of
his hero's commitment to his patch of turf, "and he would use all the ways he
knew, clean or dirty, to guard it."

Mr. James, who also writes espionage novels as David Craig, has sharpened up the
acerbic edges of other characters in this series, most notably the superior
officer with whom Harpur exchanges the driest, most cutting confidences about
womankind. Even at its filthiest, the chat is priceless.

PUSHOVER (Putnam, $19.95) is Lillian O'Donnell's best Norah Mulcahaney police
procedural in years. Too old to play the naive rookie and too street-weary for
those high-minded causes that used to elevate her from the rank and file,
Lieutenant Mulcahaney is back in the New York trenches, soiling her gloves.

"It was not her type of operation," Norah acknowledges of the stakeout of a
subway serial killer; "big task force, massive search, intricate deployment of
armed men." Not to mention all that unsightly gore on the tracks. "She was more
comfortable working with a small team." Indeed, the veteran officer does a far
more sensitive and searching job of finding the person who battered an aged
screen legend to death and kidnapped her grandson. But to her credit, Norah
doesn't flinch or go all girlish on us. Maintaining her professionalism on that
subway case, she provides a rare, clear view of transit police procedures and
the subtle play of politics within the department.

Ms. O'Donnell's too-too-stolid style is clearly never going to melt, but it's
refreshing to see Norah playing cop, instead of paragon, and stooping to such
base human emotions as jealousy. Staring her 40th birthday in the eye, she fumes
with resentment over an ambitious younger policewoman who grabs an assignment
Norah couldn't handle. But if "youth was no longer one of her assets," class is
-- and this is a classy job all around.

In HOT (Holt, $18.95), some of the sizzle has burned off the Florida mysteries
that John Lutz began five books back with "Tropical Heat." Fred Carver, an
Orlando private eye who normally thrives in soaring temperatures, takes on a
dull surveillance job for a retired cop named Henry Tiller who lives on Key
Montaigne ("condos, condos, condos, and a couple of retirement communities"),
where he keeps an eye peeled on the neighbors. The old man's suspicion that "one
of them neighbors ain't right" takes on ominous weight when Tiller is struck by
a hit-and-run driver, leaving Carver to sweat out the watch for whatever
mischief the guy next door is up to.

As always, Mr. Lutz soaks his story in the steamy atmosphere of the Florida Keys
and wrings it out with dry observations on the vagaries of the natives. But this
time he kills off his most original character, the crustaceous Henry Tiller, too
early in the game, shifting focus to a couple of mail-order villains who conduct
their most nefarious business discreetly offstage. These conventional heavies
can't be blamed, though, for the sluggish performance of the hero, who is too
distracted here by his gorgeous girlfriend to keep his mind on his job. Either
that, or the heat finally got to him.

For some writers, it's not enough to end a book; they have to throw it off a
cliff. Consider S. T. Haymon, who has one of the purest lyric voices in the
mystery field. In DEATH OF A WARRIOR QUEEN (St. Martin's, $17.95), this gifted
English stylist has written a delicate and complex tale of country passion that
sustains its perfect literary pitch until the end -- when it rushes to resolve
itself with Grand Guignol gestures and psychobabble explanations.

Before giving over to hysterics, this elegiac whodunit draws Detective Inspector
Benjamin Jurnet to a seaside village in Norfolk, where someone has tampered with
an extraordinary archeological dig of ancient druid remains associated with
Queen Boadicea. Jurnet has further cause to ponder the fierce ways of British
women when he discovers the corpse of the missing village tart buried in a sand
dune. As baffling to him as the murder itself is the devotion shown to the
victim's fully grown retarded son by a local gentlewoman of exquisite
refinement.

"Her reception of the news of her cleaning lady's murder was everything you
could have expected of such a woman -- dismay, sadness, but nothing fussy:
everything under control, a matter of manners," observes Ms. Haymon, whose
analytical style is softened by her poet's sensibility. But sense, as well as
sensibility, deserts her when she goes excavating for the darker side of her
characters, who adamantly refuse to be paganized.

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Shortage of Professors Is Envisioned

BYLINE: By ANTHONY DePALMA

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 712 words


The nation could run short of researchers and college professors in the arts and
sciences in the next several years unless graduate programs at American
universities are strengthened by new financing and greater attention to
students, according to a study on graduate education.

The heart of the problem is that the number of recipients of doctorates in the
six areas covered by the study -- economics, English, history, mathematics,
physics and political science -- has sharply declined in the last decade. The
doctoral degree is almost always a requirement for appointment as a professor or
researcher.

While enough programs exist to produce more doctoral degree recipients, many are
so small or so poorly organized that students, hard pressed to find the time or
energy to complete a course of work that can last 12 years, often drop out
before receiving doctorates, according to the study, which was made public on
Monday.

Effects of Inattention

"Unless something is done to improve the effectiveness of these programs," said
William G. Bowen, co-author of the study, "there will continue to be a waste of
human energy, resources that are not used effectively and, quite possibly, an
inadequate response by graduate education to the pressures that are going to be
felt by the end of the 1990's."

The study, "In Pursuit of the Ph.D.," (Princeton University Press) was conducted
by Mr. Bowen, a former president of Princeton who now heads the Andrew J. Mellon
Foundation, and Neil L. Rudenstine, who was executive vice president of the
foundation before being named president of Harvard University last year.

Despite its importance to the nation, graduate education has received scant
attention and comparatively little study, Mr. Bowen said.

American colleges and universities grant approximately one million bachelor's
degrees a year, compared with about 300,000 master's degrees and 34,000
doctorates.

Enrollment in graduate schools grew slowly but steadily beginning in the 1920's,
then more rapidly in the 1960's until it peaked before graduate student
deferments for the Vietnam War were ended in 1968, the report said. More
recently, the number of doctoral recipients in the humanities dropped to 3,600
in 1988 from 5,400 in 1973. By contrast, the number of engineering and science
degrees has remained steady because of an influx of foreign graduate students
who have offset a drop in the number of American students in those areas.

How to End the Decline?

The study also found that as many as half of all doctoral students in many
programs drop out before finishing.

"The low completion rates and long time-to-degree that often prevail now mean
that even modest improvements would increase markedly the number of recipients
of doctorates," the authors wrote. "Working to improve the effectiveness of
current programs is by far the most sensible way to begin to prepare for the
faculty staffing problems that are anticipated by the end of the decade."

A related study co-written by Mr. Bowen in 1989 estimated that the nation would
have to increase overall production of doctorates by two-thirds to meet
anticipated demands for faculty members and to avert a shortage. The study,
"Prospects for Faculty in the Arts and Sciences," projected that by the end of
this decade there might be only 30,934 new faculty members to fill 37,091
positions.

The study recommends that universities and graduate departments take several
steps to increase the number of doctorates. Among the suggestions are these:

*Avoid creating more graduate programs that will be so small and specialized
that they cannot meet a minimum standard of excellence.

*Advise graduate students more closely and foster a sense of collegiality among
them, especially in the trying period when a student is writing a dissertation.

*Limit positions as teaching assistants to about two years. Otherwise the
positions -- which provide financial aid to graduate students in exchange for
part-time teaching duties -- can interfere with the student's ability to
complete a degree program.

The study also recommended that a national fellowship program for the humanities
be established, tailoring it after a program being run by the National Science
Foundation.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Clinton Moves on 2 Fronts To Widen Support in South

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words


Long before the Southern primaries on March 10, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas is
trying to sew up the support of the mostly white Democratic establishments in
those states and also garner enough endorsements from black officials to shore
up his standing with minority and liberal voters.

The Clinton strategy has produced early results in party organizations, bringing
him endorsements from moderates like Gov. Zell Miller of Georgia.  He has also
been endorsed by Representative John Lewis of Georgia, a civil rights pioneer,
and Representative Mike Espy of Mississippi, the first black Congressman from
that state since Reconstruction.

So far, the other Democratic candidates have not done much campaigning in the
South, beyond assembling bare-bones networks of support.

Supporters of other Democrats are trying to slow Mr. Clinton's momentum by
warning Democratic leaders not to rush the nomination struggle to a premature
finish. Organizers for Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska have encouraged
uncommitted officeholders to await the outcome of the New Hampshire primary on
Feb. 18. Mr. Kerrey's supporters have suggested that their candidate's Vietnam
War record could catch on with Southern voters.

Some Southern liberals remain suspicious of Mr. Clinton and are touting Senator
Tom Harkin as the most attractive candidate to the party's traditional voter
groups.

The outcome of the contests in 11 states on March 10, the so-called Super
Tuesday of the primary season, could seal a nomination or break a campaign. A
week earlier, five other states, including Georgia, will hold their primaries.

But before a single vote has been cast above or below the Mason-Dixon line,
Governor Clinton has begun quietly gaining guarantees of support in Texas as
well as in Alabama, Georgia and Oklahoma.

"Clinton has managed to gather a lot of support and convince people that he is
someone who can win and present a moderate viewpoint," said Jim Mattox, the
former State Attorney General who lost the 1989 Democratic gubernatorial primary
to Ann Richards, now the Governor. "Whether he has strong appeal with overall
voters out here, I don't think anybody has any idea."

Looking for a Winner

Like many Southern politicians Mr. Mattox finds himself in a quandary. Senator
Harkin's campaign identifies Mr. Mattox as a supporter, but he said in an
interview, "The truth of the matter is, I'd like to go with the candidate who
can win." Just in case, he met with Mr. Clinton when the Arkansas Governor was
in Austin last week.

Part of Mr. Clinton's intrinsic appeal is regional, his Southern supporters
freely admit. But he has also clearly outhustled his competitors in Texas and
elsewhere, intent on shoring up a natural base that can serve as a backstop for
his ambitions should his campaign falter in New Hampshire or in another early
primary in South Dakota. Mr. Kerrey is presumed to have his own regional appeal
in South Dakota.

Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts has established only a token Southern base in
Florida, and party workers in other Southern states report no sightings of an
organization for Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California.

"The conventional wisdom is that everybody else ought to withdraw from the race
and start working on the Clinton inauguration," said Shelton Smith, a Houston
lawyer and Democratic fund-raiser who is working for Mr. Kerrey, adding, "which
I think is silly."

In South Carolina, Kevin Gray, a Harkin adviser who ran the Rev. Jesse Jackson's
successful campaign there in 1988, said Mr. Harkin could defeat Mr. Clinton by
appealing to the same coalition of black voters, labor unionists and liberals
that helped Mr. Jackson.

"I don't even understand to any degree why progressives are looking at Clinton,"
Mr. Gray said. "If you win and you remove all of your principles in the process,
you don't win anything. And I think that's what a lot of people are doing."

On Super Tuesday in 1988, more than 8.8 million Democrats voted in 14 Southern
and border states, but the results were not definitive. Fewer delegates are at
stake this time, and many states have grown disenchanted with the idea of Super
Tuesday, which forced candidates to leapfrog among regional airports and
television studios rather than spending any significant time in a state.

Georgia and South Carolina, which will hold their primaries in the weeks before
Super Tuesday, will serve as a sort of gateway to the South this year. Other
states like Alabama, which will not hold its contest until June 2, have spread
out the single-day impact of a multistate Southern vote.

"I hope somebody wraps it up by then," said Al LaPierre, the chairman of the
Alabama Democratic Party, referring to his state's primary date. "I think that's
the best way to beat George Bush."

Valuable Lesson for Clinton

A candidate like Mr. Clinton has also been forced to take into account the
lessons learned by Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, who virtually ignored early
1988 Presidential contests in the North with the hope that the Southern
primaries would propel him to the nomination. Such regional appeal, however,
proved insufficient to overcome the subsequent strength in New York and
Pennsylvania of the party's eventual nominee in 1988, Michael S. Dukakis.

But the Democrats understand that without convincing victories in the South, the
nomination as well as the general election will remain well out of reach. So the
telephone lines of the politically connected are buzzing.

Hazel Obey, the chairman of the Texas chapter of the group founded by Mr.
Jackson, the Rainbow Coalition, said she had received phone calls from both Mr.
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, as well as from the Clinton campaign chairman,
David Wilhelm, asking for her support. Mr. Harkin's people, on the other hand,
contacted her only once, and then to invite her to breakfast with the Iowa
Senator at 6:45 the next morning. She said she would probably support Mr.
Clinton.

Such critical stroking has won Mr. Clinton support in Mississippi, where
Representative Espy has agreed to serve as co-chairman of the Clinton campaign;
in Louisiana, where Representative William J. Jefferson recently was the host at
a lunch for the Governor, and in Florida, where he won a December straw poll of
Democrats.

Last week, Mr. Clinton received the near-unanimous endorsement of the
Mexican-American Democrats' convention in Laredo, Tex., something that eluded
the party's Spanish-speaking nominee, Mr. Dukakis, in 1988.

Endorsements of 'Somebodies'

"We're in the enviable position of, somebody's got to get an endorsement to beat
us," said Garry Mauro, the Texas Land Commissioner who is running Mr. Clinton's
campaign in the state. "We're going to get more than our share of the
somebodies. I don't know where the average person is going to go."

The candidate viewed as most likely to erode Mr. Clinton's early strength in his
home region is Mr. Kerrey. The Kerrey campaign is depending on good news from
New Hampshire, Colorado and South Dakota before it turns its full attention to
the South.

But Mr. Smith, of the Kerrey campaign, acknowledged that they "just got
steamrollered" by Clinton supporters at the convention of Mexican-American
Democrats and added, "Clinton has spent so much time in Texas, it's like he's
running for Governor of the state."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul E. Tsongas, facing camera at left rear, stood on frozen
Turtle Town Pond in Concord, N.H., to receive support from environmentalists.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Evolution of Billy Graham

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 209 words


To the Editor:

As a student of American religious history, I found Tom Wicker's review of "A
Prophet With Honor" (Dec. 22), William Martin's biography of the Rev. Billy
Graham, altogether unfair. Mr. Wicker rehearses Billy Graham's oft-cited sins --
his courting of the powerful, his support of the Vietnam War, his ambivalence
toward the civil rights movement, his indifference to the intellectual problems
of faith -- and justly faults the evangelist's shortcomings and Mr. Martin's
occasional failure to be more critical of his subject. But Mr. Wicker fails to
see Mr. Graham in anything but crudely polemical terms.

Mr. Martin chronicles Mr. Graham's development over time from an earnest,
airbrushed revivalist to a wiser, more compassionate prophet. In Mr. Martin's
book, Mr. Graham goes from being a cold warrior and celebrant of capitalism to
being a critic of the arms race and of the injustices of a market economy. He
began as a moralistic Jeremiah; he now reproves those who regard homosexuals as
pariahs and consider AIDS a scourge from God. Unfortunately, all Mr. Wicker
continues to see is Richard Nixon's confessor, as if Billy Graham were merely
the clerical equivalent of Bebe Rebozo.

EUGENE MC CARRAHER
Ardmore, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SUPER BOWL XXVI: Sports of The Times;
The Bills Just Loked Like Rank Outsiders

SECTION: Section C; Page 3; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS


IN the Super Bowl, even the gatecrashers arrive in limousines. One can imagine
chief executive officers drinking vintage wine in the leather-lined sanctuaries
of their stretches while their corporate vice presidents work the streets
looking for tickets.

No, doctor, there are no underdogs at the Super Bowl, even though the American
Conference has now lost eight straight times to the more physical National
Conference. In the latest, the Bills self-destructed, 37-24, to Washington for
their second straight Super Bowl loss.

The problem was that the Bills didn't have their heads on straight -- or their
helmets. Thurman Thomas, who broods that somebody out there doesn't respect him,
couldn't find his helmet for the first two plays from scrimmage.

Later, Andre Reed fired his helmet at the turf after being hammered while
chasing a pass. His 15-yard penalty cost the Bills a shot at a field goal, which
would at least have erased that big leering zero on the scoreboard at halftime.
As if it mattered.

The Washingtons, with their Hogs providing swatches of time, were just too good,
but the Bills belonged here. There are never any outsiders at the Super Bowl.

It is quite possible that even the beefy, beery, unshaven gents lurching around
the lobby of the Hyatt Regency the past few days were yuppies in grubby
disguise. Anybody who couldn't pass a computerized credit check was probably
detoured outside a 20-mile safety zone.

And that's what's wrong with the Super Bowl: It is all about winners. The grind
of a season does not lend itself to charming underdogs or marginal players
having the year of their lives.

A few Super Bowl teams have looked like imposters -- no names mentioned, but
some of them hailed from the Rockies -- but usually this is apparent only after
the fact.

Sometimes the favorite wins and sometimes it doesn't, but all the teams that
reach the Super Bowl are so-called programs or systems or juggernauts or
dynasties. This predictability is a tribute to the National Football League's
fiendishly clever restrictions on free agency.

The sad and boring truth is that there has been only one real upset in 26 years
of Super Bowls. Green Bay hammered Kansas City and Oakland in the first two
games, and then in 1969, the New York Jets carried the stigma of the brash
American Football League while the Baltimore Colts represented the name-brand
N.F.L.

Of course, the Jets had Joe Namath in his prime and the Colts' great Johnny
Unitas was not even a starter anymore, but still people were stunned when the
Jets won, 16-7.

Analysts tried to blame this aberration on the Vietnam War or the peace-and-love
generation, but in retrospect the Jets were the best team for that one season.
The Jets' spotty history before and after 1969 adds to their aura as the only
legitimate who-are-these-people? team in Super Bowl history.

The other team sports have some surprises to them. Nobody was quite sure Michael
Jordan could ever get the Chicago Bulls to the basketball championships until he
did it. Villanova really did beat Georgetown in the college Final Four in 1985.

In hockey, Minnesota was cut-rating its tickets last year before the improbable
sweep to the Stanley Cup finals, where it lost to Pittsburgh, which had been
underachieving for years. Some people thought it quite refreshing that the
finals did not include Edmonton or Montreal or the Islanders, three recent
dynasties.

Baseball, beloved baseball, produces the most surprises. We've been grateful for
whatever touch of baseball we could get this past week, whether it was Minnesota
Public Radio replaying a year-old tape of Garrison Keillor reciting "Casey at
the Bat," or the violinist at Murray's steakhouse playing "Take Me Out to the
Ballgame" and most of us standing at attention and shouting "Play ball!"

Anyway, baseball has arrivistes almost annually. What in the world were Chuck
Knoblauch of Minnesota and Mark Lemke of Atlanta doing scampering around in the
World Series last year? Where was Yogi Berra?

The Los Angeles Dodgers rode one hot pitcher, Orel Hershiser, to win the 1988
Series. The Cincinnati Reds came from relatively nowhere to win in 1990. The
1969 Mets came from the lower depths which was, as the feller said, simply
amazing.

I even spotted three Mets' caps in one walk through the skyways this week, a
reassurance that spring will be here soon. Well, maybe not here, but somewhere,
now that the Super Bowl has concluded its annual summit of fat cats.

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bills wide receiver Andre Reed throwing his helmet on the
sideline after he argued in vain for a pass-interference call during the second
quarter. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

E. C. Boggan, 48, Dies; Handled Rights Cases

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


E. Carrington Boggan, a leading advocate of equal rights for gay men and women,
died on Jan. 20 at his home in Los Angeles. He was 48 years old.

He died of AIDS, his family said.

As a lawyer, he represented gay litigants in several important cases. He also
helped found the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, a national gay-rights
organization in Manhattan.

He was the lawyer for former Sgt. Leonard Matlovich, a Vietnam war hero
discharged from the Air Force because he was a homosexual. He won reinstatement
in Federal District Court in Washington. The Air Force appealed, finally
settling in 1980 with a $160,000 payment, a promotion and an honorable
discharge. Mr. Boggan represented Vernon E. Berg in a parallel suit against the
Navy, with similar results.

In another major case, he won a Federal court ruling in 1974 granting gay
students at the University of New Hampshire the right to organize and meet on
the campus.

He had headed the editorial board of Human Rights magazine and the Individual
Rights and Responsibilities Section of the American Bar Association and was on
the board of the association's journal.

Several years ago Mr. Boggan moved to Los Angeles, where he continued to
practice law. Keeping his New York ties, he was of counsel to the law firm of
Glazer & Gottlieb in Manhattan.

Surviving are a brother, Robert J. Boggan, and a sister, Elizabeth Ann Mitch of
Springfield, Ohio.

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

BUSH AND YELTSIN DECLARE FORMAL END TO COLD WAR; AGREE TO EXCHANGE VISITS;
U.S. Looking for New Course As Superpower Conflict Ends

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


Like many Americans of his generation, 42-year-old John Driscoll holds many
memories of the cold war, particularly the fear that came with the air raid
drills at school, when he and the other students crawled under their desks,
practicing for the day the Soviet hydrogen bombs fell.

"It seems surreal now," he recalled recently, a short time after the Soviet
Union formally announced its demise. "Every summer, when I heard heat lightning
over the city and the sky would light up, I was convinced it was all over. My
whole childhood was built on the notion that the Soviets were the real threat."

Today, Mr. Driscoll is a teacher of economics and government at a high school
just outside Washington. Working with Junior Achievement, he is helping to
coordinate food shipments to Moscow, the capital of the empire that terrified
him as a child. And on a recent visit to Moscow, he said, he found that "these
folks have absolutely no confidence in themselves."

Across the country, planners, academics, Government officials and many ordinary
Americans are reassessing their view not just of the former Soviet Union but of
America as well -- trying to understand how the political and military rivalry
with the Soviets altered Americans' lives over the last 45 years, what false
assumptions it engendered and how the United States should change now that the
cold war is over.

"We're confused," said Robert Jay Lifton, a psychiatrist who is director of the
Center on Violence and Human Survival at John Jay College of the City University
of New York. "People no longer know how to view the world or how to understand
our own national problems, which have to some degree been subsumed by the cold
war."

The rivalry between Moscow and Washington so dominated the world's diplomacy,
commerce and even its culture that it is no wonder Americans are finding it
difficult to adapt.

The two nations that emerged with the strongest militaries when World War II
ended spent the next 45 years waging multi-layered competitions, first in
Europe, then Asia, Africa and Latin America.

With constant coaching from their Government, most Americans came to believe
that the Soviet goal was to impose its system on the entire world, as it had on
Eastern Europe between 1945 and 1948. So the United States embraced
"containment" -- halting the spread of Communist ideology and its presumed
influence on American society.

America threatened war to break a Soviet blockade of West Berlin in 1948-49 and
airlifted tons of food to the stranded enclave. It also spent billions of
dollars to resurrect the economies of Western Europe and fought the Korean War
from 1950 to 1953.

The first Soviet nuclear test was in 1949, and the Soviet Union grew toward
nuclear parity with the United States until each nation had the power to destroy
the other in an instant. The knowledge that each side had weapons so fearsome
that they could never be rationally fired left the constant hope that no matter
how bitter it grew, the war would always remain "cold."

But even as they tried to settle their scores by proxy wars and diplomatic
confrontations, the two sides continued to flirt with mutually assured
destruction. The severest test of nerve, and perhaps America's greatest single
cold-war victory, came in 1962 when President Kennedy forced Khrushchev to
withdraw Soviet missiles from Cuba.

America's single greatest defeat of the period was surely the Vietnam War, with
the devastating social and political turmoil that came with its loss.

In the service of containment, the United States ringed the Soviet empire with
military bases and built anti-Soviet alliances wherever possible the world over.
This competition cost the United States several trillion dollars -- no one has a
real account -- and more than 100,000 lives. And the domestic ramifications
permeate American society to this day.

The drive to ferret out Communist influence at home made perceived "loyalty" a
major preoccupation of governments, police agencies, school boards and even
social organizations.

The fears of subversion and betrayal were fed by several sensational trials,
like those of Alger Hiss for perjury and Julius and Ethel Rosenberg for
espionage. And they fed demogagic attacks on thousands of citizens by Senator
Joseph R. McCarthy and his imitators.

The fears abated little until the mid-1980's. And by then America was fully and
perhaps irreversibly engaged around the world.

When the cold war ended, the United States had 375 foreign military
installations staffed by more than 500,000 servicemen and women worldwide. Its
diplomatic engagement was just as extensive; through the 1980's America backed
its bid for world influence with more than $16 billion in foreign aid each year.
And American businesses were selling their products and services worldwide.

But now that the great conflict has at last run its course, Americans are facing
not just the giddy spectacle of a grand, global political victory. Behind it
lies a quandary of historic dimensions, as disorienting as any this nation has
ever faced.

Over the next several days The New York Times will examine how the cold war's
end has affected major American institutions and what sorts of changes may lie
ahead. Politicians, intelligence officials, foreign policy experts, military
analysts along with military-industry scientists and engineers all say they
realize that the major force that has directed them these last four decades no
longer exists. But few of them have clear ideas of what their new missions
should be.

Images
Popular Culture Widely Influenced

For most Americans it will be difficult to forget the cold war's pervasive
influence on American entertainment and culture. Cold war themes were the
subject of uncounted novels, pop songs, art work and more. Many of the most
indelible images came from films.

Among them was the scene from "Dr. Strangelove," the 1963 black comedy, showing
Slim Pickens waving his cowboy hat, shouting "Yahoo, Yahoo!" as he rode the
hydrogen bomb down toward its target, a missile field in Russia.

Cold war images permeated films until the very end. In "Rocky IV," released in
1985, Sylvester Stallone battled a superhuman-seeming, steroid-grown Soviet
boxer who warned him darkly, "I will break you." Moments later he fell bleeding
to the floor, another stunned victim of underestimated American might.

But already, film images are changing, too, demonstrating that America is not
entrapped by cold war stereotypes, no matter how memorable.

In "Star Trek VI," playing in theaters now, the Klingon empire is in collapse,
and its chancellor, not coincidentally named Gorkan, wants to make peace,
meaning "an end to almost 70 years of unremitting hostility that the Klingon
empire can no longer afford," as the character Spock observes.

Nicholas Meyer, the film's director, said Leonard Nimoy, who plays Spock,
proposed the film in 1990, just as the Berlin wall was falling, saying: "The
Klingons have always been our stand-in for the Russians. What about a Berlin
wall coming down in space?"

But in the Star Trek film, as in American political life, the prospect of losing
an enemy leaves the leaders fearful and uncertain.

"I was used to hating Klingons," William Shatner, as Captain Kirk, mutters
wistfully.

Legacy
Giving Up Secrecy Is Hard to Do

When Steven Garfinkel delivers a lecture to Federal security professionals, he
begins by showing them a slide that invariably leaves them perplexed.

Mr. Garfinkel is director of the Information Security Oversight Office, the
Federal agency that coordinates Government policy on classified documents. Late
last year, he turned to his slide as he spoke to a gathering of Defense
Department security specialists at a training seminar in Richmond, Va.

It listed the names of 12 Government agencies involved in intelligence or
security policy, including the Central Intelligence Agency, the National
Security Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency and Mr. Garfinkel's own office.

"What do all these agencies have in common?" he asked.

"They're all defense- or security-related," one man shouted. "All of them were
formed after World War II," offered another. But these were not the answers Mr.
Garfinkel was after.

With some coaxing, he finally led his audience to the response he wanted: All of
the agencies were products of the cold war. Across the room members of the
audience nodded.

Then came Mr. Garfinkel's next question: "With the cold war over, which ones can
we get rid of?"

"They didn't have any suggestions for deleting any of them," Mr. Garfinkel
recalled.

As Mr. Garfinkel and others attest, the cold war gave birth to a Government
culture of secrecy and clandestine activity that had never existed before to any
great degree, except in wartime.

Before the cold war, the nation did not even have a formal system for
classifying documents, though some agencies did keep secrets. Today, however,
Government officials classify almost seven million documents a year -- so many
that Washington has an agency to coordinate policy for keeping secrets.

But with the cold war's end, some people are asking whether all this secrecy is
still needed. In July, the Federation of American Scientists began publishing
the Secrecy and Government Bulletin, declaring in its first edition that "in the
cold war era, secrecy driven by fear and the politics of superpower rivalry
became deeply imbedded in national affairs and led to serious political, moral,
financial and environmental abuses.

"The end of the cold war provides an unsurpassed opportunity to rectify this
problem," it added.

The bulletin's editor, Steven Aftergood, said that government secrecy had often
prevented Congress and the public from "paying attention to abuses, wasted
money, failed programs" and that "a whole realm of government is beyond any
pretense of democratic decision-making."

But even with the cold war over, Mr. Aftergood, Mr. Garfinkel and others say the
Goverment has offered no plans to reduce the number of materials stamped secret
each year.

"I think it's fair to say that no one's talking yet about changing anything,"
Mr. Garfinkel said. "It looks like this cold war institution is going to be
institutionalized beyond the cold war."

Education
Need for Change Is Long Overdue

When Allen Barrow was teaching high school seniors in suburban Washington in the
1950's and '60s, "everybody expected Soviet missiles," he said, adding, "At
times there was a lot of fear."

The school system helped feed that fear. Like thousands of other teachers across
the country, Mr. Barrow showed his students films about the enemy. He
particularly remembers one "called 'Against the Wall,' I think, in black and
white, about the purges of Stalin, the millions of people executed."

Mr. Driscoll, one of his former students, had no trouble recalling that film.

"They lined up people in front of ditches and shot them," he said. "It was real
newsreel film. I remember the hats flying. And I thought, 'This is the way the
Russians act!' "

Mr. Barrow believes the cold war was a boon to education, in some ways, because
it made his students "more aware that things that go on way over there are going
to affect us here." He and others also noted that it gave an unquestioned boost
to certain subject areas, such as science and engineering, particularly after
the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957, the first man-made earth satellite.

But other educators point to darker effects as well.

As the "rhetoric of the cold war -- good guys and bad guys," filtered into the
class room, said Theodore Sizer, a professor of education at Brown University,
"study of Japan or Asia was limited," while academic attention was lavished on
the Soviet Union. For that, he said, America is now paying a price.

Marc Tucker, president of the National Center on Education and the Economy, has
been studying not just America's schools but those of countries whose students
usually score much better by generally accepted international standards of
measurement. Among them are schools in Germany and Japan. The difference, he
says, goes back to America's view of itself in the cold war's first decade.

The United States ended World War II the globe's unquestioned leader, the only
nation to enter the postwar era at full industrial capacity and in possession of
nuclear weapons. As a result, from 1945 into the late 1950's, "we were
enormously confident in our economic institutions, and in our social structure,
including the schools," Mr. Tucker observed, while the Germans and the Japanese,
and to some extent other Europeans, had to rebuild.

"But what is only now becoming apparent is that World War II led to a
fundamental restructuring of the world economy," he added, alluding to the
growing global trade of increasingly high-technology products. The Germans,
Japanese and others restructured their societies, including their school
systems, to suit. But American education stuck to a pattern that was largely set
early in this century.

"We drifted," Mr. Sizer said. "We were so damned focused on Russia that we never
faced up to the changing economic reality."

"There were important exceptions," he said, "but in general American education
underwent a mindless continuation of the existing system."

Direction
Fear Giving Way To New Concerns

Dr. Lifton and his staff at the Center on Violence and Human Survival have been
monitoring the views of selected clusters of people on broad national issues for
many years. But his current study, begun before the cold war ended, came up with
a result that surprised him.

About 80 people from different social backgrounds in the New York area were
interviewed in depth starting in 1987, and at the beginning "the fear of nuclear
war we encountered was fairly widespread," he said, adding, "They spoke of a
holocaust, the end of the world."

But Charles B. Strozier, co-director of Dr. Lifton's center, said that by 1990
"we began to note how that imagery was changing: Rather than fear of nuclear
war, people began offering environmental images, fear of the greenhouse effect,
the ozone layer and Chernobyl as dangers to the future."

Out of that, Dr. Lifton said, Americans appear to be turning their concern away
from mortal enemies toward dangerous social problems instead.

But in the view of John Mack, a psychologist, it may not be so easy for the
nation's leaders to follow.

Dr. Mack is founding director of the Center of Psychological Studies in the
Nuclear Age at Harvard University. His studies convince him that in America, the
cold war greatly exaggerated the human tendency "to judge ourselves by who we
are and who we are not -- male or female, good guy or bad guy, American or
Russian."

That need, Dr. Mack says, is a central feature of the human psyche, and it grew
far stronger because the other side was poised to strike with nuclear arms.

For the last 40 years, America's leaders have played on that, he said. But now,
with the new era, how will the nation's leaders cope when "they can't find a
reliable enemy to mobilize the nation any longer?" he asks.

With the enemy at last removed, Dr. Sizer wonders whether America can "be driven
by a sense of our own ideals" without the additional impetus of fear of
annihilation.

Or, as Dr. Mack asks, will the nation's leaders create new enemies instead?
"Will we fall back," he wonders, "to the old easy way of divide and blame,
mobilize the people out of fear?"

That is the looming question of America's new age.

                             --------------------

NEXT: The American military struggles to redefine itself.

HOW WAR BECAME 'COLD'

Athough Walter Lippmann and Bernard Baruch have been given credit for inventing
the term "cold war," it was coined by the publicist and speechwriter Herbert
Bayard Swope. By his own account, given in "William Safire's Political
Dictionary," Mr. Swope first began using the phrase in personal letters just
before World War II, when Americans were talking about possibly entering "a
shooting war" with the Germans. Mr. Swope considered that phrase "rather
tautologous and redundant," he said in a letter to Mr. Lippmann, so he came up
with the phrase cold war -- "the proper opposite of the so-called 'hot war.' "

Mr. Swope said he first used the phrase referring to the American-Soviet
conflict in a speech he wrote for Mr. Baruch in 1946. But Mr. Baruch said he and
his advisers decided that the phrase "was too severe," and so he did not use it
until 1947. By that time, apparently, he had decided that the severity was
warranted. In a speech in Columbia, S.C., he said: "Let us not be deceived.
Today we are in the midst of a cold war."

The phrase caught on quickly after that, in part because Mr. Lippmann began to
use it, too.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: After the Cold War/First of six articles.

CORRECTION-DATE: February 9, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A chronology last Sunday about the cold war gave an incorrect date in some
editions for the downing of an American U-2 reconnaissance plane over the Soviet
Union. It occurred on May 1, 1960, not May 26.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Khrushchev pounding a desk at the United Nations in 1960.
(Associated Press) (pg. 1); "Spurring On America's Youth" -- You lost two turns
if you wer dealt the Sputnik card in this 1957 game; "Red Scare" -- Sen. Joseph
R. McCarthy; "We'll Bury You" -- A 1962 documentary; "Vietnam" -- Gen. William
C. Westmoreland and Lyndon B. Johnson in Cam Rahn Bay in 1967; "Perestroika" --
Mikhail S. Gorbachev. (pg. 10)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

While Fear of Big War Fades, Military Plans for Little Ones

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2691 words

DATELINE: FORT KNOX, Ky.


On a bleak, cold hillside one January afternoon, a class of future Army tank
commanders huddled on a set of bleachers as Col. John Sylvester, one of the
heroes of the Persian Gulf war, explained why the breakup of the Soviet Union
would have no effect on their careers.

A towering Daniel Boone figure with muddy boots and a booming voice, Colonel
Sylvester led the Tiger Brigade of the Second Armored Division of M1-A1 tanks
against Kuwait International Airport a year ago. Now, as warrior-teacher, he was
telling these young captains and lieutenants that even with the cold war's end
they might still find themselves in a war someday.

And in war, Colonel Sylvester told them, the enemy will always try to put
obstacles on the battlefield "to make you vulnerable so he can kill you." Simple
as that.

But what the Colonel didn't say was who that enemy might be. The fact was, he
didn't know.

With the cold war ended, the future is sweeping over the United States military.
Nowhere is frustration as intense as here at the Army's tank school, where
virtually every tank driver since World War II has trained with a Soviet enemy
in mind.

An Old Fear, Now Gone

That vision of an enemy that could point 90 or more divisions at Western Europe
and still wage global war with the United States was implanted in multiple
generations of Americans in uniform. But now it has evaporated, leaving the
United States military without the old certainties about its role in the world,
its deployment overseas, its need for futuristic weapons and battlefield
scenarios.

At no time since the end of World War II has America's two-million-member
military establishment faced as much fundamental change and uncertainty as in
1992, the first full year that will unfold without a unified Soviet military and
the industrial complex that supported it.

Significant military threats to American security are greatly diminished, but
they have not disappeared altogether: Saddam Hussein reminded the world that
sizable military challenges might arise in the undefinable era ahead, but these
potential adversaries are vaporous shapes.

"This transition period is potentially dangerous," argued Maj. Gen. Thomas C.
Foley, who commands the armor school at Fort Knox. "I don't want to say there is
a bogey man behind every tree, but you have to admit when the American people
say, 'Our interests are being threatened, let's do something about it,' we have
got to be ready to go, on a much reduced scale maybe, but ready to go."

A Game With Only One Team

For other officers, the loss of certainty is more distressing.

Col. Dennis H. Long is the director of "total armor force readiness" at Fort
Knox. His job is to look 15 to 20 years into the future and recommend to the
Army what kind of tanks and other armored vehicles the service should design.

"For 50 years, we equipped our football team, practiced five days a week and
never played a game," he said. "We had a clear enemy with demonstrable
qualities, and we had scouted them out."

Now, he continued, "We will have to practice day in and day out without knowing
anything about the other team. We won't have his playbook, we won't know where
the stadium is, or how many guys he will have on the field. That is very
distressing to the military establishment, especially when you are trying to
justify the existence of your organization and your systems."

The Questions
How to Learn From Small Wars

The final collapse of the Soviet empire has caused millions of Americans and
many of their representatives in Congress to call for dramatic reductions in the
American military. And it has led the Bush Administration to retreat, though in
small steps, from the large military budgets that characterized the Korean War
era, the Vietnam War era, the late Carter Administration, the Reagan era and
even the first days of the Bush Administrastion.

"For all of my lifetime," said Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of Wisconsin
and chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, "the driving force for
everything has been the Soviet threat." Now that it has gone away, he continued
in an interview, "we are cut loose from a lot of our certainties, and we must
ask ourselves first-principles questions which haven't been asked in 40 to 50
years."

What are those questions?

Former Defense Secretary Harold Brown said the first question Americans must
answer is what kind of military power they want the nation to be.

"Is it really America's job to fight in North and South Korea?" he asked.
"Apparently it is America's job to fight in the Persian Gulf. What about
southern Africa and Latin America?"

"My own guess is that the American public wouldn't see the same motivation" in
those regions that it did during the cold war, Mr. Brown said, when global
military competition with the Soviet Union led to American intervention in
Europe, Central America, the Caribbean, the Middle East and Asia.

"The end of the cold war should mean the end of the cold-war method of judging
defense requirements," former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger wrote
recently in Foreign Policy.

In an interview, Mr. Schlesinger said American society must recast its
definition of power to include such elements as economic competitiveness,
productivity and investment in industry. These other priorities, he suggests,
will move to more commanding positions as the need for massive military strength
disappears.

Loaded Words in the Budget

This transition holds practical problems, however, and most of them are in
Washington, where the annual budget cycle requires the Pentagon and the Congress
to define "threats" to national security and then to state the "requirements"
for weapons and forces needed to meet them. From this process emerges an annual
Pentagon budget and five-year spending plan to "acquire" the forces and weapons
needed.

But without a big threat, there is little agreement on how to proceed.

Representative Aspin recently suggested that the Persian Gulf war should be the
model for future wars. The Iraq experience would be transplanted around the
globe to measure the relative strength of other troublesome regional powers as a
means to plan forces to defeat them. Mr. Aspin has dubbed this method "Iraq
equivalents."

In August 1990, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, defined a strategy that would shrink worldwide
American forces by 25 percent from cold-war levels while increasing spending for
a new generation of high-technology weapons to outfit the American military of
the future.

Military's New Tasks

This transitional strategy foresaw the threat of regional wars in the Persian
Gulf or Korea. It focused on the spreading ballistic missile threat, nuclear
proliferation, terrorism, drug trafficking and the possible re-emergence of a
Soviet threat in Europe.

The collapse of the Soviet Union quickly undermined this strategy and
highlighted the fact that Mr. Cheney and General Powell were building so many
new weapons that future defense budgets, after a period of shrinkage, would
actually begin growing again by tens of billions of dollars a year later in the
decade.

But Mr. Cheney and General Powell have now retrenched further.

Oppressed by the new reality that it must justify itself in a relative vacuum of
"threats," the military's leaders are clinging to the truisms of military
philosophy, admonishing political leaders in the way Machiavelli might have
instructed his prince or Clauswitz his king.

The advice is simple and blunt: any nation that disarms invites attack; wars,
when they come, are seldom the wars expected; being as good as a potential
adversary is not enough; winning means not only exceeding the strengths of the
opponent, but dominating him so completely that the conflict is ended early with
favorable results and minimal casualties.

The Background
A Strategy Built On Years of Fear

On Aug. 25, 1989, Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., General Powell's predecessor as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, distributed his last "national military
strategy," a classified guide to waging global conflict with the Soviet Union.
He did not know that in just 76 days the Berlin wall would fall, bringing the
end of the cold war clearly into view.

"Should deterrence fail and war come," he wrote to Secretary Cheney, "the United
States must be prepared for an extended conflict involving the survival of the
nation." The document, which was sent to top military commanders, spoke of
"total mobilization at home" to build the nation's wartime combat power.

"United States forces will seek out and destroy Soviet naval forces, project
power ashore and be prepared to conduct attacks against the Soviet homeland,"
Admiral Crowe wrote. Should the war go nuclear, the document says, "our forces
will hold at risk those assets that the Soviet leadership would need to prevail
in a nuclear conflict and to dominate a postnuclear world."

It was a military catechism that epitomized an era -- an era in which NATO
developed strategies to offset the numerical superiority of the Warsaw Pact; an
era in which the United States Navy focused on resupplying Europe in wartime, on
dominating the oceans and on building a maritime strategy using aircraft
carriers and marines to strike on the Soviet flanks.

Harking Back to Their Coming of Age

For most senior general officers in the American military today, coming to
adulthood coincided with the onset of prospective East-West conflict.

General Foley, now the commander at Ft. Knox, recalled that when he arrived in
West Germany in 1961 as a young second lieutenant and watched the Berlin wall
going up, "I think all of us took very seriously the fact that we could go to
war at any time.

"There was a fear," he said, a recognition that those officers who had brought
their families to Europe might not get the opportunity to warn them in the event
that war broke out with nuclear weapons.

When his wife, Sandy, and two young children arrived by transport ship in
Bremerhaven and traveled by train to Bavaria in June 1962, the Foleys had been
separated for a year by the Berlin crisis. Their family reunion lasted only
three days before Lieutenant Foley had to be back with his unit in a high state
of readiness for war.

When there was spare time, the Foleys reconnoitered the escape routes through
Germany that Mrs. Foley and the children would use if war broke out.

"That's how serious it was taken," he said.

This seminal cold war experience shaped General Foley's lifetime view, leaving
him with the opinion today that the United States should strive to remain a
potent military power to deter threats, even if the threats were not readily
apparent.

The Analysis
Threat Is Diverse Rather Than Deep

For the military, and the nervous Foleys, the cold war was a time of great
building and transition. The first bomber designed to carry nuclear weapons, the
B-52 Stratofortress, went on 24-hour alert in 1957. The Air Force's Strategic
Air Command became the first among equals of all military commands; its mission
was to annihilate Soviet targets with nuclear fire.

In June 1962, the same month that Mrs. Foley followed her husband to Europe, Roy
Alcala graduated from West Point and reported to tank school at Fort Knox.

The commencement speaker for Lieutenant Alcala's graduating class at West Point
had been President John F. Kennedy, who admonished the cadets that the global
competition between the Soviet Union and United States might send them into the
third world as cold warriors against the spread of Marxist revolutions.

"I know that many of you feel, and many of our citizens may feel, that in these
days of the nuclear age, when war may last in its final form a day or two or
three days before much of the world is burned up, that your service to your
country will be only standing and waiting," Mr. Kennedy said.

"Nothing, of course, could be further from the truth."

Five Soviet leaders and several wars later, Mikhail S. Gorbachev began the
process of turning the world on its end. And after two tours in Vietnam and
three years of graduate school at Yale University, Colonel Alcala and many of
his contemporaries saw the decline of the Soviet Union long before the Pentagon
officially acknowledged it.

"We began to see it in 1986 and the spring of 1987," he said. By this time,
Colonel Alcala was running a small research group for Gen. Carl E. Vuono, the
Army Chief of Staff.

Sensing the future, General Vuono mobilized his staff to formulate what he
called a "successor strategy" that would allow the Army to shrink in size, while
maintaining its lethalness and mobility for any crisis.

Change in Risk Ratio

"Changing from the containment of the Soviet Union," Colonel Alcala said, meant
that "we were preparing our forces so they could act in areas other than
mainland Europe while not knowing precisely what kind of threat they would
face."

"Our conclusion was that while the risk to national existence was way down, the
probability of having to engage was way up.

"It took the exercise against Iraq to shed much of the old language and to
demonstrate what we had done," Colonel Alcala said.

General Vuono and Colonel Alcala also understood that the service would have to
shrink substantially because no set of hypothetical threats could ever measure
up to the demands the Soviet military had put on American military preparedness.


The Outlook
The Dead Past Shapes the Future

Veterans of the Pentagon's planning process say the military has spent most of
its time for the last two years justifying a slimmed-down version of the
cold-war military structure, rather than trying to design a force for the 21st
century.

The notion of throwing out a decades-old system is a powerful bureaucratic
threat. It rankles veterans.

"It can't be a clean sheet of paper," said Mr. Brown, the former Defense
Secretary. "You have an immense capital investment, and you can't throw it
away."

Planning for the future need not waste the investments of the past, some experts
say. Without a clear and identifiable military threat, why not design a smaller,
highly mobile and lethal military that could respond to a crisis anywhere in the
world, seize territory, control the air over the battlefield and provide support
from the sea, but at half the cost of the military that existed when the Berlin
wall fell?

New ideas about so-called all-purpose forces are being offered. Some argue that
the military has only begun to explore the possibilities offered by
cost-effective combinations of computers, radars and high-technology munitions
that can bring more firepower to bear on targets than at any time in history.

Mr. Aspin, head of the House Armed Services Committee, has advocated new
procurement strategies to slow the development of new weapons: "rolling over"
research and "skipping generations" of weapons instead of rushing into
production with every new model.

It appears that the Pentagon is moving in that direction.

The Doubts
Inertia Hobbles A Vast Military

Just retired from the Army that he joined in the era of Dr. Strangelove, Colonel
Alcala is proud of the imprint his generation left on his service. But he has
also begun to believe that the United States can remain the strongest global
military power while also shedding much of the "dishonesty, pork and near-term
economic gain" that impels the Pentagon's budget.

He says he would be willing to scrap the Army's tank factories and deactivate
divisions that have lost their purpose. He would experiment with so-called cadre
divisions that would maintain a skeletal core and fill out with reservists in a
crisis.

"The right answer is probably unachievable," he said, "because it requires
traumatic change and the amputation of useless limbs if we do it right. You have
to cut the money, change the strategy and make the force fit the strategy. And
you'll never get that on Capitol Hill."

Next: Sweeping changes proposed for the nation's intelligence agencies.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: After the Cold War -- Second of six articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: "This transition period is potentially dangerous," argued Maj.
Gen. Thomas C. Foley, who commands the armor school at Fort Knox, Ky. "I don't
want to say there is a bogey man behind every tree, but you have to admit when
the American people say, 'Our interests are being threatened, let's do something
about it,' we have got to be ready to go, on a much reduced scale maybe, but
ready to go." (Keith Williams for The New York Times); B-2 Stealth Bomber; F-22
Advanced Tactical Stealth Fighter; SSn-21 Seawolf; M1 Tank; Aircraft carrier
battle groups; Bubble gum card (From "better Dead Than Red!" by Michael Barson,
to be published by Hyperion in the spring) (pg. A8)

Chart: "New Weapons for an Old War"
Some weapon systems designed for cold war applications.

Weapon: B-2 Stealth Bomber

Original Mission: To penetrate Soviet airspace undetected carrying nuclear
weapons during wartime Development by Northrop began in 1978; first flight was
in July 1989.

Status: The Pentagon wanted 75 planes at a cost of $65 billion, but President
Bush's budget proposal for fiscal 1993 calls for halting production at 20
planes. The program has already cost $34 billion.

Weapon: F-22 Advanced Tactical Stealth Fighter

Original Mission: To replace the F-15 Eagle and F-16 Falcon fighters and
maintain air supremacy over any improved Soviet fighters. The search for this
new generation or aircraft that could at supersonic speeds without detection
began in 1981; Lockheed won the design competition in April 1991.

Status: Full-scale production to begin this year at an expected cost of $95
billion for 650 planes. In the fiscal 1993 budget, the Pentagon is requesting
$2.2 billion for the program.

Weapon: SSN-21 Seawolf -- named for the first submarine in this class

Original Mission: To succeed the Los Angeles-class submarine with the mission of
preventing the Soviet Navy from seizing the oceans during wartime. The first
boat, ordered in January 1989, is under construction.

Status: The Navy wanted 30 boats for a total cost of $65 billion. President
Bush's fiscal 1993 budget proposal calls for ending the program after only one
submarine is built.

Weapon: M1 Tank

Original Mission: To counter heavy armored Soviet tank divisions in Europe.

Status: Congress instructed the Pentagon to proceed with the M1-A2, an upgrade
of the M1-A1, even though the Defense Department says it already has more tanks
than it needs. Current proposals call for $315 million next year.

Weapon: Aircraft carrier battle groups

Original Mission: To maintain "deep attach" capabilitites against the Soviet
Union, and to provide forward air attack abilities around the world.

Status: Three new carriers are under construction, and the Navy wants to build
another. The 15 carrier battle groups already deployed cost more than $20
billion a year to operate. Each carrier along with its battle group costs about
$45 billion over its 30-year life cycle. (Sources: Defense Department;
Congressional Research Service; Senate Armed Services Committee; Office of
Management and Budget; Jane's All the World's Aricraft, 1991-92; Jane's Fighting
Ships, 1991-92.) (pg. A8)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words



International A3-11

TAKING AIM AT HUSSEIN

President Bush has sent the Director of Central Intelligence on an unpublicized
mission to talk with leaders in Egypt and Saudi Arabia. The goal: hasten the
downfall of the Iraqi President.  A1

FOREIGN POLICY DOUGHNUT

Containment of Communism was the guiding principle of United States foreign
policy for more than 40 years. Now, with the cold war over, there is no core
issue, prompting one expert to compare United States foreign policy to a
doughnut -- "lots of peripheral interests, but nothing at the center." A1

PREACHING, NOT PRACTICING

The United States urges Japan and other countries to open their markets to
American goods, but at the same time it puts up many barriers to imports.  A1

A WARNING FROM YELTSIN

The President of Russia, appealing for Western aid on a visit to France, said
dictatorship would return to Russia if his economic program did not succeed.  A8


Prices have increased in Moscow but supplies haven't.  A8

Four former Soviet republics give details on disarmament.  A9

The United States names ambassadors to five former republics.  A9

CROATIA SAYS YES TO U.N.

The President of Croatia agreed to accept a United Nations peace plan, but the
leader of a Serbian enclave rejects the proposal.  A3

BOUNCING BACK IN CARACAS

Laughing heartily despite the bullet holes in the window behind his desk, the
President of Venezuela appears to have quickly recovered from a coup attempt.
A3

TOUGH TALK FOR ISRAEL

A key Democratic Senator says he supports the Bush Administration's plan to make
a halt to new Israeli settlement building in the occupied territories a
condition for loan guarantees.  A11

MORE MISERY IN BANGLADESH

A nation that endures chronic poverty and deadly cyclones is being swamped by a
tide of Muslim refugees from Myanmar.  A6

IRELAND'S NEW LEADER

Albert Reynolds, a former Finance Minister, became Prime Minister-designate
after a majority of his party chose him to replace Charles J. Haughey, who is
resigning.  A7

National A12-17

WHITE HOUSE REVERSAL ON OZONE

With the backing of an Administration that had previously opposed it, a proposal
that calls for speeding the phase-out of chemicals that damage the earth's ozone
layer cleared the Senate, 96 to 0.  A1

THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH CARE PLAN

Mr. Bush became the last of the major Presidential candidates to join the
national debate on health care, formally proposing several tax incentives and
other changes that he said would make quality care affordable to every American.
A1

News analysis: The gaps in the President's proposal.  A15

A NEW HEADACHE FOR CLINTON

A report in The Wall Street Journal suggested that as a young man, Governor
Clinton manipulated the military draft process to avoid serving during the
Vietnam War. The Governor denied the account, but the issue dogged him during a
day of campaigning in New Hampshire.  A16

Senator Harkin, the populist with a piece of the pie.  A16

Political Memo: The candidates' ads are a snapshot of strategy.  A16

PLANE CRASHES INTO MOTEL

At least 16 people were killed in Evansville, Ind., when an Air National Guard
transport plane crashed into a motel filled with visitors attending a
convention.  A12

BADLANDS ON THE BORDER

The Big Bend of the Rio Grande has been outlaw country for a long time, and now
it is drug smugglers who increasingly find the terrain a useful ally.  A12

REPORT ON C.I.A. ANALYSES

A C.I.A. task force appointed in the aftermath of Robert M. Gates's grueling
confirmation hearings last fall has rejected the assertion that the agency
systematically slanted intelligence over the years. The findings, included in a
classified report recently submitted to Mr. Gates for his approval, largely
blame poor management and the inexperience of some analysts for allowing the
perception of purposely slanted intelligence to flourish.  A13

IN A WORD, UNEXPECTED

Washington at Work: When Bob Woodward set out last year to learn everything he
could about Vice President Quayle, the Capital awaited bombshells. But there
weren't any when The Washington Post last month published the resulting series
on Mr. Quayle, by Mr. Woodward and David Broder. The ensuingcriticism from
journalists left Mr. Woodward puzzled and the Vice President's aides gleeful.
A14
Washington Talk: Of tax writing, cynicism and special pleading.  A13

Pittsburgh Journal: The emergence of a horror-film capital.  A12

Law Page B6

The legal profession steps up recruitment of homosexual lawyers.

New research on the reliability of DNA fingerprinting.

Metropolitan Digest, B1

HOMELESS AND HOTELS

As New York struggles toward new ways of sheltering the homeless, a failed
tourist hotel near Kennedy International Airport is about to re-open as a
homeless hotel -- a revival of what critics called the worst of the old ways.
A1

HARD TIMES, NASTY SCHEMES

Fueled by a lingering recession that has made credit tight and people desperate,
loan frauds that dangle the prospect of quick cash for an upfront fee are the
fastest-growing category of consumer complaints throughout the metropolitan
area, consumer agency officials said.  A1

Neediest Cases B4

Business Digest, D1

Weekend C1-30

Amsterdam Ave., divine amid dowdy.  C1
Athletes as the stuff of art.  C1
Down-to-earth dining in Brooklyn.  C1

Obituaries A19

Harding Bancroft, an executive at The Times and a diplomat.

Sports B8-17

Basketball: Magic Johnson's All-Star presence causing jitters.  B9
Knicks Defeat Rockets B9
Olympics: Pipkins get berth in luge after runoff.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials A28
Bush on health.
No demons in Central Asia.
End the fetal research ban.
Connecticut's pain.

Letters A28

A. M. Rosenthal: The California story.  A29
Leslie H. Gelb: 1932 and 1992.  A29
Robert F. Kennedy Jr.: Drinking from sewers.A29
Fritz Stern: Bush treats us like children.  A29
David A. Ridenour: The wrong way to health care.  A29

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Moscow, economic shock produces a milk paradox. A8 (Viktor
Grityuk/Matrix for The New York Times)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Photo Op: Making Icons or Playing Politics?

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN;  Charles Hagen is a critic who writes frequently about
photography and art.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2021 words

DATELINE: WOODSVILLE, N.H.


The scene comes out of the best tradition of American barnstorming politics, as
practiced in the media age. Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative television
commentator and maverick candidate for the Republican Presidential nomination in
the New Hampshire primary on Feb. 18, is in the middle of a daylong campaign
blitz along the western edge of the state. By late morning the candidate has
made his way to Butson's supermarket in Woodsville. Trailed by a ramshackle army
of campaign aides and media people, microphone booms raised like halberds, he
enters the store in search of votes.

Halfway down the first aisle he accepts a slice of pizza from a young woman
handing out samples. As he begins to munch, photographers and television crews
jostle for position in front of him, TV lights blazing and photographic strobes
flashing. After a moment, Mr. Buchanan heads down another aisle and buys a
ticket for the New Hampshire lottery. Again, photographers and television crews
cluster eagerly, as he holds up the ticket and half-eaten slice of pizza.

So goes another in the seemingly endless series of similar events that make up
the daily routine of a modern political campaign. These carefully crafted
"photographic opportunities," half real and half symbolic, have become the main
activity of most candidates' days.

New Hampshire in primary season becomes the "mother lode of photo ops," as Barry
Piatt, a press aide to Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, puts it. In these intricate
ritual dances of candidates and news people, the purpose of photographing the
campaign can get lost beneath the visual equivalent of empty rhetoric.

Many people trace the rise of the by-now-infamous photo op to news editors'
demands for a steady stream of colorful and simplistic images. Others blame
Ronald Reagan's well-oiled 1980 Presidential campaign. "Setting up the
situation, photo op, photo op, photo op -- this is a new language that didn't
really exist before 1980," says Arthur Grace, a former Newsweek photographer and
a veteran of many campaigns. Now, he says, "everyone's taking a page out of
Reagan's book."

While the images that result from these essentially theatrical events invoke
cherished and powerful symbols of American public life, they rarely have much
esthetic interest or freshness. But they play a central role in shaping public
perceptions of the candidates and of the political process as a whole.

In itself, the fact that photo ops are built around symbols is not bad. Symbols
sum up complex and important values, and the campaigns offer voters an
opportunity to reaffirm shared beliefs about themselves and the country. But as
candidates try to exert tighter control over images and their meanings, the
pictures end up being more predictable. What's lost is the sense of the
candidates as real people. It is the unexpected, unplanned detail -- what the
late French critic Roland Barthes termed the punctum -- that serves as the
photograph's badge of authenticity. In photo ops, such details usually appear
only by accident.

In most news photographs, esthetics are necessarily secondary to facts. But
occasionally, pictures like Robert Frank's magisterial images of a row of
top-hatted politicians in Hoboken or an impassioned orator in Chicago -- both
from his classic 1958 book, "The Americans" -- define the nature of politics
more clearly than any political-science treatise could. Other images -- whether
of Adlai Stevenson with his legs crossed, revealing the hole in his shoe, or of
Harry Truman gleefully holding aloft a premature copy of The Chicago Tribune
proclaiming Dewey's victory -- have etched themselves into the national memory.
While it is possible that an iconic image of this sort may come out of this
year's election, the business of campaign photography has largely been reduced
to a mechanical exchange of formulaic images with little if any life left in
them.

The underlying strategy of photo ops is the same as that of most ads: pose the
candidate (or the product) with symbols of appealing values, in the hope that
viewers will equate the two. In beer commercials these values can include the
camaraderie symbolized by a welcoming group of guys in a bar, or the sexual
abandon implied by a gaggle of bikini-clad cuties. For a Presidential candidate,
the values include patriotism -- where there's a candidate, there's sure to be a
flag -- as well as physical vigor, compassion and honesty. Photo ops can also be
used to send subtle messages about the candidate's class allegiances. When Mr.
Buchanan, a rich man by the standards of most Americans, holds up his pizza and
lottery ticket, he's not only carrying out a time-honored ritual expected of a
serious candidate, but he is also paying homage to the working-class values
these objects embody.

Most photo ops are built around a core of reality, but "there is a line you
cross where these supposedly spontaneous events are actually totally staged,"
says Steve Liss, who recently photographed Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas for
Time magazine. He notes that when President Bush, on a recent trip through New
Hampshire, stopped to greet a farmer standing in his field with a cow, the event
was presented by campaign aides as unplanned. Later, the farmer was identified
as a co-chairman of the local Bush campaign committee. "You could be taken for
an idiot if you played into this kind of thing," Mr. Liss says. "And a lot of
media people do."

Factories are always popular campaign stops, but given the parlous state of New
Hampshire's economy, they've become especially prominent this year as sites for
photo ops. The other day, both Mr. Buchanan and Governor Clinton visited
factories, but each tried to give a different slant to the symbolism involved.
Mr. Buchanan, to underscore his contention that American jobs are being lost to
foreign competitors, spoke outside an abandoned factory in North Haverhill.
Governor Clinton, in a more positive vein, toured the American Brush Company
factory in Claremont, where better cooperation between labor and management has
helped improve business. Despite the different messages the candidates were
trying to put across, the resulting photographs showed simply two more factory
visits -- and the limits on the kinds of information that photo ops can convey.
Complex points of policy do not translate well into photographs.

Children, too, are naturals on the photo op circuit, and candidates make it a
point to be photographed with them. Thus, an earlier stop in Mr. Buchanan's
whirlwind tour of Woodsville was at the local elementary school, where he
fielded questions from third-graders.

Occasionally, photo ops get out of hand, and residents balk at taking part. The
week before Mr. Buchanan's visit, Vice President Dan Quayle had also dropped in
at Woodsville Elementary, and in shoving for position around him the
photographers had knocked over some children. As a result, the principal was
reluctant to let the media in to record Mr. Buchanan's visit. But campaign aides
promised that the press would be on its best behavior, and the photo op went on.

Candidates often find themselves scrapping over the same potent symbols. That
evening in Manchester, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who has made much of his
service in Vietnam, was scheduled to appear at V.F.W. Post 79. The small, smoky
hall, filled with weathered men in flannel shirts and women in bowling jackets,
would seem to be the perfect place to make a pitch for patriotism and
working-class values. But when the Senator, a Democrat, and his staff arrived,
they found that they had been upstaged. Representative Robert C. Dornan of
California, himself a Vietnam vet, had been stumping the state for President
Bush and had dropped in on the same post half an hour earlier. A number of the
television crews and print reporters there to cover Senator Kerrey's visit wound
up interviewing Mr. Dornan instead. In the end, the images of the two men were
much the same, with such subtleties as party differences conveyed only in
picture captions.

Often, the message conveyed by a photo op is only peripherally related to the
stated issues of the campaign. A photograph distributed by the Associated Press
on Jan. 21 recorded a photo op in which former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts appeared at a pond in Concord to announce support from various
environmental groups. The photograph, which was printed the next day by The
Manchester Union Leader, showed the sweater-clad Senator about to throw a
football. The Union Leader didn't even mention the ostensible purpose of the
event, thus gutting the occasion of any but symbolic content. But the photograph
did demonstrate that Senator Tsongas was a regular guy, especially coming as it
did just after the Super Bowl. In a less obvious way, it also offered evidence
of the candidate's good health -- which some might see as an issue, given his
successful fight against cancer nearly a decade ago.

Staged photographs can backfire. Earlier in the campaign, Governor Clinton
appeared at a bowling alley in the kind of photo op no doubt intended to
demonstrate that he, too, has the common touch. But when the tabloid Star ran a
picture taken there, along with an article alleging that the singer Gennifer
Flowers had had an affair with the Governor, the picture took on very different
connotations. It showed Governor Clinton putting on a pair of bowling shoes, but
The Star ran it next to a photograph of Ms. Flowers lolling on a bed. Because of
the juxtaposition, the Governor appeared to be sitting on the edge of the bed,
looking over his shoulder toward Ms. Flowers. Elsewhere, The Star paired
photographs taken at different times and places of Governor Clinton and Ms.
Flowers on the telephone, suggesting through the layout that they might have
been talking to each other.

Fed up with photo ops, some photographers try to find fresh ways to reveal the
workings of the campaign and the personalities of the candidates. In the 1988
campaign, Arthur Grace photographed the candidates for Newsweek in black and
white, using a Rolleiflex camera rather than the 35-millimeter cameras standard
among photojournalists today. "It was a tremendous discipline," he reports.
Because the Rolleiflex allows only 12 shots per roll and does not have
interchangeable lenses, Mr. Grace says, "it forces you to think about what
you're doing."

Whereas most campaign photographs are tightly cropped and simplistically
composed, Mr. Grace's pictures have a refreshing looseness. They often catch
candidates off guard or show the machinery of the photo op, as well as the
central symbolic event. Some of his portraits were used in the magazine during
the primary season, and more than 20 appeared in a special issue about the
election. A year later, the portraits were published by the University Press of
New England in the book "Choose Me: Portraits of a Presidential Race."

Mark Peterson, a 36-year-old photographer for the JB picture agency in New York,
who has been following Governor Clinton in this campaign, says that he often
finds the audiences more revealing than the candidates themselves. "At this
point, the candidates are so polished," he says, "that the most interesting
thing to photograph is the people who come to the rallies." He used this
approach in covering David Duke in his campaign for the Louisiana governorship.
"Sometimes you could capture the anger on their faces," Mr. Peterson says,
"better than you'd ever get it from looking at him."

Steven Rubin has turned away from photographing the candidates altogether. For
several months, Mr. Rubin, a 35-year-old freelancer from New York, has been
photographing families, unemployment lines, soup kitchens and other situations
that, to him, reflect the issues of the campaign. He says that he turned to his
new direction because of his dissatisfaction with photo ops. "I found it boring
and wearing to be chasing the candidates all the time," Mr. Rubin says. "And in
the end your picture is different only because you're standing two inches to the
left of the next photographer."

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Paul Tsongas and entourage, at left, face off against
photographers in Concord, N.H. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(pg. 1);
Homeless children being served a hot dinner by church workers--Steven Rubin has
turned away from photographing the candidates altogether and instead is focusing
on the issues of the campaign. (Steven Rubin/JB Pictures); The candidate Patrick
Buchanan tries some pizza for the cameras. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)(pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Clinton Says He's Victim of G.O.P. 'Attack Machine'

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H., Feb. 10


Gov. Bill Clinton rolled back into New Hampshire today with a full-scale
political attack: He presented himself as the victim of a "Republican attack
machine," asserted that the relentless focus on his character was cheating the
voters and promised to "fight like hell" in the last eight days of this primary
campaign.

Mr. Clinton, who returned from a weekend in Arkansas to a suddenly tight
Democratic race with former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, delivered
his speech on a snowy hill in a suburban subdivision, and he sought the high
ground in more ways than one. He tried to present himself as the candidate
rewarded by the voters for his emphasis on "the real problems of real people,"
who had then paid a heavy price for his success.

"The Republican attack machine went into action," said Mr. Clinton, who was
flanked by his wife, Hillary. "We know their game plan. They've run it against
me for years in Arkansas.  We've seen it in this country before.  Define and
destroy before people really get to know the candidate."

No New Evidence

Mr. Clinton offered no new evidence at his news conference today that connected
the national Republican Party to the recent series of stories that have buffeted
his campaign: the accusations printed by a supermarket tabloid that he had a
12-year sexual affair with a cabaret singer or the suggestions in other
publications that he had sought to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. Mr.
Clinton has denied both accusations, but in the view of many political
professionals here, they have taken a heavy toll.

Asked for evidence for Mr. Clinton's assertions, the campaign provided a
collection of previous reports suggesting that Arkansas Republicans had
encouraged rumors about infidelity and Mr. Clinton. Gary Koops, the spokesman
for the Republican National Committee, said, "This is nonsense."

Throughout the furor of the past few weeks, the Clinton campaign has clearly
hoped to capitalize on a backlash against the news media and its probing of
candidates' personal lives. After a weekend when campaign advisers clearly
realized that Mr. Clinton needed to escalate his counteroffensive, Mr. Clinton
tried to broaden the debate, asserting that the tenor of the past few weeks
represented a dangerous return to the negative politics of 1988, and that the
voters would be the losers.

"There's just too much at stake this time around," Mr. Clinton said. "The past
few weeks of this campaign have descended into a bizarre series of diversions
that don't have anything to do with the hopes and dreams, crises and fears of
the people of New Hampshire or this country."

                             --------------------


New Spotlight on Tsongas

Special to The New York Times
MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 10 -- Mr. Tsongas is experiencing a sea change in his
quest for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

Polls released over the weekend showed him pulling even with Mr. Clinton. After
weeks of being relatively neglected by the press, Mr. Tsongas, who was the first
Democratic candidate to challenge Mr. Bush last April, today found himself the
subject of much media attention. Mr. Tsongas was philosophical about this
newfound visibility.

"This too will pass," he said as he sat in a car signing copies of his economic
plan, "A Call to Arms," before his next appearance. "I didn't get depressed over
the hard times and I'm not going to get euphoric over the good times."

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 13, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Tuesday about Mr. Clinton's trip to Londonderry, N.H.,
misidentified the farm he was visiting. It was Stonyfield Farm.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton, who returned from a weekend in Arkansas,
promised to "fight like hell" in the final days of the New Hampshire primary
campaign. Mr. Clinton and his wife, Hillary, left, visited workers at Sunnyfield
Farms during a campaign stop yesterday in Londonderry. (Edward Keating/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Iowa's Secrets

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES


Iowans did not get their media fix this election year. Few came to report on a
one-horse race. So, if you had a tape recorder and so much as smiled at
residents of this city in the last week, you heard their whole life histories
and innermost political secrets.

The biggest secret was who Iowa Democrats longed to see on top of their national
ticket if their own favorite son, Senator Tom Harkin, faltered: none other than
Mario Cuomo.

They knew precious little about the New York Governor. Yet in almost every
conversation I had, they eventually talked themselves around to him as their Sir
Lancelot of Liberal Words, the man who could articulate them out of the
political wilderness and back into the White House.

The second-biggest secret was that they virtually all said Bill Clinton had been
mortally wounded. Not by the Arkansas Governor's views, which they barely knew.
But by the only things they did know -- the smears -- which they insisted they
themselves had rejected.

So much for the argument that the press should pass on any personal matters of
"character" to the people -- confident that the multitudes will sort every thing
out just fine and fair. And so much perhaps for a candidate who showed great
promise.

But I am getting ahead of the story of my three days in Des Moines and my
unscientific surveys, which did not bode well for Democratic hopefuls now in the
race and which held hope for George Bush only by default.

It is hard to tell what to make of Iowa. Its two and a half million people seem
quite comfortable being bland and friendly. And yet from this seeming
transparency have arisen some of the most fiery liberal populists in Congress
over the last 20 years -- Harold Hughes, the Bible-smoking Governor and Senator,
and anti-Vietnam War Senators John Culver, Dick Clark and Tom Harkin himself.

Iowa is at once bland and quirky. The Democrats act more liberal than in most
states, and the Republicans seem more moderate than most of their counterparts
elsewhere. And still the whole state brew tastes kind of conservative. And yet,
Iowa chose Michael Dukakis over Mr. Bush in 1988.

The quirkiness was on display at a primary caucus I attended in a so-called
yuppie section of the city. More than 300 joined this fray four years ago. On
Monday evening, 36 showed up. After some juggling, the tally read: Harkin, 24;
Bob Kerrey, 6; Paul Tsongas, 6. Mr. Harkin won about 75 percent of the delegates
statewide in a very low turnout.

I asked the Harkin people at the caucus whom they would support if Mr. Harkin
had to withdraw. Some bridled at the question and complained that the national
press was not giving their Senator a chance. And they warned the uninitiated
outsider about Mr. Harkin's legendary tenacity. But most played the game and
said they might gravitate to Senator Kerrey, without enthusiasm. A few spoke
well of Paul Tsongas. None would move to Mr. Clinton.

But from their lips -- and in dozens of other conversations -- jumped the name
of Mario Cuomo. Why? "I heard he gave a great speech at the Democratic
Convention years ago," said an ad manager. "But I've never seen it myself." Said
a psychologist, "I saw him on television. He was forceful." And so forth.

After Mr. Harkin, Mr. Cuomo was their clear choice -- and an abstraction. They
remembered his lyrical voice, not his words; his powerful liberal ideals, not
his specific proposals. They wanted this dragon-slayer, though none could cite
his deeds.

Bonnie Campbell, now Iowa Attorney General and formerly chairwoman of the state
Democratic Party, strongly endorsed Mr. Harkin. But as a fallback, she also
looked to Mr. Cuomo. She felt a kinship for Mr. Cuomo based on a sense of what
she and he would do with governmental power.

"My goal is to inspire confidence in government and governmental leadership,"
said this poised woman. She scorned those who "run against government to get
control of government." She felt that Mr. Cuomo was someone who might dare to be
"bold."

I told her and the others that Mr. Cuomo's record was one of bold rhetoric and
mixed results. I spoke of his self-destructive argumentativeness. She and the
others took it all in -- and did not comment, or change their minds. But Iowa is
quirky, isn't it?

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
Democrats Move to Capitalize on Clinton's Troubles

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 13


The Democratic candidates for President slashed, hustled and frantically
repositioned themselves today, convinced that the tempest over Gov. Bill
Clinton's draft record had created vast new openings in next Tuesday's primary
here.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa asserted that Mr. Clinton was no longer a serious
contender in New Hampshire, and fired a withering new attack on the man who
seems to be gaining the most from the Arkansas Governor's troubles, former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.

Mr. Clinton tried to change the subject, from his Vietnam draft history back to
his economic program for the nation. "The character issue in this campaign is
who is really willing to put it on the line for you to make your future better,"
he told an audience of retired people in Concord.

Kerrey Says He's 'Electable'

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, meanwhile, tried to sell himself as the most
"electable" candidate in the field.  "A decorated war veteran," one of his
television commercials declares this week. "No one can question his patriotism."

And Mr. Tsongas, for 10 long months the lonely long shot in the race, was
displaying the cockiness of a front-runner for his now-huge media contingent. He
defended Mr. Clinton, attacked President Bush, and joked about his lack of
charisma.

It was a day when New Hampshire was humming with politics, from the floor of the
Statehouse to the environs of the Portsmouth Shipyard, from the overloaded
airwaves of Manchester and Boston television to the the storefront campaign
offices crowded with volunteers in downtown Concord. There was a keen pitch of
excitement among the strategists and staffers who were struggling to get a
handle on a race where so many voters seem so undecided so late.

New Hampshire voters are chronically, perhaps congentially, volatile, but Chris
Spirou, the state Democratic chairman, said today, "I don't think we've ever
faced this situation before."

Clinton Does Some Explaining

Mr. Clinton sprinted back on the campaign trail today, one day after he found
himself explaining and defending a letter he wrote in 1969 thanking an Army
officer overseeing an Reserve Officers Training Corps program for "saving" him
from the draft. His campaign advisers said he was intent on reaching over the
heads of the news media and speaking directly to the voters; he did so tonight
with a 30-minute live television show.

Mr. Clinton hired an independent research firm to assemble a dozen undecided
voters who were allowed to quiz the Governor on any subject.

"For 13 years, this story was always the same in Arkansas. Until I got into the
Presidential race, no one ever said anything different," he said. "And even nw,
the facts are not in dispute. I put myslef into the draft and I got a high
number."

He was also on the air with television commercials defending his draft record.

This afternoon, Mr. Clinton spoke, with palpable pleasure, of the themes that
were the centerpiece of his campaign until it was rocked by accusations of
infidelity from a supermarket tabloid, accusations that Mr. Clinton flatly
denied. His voice grew stronger and his style ever more impassioned as he stood
before the New Hampshire Legislature and talked of the economic challenges
facing the nation. "We have to go beyond the established political solutions,"
he said. Alluding to Mr. Harkin, Mr. Clinton noted that he was sometimes accused
of not being a "real Democrat."

The Arkansas Governor, who adroitly positioned himself last year as the voice of
a redefined Democratic Party, added, "I do know I'm against brain-dead politics,
in either party, or both." Throughout the day, the voters asked Mr. Clinton
about Medicare, AIDS, the deficit and the future of the Haitian refugees; but
the reporters who swarmed around him at every stop asked about the draft.

Still, he seemed energized by the crowds. "Every election is a fight, it's a
contest," Mr. Clinton told cheering students at Winnisquam High School in
Tilton, where, coincidentally, it was 60's Day and the students wore headbands,
tie-dyed shirts and fringed vests.

Bringing Along Charisma

Mr. Tsongas picked up an endorsement today from Representative Joseph P. Kennedy
2d of Massachusetts.  After Mr. Kennedy delivered a rousing speech in Concord on
his behalf, Mr. Tsongas quipped, "People say I don't have any charisma, so I
brought some." When asked about Mr. Clinton's problems, Mr. Tsongas said he had
no problem with the issues being raised, but objected to the frenzied manner in
which they were being raised. He criticized Mr. Bush's health care plan as
inadequate, and he defended himself from an attack from Mr. Harkin.

Emblematic of Mr. Tsongas's new stature in the race are the attacks now coming
his way. Mr. Harkin, who is running neck and neck with Mr. Kerrey in the nightly
tracking polls, used the Seabrook nuclear power plant as a backdrop to stress
his emphasis on alternative energy sources and assailed Mr. Tsongas for favoring
nuclear power.

"Mr. Tsongas has been a Seabrook cheerleader for that plant right there," Mr.
Harkin declared. "There is no such thing as a pro-nuclear environmentalist." Mr.
Harkin, who is running as the "real Democrat" in the race and the voice of
traditional Democratic values, is also on the air with a new television
commercial attacking Mr. Kerrey, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas, asserting they are
promoting "trickle-down" economics. And in an interview, Mr. Harkin asserted
that "the myriad of problems that seem to confront Mr. Clinton all the time" had
eliminated him as a serious contender in New Hampshire.

Kerrey's Added Edge

"It looks as though this race is coming down to a two-person race: Mr. Tsongas
and myself," Mr. Harkin asserted. "We're closing in. The surge is out there. I
feel the undercurrents pushing us up."

Mr. Kerrey's camp, obviously, sees the race quite differently. The Nebraska
Senator is trying to present himself as the logical alternative to a damaged Mr.
Clinton and to Mr. Tsongas, who is seen by many Democrats as something of a
favorite son in New Hampshire who may not travel well. From the start of his
campaign, Mr. Kerrey's allies have tried to present him as a Democrat who would
be exceedingly well positioned against Mr. Bush in the fall, arguing that his
record as a Medal of Honor winner, who lost his leg in Vietnam, makes him immune
to the accusation of being soft on defense.

This argument, however, took on an added edge over the past few days, as the
furor over Mr. Clinton's draft status grew. The commercial now on the air for
Mr. Kerrey not only touts his military record, but notes that he is "not a
regional candidate," apparently a swipe at Mr. Tsongas.

"We just have to drive our points home," said Steve Jarding, Mr. Kerrey's press
secretary. "In some ways, it's easy. In some ways, it's frightening, because you
don't have a second chance."

Mr. Kerrey himself told reporters today: "Every day this campaign rushes up to
the wire. It's clear to me, this is a wide open race."

The organizers of an effort to write-in Governor Mario M. Cuomo here announced
they were holding a rally on Sunday, featuring Arthur Schlesinger Jr. In a
statement today, Mr. Schlesinger declared, "Mario Cuomo is the strongest
candidate the Democrats can come up with" to beat Mr. Bush.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Tom Harkin stepped up attacks on other Democratic
candidates yesterday. In a new television commercial, he accused Senator Bob
Kerrey, Gov. Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas of promoting "trickle-down"
economics. He conferred with an aide, Don Sweitzer, second from right, during
lunch yesterday in Manchester, N.H. Former Representative Toby Moffet of
Connecticut was at left. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Recruiter;
Ex-R.O.T.C. Official Tells Why He Kept Letter

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., Feb. 13


A retired Arkansas R.O.T.C. recruiter said today that he kept a letter written
by Bill Clinton 22 years ago because he was angry that Mr. Clinton turned his
back on Army officer training during the Vietnam War.

The recruiter, Col. Clinton Jones, who recruited cadets for the R.O.T.C. program
at the University of Arkansas from 1967 to 1970, gave the letter to ABC News on
Wednesday at the network's request. In it, Mr. Clinton argued against the war
and thanked the program's commander, Col. Eugene Holmes, for "saving me from the
draft."

"I would not classify him as a draft dodger," Colonel Jones said today from his
home in Myrtle Beach, S.C. "I know that people of that age at that time did not
want to be drafted. We offered them an alternative."

Mr. Clinton was given a draft deferment in 1969 after saying he planned to
attend the University of Arkansas Law School and agreeing to join the R.O.T.C.
program. But he did not attend law school in Arkansas and never enrolled in the
program.

Mr. Clinton wrote in the letter to Colonel Holmes, the head of the R.O.T.C.
program at the University of Arkansas, that he was troubled about not going to
war, but had decided to give up his deferment "to maintain my political
viability within the system."

Colonel Jones said today, "If you read the letter, it's pretty obvious why I
kept it."

"The main thing I'm saying is that the man committed himself to something," he
said, but did not join the officers' training unit.

Colonel Jones also suggested Mr. Clinton may have broken a contract for military
service. Army regulations at the time required every cadet to sign a contract to
join the program, and every member of advanced R.O.T.C. was required to be
enlisted in the Army Reserve. Both were prerequisites for obtaining the R.O.T.C.
deferment, he said.

"He would have had to sign two papers, so this was not all verbal," Colonel
Jones said.

Colonel Jones said he made a copy of Mr. Clinton's letter before filing it,
adding that he did nothing illegal in making the copy and keeping it.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words



International A3-13

U.N. READY FOR YUGOSLAVIA

The leader of the United Nations won backing from permanent members of the
Security Council for a peacekeeping force in Yugoslavia, the first such
operation on the European mainland. A 13,000-member force would be sent to
bolster the fragile Yugoslav cease-fire.  A1

ANGER OVER AN M.I.A. CASE

Senator John McCain of Arizona has asked the Attorney General to investigate an
apparently fraudulent photograph that purports to show a missing serviceman
still alive in captivity in Indochina. The Senator fears that criminals are
preying on the families of the missing.  A3

WEAPON AGAINST DEATH PENALTY

Canada plans to extradite an American to Florida next week to stand trial in a
double murder. But at Canada's insistence, prosecutors will not seek the death
penalty.  A3

YELTSIN PLANS 'CORRECTIONS'

President Yeltsin of Russia promised to make "urgent" corrections in his
economic plan so he could speed change at collective farms and help shield the
poor from inflation.  A6

Tajikistan agrees to restrict its sales of weapons components.  A7

ISRAELIS FIRM ON SETTLEMENTS

The Prime Minister's chief of staff said there was no chance that Israel would
accept a freeze on new settlement housing in the occupied territories as a
condition for receiving American loan guarantees.  A10

Israel clears interrogators in the death of a Palestinian.  A9

RAID JOLTS TOKYO POLITICIANS

Another scandal hit Japan's governing party, with the police raiding the offices
of a trucking company that is reported to have funneled hundreds of millions of
dollars to top politicians and organized crime.  A5

Tokyo Journal: A news blackout on a prince's hunt for a bride.  A4

LIMITED SUPPORT FOR RUSHDIE

An effort to organize a consortium of American publishers to bring out the
paperback edition of Salman Rushdie's "The Satanic Verses" is struggling to find
support.  A11

WEIGHING ACTION IN HAITI

United States and Latin American officials are informally discussing the
possibility of setting up an international peacekeeping force to restore order
in Haiti and allow a civilian government to be restored.  A12

A reprieve for six Haitians loaded onto a ship of returnees.  A12

National A14-20

DEMOCRATS' TAX PLAN EMERGING

The Democratic majority on the House Ways and Means Committee began working on a
package centered on temporary credits of up to $400 for most taxpayers, a
permanent one-point reduction in the corporate tax rate and a modest cut in the
rate on capital gains.  A1

RISE IN RETAIL SALES

In one of the first important reports to signal a possible economic rebound, the
Commerce Department said sales at the retail level were up 0.6 percent in
January.  A1

YOUNG MR. CLINTON AND THE DRAFT

A review of public records suggestss that Bill Clinton's making himself eligible
for conscription in 1969 posed no immediate likelihood that he would actually be
drafted.  A1
The Clinton controversy has reopened old wounds.  A16
In the South, the Clinton campaign faces a new challenge.  A17
A retired recruiter says why he kept a letter from Mr. Clinton.A17
The other Democratic candidates scurried to capitalize.  A16
Senator Kerrey has seized on "electability" as his own issue.  A18

THE TALK OF NEW HAMPSHIRE

If interviews with dozens of Manchester residents are any guide, then all the
Presidential candidates have a problem. In conversations over two days, not one
of those people expressed enthusiasm for anyone in the field. Many said they
were undecided; others said they were decidely uninterested.  A1

Rumors on Capitol Hill: Could someone else join the race?  A17

White House Memo: Reaching for the mantle of Reagan.  A18

THE COSTS OF PEACE

Fearing economic dislocation from cuts to the Pentagon budget, Congress is
considering proposals to cushion the effect on communities, employees at arms
plants and displaced military personnel.  A1

MOVE TO DELAY TEXAS VOTE

The State of Texas asked the United States Supreme Court to order a postponement
of the March 10 primary for the State Senate.  A19

REVERSAL ON FARM CHEMICALS

Citing new evidence, the E.P.A. said it was lifting most of the restrictions
that it placed nearly three years ago on a family of farm chemicals that
prevented damage to fruit, vegetable and grain crops but were shown then to
cause cancer in laboratory animals.  A14

San Francisco's safety law on video terminals was voided.  A14

Law Page D20

ABUSE AND AN ACQUITTAL

A new Texas law permits a defendant charged with killing a family member to
introduce evidence of prior abuse, as well as expert testimony on the peculiar
psychology of victims of battering. The law played a central role in the
acquittal yesterday of a girl who had shot her father to death.  A1

Metropolitan Digest, B1

DOES KALIKOW WANT DAILY NEWS?

Peter S. Kalikow, owner of The New York Post, said that he intended to make an
offer to acquire the bankrupt Daily News, a move that apparently has the
financial backing of Bankers Trust Company, one of his creditors.  A1

Business Digest,D1

Weekend C1-29
Where romance blooms.  C1
A Euro-fling at the Mark hotel.  C1
Movie studio proposes half-price days.  C6
For Children C12
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"The Most Happy Fella." C1
Film: At the Movies C6
Music: Tito Puente, El Rey.  C3
Dance: Erick Hawkins troupe.  C3
Word and Image: "Billy Dyer and Other Stories." C27

Obituaries B11
Dr. Nahman Avigad, an Israeli archeologist.
Dr. Alfred L. Copley, an abstract artist and a medical researcher.
Stella Roman, a Met soprano.

Sports B12-20
Baseball: Gooden throws off mound.  B17
Basketball: Bulls beat Knicks, 106-85 B13
Column: Anderson on mogul skiing.  B13
Olympics: U.S. hockey team tops Finland.  B13
Weinbrecht captures gold in moguls.  B13

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29
Editorials A28
The Vietnam test.
Winking at aggression.
Love on the wing.
Mitchel Levitas: Golan.
Letters A28
A. M. Rosenthal: Victory for Buchanan.  A29
Leslie H. Gelb: Iowa's secrets.  A29
A. S. Byatt: Love's rhyme knows reason.  A29
Elizabeth Becker: Vietnam again haunts politics.  A29

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A young Haitian is taken back to an unsettled homeland.
(Associated Press) A12

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Girl of His Dreams

BYLINE: By Catherine Texier;  Catherine Texier is the author of the novels "Love
Me Tender" and "Panic Blood."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 869 words



WHORES FOR GLORIA
By William T. Vollmann.
138 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $19.

WILLIAM T. VOLLMANN is a poet of the underground. In his new novel, "Whores for
Gloria," a slim volume that most resembles his collection "The Rainbow Stories,"
he has trimmed down his focus to reveal the essence of his obsession: the search
for love and redemption amid despair and self-destruction.

Readers of Mr. Vollmann's previous books will recognize one of his favorite
terrains, San Francisco's Tenderloin district, and its denizens, the street
whores who turn tricks for 20 or 40 bucks a pop in back alleys. The story is
skeletal. Jimmy, a middle-aged Vietnam veteran on the skids, pays prostitutes to
tell him their stories or share their memories and occasionally to have sex with
him when he can manage it. He is engaging in a futile attempt to recapture or
re-create a whore he has loved and lost, Gloria. Gloria, the gorgeous hooker,
the quintessential woman and male fantasy, with "hellishly beautiful breasts,"
may or may not be imaginary. At the beginning of the book we hear Jimmy talking
to Gloria on a pay phone about their baby, but it turns out the phone is broken.
At one point Jimmy says that they were childhood friends, at another he claims
that he and Gloria were married. But whether Gloria is a figment of Jimmy's
imagination or a real whore with whom Jimmy had an affair, she is still a
fantasy that he is trying to bring to life.

In a way, Jimmy himself is a symbolic john, a man who sees whores as a
flesh-and-blood support to his fantasy. As he "flatbacks" the hookers (as he
puts it), he imagines his dream Gloria with their body parts -- the eyes of one,
the hair of another, the genitals of yet another -- "each representing some
woman's physical character like notes of music." But since this effort fails to
create a satisfying Gloria, he now requires the souls of the whores. For the
price of a trick, he gets to hear happy stories, sad stories (they are
excruciatingly sad), childhood memories, anecdotes of the trade, but still
Gloria eludes him. It's only with the help of an older whore, Peggy, that Gloria
finally comes alive for a brief, intensely religious moment. A Virgin Mary of
purity, Gloria appears "like an annunciation," she looks "brighter," she is
surrounded with light, she glows. Soon Jimmy forgets Peggy's presence and
fantasizes driving away with Gloria until the wrong "memories" come out of
Peggy's mouth, jarring him out of his daydream and back to his sordid reality.

His attempt to re-create Gloria -- on the advice of his friend Code Six, a
fellow Vietnam veteran and boozer -- by acquiring the hair of a whore and
adorning the head of another one with it backfires. The result is painfully
grotesque. Yet Jimmy cannot give up his pathetic obsession.

For a while, these efforts seem to pay off. Jimmy believes he sees a "real and
finished" Gloria who "casts a shadow" and has "the firmness of flesh."
Predictably, though, one morning he wakes up and the vision is gone.

The strength of Mr. Vollmann's novel, its poetry, its humanity, lies in the
portraits of the prostitutes, transvestites and pimps who people the sidewalks
of the Tenderloin district. And what a gallery of rogues it is. There is Nicole,
"used up like a dirty eraser," who has AIDS. There's Jack, a pimp who shoots
dope and loves his one record of Chopin nocturnes, although he doesn't own a
record player. There's the old transvestite and whore Phyllis. Jimmy says of
her: "Have you ever looked at an old street-whore's hand? Dirty worn creases
deep as cuts, fingertips callused and peeling, thumb blackish-grey, but the
whole hand so pale under the dirt." And there are Korea, Cynthia and Candy, and
all the girls we see lounging on the hoods of cars on a warm summer night, their
miniskirts hiked up on their thighs, smiling "like tropical orange juice girls"
and giggling "like little girls staying up past their bedtime."

Structured as a collection of fragmentary monologues, "Whores for Gloria" has
the unmistakable tone of truth in the speech patterns of the characters and in
their stories, which at times sound as though they were directly transcribed
from a tape recorder. There's an element of reporting here, and although the
monologues are fascinating, they don't truly coalesce into a fully accomplished
novel. As characters, Jimmy and the elusive Gloria pale next to the gritty
reality and density of the whores' lives. And although the quest for the fantasy
woman, both ultimate sex symbol and all-encompassing love, results in a dramatic
ending, it doesn't quite have the emotional power to carry the novel. At times,
Jimmy's search seems nothing more than the aimless obsession of a terminal
drunk, superficially imposed on the hookers' stories.

None of this takes anything away from the harrowing poignancy of Mr. Vollmann's
voice. "Whores for Gloria" is in the tradition of both Hubert Selby Jr.'s "Last
Exit to Brooklyn" (sharing its theme of redemption through self-hatred,
self-destruction and the abyss of sex) and the lyrics of Lou Reed. The power of
Mr. Vollmann's writing turns this short novel into a lyrical poem of the street,
sad and beautiful.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Assails Comments of Japanese

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 165 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16,


In an interview published Saturday in The Boston Globe, President Bush rebuked
Japanese officials for denigrating American workers and said he deplored "the
ugliness and discriminatory undertones" of the growing trade dispute with Japan.

"Getting into this bashing of each other is not the answer," Mr. Bush said. "But
I'll defend the work of the American worker, and I think it doesn't help when a
Japanese official mocks the American worker."

Japan's Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, and members of his Government have
recently questioned Americans' work ethic, accused them of being lazy and
suggested that their products were inferior.

Turning to the Presidential election campaign, Mr. Bush said he thought attacks
on the character of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas were "quite unfair."

Mr. Clinton, a candidate for the Democratic nomination, has faced accusations of
marital infidelity and suggestions of impropriety regarding his draft status
during the Vietnam war.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

An Ex-Chemist's Formula for Dow Corning

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: MIDLAND, Mich., Feb. 14


The Dow Corning Corporation still insists that the breast implants it has
provided for 600,000 women pose no unreasonable health risk. It says the
silicone in the implants, which some scientists and women blame for crippling
illnesses, is about as harmless as anything that can be sewn into the body.

But in the last few days, the company has taken a new attitude on scientific
questions and public opinion.

"It's necessary to be right, but it is no longer sufficient," said Keith R.
McKennon, the new chairman and chief executive of the company.

It is not so much that regulators, interest groups or people who bring lawsuits
have scientific expertise that will add to what a company knows about its
products, Mr. McKennon said, but rather that those parties "want you to
recognize they have the right to be participants."

Mr. McKennon, who is 58 years old, took office last Tuesday after Lawrence A.
Reed, Dow Corning's former chief executive, shifted to chief operating officer
and the chairman, John S. Ludington, retired.

Mr. McKennon is a veteran of the laboratory and the legal and
government-relations side of the chemical business. He spent 35 years at one of
Dow Corning's parents, the Dow Chemical Company, where he was most recently
executive vice president for technology. Corning Inc., the glass and chemicals
company in south central New York State, owns the other half of Dow Corning,
which is not traded on the stock market.

For most of the time Mr. McKennon was at Dow Chemical, the company exemplified a
"damn the torpedoes" philosophy, resolutely producing napalm and Agent Orange
during the Vietnam War no matter how bitter the demonstrations against it,
refusing to let the Environmental Protection Agency on its premises, even suing
the Federal Government for taking pictures of its plant from a helicopter.

But that time is gone. In the early 1980's, Mr. McKennon himself was involved in
Dow Chemical's decision to stop producing the herbicide 2,4,5-T after strong
pressure from the E.P.A. The company decided an argument was not worth the
effort.

Salvaging a Disaster

Now, at Dow Corning, Mr. McKennon's job is to salvage a public relations
disaster in which the company appeared not to care about the health of the women
carrying its implants. In an interview in his office, he said he did not know
how many of Dow Corning's 8,300 employees believed the outside world had nothing
to tell them, but that to the extent the attitude existed, his goal was to purge
it.

A scientific advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration will hold
hearings beginning Tuesday to decide whether implants should be banned;
currently, there is a moratorium on their use. But what happens to breast
implants is almost irrelevant to profits at Dow Corning, which earned $159.2
million last year on sales of $1.85 billion.

In fact, the implants, which sell for about $600 a pair, have never provided
even 1 percent of Dow Corning's sales. The company has consistently lost money
on implants, said Mr. McKennon, who added that he was not sure why Dow Corning
was in the business, or whether it should be in the future. But right now, Dow
Corning's reputation is at stake.

"It's critical to get a more conciliatory type of corporate image across," said
Leonard Bogner, an analyst at Prudential Securities who follows Dow Chemical.
Mr. McKennon is probably not inclined to "give away the kitchen sink," Mr.
Bogner said. But, he added, "he is someone who does have a reputation for being
able to communicate without walking in, saying hello, and making you want to hit
him over the head."

Communication with the outside world has never been Dow Corning's strength, said
Barbara Carmichael, the company's chief spokeswoman. The company has always
believed that it was in sole control of its fate, she said, and "the notion that
you can't control things is a lesson we're learning here."

The reason for the company's focus may be the nature of its business, which is
primarily selling specialty chemicals to other manufacturers. Founded in 1943 by
Corning and Dow Chemical, the company, which has its headquarters here, near
that of Dow Chemical, is a world leader in silicones. Its 4,500 products are
used for things like fittings on electrical connections, engine valves and
lubricants, antiperspirants, caulk for concrete roads and sealants on the Space
Shuttle.

An 'e' and Not an 'e'

Silicone, with an "e" on the end, is made of chains of atoms of oxygen and
silicon, which is obtained from quartz rock. A Dow Corning subsidiary also makes
silicon, with no final "e," which is used in computer chips.

The company's products are in every household, but Dow Corning is largely
invisible to the public, said James H. Wilbur, an analyst at Smith Barney,
Harris Upham & Company. "People get the names mixed up; they don't know the
difference between Dow Corning and Dow Chemical," he said. "But it's been around
for a long time, and most people who have used their products are tickled pink."

Behind this company that provides ingredients for others' products, he said, are
executives "who managed the business well and produced excellent returns." He
added, "This public exposure is completely out of their realm."

With the implant controversy, Dow Corning has reversed a long-held course and
released internal memos, even though they appear to give ammunition to its
critics. It is promising full cooperation with the Government on its
breast-implant investigation, and Mr. McKennon is even saying Dow Corning will
consider paying the medical bills of indigent women who must have their silicone
pouches removed.

The company is also establishing an advisory committee that includes women who
have implants and leaders of advocacy groups.

Mr. McKennon, who was granted a patent 30 years ago for a chemical that helps
underground oil flow into wells, said he is no longer a scientist. Of implants,
he added: "I think these devices fill an important medical need. I believe they
don't pose an unreasonable risk."

Some say Mr. McKennon was one of the few people who could have taken the job at
Dow Corning, which required an outsider but someone familiar with the company.

The Dow Corning board comprises 14 people: 4 are executives of the company, 5
represent Dow Chemical and 5 represent Corning. Mr. McKennon has been on the
board since 1987 representing Dow Chemical; he now sits as head of Dow Corning.

A Job for Two

The chairman of Corning said through a spokesman that it would be inappropriate
to discuss the board's decision to replace Mr. Reed with Mr. McKennon. The
chairman of Dow Chemical referred all comment to Mr. McKennon, who said the
board "reached the conclusion that this controversy and the operation of this
company is a bigger job than any one person at the top can do."

He added: "The taps on my shoulder came at least as much from Corning as they
came from Dow. I am emphasizing 'at least.' That would be a full 50 percent."

Asked if any of the Corning members of the Dow Corning board were appropriate
choices for his job, Mr. McKennon said, "I don't believe Corning has had
experiences like Dow in the last 15 years or so."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The job of leading the Dow Corning Corporation out of the public
relations disaster created by health concerns over silicone breast implants has
gone to Keith R. McKennon, new chairman and chief executive. (Peter Yates for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
BUSH JARRED IN FIRST PRIMARY; TSONGAS WINS DEMOCRATIC VOTE

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1904 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 18


President Bush received a jarring political message in the New Hampshire primary
today, scoring a less-than-impressive victory over Patrick J. Buchanan, the
conservative commentator.

With 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Bush had 58 percent of the vote
and Mr. Buchanan 40 percent.

On the Democratic side, also with 99 percent of the vote counted, former Senator
Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts was the winner with 35 percent. Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas was comfortably in second place at 26 percent and in a
position to take his resilient candidacy on to the string of primaries in his
native South.

The Democratic results left the race for the nomination unsettled, and seemed
likely to fuel talk of another candidate's entering the race. The Bush-Buchanan
battle also brought Mr. Clinton some relief by taking him out of the glare of
the political spotlight, where he has been trapped for the last two weeks in the
debate over his draft status during the Vietnam War.

Clinton Looks Ahead

Reflecting Democratic glee over the President's showing, Governor Clinton said,
"In November, we will win a great victory against Pat Buchanan."

Mr. Bush, in a statement tonight, said his opponents in both parties had "reaped
the harvest of discontent with the pace of New Hampshire's economy" and added,
"I understand the message of dissatisfaction."

The signal to Mr. Bush was unmistakable. Even though Mr. Buchanan's support
represented more than 63,000 actual votes, it amounted to a roar of anger from
those who voted in the Republican primary, and it showed the power of a "send a
message" campaign against him in times of economic distress.

Mr. Bush now faces a galvanized Buchanan campaign in one state after another,
with the battle to be joined on March 3, when the Buchanan forces hope to make
another stand in Georgia. Down the road, Mr. Bush will confront a Democratic
Party that has now been given a road map of his vulnerabilities.

No Big Push for Cuomo

In the Democratic race, Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska
apparently emerged from the voting neck and neck -- as they were in the polls
during the past few weeks. But former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California was
right with them, after polls suggested for weeks that he was well behind the
pack.

And one "surprise" that some had predicted simply did not materialize: the
write-in effort for Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York did not break out of the
single digits.

Republicans loyal to Mr. Bush tried to play down the results. The President's
political advisers asserted that New Hampshire, with its battered economy and
sensitivity to taxes, would be Mr. Buchanan's "high water" mark. But there was
alarm in the White House, as the euphoric Buchanan campaign prepared to move
ahead, hoping that the New Hampshire result would bring a flood of
contributions.

The voting today carried many ominous signs for Mr. Bush. Mr. Buchanan won half
of the men who voted in the Republican primary and half of those who identified
themselves as conservatives, according to interviews with people leaving the
polling places.

Mr. Bush held on to a majority of the Republicans, but Mr. Buchanan carried more
than half of the registered independents who chose to vote in the Republican
primary. Taken together, the unrest of men, conservatives and independents
showed deep fault lines in the coalition that carried Ronald Reagan to power,
kept him there and elected Mr. Bush as his heir.

There was much historical irony here: It was New Hampshire that resurrected Mr.
Bush's candidacy four years ago, after the then-Vice President placed third in
the Iowa caucuses and came limping to this state desperate for affirmation from
the voters.

Mr. Buchanan's constant urging to send a message to the White House clearly paid
off: three in 10 of those voting in the Republican primary said they wanted,
first and foremost, to do that, and they overwhelmingly backed Mr. Buchanan, the
survey showed.

Moreover, Mr. Bush was clearly punished for breaking his 1988 pledge to forswear
new taxes. Nearly a third of the Republican primary voters said that was "very
important" to their vote, and most of them gave their support to Mr. Buchanan.

Reading His Lips, Again

This anti-tax sentiment, some analysts said, was fed by the Bush
Administration's decision not to include a $500 increase in the tax exemption
for children in a list of high-priority proposals to energize the economy -- a
decision that Mr. Buchanan also pounded upon.

Mr. Buchanan began his campaign as a plea to put "America first" and radically
redirect the nation's attention to home front concerns, but it was a commercial
attacking Mr. Bush for breaking his tax pledge that was the hallmark of his
campaign here. Again and again, New Hampshire voters were greeted with the image
of Mr. Bush declaring, "Read my lips, no new taxes" in 1988, and were reminded
that he broke his promise.

Mr. Buchanan also clearly benefited from his intensive campaigning here, in
contrast to the largely long-distance courtship of Mr. Bush.

The wounds suffered by Mr. Bush today made many Democrats agree with Phil
Angelides, the California Democratic chairman, who asserted that the Democratic
nomination in 1992 was the most valuable since 1976, when the Republicans were
reeling from Watergate, and Jimmy Carter defeated President Gerald R. Ford.

But New Hampshire did little to sort things out. Ronald H. Brown, the chairman
of the Democratic National Committee, said tonight, "It's a wide-open race. This
was the starting gun, not the finish line."

Mr. Tsongas has seen New Hampshire transform his campaign from one accorded
little attention, and even less chance of success, to one that is treated as a
serious drive for the nomination. But he still needs to demonstrate that his
candidacy can travel well.

He promoted his underdog victory as an affirmation of his message: a "bitter
medicine" appeal to restore the economy, through such measures as a cut in the
tax on capital gains to encourage investment. The polling of voters today
suggested that much of his support was from people who wanted a candidate with
specific ideas, as well as one who has shown strength and courage. The survey
also showed that he had strength among upper-income voters, drawing half of
those with incomes over $50,000.

But many Democrats still see his showing here as a reflection of his regional
roots, his months of painstaking organizing, and the stumbles of the rest of the
field.

Mr. Clinton managed to get some breathing space from the New Hampshire results,
after three weeks when his standing suffered amid questions over whether he
tried to avoid the draft, and accusations from a supermarket tabloid that he had
a 12-year extramarital affair.

Mr. Clinton denied both charges, and voters in the polls today seemed to
consider them unimportant. Only one in 20 said the assertions about Mr.
Clinton's character were very important in their vote.

Still, in a troubling sign for the Democratic candidates, nearly a third of the
voters in the Democratic primary said they wanted to see someone else in the
race.

Decisions Made Late

Emblematic of this confused Democratic race: 45 percent of the Democrats made
their voting decisions in the past three days, or today, accoring to the surveys
of those leaving voting places. This compares with 29 percent of the Republicans
who decided during that time frame.

The poll was conducted by Voter Research and Surveys, an organization created in
1990 by ABC News, CBS News, CNN and NBC News.

The results are based on interviews with 1,918 voters in 60 randomly selected
precincts who voted in the Democratic primary, and on 1,848 voters in 60
precincts who voted in the Republican primary. The findings for the full samples
have a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.

As the results finally settled in tonight, the candidates reacted with a mixture
of exhaustion and relief. Mr. Clinton, who finished several points ahead of what
the final polls had predicted, seemed thrilled to have gotten out of New
Hampshire in fighting shape.

He gave a preacherly speech, a mixture of pride and gratitude, telling a rally,
"This has been a tough campaign, but at least I've proved I can take a punch."
He asserted that the voters here had made him "the comeback kid" and said he
looked forward to "taking this campaign across the country." Mr. Clinton is
clearly hoping to use his financial and organizational edge for a long march to
the nomination.

'Are You Listening?'

Mr. Tsongas cast his victory as a triumph over Washington and the conventional
wisdom: "Hello, Washington, this is New Hampshire calling. Are you listening?"
He said the voters here were saying, "Just tell us the truth, tell us the
truth."

Mr. Buchanan, at a wild rally tonight, promised to "take our party back from
those that have walked away from us." While his audience chanted, "God bless
America, God bless Pat," Mr. Buchanan called for recruits and said he would take
his campaign on to Florida, Maryland, Georgia "and points beyond."

As the race moves to the South, Mr. Bush will also have to contend with David
Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader who mounting campaigns in several states in
the region.

Mr. Duke, a former Louisiana state representative, is on the ballot in South
Carolina, Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma and Tennessee. His best chance
of making an early showing may be in South Carolina, which has a March 7 primary
and where he has made several campaign appearances.

No Rest for Tsongas

For the Democrats, New Hampshire begins a wave of primaries and caucuses that
will, by March 17, produce 55 percent of the delegates to the Democratic
convention in July. The Maine caucuses will be held this Sunday, and Mr. Tsongas
is probably the favorite there, given his regional roots and the bounce he will
get out of New Hampshire. On Tuesday comes the primary in South Dakota, where
both Midwesterners in the race, Mr. Kerrey and Mr. Harkin, are desperately
looking for a lift.

But the next major struggle for the Democrats comes on March 3, when primaries
or caucuses will be held in Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, Maryland, Minnesota, Utah
and Washington. This is the day that will suggest whether Mr. Tsongas has
national appeal that could help him generate more money and credibility before
the daunting round of 11 primaries and caucuses to be held one week later, on
March 10, Super Tuesday.

The Tsongas campaign says it is emphasizing Maryland, Colorado and Washington
and is particularly hopeful of winning Maryland. "Maryland is wide open," said
Nate Landow, the state Democratic chairman there.

Mr. Clinton is hoping for success on March 3 in Georgia, where he has the
support of Gov. Zell Miller. The Arkansas Governor badly needs some victories to
steady his candidacy and is counting on his native South to provide them. Like
Mr. Tsongas, however, Mr. Clinton needs to show strength outside his region, and
he will be counting on his superior resources to keep him in the mix almost
everywhere.

There is a real possibility that March 3 could produce a muddle, with Mr.
Tsongas showing strength in Maryland and Mr. Clinton in Georgia while Mr. Kerrey
and Mr. Harkin pop up elsewhere. "We could have a very indecisive day," Mr.
Landow said.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 20, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A chart in some copies yesterday giving results of a poll of Democratic primary
voters in New Hampshire misstated the response to one question. Among those who
said they voted for Gov. Bill Clinton, 58 percent said that the economy and jobs
were among the issues that mattered most in determining their vote.



GRAPHIC: Photos: Patrick J. Buchanan, left, who made an impressive showing
against President Bush, watching Republican returns yesterday in Nashua, N.H.
(Agence France-Presse); Paul E. Tsongas was the winner in the five-candidate
Democratic race (Reuters) (pg. A1); Paul E. Tsongas and his wife, Niki, thanking
supporters last night in Manchester, N.H. after his victory in the Democratic
primary (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A16)

Table: "On the Voter's Minds: Republicans"

                                    Buchanan           Bush    All voters in
                                      voters         voters   G.O.P. primary

Said they were Republicans               56%            70%              63%
Said they were Independents               41             30               36

Approve of the way Bush
is handling his job                        7             84               49
Disapprove                                90             11               47

Said vote was because
candidate "would make
the best President"                       45             93               70

Said vote was "to send
a message"                                52              5               27

Said Bush breaking "No
New Taxes" pledge was a
very important factor                     61              6               30

Conservatives                             57             53               54
Moderates                                 32             36               35
Liberals                                  10             11               11

Said compared to four
years ago, family's
financial situation is:
  Better today                            12             23               18
  Worse today                             57             28               41
  About the same                          30             48               40

Men                                       64             51               57
Women                                     36             49               43

Poll conducted by Voter Research & Surveys of 1,203 Republican voters leaving
voting places throughout New Hampshire on Tuesday.

Table: "On the Voter's Minds: Democrats

                                     Clinton        Tsongas    All voters in
                                      voters         voters     Dem. primary

Said the candidate's
specific ideas were among
factors that mattered most
in deciding their vote                    39             59               47

Said the strength and
courage a candidate has
shown in life were among
factors that mattered most                26             40               32

Said they are satisfied
with party's candidates
for Presidents                            77             67               64

Would like to see some-
one else enter the race                   20             26               30

Said allegations about
Bill Clinton's character
were a very important
factor in their vote                       6              7                6

Said economy and jobs
were among issues that
mattered most in deciding
their vote                                18             63               58

Said health care was
among issues that
mattered most                             36             32               36

Poll conducted by Voter Research & Surveys of 1,917 Democratic voters leaving
voting places throughout New Hampshire on Tuesday. (pg. A16)

TYPE: Statistics

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Georgia;
Carter Welcomes Tsongas to Plains

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 906 words

DATELINE: PLAINS, Ga., Feb. 22


Former President Jimmy Carter met with Paul E. Tsongas here today and, though
not endorsing the former Massachusetts Senator, said Mr. Tsongas's honesty and
message of economic truth could appeal to Georgia voters.

Mr. Carter emphasized that he would not endorse any Democratic candidate in
advance of the March 3 primary here, and he stressed two of Mr. Tsongas's
favorite themes: no tax cut for the middle class and telling the American voters
the truth.

He advised Mr. Tsongas to make a maximum campaign effort in every state and to
use his Massachusetts friends to campaign "person to person" for him as Mr.
Carter's friends, the "Peanut brigade," did for him during his successful 1976
Presidential bid.

Sought Visit With Carter

Taking Mr. Carter's advice, and as a result of a warm reception at a Democratic
money-raising dinner in Atlanta on Friday, Mr. Tsongas, who has neither a strong
financial nor organizational base in the South, said he was considering spending
one more day in the state at some future date.

Mr. Tsongas had asked for today's visit with Mr. Carter. Other Democratic
candidates have sought advice from the former President, but Mr. Tsongas was the
first to be invited to Mr. Carter's home here.

The two spent an hour in private conversation with their wives and then held a
joint news conference in the driveway. "I think the South is quite receptive to
the kind of message that Senator Tsongas brought to New Hampshire," Mr. Carter
said.

Mr. Carter compared Mr. Tsongas's campaign to his own Presidential campaign,
when Mr. Carter, a former Governor of Georgia and peanut farmer, became the
Presidential nominee without the backing of the Democratic Party hierarchy. He
said that the lack of support had given him "an element of freedom" to follow
his own conscience.

Give People the Truth

"The beginnings are very similar," Mr. Carter said of his and Mr. Tsongas's
campaigns. "Nobody thought we had a chance."

Mr. Carter said he would not predict the outcome of this year's election, but he
said the country was in a cycle of change similar to the one occurring when he
was elected in the wake of the Vietnam War and Watergate.

"Then people were looking for somebody to tell the truth and I promised to tell
the truth," Mr. Carter said. "I think that there is a kind of similar desire on
the part of the American people now just to have a candidate tell them the truth
and be honest and acknowledge maybe some unpopular positions.

"The more Democratic candidates yield to transient demagoguery like tax cuts
when we will probably be facing a $400 billion to $500 billion deficit this year
is a step backwards," Mr. Carter said.

Mr. Carter suggested that Mr. Tsongas take a lesson from Senator Wyche Fowler's
1986 campaign against an incumbent Republican, Mack Mattingly.  Mr. Fowler, a
liberal Representative from an Atlanta district, campaigned in the rural
southern part of the state by telling voters he did not know anything about
farming, but was willing to learn. He did not apologize for his opposition to
the United States-backed war in Nicaragua, a war that was popular among rural
voters.

'Mecca Steps' for Tsongas

"He was honest and and he told the truth and acknowledged the areas of the state
that he didn't know," Mr. Carter said. "People are looking for somebody who is
honest and tells the truth."

Mr. Carter said that the Democratic establishment here supported Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas, but that the only support that really counted was that of
the voters.

In the last several days Mr. Tsongas has repeatedly been asked about his ability
to be elected. Today he cited a recent New York Times/CBS News Poll that said
that among the announced Democratic candidates he would do the best in a contest
against President Bush.

On arrival at the rain-washed airport in nearby Albany, Mr. Tsongas said that he
had visited with Mr. Carter at the Carter Center at Emory University in Atlanta
last September.

At that time, Mr. Tsongas said that he had "to go out and prove myself."

Today's visit, he said, constituted "one of the Mecca steps along the way"
toward the Presidential nomination.

"You can't run for President without going to Plains," Mr. Tsongas said.

Mr. Tsongas was in the state for the annual Jefferson-Jackson dinner that
Democrats here use as an annual fund-raising event.

Tsongas Criticized

Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton were the only Democratic Presidential candidates to
appear at the dinner. Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska sent a videotape that was
played to the audience of 3,000 people.

Representative Newt Gingrich, the Republican House Whip, and Gov. Zell Miller of
Georgia introduced the candidates.

Earlier this week, Governor Miller had criticized Mr. Tsongas's opposition to a
tax cut for the middle class and erroneously accused Mr. Tsongas of being
opposed to capital punishment. Mr. Miller had said Mr. Tsongas would take the
Democratic Party down the "well-worn path to defeat."

At the dinner, Mr. Tsongas said he was not the "enemy"; the Republican Party
was. He gave a speech long on jokes about his outsider status with only a bit of
his standard economic message.

One state legislator summed up the audience's reaction to both Mr. Tsongas and
Mr. Clinton, noting that Mr. Tsongas had come without any friends and impressed
everyone and Mr. Clinton came with friends and impressed them all.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 25, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article on Sunday about a campaign trip to Georgia by former Senator Paul E.
Tsongas of Massachusetts misidentified a member of Congress who helped introduce
the Democratic Presidential candidates at a Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner in
Atlanta. It was Senator Wyche Fowler, Democrat of Georgia, not Representative
Newt Gingrich, a Georgia Republican.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas visiting Jimmy Carter yesterday
at his home in Plains, Ga. The former President and Mr. Tsongas's messagfe could
appeal to Georgia voters. (Mike Haskey/Columbia Ledger-Enquirer)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Players;
Tsongas's Top Aide: An Admirer Since '72

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


In 1970, Dennis Kanin, who was the political coordinator for the Vietnam War
Moratorium in Massachusetts, heard that a city council candidate in Lowell,
Mass., Paul E. Tsongas, was opposed to the war.

When the two crossed paths again, in 1972, and Mr. Tsongas was running for
Middlesex County commissioner, Mr. Kanin recalled: "I went up and asked him who
he was supporting for President, and he gave me a straight and immediate answer:
John V. Lindsay. That is typical of him. I appreciated the answer and voted for
him."

It was the beginning of a political and personal relationship that has lasted
two decades. Today, Mr. Kanin, 45 years old, is the campaign manager for Mr.
Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts and now a leading contender for
the Democratic presidential nomination.

Political Aficionado

Mr. Kanin (pronounced CAN-in) is a self-described "political junkie" who has
worked in the Presidential campaigns of Lyndon B. Johnson, Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota and George McGovern of South
Dakota.

Mr. Kanin even ran, unsuccessfully, for political office himself, seeking to be
a state representative in Massachusetts when he was in law school at Harvard
University.

Mr. Kanin also managed Mr. Tsongas's successful campaigns for the House and
Senate and was Mr. Tsongas's chief of staff in both offices. In Washington, Mr.
Kanin's wife, Carol, and Mr. Tsongas's wife, Niki, ran a catering business
called "The Dessert Gourmet." And Mr. Kanin and Mr. Tsongas are both partners in
the Boston law firm of Foley, Hoag & Eliot.

"There are boxes within boxes," said Mr. Kanin about his relationship with the
candidate.

For example, during Mr. Tsongas's race for the Senate in 1978, Mr. Kanin sought
to raise his candidate's name recognition with commercials in which people tried
to spell and pronounce Tsongas (SAHN-gus is right). Mr. Kanin said the technique
was based on political advertisements used by his father-in-law, Frank Licht
(rhymes with "peach"), the former Governor of Rhode Island.

Mr. Kanin said he was confident the current campaign would not have to used such
tactics.

"We seem to have pretty good name recognition without that now," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dennis Kanin, who worked on the Presidential campaigns of Lyndon
B. Johnson, Edward M. Kennedy, Eugene J. McCarthy and George McGovern, is
campaign manager for Paul E. Tsongas. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Arriving at the Next Battleground, Clinton Attacks Tsongas in Maryland

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 745 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Feb. 22


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who has spent the last few days attempting to
lower expectations about how well he can perform against Paul E. Tsongas in the
Maryland primary on March 3, indicated today that he planned to turn Maryland
into a battleground after all.

Without mentioning Mr. Tsongas, a former Senator from Massachusetts, by name,
Mr. Clinton took him to task for criticizing proposals to cut taxes for the
middle class and to create a student loan fund. Mr. Tsongas has said such ideas,
which Mr. Clinton has proposed, were irresponsible and insufficient to meet the
nation's needs. Mr. Clinton called this "pious rhetoric."

"One of my opponents in this race never tires of saying he's no Santa Claus,"
Mr. Clinton said at a rally sponsored by the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees. "The American people don't need a Santa Claus.
They don't want a Santa Claus. They don't want a handout, but a hand up.

"We don't need Santa Claus," Mr. Clinton said, appropriating one of Mr.
Tsongas's catchiest campaign phrases. "We need a leader."

Until Mr. Tsongas's victory on Tuesday in the New Hampshire primary, Mr. Clinton
had praised rather than criticized him. His more direct attack seemed calculated
to counter what voters have described in opinion surveys as Mr. Tsongas's
strengths, including the specificity of his plans for economic growth.

"Every plan is just a piece of paper," Mr. Clinton said. "And all that matters
in the long run is who can energize people."

Mr. Clinton was endorsed today by Mayor Kurt Schmoke of Baltimore and by
Representatives Benjamin L. Cardin and Steny H. Hoyer, and his campaign planned
to begin broadcasting television commercials in the Baltimore market this
weekend.

But even as Mr. Clinton was stepping up his attacks on Mr. Tsongas, leaders of
his Maryland campaign continued to play down expectations.

"Tsongas has picked one state, and we're running a national campaign," said Joel
Rozner, the Clinton campaign's Maryland state director. "Tsongas has sort of
drawn the line in sand here."

Resisting Predictions

Mr. Rozner said Mr. Clinton would "do well" in Maryland. Other Clinton advisers,
however, have resisted making any prediction about whether the Arkansas Governor
can win here. They have said they expect Mr. Clinton to be weakest in affluent
suburban Montgomery County, where they fear many Democratic primary voters have
been scared away by negative publicity about Mr. Clinton's personal life and
accusations that he tried to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Clinton said at a news conference in Washington this morning that he had not
yet decided how worthwhile it would be to use limited resources in Maryland. "I
just instinctively feel there are a lot of upper-income voters who will believe
in the sort of we-don't-need-a-Santa-Claus message that Mr. Tsongas is putting
out," he said.

Most of Mr. Clinton's pitch today was to black voters in Baltimore and
Washington, where he appeared with a group of city officials and repeated his
support for statehood for the District of Columbia.

Larry Gibson, a lawyer who has managed Mr. Schmoke's campaigns, said the
Baltimore Mayor had met with each of the Democratic Presidential candidates
before deciding that Mr. Clinton's urban agenda was the best.

"Most of them are acting as if only suburbanites are going to vote in this
election," Mr. Gibson said.

'It Will Be a Close Race'

Prince George's County and the city of Baltimore are two of the most populous
areas of the state and both have black majorities. But Clinton campaign
officials worry that lower voter turnout in the state's urban areas might be
offset by higher turnout in the more affluent suburbs.

"It will be a close race," Mr. Rozner said. Mr. Tsongas, he said, will be aided
by the publicity he attracted by winning the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday.
"Whoever wins New Hampshire gets a tremendous bump," he said.

But Mr. Clinton is clearly taking no chances with the outcome of the Maryland
contest, which falls on the same day as the Georgia primary, where Mr. Clinton
is thought to hold a regional and organizational advantage over Mr. Tsongas.

Likewise, Mr. Tsongas is making a run at Mr. Clinton's Southern base and won
favorable reviews in the South on Friday. He charmed a large audience at a
Democratic money-raising dinner in Atlanta when he took jabs at Gov. Zell
Miller, a Clinton supporter.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japanese Didn't Invent Military Sex Industry

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


To the Editor:

Lest your report on karayuki-san, "comfort women," forced into prostitution by
the Japanese army in Korea (news article, Jan. 27) be used to fuel the fires of
Japan-bashing, let us be clear that the military exploitation of women through
rape and prostitution has a long history in every military society, including
ours.

A former Navy chaplain who served in Japan during the post-World War II
occupation told me that when he protested the American base commander's efforts
to set up prostitution centers using Japanese women, he was reassigned
stateside.

As a Japanese-American woman growing up on United States military bases, I faced
the assumption that any woman who looked Asian was sexually available to
soldiers. I was often called "geisha-girl" or "Suzy Wong" (soldiers usually
couldn't tell Japanese from Chinese). Every base I ever lived on, in the United
States, Okinawa and Germany, had a thriving red-light district near it.

The enormous growth in the Thai sex industry occurred with the escalation of the
Vietnam War, in which Bangkok was a major rest and recuperation spot for United
States troops. When the war ended, the economy was so dependent on the revenues
generated by the sex industry that Thais shifted their sales pitch to tourism.
Underground best-selling guidebooks give advice about where to find particular
kinds of prostitution, including children. Some travel agencies arranged sex
tours for Western European, American and Japanese men to Thailand.

The largest users of Korean women for prostitution now are United States
soldiers. My Sister's Place, an agency that works with Korean women who marry
soldiers or work as prostitutes, estimates that one of every six Korean women 15
to 35 years old works in the sex industry. The women have few other economic
options, especially if they have run away from abusive homes or are divorced.
The situation was similar around Philippine United States bases and continues on
Okinawa, where women from the Philippines and Thailand are illegally imported
for the sex industry.

Women in virtually every Asian country are organizing against the economic
structures, military bases and social patterns of male dominance that force
hundreds of thousands of women and children into the sex industry. If we are
shocked by the story of karayuki-san, which ought to shock us for its brutality,
we also ought to assist the women of Asia in their struggle against similar
abuses now.

RITA NAKASHIMA BROCK
St. Paul, Feb. 3, 1992

The writer, a professor of humanities at Hamline University, has done field work
on the sex industry in Thailand, Japan, the Philippines and Korea.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Martial-Arts Movies Find a Home In South Africa

BYLINE: By CELIA WREN;  Celia Wren has written about the arts for The Weekly
Mail, a South African anti-apartheid newspaper.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 22; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


Crippled by the recent culture boycott, the South African film industry is all
but moribund these days. Occasionally, the promise of an artistic movie with a
big name or anti-apartheid message -- for example, Athol Fugard's "Road to
Mecca" starring Kathy Bates or the protest musical "Sarafina!," recently filmed
in Soweto -- will raise the spirits of South African directors and producers.
But the film makers spend most of their time hoping that the end of apartheid
will usher in a new era, when they can make and market films without censure
from the international community.

Nonetheless, one cinematic genre is flourishing: martial-arts movies.  Modest
production costs, minimal unionization, varied scenery and perpetual sunshine
make South Africa an ideal place to shoot such low-budget films. Because
martial-arts movies require few special effects and tend to draw a dependable
audience, film makers who shoot in South Africa can be sure of making money,
especially if they keep their South African connections quiet.

Among the martial-arts movies made recently in South Africa are "American
Kickboxer," "To the Death," "Dance of Death," "Toxic Heart," "Backlash" and
parts two, three and four of "American Ninja." Cedric Sundstrom, director of two
"American Ninja" movies, is thinking of making one more sequel and is currently
at work on "The Piscean Factor," a martial-arts film with an ecological message.
Most of these films follow the classic formula set down in the Bruce Lee film
"Enter the Dragon": a martial artist, sent undercover to expose a ring of
criminals or spies, manages at the same time to avenge a murdered friend or, in
most cases, brother.

The proliferation of martial-arts movies follows the 1980's boom known as the
"Hollyveld" years. To offset isolation arising from opposition to apartheid from
foreign artists, the South African Government initiated a system of tax rebates
to attract film makers to the country.

Under the incentive system, crews flocked to South Africa to make low-budget
action films like "Platoon Leader," a movie about the Vietnam War directed by
Aaron Norris, Chuck Norris's brother, in Natal Province on South Africa's east
coast.

The tax rebate also led to widespread fraud, as some producers reported to the
Government up to eight times the amount they spent. Because many rebates were
allocated on the basis of local box-office returns, the Department of Home
Affairs found itself investigating a morass of faked receipts, nonexistent movie
houses and, by one account, an entire movie rumored to have been shot with no
film in the camera. According to the Home Affairs Minister, Gene Louw, 193 films
have come under investigation and 28 producers have been ordered to return their
rebates.

After the scandal blew up in 1988, the Government overhauled the system. Now,
only films that reflect what the Government regards as the South African way of
life are eligible for rebates. Just what qualifies under the new system is open
to debate. The director Mr. Sundstrom was turned down for a rebate for "The
Piscean Factor," a futuristic martial-arts movie about water shortages. His
application argued that the film is relevant to the future of the South African
ecology.

Of course, most martial-arts movies could not pretend to qualify for the
rebates. But filming in South Africa is still inexpensive, and the existence of
a large number of film makers and technicians trained during the Hollyveld years
keeps projects coming into the country.

Because South African directors and actors have experience with martial-arts
films, the productions are even more risk-free. The 23-year-old director Thomas
Witt got his start when he was spotted at a gym, training near members of the
cast of "American Ninja 2." Mr. Witt ended up playing a ninja in that film, and
he subsequently directed and starred in two martial-arts movies that were not
released commercially but went directly onto videocassette. Last year, after
serving as assistant martial-arts choreographer for "Backlash," he began working
on the script for "Iron Fist," which he describes as "a thriller with a
martial-arts twist."

According to Mr. Witt, few South African martial artists do well in front of the
cameras. This, he says, accounts for the fact that, while extras are South
African, drawn from local gyms or martial-arts academies, the stars are
generally American or European. The recently completed "Backlash" starred Jerry
Trimble, an American who holds the world kickboxing championship, and Karen
Sheperd, another American, who is one of the few women martial artists who acts
in films.

Few actors who come to South Africa to film are well known. In the past, filming
here was risky. American actors sometimes found themselves censured by the
acting community when they returned to the United States. Michael Dudikoff, who
starred in three of the "American Ninja" movies, was under so much pressure when
he went home that he pledged never again to work in South Africa. When he
decided, after dropping out of "American Ninja 3," that he wanted to star in
"American Ninja 4," the largely South African cast and crew had to relocate to
Lesotho, a tiny nation encircled by South Africa.

Neither South Africa nor Lesotho was mentioned in the movie's script, which
concerned an imaginary African nation ruled by a megalomaniac. Martial-arts
movies filmed in South Africa almost never reveal their true setting: plots are
set on tropical islands or in vague African countries. In "American Ninja 2,"
Cape Town's cliffs masqueraded as a Caribbean coastline. "American Ninja 3" took
place on "the remote Caribbean island of Triana." One of the few films that did
not disguise its locale was Darrell Roodt's "To the Death," about an illegal
kickboxing tournament in which the losers are shot in the back of the head.

"To the Death" was an unusual venture for Mr. Roodt, who directed "Sarafina!"
and is considered one of his country's most artistic film makers. But a number
of South African directors have resorted to working on the odd martial-arts
movie. Because of the infamy attached to the country's name, it is hard to
market a high-profile South African film internationally; audiences might
boycott it. At the same time, it is impossible to make money showing a film
nowhere but inside the country. South African audiences have displayed a marked
preference for Hollywood films, and the country has only two movie distribution
companies. As a result, few South African films are shown.

Apartheid's demise may change all this, but meanwhile, South African film makers
need to make a living.  "You can't stand waving the flag and hoping something
will happen," Mr. Sundstrom says of South African film makers who hope for
political change. Instead, he made "American Ninja 3" and "4," although he
points out eagerly that he recently directed the pilot for a television series
about the plight of Johannesburg's street children.

Mr. Sundstrom says he tried to elevate his martial-arts films by working in
references to the mystical philosophy of the ninja, a covert martial artist
whose origins can be traced to feudal Japan. He also put in jokes for knowing
viewers: in "American Ninja 4," a villain bellows, "This is an illegal
gathering," the statement traditionally used to break up gatherings the South
African Government found undesirable. But ultimately, Mr. Sundstrom says, he was
obliged "to stick to the formula."

The Department of Home Affairs, in overhauling the rebate system, announced last
spring that "the days of the ostrich syndrome are past." Perhaps, but in the
meantime, South African film makers can always fall back on the karate mat.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Bradley in "American Ninja 3: Blood Hunt," a 1989 film
made in South Africa -- The true setting is often concealed. (Cannon
Releasing)(pg. 22); Michael Dudikoff in "American Ninja 2: The Confrontation" --
he faced pressure afterward. (Cannon Releasing)(pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Primaries Are No Test of Character

BYLINE: By Walter F. Mondale;  Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale is head
of the Mondale Policy Forum at the University of Minnesota Humphrey Institute of
Public Affairs.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS


Despite the strong voter turnout in New Hampshire, many people remain deeply
dissatisfied with how we select our Presidential nominees. Leading up to this
year's campaign, we heard plenty of promises from the media about greater
attention to the substance of candidates' ideas. Soon enough, though, personal
issues took over.

Already, Bill Clinton and his wife have had to justify their marriage, and he
has been forced to defend a thoughtful letter written as a college student
coming to terms with the draft and the Vietnam War. Paul Tsongas has stripped to
a swimsuit to prove his health. And Bob Kerrey has had to explain repeatedly why
his family business cannot afford to buy private health insurance for its
workers.

How did these become issues in a Presidential campaign?

Character is a legitimate political issue, especially in a President. We have
had Presidents with personal problems that seriously diminished their public
judgment and power to govern effectively. We should learn about these problems
before they are elected, not afterward. But the campaign is actually neglecting
the qualities of character that relate most directly to the capacity to govern.

Voters deserve to know about any candidate who wants to be President. We are
voting for a person, after all, not a list of issue positions. We should know
not just what the candidates say about issues, but who they are: Their depth,
intelligence, honesty, sense of responsibility, courage. We should know if they
are stupid, arrogant, dishonest, careless.

This is why the public is eager to get past the campaign handlers and the
managed messages. It is why we so avidly watch the Presidential debates,
searching for any clues of what really moves the candidates.

Easily lost in the obsession with personal character, however, are more relevant
questions about political character.

Some of these questions are profound: What are the candidate's core political
values? Does he have a firm sense of the direction in which he wants to lead the
nation? Is he secure with himself -- with his convictions and his conscience?

Other questions are more mundane, but hardly unimportant: Does the candidate
have the skill to build a coalition among disparate groups? Will he be able to
gain the trust and respect of members of Congress? Will he be able to handle
himself with foreign leaders? Does he have the force of character and persuasive
talent to get others to go along with him on controversial decisions? Does he
have the judgment to select good advisers and Cabinet members?

Unlike a parliamentary system, where leaders are picked by peers who know them,
we have developed a self-nomination system where almost anyone with the ambition
can run for President. A candidate is not required to pass any test; he or she
does not need any organizational base of support; it is not even necessary for
him or her to have been elected to office before.

Dealing with questions of political character in the campaign has become so
difficult because we have confused the party nomination process with the
Presidential election itself. The election is the business of the people. But
the nomination is more properly the business of the parties.

The problem lies in reforms, especially in the Democratic Party, that were
supposed to open the nomination process and build public trust. Instead, they
have produced an almost universal suspicion of the candidates. In turn, party
leaders have lost the power to screen candidates and select a nominee they
believe will best compete and represent the party in the November election.

Under these circumstances, the mass media become the only forum for dealing with
questions of character, personal or political. Voters end up having to
substitute for a nomination process that is incapable of passing judgment on
character. Rumors begin to pass for news, and reporters are forced to engage in
the psychoanalysis of candidates. Everyone involved is cheapened -- the
candidates, the reporters and the voters.

The solution is to reduce the influence of the primaries and boost the influence
of party leaders, who can be held accountable for the personal and political
character of a nominee. The "super-delegates" category established within the
Democratic Party after 1984 allows some opportunity for this, but it should be
strengthened.

In November, the American people will once again vote to decide who will occupy
the most powerful public office on earth. A Presidential election is our
national celebration of democracy. It should provide an occasion for serious
debate worthy of a great country. The process should have some dignity -- even
nobility.

Our citizens deserve a full opportunity to become informed, not just about the
issues, but about what kind of political character each candidate would bring to
the Presidency.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1169 words



Nominees on Cassette

As happens every year, the Oscar nominations announced last week find top films
with their video plans spread across the calendar. Of 14 movies named in 6 major
categories (picture, director, actor, actress, supporting actor and actress),
only 3 are out on tape.

"Thelma and Louise" is currently No. 1 on most best-renter lists. Two more of
the 14, "The Silence of the Lambs" and "City Slickers," have also been best
renters for months. What is the advantage of being nominated? "It attracts
people who haven't seen the film yet," said George Feltenstein of MGM/UA, which
released "Thelma and Louise."

In March, 4 more of the 14 films will be available, beginning next week with
"Barton Fink." On March 12 will come "Boyz N the Hood," which has begun a second
theater run virtually on top of its video release. Later in the month "The
Fisher King" and "Rambling Rose" will be released.

Big films from the holidays and later will be spaced through the summer and
fall, with actual dates for the most part unannounced and as carefully plotted
with an eye to the competition as are theater release dates. First out, on May
28, will be "For the Boys." In June will come "Cape Fear" and after that "Fried
Green Tomatoes."

"The Prince of Tides" is scheduled for sometime in the summer, as is "Bugsy,"
though this release could be delayed by an extended run in theaters. "Beauty and
the Beast" is reportedly planned for November.

That leaves "J. F. K.," with eight nominations all told. "No comment at all,"
said a Warner spokesman.


Laser Beginnings

The book lists videos -- about 5,000 movies, documentaries, animated features
and other titles -- but Douglas Pratt's "Laser Video Disk Companion," just
published in an updated edition by New York Zoetrope, is really a course of
instruction for those interested in getting started with disk or adding to a
disk collection.

Mr. Pratt, who is the editor of the "Laser Disk Newsletter" in East Rockaway,
L.I., writes with a warm and accessible style. Before assessing the titles, he
tells how disks are made and what differentiates films on disk from those on
tape. The book also describes the technical aspects of visual and audio and what
goes into making a good disk.

In his 4,000 reviews, Mr. Pratt plays standard critic but also gives painstaking
attention to production values and how successfully they have been duplicated in
the manufacture of the disk. If that sounds daunting, be assured that in Mr.
Pratt's hands it becomes fascinating. "The Laser Disk Companion" is $24.95 and
is available where disks are found. Or call (800) 242-7546; in New York City,
(212) 420-0590.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES



Dogfight
1991. Warner. $92.99. Laser disk, $29.98.
1 hour 34 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

The year is 1963 and to entertain themselves on their last night in the United
States before shipping out to Vietnam, Birdlace (River Phoenix) and some fellow
marines have a competition to pick up the ugliest girl. Birdlace, however, gets
more than he bargained for when his entrant in the competition (Lili Taylor)
turns out to be intelligent and appealing. But after that the idea goes nowhere.
While the director Nancy Savoca was noted for her touch with ordinary people
like these in her first movie, "True Love" (1989), here it is as if she doesn't
know what they are really like. "The film wants to be honest (and in its
cruelties, it is), but the operative sensibility is that of a sitcom world"
(Vincent Canby).

L. B. J.
1991. PBS Home Video. Two tapes,
$39.95. 4 hours. No rating.

"He was just interesting as hell," says one critic of the former President in
David Grubin's documentary, which was shown on PBS last fall. Four episodes pick
up Johnson in early career and end with the ravaged figure who, brought down by
the Vietnam War, declined to run for re-election in 1968. Using recollections of
L. B. J.'s intimates and detractors, the tapes uncover some of the many layers
of a man who wished he could deal with everything as if he were on Capitol Hill.
"If I could just sit in a room with Ho Chi Minh, I think we could cut a deal,"
he told an associate. Through apt material and a lean style, Mr. Grubin "manages
quickly, deftly, pungently to get at the political style of a formidable
practitioner" (Walter Goodman).

Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare
1991. New Line. $94.95. 1:36. CC. R.

The sixth and supposedly final chapter of the "Nightmare on Elm Street" series
finds the talon-fingered Freddy Krueger (Robert Englund) with such a depleted
pool of teen-agers to victimize in Springwood, U.S.A., that he has to zero in on
a home for wayward children. There he encounters his own long-lost offspring,
who proves his father's undoing. Until then, though, all "join Freddy in
fantasyland sooner or later, with results that can be ghoulishly ingenious"
(Janet Maslin).

Coup de Torchon
1982. First Run Features. $59.95. 2:08. French with English subtitles. No
rating.

The scorned and inept police chief (Philippe Noiret) in a small French West
African village turns the tables on his detractors by shooting all the riffraff,
including the husband of his mistress (Isabelle Huppert). With characteristic
flair and polish, Bertrand Tavernier's film painstakingly documents the racial
tension and dissolution among the colonials, but there is little payoff in a
work that "seems strangely lacking in momentum and direction" (Maslin).

FROM ELSEWHERE

Screen adaptations, from "The Prince of Tides" to "Fried Green Tomatoes," figure
prominently in this year's Oscar nominations. Here are some of the best-known
adaptations available on tape.

THE THIN MAN. W. S. Van Dyke's treatment of the Dashiell Hammett story
introduced the sleuths Nick and Nora Charles. 1934. MGM/ UA. $19.99. LD, $34.98.
1:33. Black and white. No rating.

THE WAR OF THE WORLDS. The Martians have them on the run in Bryan Haskin's film
based on the H. G. Wells classic. 1953. Paramount. $19.99. 1:25. G.

THE KILLING. Lionel White's novel is the basis for Stanley Kubrick's taut
thriller about a race track heist gone awry. 1956. MGM/UA. $19.99. LD, $39.95.
1:25. Black and white. No rating.

ELMER GANTRY. Burt Lancaster livens Jean Simmons's ministry in Richard Brooks's
adaptation of the Sinclair Lewis novel about a 20's evangelist. 1960. Fox.
$19.99. 2:26. No rating.

THE BIRDS. Seagulls are nasty but crows are the standouts in the Alfred
Hitchcock thriller drawn from the story by Daphne Du Maurier. 1963.
MCA/Universal. $19.99. LD, $39.98. 1963. 2:00. PG-13.

THE SPY WHO CAME IN FROM THE COLD. Espionage gets unglamorous in Martin Ritt's
adaptation of John le Carre's novel about a down-and-out agent (Richard Burton).
1960. Paramount. $19.99. 1:52. CC. Black and white. No rating.

THE DAY OF THE JACKAL. Charles de Gaulle is an assassin's target in Fred
Zinnemann's film based on the Frederick Forsyth best seller. 1973.
MCA/Universal. $59.99. LD, $39.98. 2:20. PG.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Geena Davis, left, and Susan Sarandon in "Thelma and Louise."
(Pathe Entertainment); Robert Englund in "Freddy's Dead: The Final Nightmare."
(New Line Cinema)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: The Voters;
Warnings for Winners In South Dakota Results

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: SIOUX FALLS, S.D., Feb. 26


There was bad news all around after Tuesday's South Dakota Presidential primary,
even for the winners.

While Democrats here handed Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska his first victory,
with 40 percent of the vote, the main reason people said they voted for him was
because he "knows my state."

President Bush, who received 69 percent of the Republican vote, could hardly be
reassured, considering that 31 percent voted for an uncommitted slate. And many
disgruntled with the President vowed to desert their party and vote for a
Democrat in the fall.

A nagging minority of Democrats also voiced doubts about the character and
honesty of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, and about the health of former Senator
Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, issues that could haunt them as the race turns
south.

Warnings From the People

These warning signals came from a survey of voters leaving polling stations in
South Dakota on Tuesday. While turnout was light in this sparsely-populated
state of just under 700,000 -- only 58,608 Democrats and 44,664 Republicans
actually went to the polls -- the findings underscore the political land mines
faced by the Democratic field and an incumbent President.

Mr. Kerrey scored a victory over Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who finished second
and with whom he was vying for pre-eminence as the farm belt favorite. One-third
of the Kerrey backers cited his regional ties, while 25 percent pointed to his
ideas, and another 25 percent said that he "cares about people like me."

While he was the clear favorite of the state's dwindling farm population, Mr.
Harkin came in second over all, a showing that could cripple his money-hungry
campaign. Only 21 percent of Mr. Harkin's supporters mentioned the regional
factor, while the largest proportion, one-third, credited him with caring about
their issues.

And though Mr. Harkin is considered closest to labor, Mr. Kerrey did equally
well among those with a union member in their household. Both men each got about
a third of the union vote. Although both candidates are veterans, Mr. Kerrey had
made much of his Vietnam War experience, and he won half of the veterans' vote.

Mixed Outcome for Clinton

Mr. Clinton's third-place showing was repsectable for an outsider who had little
presence here until the final days of the campaign. But he might have done
better, perhaps overtaking Mr. Harkin, had voters not had misgivings about
accusations of marital infidelities and disclosures that he tried to avoid the
draft.

Asked if they were satisfied that Mr. Clinton had the "honesty and integrity to
serve effectively as President," 32 percent said no and 61 percent said yes. Of
the Democrats who voted for Mr. Tsongas, 49 percent said they had qualms about
Mr. Clinton's integrity; 38 percent of the Kerrey and Harkin voters also were
concerned.

Mr. Tsongas, the winner of the New Hampshire primary, received 10 percent of the
vote here, a sign that his strength in New England may not resonate in other
regions. Although Mr. Tsongas said he has been cured of cancer, some voters are
worried.

Twenty-six percent of the Democratic voters said they were concerned that his
health "will interfere with his ability to serve effectively as President."
Nearly one-third of the Kerrey and Clinton supporters said they were concerned
about Mr. Tsongas's health, as were 24 percent of the Harkin backers.

Health Care the Issue

Karen Schreier, chairman of the South Dakota Democratic Party, said Mr. Kerrey
won for more reasons than his local ties. "Kerrey campaigned here more than
Harkin, and organization was a big part of it," she said.

As for health care, the polling by Voter Research and Surveys, an organization
created by the four major television networks in 1990, found that more than any
other issue, health care mattered most to Mr. Kerrey's supporters. Perhaps that
was because the largest pool of Democratic voters, 43 percent, were over the age
of 60.

Mr. Kerrey has made national health insurance the centerpiece of his campaign,
and 35 percent of his supporters said the issue was critical to them, closely
followed by 33 percent who cited the economy and jobs. Among Mr. Harkin's
backers, the biggest concern, among 39 percent, was farm policy, while 47
percent of Mr. Clinton's and Mr. Tsongas's backers said the economy and jobs.

The vote against Mr. Bush was also largely a protest over the sour state of the
economy. Fifty-four percent of those who rated the national economy as poor
backed the uncommitted slate.

'Still a Danger Sign'

While Mr. Bush retained the overwhelming loyalty of voters identifying
themselves as Republicans, the uncommitted slate got its biggest vote, 60
percent, among independents.

Bob Burns, head of the political science department at South Dakota State
University at Brookings, said the protest vote against Mr. Bush should not be
underestimated: "When an incumbent President cannot hold 70 percent or more in a
primary against an uncommitted slate, it says there's real discontent in the
ranks."

Although they were answering the poll in the heat of casting a primary ballot,
more than 4 of 10 of those who voted uncommitted said they would vote for Mr.
Tsongas or Mr. Clinton if either was the Democratic nominee against Mr. Bush.

The findings also showed that men were less supportive of Mr. Bush than women --
a pattern that was apparent in the New Hampshire primary. By 14 percentage
points women were more supportive than men of Mr. Bush.

Mr. Bush's conservative opponent, Patrick J. Buchanan, did not file in time to
get his name on the ballot here.  Today, Mr. Buchanan, a conservative columnist,
said the President's performance showed he was "politically as weak as a
kitten."

But Don Peterson, chairman of the South Dakota Republican Party, said many Bush
supporters stayed home.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tables: "South Dakota Voters: Democrats"

% of                          Voted for
Tota                             Kerrey    Harkin   Clinton   Tsongas     Brown
l
49%  Men                            38%       28%       19%        8%        5%
51   Women                           42        24        19        10         3
83   Democrats                       40        28        19         8         3
16   Independents                    40        19        21        12         7

CANDIDATE QUALITIES THAT MATTERED MOST
29   Has specific ideas              35        19        21        17         6
26   Cares about people
     like me                         38        34        19         3         5
20   Knows my state                  65        28         5       2<0
20   Has shown strength and
     courage in life                 45        14        19        17         5

ISSUES THAT MATTERED MOST
37   Economy/jobs                    35        23        24        12         4
33   Health care                     43        24        22         8         3
24   Farm policy                     39        43        11         4         2

OTHER FACTORS
25   Farmers                         33        40        16         5         4
24   Veterans                        50        18        17         8         5
32   Concerned about
     Clinton's character             46        31         1        14         6
26   Concerned about
     Tsonga's health                 48        24        23         1         3


(Based on a poll conducted by Voter Research & Surveys of 1,248 Democratic
voters leaving 38 polling places throughout South Dakota on Tuesday.)

Table: "South Dakota Voters: Republicans"

% of                                              Voted for:
Total                                                   Bush    Uncommitted
48%   Men                                                 61            39%
52    Women                                               75             25
83    Republicans                                         76             24
14    Independents                                        40             60

FAMILY'S FINANCIAL SITUATION
26    Better today than four years ago                    82             18
51    About the same                                      71             29
22    Worse today than four years ago                     51             49

ISSUES THAT MATTERED MOST
30    Economy orjobs                                      57             43
25    Health care                                         61             39
23    Taxes                                               63             37
22    Federal budget deficit                              56             44


*4OTH
ER
FACTO
RS
54    Satisfied with Party's candidates                   95              5
39    Would like to see someone else
      the race                                            36             64
20    Farmers                                             66             34

(Based on a poll conducted by Voter Research & Surveys of 628 Republican primary
voters leaving 38 polling places throughout South Dakota on Tuesday.)

How the Survey Was Conducted

The Election Day exit poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters as
they left voting stations throughout South Dakota on Tuesday.

The poll was conducted by Voter Research and Surveys, an organization created in
1990 by ABC News, CBS News, CNN and NBC News.

The results are based on 1,248 voters in the Democratic primary and 628 voters
in the Republican primary in 38 randomly selected precincts around the state.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results from such polls should differ by no
more than a few percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking
to interview all primary election voters in South Dakota on Tuesday. For
Democrats, the difference should be no more than four percentage points in
either direction; for Republicans, it should be no more than five percentage
points.

Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error.  In
addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey
of voter opinion on Election Day may introduce other sources of error into the
poll. For example, refusal rates by voters leaving voting stations can be higher
than those for other types of polls.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment
Democratic Free-for-All;
Expectations of an Orderly Campaign Fade As Voters Choose One Man, Then Another

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 26


Forget about all the neat scripts for an orderly Democratic primary campaign,
from the "Triumphant March of the Early Front-Runner," starring Bill Clinton, to
the "Unstoppable Surge of the New Hampshire Underdog," featuring Paul E.
Tsongas.

The voters are involved now. The plot lines are messy. And the Democratic
nomination is still very much up for grabs. One sure sign was the rough new
attack mounted by Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska in Georgia today, where he took
aim at Gov. Bill Clinton's draft record and his chances against President Bush
in the fall.

In one of boldest attempts yet to try to weaken Mr. Clinton, Mr. Kerrey said
that if the Arkansas Governor is the Democratic nominee, "I think he's going to
get opened up like a soft peanut in November of 1992." [Page A22.]

New Competitiveness

South Dakota's primary on Tuesday underscored this new competitiveness. It
resuscitated Senator Kerrey, who was in danger of fading fast after his sluggish
performance in the earlier contests, and raised second thoughts about Mr.
Tsongas, whose vote percentage barely broke into double digits after a week of
remarkably good press from his win in New Hampshire. Coming after his squeaker
of a victory in Sunday's Maine caucuses over former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California, Mr. Tsongas's showing in South Dakota stoked the criticism that he
was a one-state wonder.

And Mr. Clinton, the Arkansas Governor who was once expected to be well on his
way to the nomination by now, has yet to win a primary or caucus.

Many Democrats continue to see him as the front-runner, if only because of the
powerful advantage he gets from the primary schedule: in the next 12 days,
contests will be held in 10 Southern or border states. With Mr. Clinton's
careful cultivation of the region, and his superior financial and organizational
resources, he remains formidable.

Questions Linger

Still, as the voting in South Dakota suggested, Mr. Clinton now walks under a
cloud of doubts in the view of some primary voters. Surveys of voters leaving
the polling places on Tuesday found that 32 percent said they were not satisfied
that he had "the honesty and integrity to serve effectively as President," while
61 percent who said they thought he had those qualities.

The accusations of marital infidelity and questions about whether he sought to
avoid the draft during the Vietnam War -- matters that consumed the Clinton
campaign for weeks in New Hampshire -- may have moved off the front pages, but
they may be lingering in the public's mind.

Mr. Kerrey seems ready to probe at least some of these vulnerabilities in
Georgia, where the Medal of Honor winner arrived today with a flat declaration
that Mr. Clinton's draft record would be an issue in the general election.

There is clearly room for a Clinton alternative in the race, but none of his
rivals have fully capitalized on this opening.

Mr. Kerrey's 40 percent victory in South Dakota gives him a second chance at
filling this void. The Nebraska Democrat won in a state that was as much in his
backyard as New Hampshire was in Mr. Tsongas's, but it will give Mr. Kerrey his
time in the spotlight, and, equally important, new credibility to raise money.
Some of Mr. Kerrey's sympathizers argue that the freshman Senator, who seemed to
suffer more than most for his late entry into the race, is finally hitting his
stride.

Mr. Tsongas, who made an astonishing leap forward in New Hampshire, now needs
all the more to prove that his victory there was no fluke. Maryland, which like
Georgia votes next Tuesday, is his best opportunity to do so, in part because of
its educated, upper-income suburbanites, similar to those who proved to be an
important part of his support in New Hamphsire.

Some See Two-Man Race

Dennis Kanin, his campaign manager, contends the race for the nomination is
still "a race primarily between Tsongas and Clinton with some resuscitation
value in South Dakota for Kerrey."

Still, the voters will not be heard on that assessment until next Tuesday, when
primaries or caucuses will be held in Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Minnesota,
Idaho, Utah and Washington.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who won his own state's caucuses but finished second
in neighboring South Dakota after a weak showing in New Hampshire, indicated he
was staying in the race. But life gets grim and money gets tight for candidates
lagging behind at this stage.

After demonstrating with a virtual tie with Mr. Tsongas in the Maine caucuses on
Sunday that an insurgent can work wonders in a caucus Mr. Brown, was far back in
the single digits in South Dakota.

'Awaiting Its Defining Moment'

All of this adds up to a murky race.

"It's a race that's headed toward a showdown, somewhere, I'm not sure where,"
said James Carville, a strategist for Mr. Clinton. "It's a race that's awaiting
its defining moment. There's yet to be a primary that's not connected to a state
that a candidate lives in."

Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker who is uncommitted to any of the
candidates, said: "The question now is, how protracted will the process be?  And
I'm not sure we'll have a very clear answer on that until we get to Illinois or
Michigan." Those primaries, on March 17, mark the return of the race to the
battlegrounds of the North.

As the race unfolds, many Democratic officials, on Capitol Hill and elsewhere,
watch and worry. The talk of another candidate's entering the race was suspended
by New Hampshire, where Mr. Clinton scored a respectable enough second-place
finish to declare himself "the comeback kid," but the fear remains that the
party will produce a fragile nominee. Some worry about Mr. Tsongas's skills as a
candidate, others about Mr. Clinton's baggage.

Democratic officeholders have a chronic anxiety, justified in five of the last
six Presidential elections, about a drag at the top of the ticket. But this
year, there is an added edge of frustration, because Mr. Bush seems so
vulnerable to so many Democrats.

"There's great news coming from the Republican side of the ledger," said a
Democratic House member, who spoke on condition that he not be identified, "but
not great news coming from the Democratic side of the ledger."

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "The Primary Vote"

Democrats

1,010 of 1,010 precincts, 100 percent of the vote counted.

Kerrey                 23,974   40%
Harkin                 15,153    25
Clinton                11,421    19
Tsongas                 5,756    10
Brown                   2,304     4
Others                  1,286     2


Republicans

1,010 of 1,010 precincts, 100 percent of the vote counted.

Bush                   30,948   69%
Uncommitted            13,716    31

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary/February 23-28

BYLINE: By Joel Kurtzman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1708 words



ECONOMY

Playing Veto Games With the Tax Bill


Considering the hype, you would have expected the Democrats' tax bill to pass by
more than 221 to 209. After all, it was supposed to return America "to the
time-honored tradition of taxing people according to their ability to pay," said
Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, a principal author. It was also
supposed to stimulate growth. The bill cuts taxes on the middle class by $45.9
billion, raises them on the wealthy by $64.1 billion, and uses the difference to
pay for things like indexing capital gains and increasing deductions for
business. But the total bite is about the same. That may be the problem. "It's
very hard to understand how a revenue neutral bill will stimulate the economy,"
said Norman Ornstein, a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. So
why pass it? Politics, he said. "They wanted to send something to Bush he would
have to veto. They had to hold their noses on this one."

G.D.P. Up, Forecasts Flat

The Commerce Department said the nation's gross domestic product grew by 0.8
percent in the fourth quarter of 1991, not by 0.3 percent as it had originally
reported. But that change is not that meaningful. "Expected," said Samuel D.
Kahan, chief economist at Fuji Securities. "It came from changes in
inventories." According to the department, consumers spent $7.3 billion more
than it had originally thought. But even with the uptick, economists are not
rushing to alter their forecasts. "My estimate is still for 1 percent growth in
the first quarter," Mr. Kahan said.

The Gloom-and-Doom Consumer

It's been 17 years since consumers felt this gloomy about the economy, the
Conference Board said last week. Its index of consumer confidence fell to 46.3
in February from 50.3 the month before. The index was a robust 100 in 1985. Back
in 1974, when consumers last felt this bad, they had good reason. The economy
was mired in recession, the Vietnam War was raging and President Richard M.
Nixon was forced to resign. But now? The index shows consumers are worried most
about layoffs. Since worried consumers don't spend, a robust recovery may still
be some time away.

Brady's Furry-Feathery Guys

Consumers are mopey, but someone is buying durable goods. According to the
Commerce Department, sales of long-lasting, big-ticket items like dishwashers,
trucks and airplanes rose by 1.5 percent in January. That upturn was enough to
make Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady sound a little, well, giddy. "I see
robins on the lawn in the economy now," Mr. Brady told the National Association
of Business Economists last week. And then he added: "I went out last weekend
and bought two new tires." Tires are not in the durable category.

Can't Brady's Bunch Count?

When Secretary Brady went to Congress last week, it was to ask for money. He
wants $55 billion to bail out the nation's savings and loan institutions. But
hold on, where did the first $105 billion go? According to the General
Accounting Office, Congress's investigative arm, no one knows for sure. It
reports that the Resolution Trust Corporation, which oversees the bailout, has
not only lost track of billions of dollars in loans, real estate and other
assets seized from failed institutions, but also has lost track of the cash it
got when those assets were sold. Those are powerful accusations. In one
instance, the G.A.O. said, $7 billion appears to have vanished from the
Government's books, but it does not know whether that is due to fraud,
incompetence or simply poor record-keeping. The R.T.C. acknowledges it has
problems.

Over the Slump's Hump?

Little by little, Detroit is moving the metal. Sales of domestically built cars
and light trucks rose by 4 percent in mid-February. Though it was too early to
declare the slump over, analysts were optimistic since most of the sales were to
customers entering the showrooms, not to rental fleets. "We're seeing a
semblance of recovery," said Jack V. Kirnan, an analyst at Kidder Peabody.

For Greenspan, Four More Years

Even though Alan Greenspan was a shoo-in for the job, President Bush did not
nominate him to a second four-year term as chairman of the Federal Reserve until
the eleventh hour. It took last summer's jittery bond markets to nudge Mr. Bush
along. Since then, Mr. Greenspan, a hard-money man, has been whacking away at
interest rates and pumping up the money supply. That policy won the Senate over.
Last week he was confirmed.



COMPANIES



In the Image of Toyota?

 Last week, the the General Motors Corporation announced losses of $4.45 billion
for 1991 and detailed the first stage in its plan to shrink the company by
eliminating 71,000 jobs and closing 21 plants. But cost-cutting alone may not be
enough. "Almost all of its costs are fixed. The U.S. market is the world's most
cyclical. That kills them," said James Womack, co-author of "The Machine That
Changed the World." "Toyota is different. It manufactures only 50 percent of its
vehicles -- the rest are contracted out -- and makes only 25 percent of its
parts. The rest come from suppliers. It employs only a fraction of the people
G.M. does, yet it maintains its quality." For G.M. to compete, it must remake
itself, Mr. Womack said. "We're a long way from the end of this tale," he added.


A Chip That Can Grow Old

Behind every successful computer, there is a chip. Trouble is, over time, even
the best ones become outmoded. So last week, the Digital Equipment Corporation,
the nation's No. 2 computer maker, said it was introducing a 64-bit
microprocessor called Alpha. Alpha chips, which are far faster than most other
microprocessors in use, will be at the heart of Digital's next-generation
machines. Digital, which spent $1 billion to develop the Alpha in a
bet-the-company strategy, plans to license the technology to other
manufacturers. "People are going to have to get a good running start to leap
over Digital with this one," said Terry Shannon, a consultant in Ashland, Mass.,
who follows Digital.

Park American

Japan bashing has taken an interesting turn. Workers at the Ford Motor Company's
Escort plant in Wayne, Mich., have decided that foreign cars can no longer be
parked in the lot nearest the plant. Those spaces are now reserved for drivers
of domestic cars. But that presents a problem for those who drive the Escorts
made at that plant. The car was designed by Mazda Motors and has a Japanese
engine, transmission and running gear.

Mob Ruling

Putting the mob out of business is not easy. Last week, the Government settled
charges against Thomas and Joseph Gambino, sons of the late Carlo Gambino, the
crime boss, for $12 million and a pledge to stay out of the trucking business in
New York's garment district. The Gambino brothers, co-defendants in a monthlong
trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, were accused of controlling trucking
in the garment district. That added to the price of finished goods and kept
others from competing. The settlement gives the Gambino brothers until March
1993 to sell their companies. They have until 1995 to pay their fines, which,
presumably, can come from the proceeds of the sales. With $70 million to $100
million in the bank and their other trucking businesses in New York left intact,
no wonder the brothers left the courthouse smiling.

Sit Down and Shop

Most couch potatoes get their exercise walking through the junk-food aisle at
the supermarket. But soon they may not even do that. The Hewlett-Packard Company
and TV Answer Inc. last week announced plans to join forces to create
interactive televisions. Hewlett will manufacture a $700 computer that will
enable a TV set to be connected to TV Answer's information service. The service
will allow viewers to buy groceries, order pizza and pay their bills -- for a
fee. It will also provide TV listings. TV Answer, in Reston, Va., will transmit
its service on a portion of the radio spectrum allocated for that use last month
by the Federal Communications Commission. The F.C.C. is expected to start
licensing the service by the end of the year.

Last week William Aramony, president of the United Way of America, was forced to
retire. Disclosures of high-expense-account living and questionable management
practices created dissension among the agency's network of local affiliates.



INTERNATIONAL



China, a Favored Nation

China has been a darling of the Administration. Even though it has a poor of
record on human rights and a large trade surplus with the United States, the
Administration has supported renewing its most-favored-nation trade status when
it expires in June. That allows China to sell goods in the United States with
the lowest possible duties. But China is no darling to the Senate. Last week it
voted 55 to 44 for severe conditions on renewal. It is asking Beijing to account
for and release from prison all citizens who have been accused of expressing
their political beliefs nonviolently. The bill requires President Bush to
certify that China has changed its ways on human rights to keep its trade status
in effect. The Administration must also certify that China has made progress in
opening its markets to American goods and has stopped shipping arms to countries
hostile to the United States. China opposes those conditions. The White House
has threatened to veto the bill.

Buying the Source

Two of Europe's best-known business names, Nestle S.A. of Switzerland and the
Agnelli family of Italy (it owns most of Fiat) are fighting for control of
Source Perrier S.A. That's the company that bottles France's best-known fizzy
water; it is also one of France's largest cheese producers. The bidding has
reached a stalemate. The Agnellis, who control 49.3 percent of Perrier's parent
company, made a bid for the remaining shares for $1.21 billion -- about $265.28
a share. Nestle, which bid $2.4 billion for all of Perrier, is also offering
$265.28 a share. Both groups have resisted increasing their bids but also refuse
to give up. At the rate it is going, Perrier could remain French for quite some
time.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dan Rostenkowski (Associated Press); Thomas Gambino (Associated
Press)

Graphs: Track monthly index of consumer confidence, Feb. 1991-Feb. 1992 (Source:
The Conference Board); monthly percent change in durable goods orders, Jan.
1991-Jan. 1992 (Source: Commerce Dept.); General Motors' net profits and losses,
1987-1991 (Source: Company reports)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STROLLING THROUGH THE PARK;
BUENOS AIRES

BYLINE: By Nathaniel C. Nash

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 10; Column 4; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 234 words


Few places in Buenos Aires are more popular with the citizenry -- or Portenos,
as they call themselves -- than the Plaza San Martin, with its statue of the
liberator of southern Latin America, Jose de San Martin. Portenos respectfully
sun themselves on the statue's pedestal. Visiting dignitaries, accompanied by
colorful honor guards,lay wreathes here.

In the plaza, or park, itself is the memorial honoring Argentines who died in
the 1982 Falklands War, a monument remarkably similar to the Vietnam War
Memorial in Washington. But that conflict with Britain is mostly forgotten here.
Children play on swings, supervised by nannies and parents. Lovers kiss
passionately on benches. Artists sell sketches of city architecture. The park is
bordered by the Plaza Hotel and sidewalk cafes, the mainstay of daily life.

Since the maintenance of the park was recently privatized, San Martin has become
a manicured botanical garden, with beds of roses and other flowers constantly in
bloom. In addition to majestic palms and an enormous gomero tree that sprawls
for 150 feet near the swings, there are jacarandas, which erupt into a mass of
blue flowers in November, and a tipa tree, known for the foam, or spit, that
drops from its leaves.

After walking around the park, a visitor might enjoy a cup of coffee in a cafe,
perhaps while reading a volume of Borges, the most famous Porteno of them all.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters
In Two Regions With Primaries Tomorrow, the Primary Emotion is Anger;
Baltimore Suburb Seems to Prefer Tsongas Appeal

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: TOWSON, Md., March 1


Yes, many people in this Baltimore suburb aren't exactly sure what his name is.
And, yes, they aren't exactly sure what his policies are. But they know one
thing about Paul E. Tsongas: They're leaning toward voting for him.

"I like that guy with the funny name that has a 'G' in it," said Allan Cohn, a
39-year-old insurance salesman.

Tsongas? he was asked.

"That's him -- he's the one. Tsongas," Mr. Cohn said, repeating the name as if
to help himself remember it. "He seems genuine, real."

Two days is a long time in politics, and by Tuesday, when Maryland holds its
primary, a candidate's friend may have become an enemy. But for now, on the
streets and in the homes of this white-collar Baltimore suburb where Democrats
outnumber Republicans 2 to 1, choices are being made not so much from the
intellect as from the gut. That, it turns out, bodes well for Mr. Tsongas and
ill for his closest rival, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

Comparing the Candidates

"Tsongas has a strength from living with problems," said Jeanne Stevenson, a
68-year-old retired apartment manager. "He had cancer. His father was an
immigrant who struggled. Clinton? I don't know, there's something uncomfortable
about the man. My inner sense is there's something under the surface."

Jay Klein, 38, who works for a collection agency, had a similar problem with Mr.
Clinton. "It's hard to pin down," Mr. Klein said. "There's something about him I
don't trust."

In chats with more than 70 people -- 50 of them Democrats -- in their living
rooms and offices and on street corners, most of the Democrats supported Mr.
Tsongas, a former Senator from Massachusetts. Seven backed Mr. Clinton. No one
said they planned to vote for Senators Bob Kerrey of Nebraska or Tom Harkin of
Iowa, or for former Gov. Edmund G. Brown of California. All three candidates
have run minimal campaigns in Maryland.

Time and again, Clinton opponents said their decision was based not on questions
of whether Mr. Clinton had an extramarital affair with Gennifer Flowers or about
a letter he wrote during the Vietnam War epressing opposition to the draft.
Instead, they used words like "too slick" or "just another politican" or "too
driven."

An Erosion of Trusct

But it seemed likely those perceptions were part of an erosion of trust rooted
in the allegations of infidelity and draft evasion. Nearly everyone in town,
even those who groped for the name "Tsongas," readily knew the name "Gennifer
Flowers."

Not everyone, of course, was smitten by Mr. Tsongas. "I'm voting for Clinton,"
said Craig Horn, a 30-year-old investment counselor. "I like him. Tsongas is a
Republican in disguise. But no one knows Clinton, other than the furor over the
controversies."

If some people seemed a bit guilty about their conclusions -- and some did -- it
remained their conclusions nonetheless.

Elsie Heyrman, 39, a computer programmer, said: " There's no way I'll vote for
Clinton. It's not Gennifer Flowers or the draft. My brother was a conscientious
objector; I remember how complicated all that was. Clinton's letter was moving.
I liked him for it. But he's dead. Let's face it, he's never going to be
President of the United States. I'm not wasting my vote."

All this is not to say that the issues are not considered. Mr. Tsongas is
perceived here as offering the best plan for turning the economy around. But
even when campaign issues crop up, they are often framed not only on their own
merits, but also as reflections of character.

"Tsongas is willing to take a chance," Charlotte Snyder, a 44-year-old
librarian, said of the candidate's opposition to a middle-class tax cut.  "He's
got the moxie to look people in the face and say we're going to have to work
hard to make things better."

At once Southern and Northern, its accents changing from speaker to speaker and
from block to block, Towson (the first syllable rhymes with how) is not typical
of Maryland. While most statewide polls put Mr. Tsongas ahead of Mr. Clinton by
about 10 points, the former Senator's level of support seems larger here,
consistent with the vote in the New Hampshire primary that had him running
especially strong in white upscale areas like this one.

Still, Towson is like much of America. It seems to be in the middle of an
architectural wrestling match, the coupolas on its 19th-century buildings trying
and failing to stave off the sleek new steel-amd-glass office buildings.

Downtown is yesterday: an Elks lodge and the 1855 courthouse, and the bells of
the Church of the Immaculate Conception filling the noon air. On the periphery
of the town is today: the new mall and the occasional homeless beggar and the
traffic without end along the endless highway strip of fast-food restaurants and
convenience stores.

For Helen Little, a 70-year-old Republican who is a retired teacher, there is a
similarity between the town and the nation: a fine past, but a present that is
not horrible but is not as good as the past.

"Everything isn't as nice as it used to be," she said in a walk around town,
referring to both Towson and the United States.

Disappointment With Bush

Like some Republicans here, she groped for ways to support President Bush. "I
blame Bush and I don't blame him. I think he should be able to cut government,
but I know it can't be done."

Some seemed to treat him as a nice boy who had not lived up to their hopes.  But
others viewed the President as a bit of a brat who needed to be spanked. Now
it's into the woodshed with Patrick J. Buchanan.

"Reagan and Bush lied to me," said Tom Bodie, a 51-year-old lawyer. "They said
they would dismantle the bureaucracy, and their way of doing that was the
savings-and-loan mess. I'm going to vote for Buchanan to send a message loud and
clear to George Bush to get his act together."

Marcia Jakovicks, 46, a bank manager, said she was tired of politicians. "As a
young person I was in awe of the Kennedys, and I was buffaloed," she asserted.
"George Bush has tried, but he's a politician. I'm voting for Ruchanon simply
because he's not a politician."

Then she laughed and said: "That's quite a leap, isn't it? From the Kennedys to
Pat Buchanan."

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Let's face it, he's never going to be President of the United
States," said Elsie Heyrman, in Towson, Md., saying she would not vote for Gov.
Bill Clinton; "I like that guy with the funny name that has a 'G' in it," said
Allan Cohn, an insurance salesmen in Towson, Md., referring to Paul Tsongas.
(Photographs by Marty Katz for The New York Times)

Maps: "Close-Ups: Colorado and Maryland" -- In Bear Valley, the people's choice
seems to be "none of the above." In Towson, voters said they were leaning toward
Paul E. Tsongas. Maps of Colorado and Maryland show locations of Bear Valley, CO
and Towson, MD.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Banana Republic, U.S.A.

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 33; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


We have a Government of followers following followers, turning the United States
inward and honing the mentality of a banana republic. This week inside
Congressional hearing rooms, you could have heard the whines and wails of
weakness.

Secretary of State James Baker went there to make the case for $900 million over
two years for U.N. peacekeeping operations in places like Cambodia and
Yugoslavia. Even that amount would fall far short of what the U.N. said it
expected and needed from America.

Meanwhile, the Administration was already working behind the scenes to settle
for much less than $900 million -- so that all could hide what little they would
vote for the presumably unpopular task of peacekeeping.

But return to yesterday's hearing and listen to Fritz Hollings, chairman of the
Senate Appropriations subcommittee. Talking of Israel brushing aside U.N. forces
in Lebanon a few weeks ago, the South Carolina Democrat said: "I've always
thought maybe we ought to give the role over to McDonald's and Burger King
because they walk right by and sell hamburgers as they go forwards and
backwards."

To which Mr. Baker responded that "Some peacekeeping operations have been more
successful than others."

On Tuesday, Harold Rogers, top Republican on the House Appropriations
subcommittee, argued that it was unfair for the U.S. to pay 30 percent of
peacekeeping operations since "we only represent 25 percent of the world's"
economy. "And Cambodia makes the case," he said. "I mean, Cambodia is in Japan's
economic sphere of influence."

Mr. Baker explained that paying more than others was what leaders did.
Mercifully, he ignored the point about Japan.

Joseph Early, a Massachusetts Democrat on the House subcommittee, offered that
peacekeeping is "good rhetoric . . . good theory. But we can't afford it."

How do you explain to someone who does not instinctively understand? How do you
convey the unthinkable horror of the U.S. failing to do everything it can to
stop the killing in Cambodia? Who needs to be reminded of the million Cambodians
who died after President Nixon brought the Vietnam War fully to Cambodia? Who
can imagine not finding a few hundred million dollars to prevent the resurgence
of the dread Khmer Rouge?

Mr. Baker made all the right points. He told the lawmakers that "we have spent
trillions of dollars to win the cold war and we ought to be willing to spend
millions of dollars to secure the peace."

The Administration and a number of legislators know the peacekeeping money is a
necessity, but no politician will lead the fight for it. The obvious place to
find it is in the Pentagon budget, yet Mr. Bush rejects this. And no one wants
to step out front on anything "foreign," particularly foreign aid.

So Congress and the Administration are working out an arrangement beyond public
view. It revolves around a budgetary term known as "headroom," or money not
spent as quickly as expected.

It seems that there is some $200 million to $300 million in headroom in the
current fiscal year, mainly monies that had been earmarked for the shaky
democracies of Eastern Europe. Most of this headroom will be reallocated for
peacekeeping and buried in a legislative device known as a continuing resolution
on appropriations. Those doing the bargaining will look for several hundred
million dollars elsewhere for the coming fiscal year. They will settle for less
than they know is required to do the job and trigger the necessary funds from
other nations.

But that is the best they think they can do in the current political climate.
Even then, everything must be hidden -- in rhetoric and legislative devices. The
people must not be made too aware that their leaders are spending money to keep
the peace. For otherwise the people will punish them -- or so these leaders
assume.

Such leaders are not leaders. They are followers, of their own fear. That fear
suffused Congressional hearing rooms this week. And it spreads the mindset of
weakness and irresponsibility throughout Washington.

Americans are in pain. And our leaders must pull themselves together to address
that pain. But pain is one thing and killing another. And unless our followers
become leaders and regain some balance about foreign and domestic priorities,
thousands upon thousands will perish.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Green Teens

BYLINE: By Nancy Marx Better;  Nancy Marx Better, a New York-based freelance
writer, specializes in business issues.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 44; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2518 words


It's 11 on a cool Fall morning, and Sol Solomon, an 18-year-old native of Santa
Monica, Calif., is pacing back and forth before some 900 students in an
auditorium at Martin Luther King Jr. High School in Manhattan. Dressed in faded
jeans and a T-shirt, his long black hair flowing from a baseball cap worn
backward, Solomon is complaining about the environment's destruction. "The ocean
I'm surfin' in is like a toilet that hasn't been flushed," he laments. "The sky
has got colors in it Picasso couldn't even paint. What's going on here? Who's in
control? Some corporate dude who wants to get rich? Some corporate dude who
doesn't care about me?"

Amid cheers from his audience, Solomon reels off a dizzying list of ecological
disasters: global warming, ozone holes, acid rain, toxic waste, vanishing
wildlife. He tells how young consumers forced Star-Kist to stop buying tuna from
fishermen who ensnared dolphins, how they stopped McDonald's from using foam
containers and how they stopped Burger King from importing beef harvested from
tropical rain forests.

"I know a lot of companies that are good, and I know a lot of companies that are
bad," Solomon says. "So I'm going to speak out and boycott companies I don't
like, because I can make a difference." Intoxicated by the potent juice of
ecological righteousness, the Martin Luther King Jr. students clap wildly.

Solomon is a member of YES -- Youth for Environmental Sanity, a troupe of
eco-crusaders that travels around the country preaching an evangelical mission
with a funky mix of skits, slides and songs. Founded two years ago in Santa
Cruz, Calif., YES, which is financed by Earth-Save and other environmental
groups, has already reached more than 100,000 junior- and senior-high-school
students, inspiring many to establish their own eco-clubs. The YES performers
deliver an impassioned plea to their peers. "Who says we can't save the earth?"
asks Solomon. "If we don't save it for ourselves, nobody's going to save it for
us."

Earth Day is more than two decades old, and many adults have felt their ardor
for the environment cool off. Not teen-agers. In a recent survey of 10,000 young
people, the Bedford Kent Group, a New York consulting firm, found that more than
75 percent championed the environment as their favorite cause -- over
homelessness, AIDS, illiteracy and drug abuse. Hundreds of groups are cropping
up around the country, with punchy acronyms like HOW (Help Our World), STOP
(Students Tackle Ocean Plastics) and LIFE (Let's Improve Future Environment).
Just as the civil rights struggle and Vietnam shaped the baby-boom generation,
global catastrophes like the Valdez oil spill or local crises like overflowing
garbage dumps make their children brood darkly. They've adopted the movement
their parents abandoned, convinced it's their job to turn back the tide.

To fight the good fight, so-called green teens have turned to tactics their
parents should recall from college days. According to a survey by Alexander W.
Astin, a U.C.L.A. education professor, the percentage of college freshmen who
have taken part in protests is higher than ever -- surpassing even the late
1960's. Across America, teen-agers are nagging their parents to cast aside
disposable diapers, disposable razors, disposable lighters. Chanting their
movement's anthem -- "Reduce, Reuse, Recycle!" -- they conduct environmental
audits of their households, examining how much trash is produced, how much
energy is consumed, how much water is used. At school, they lobby teachers to
substitute ceramic mugs for foam cups. Even their little brothers and sisters
are getting in on the act, shunning felt-tip markers with ingredients like
toluene (bad) and ethanol (very bad) in favor of beeswax crayons.

It's a reversal of the age-old generational war: now children are bullying their
parents into changing their behavior. At the Bel Air Elementary School in New
Brighton, Minn., 17 sixth graders were suspended in 1990 for boycotting
disposable trays. Barred from class, the malcontents cleaned up a local park. At
the next board meeting, the administration capitulated and agreed to buy
reusable trays districtwide.

Even an innocent picnic can become a test case for the green police. Barbara A.
Lewis, a Salt Lake City schoolteacher and mother of four, remembers the look on
her 13-year-old son's face when she brought home plastic cups. "It was as if I'd
committed a crime," she says.

Before too long, it may be. In Closter, N.J., a handful of elementary-school
students founded Kids Against Pollution (KAP) four years ago to protest foam
containers. After speaking before the local Board of Education, the Mayor and
the Town Council, the students succeeded in getting the substance banned from
the entire community. Today KAP numbers more than 1,000 chapters across the
country and abroad, in junior and senior high schools as well as elementary
schools.

KAP is now lobbying Congress for an "environmental bill of rights." Their
proposed statute, sponsored by Representative Frank Pallone of New Jersey,
proclaims: "We believe we are entitled, by law, to clean air, land and water. It
does not appear that our right to a clean environment is being upheld."

VERY POLITICAL movement has its heroes, its martyrs, its myths. Looming large in
the green-teen pantheon is 17-year-old Joel A. Rubin, now a junior at Phillips
Exeter Academy. In January 1990, as a freshman at Cape Elizabeth High School in
Maine, he saw a TV film shot by Sam LaBudde, a San Francisco biologist who
worked aboard a Panamanian tuna boat to document dolphins being slaughtered in
tuna nets. "I didn't see how humans could murder them so brutally," says Rubin.
"Maybe it's because I was taking biology at the time, and I knew dolphins were
intelligent."

Rubin blames the blunder, in part, on the generation gap. "If my parents had
seen the program on TV, they would have said, 'That's too bad about the
dolphins, but that's life,' " he says. "They weren't taught how to save the
environment when they were growing up."

With the help of his biology teacher, Rubin got the home addresses of three
senior executives at H. J. Heinz, the parent company of Star-Kist, the largest
producer of canned tuna in the world. He sent letters and received no reply.
Frustrated, he enlisted 75 other biology students and deluged the Star-Kist
executives' mailboxes with postcards. Says Rubin: "We wanted to affect these
people on a personal level. We wanted them to come home every day to those
postcards."

In April 1990 -- 10 days before Earth Day's 20th anniversary -- Star-Kist
announced that it would no longer buy, process or sell tuna caught at the
expense of dolphins. At the press conference, Anthony J. F. O'Reilly, president
of Heinz, read a handful of postcards from the Cape Elizabeth students,
including one that carried a single line: "How can you sleep at night knowing
your company is doing this?"

The Star-Kist saga galvanized teen-agers everywhere. It also helped set the
movement's confrontational tone. In the fall of 1990, KAP members mailed 3,000
letters to McDonald's headquarters in Oak Brook, Ill., begging the company to
banish its foam containers. Last winter, McDonald's announced a switch to
paper-based wrappings. The company also agreed to work with the Environmental
Defense Fund on a waste-reduction program.

McDonald's was lucky; it succeeded in shoring up its image among young
consumers. Other businesses haven't been so fortunate. In March 1990, a group of
junior-high-school students in Walnut, Calif., persuaded the State Legislature
to pass a bill banning the mass release of balloons at the beginning of football
games and the like. Testifying before the state's Natural Resources Committee,
the students argued that after balloons pop, tiny pieces float to earth, choking
small animals and birds. The students won their vote -- dealing a severe blow to
the balloon business in California.

If teen-agers have been remarkably successful at forcing concessions, it's
probably because they have intransigence on their side. In April, 100
high-school students were invited to Pepsico's headquarters in Purchase, N.Y.,
for an environmental conference sponsored by the Volunteer Center of United Way.
They refused to attend if box lunches were served, objecting to the excess
packaging. It would have to be a buffet.  "These kids were extremely
strong-minded," says Louise Leeds, coordinator of the conference. "They weren't
going to give an inch."
 GREEN TEENS AREN'T the first group of young people to threaten corporate
America. But they may be the most effective. Opposition to Vietnam couldn't
easily be expressed as a point-of-purchase decision, but opposition to
environmental degradation can. "I think boycotting is something that allows you
to make a real statement," says Ryan Eliason, who helped create the YES tour as
a high-school senior in Santa Cruz, Calif. "It feels powerful. If you're saying
to a company, 'No, I don't like what you're doing and I'm not going to support
it,' you feel strong."

Thus far, only a handful of adults have capitalized on youth's enthusiasm for
the environment. The most prominent is John Javna, author of a best seller, "50
Simple Things Kids Can Do to Save the Earth." Last fall his Berkeley,
Calif.-based publishing firm, the Earthworks Group, brought out a sequel,
entitled "Kid Heroes of the Environment," a collection of stories celebrating
eco-victors.  Prompted by the success of adult eco-magazines like Garbage and E,
Marvel Comics introduced Captain Planet, a comic book based on an international
band of teen eco-heroes who battle earth polluters. There's more to come: in
1993, New Line Cinema will release "Toxic Crusaders," a feature film based on a
band of characters who are "faster than a nuclear meltdown, stronger than the
Environmental Protection Agency and able to blow away radioactive fallout in a
single breath."

"50 Simple Things" has spawned a flurry of junior self-help books, most of them
advising teen-agers to help the earth by acting nice, not by acting up. In early
1993 the New York-based Council on Economic Priorities will publish, with
Ballantine Books, a youth version of its best seller, "Shopping for a Better
World," which rates the makers of 2,000 grocery products, based on companies'
social, political and economic policies. "Our aim is to have consumers of every
age turn their shopping carts into vehicles for social change," says Alice
Tepper Marlin, president of the council.

That's no idle threat. According to the Rand Youth Poll, the 28 million
teen-agers in the United States from ages 12 to 19 have almost $60 billion to
burn.  While the number of teen-agers has declined over the last decade, their
purchasing clout has doubled.  What's more, busy parents dole out $28.3 billion
to kids for family grocery shopping. All told, the Rand group estimates the
impact of teen-agers on the United States economy at about $230 billion per
year.

Not surprisingly, green marketing is booming -- for adults and children alike.
Some 600 new "green" products were unveiled in 1990, which means such
introductions are increasing at a rate 20 times faster than the overall rate for
new packaged goods.  Many of these introductions are targeted at children.
Animal Grahams, a line of crackers made by the Small World Products Group,
depicts 11 endangered species, including pandas, elephants and rhinoceroses.
Made from organically grown flour, they're packaged in biodegradable cardboard
boxes with soybean ink. The Small World Products Group plans to donate 2 percent
of the wholesale price of the crackers to environmental causes.

Some companies, like Chevron, Exxon, Scott Paper, Weyerhaeuser, and Procter &
Gamble -- are setting up environmental-education programs to improve their image
among young consumers. Sebastian International, a hair-care manufacturer based
in Woodland Hills, Calif., recently began a project called Little Green, which
includes "eco-literacy" contests in elementary schools.

But corporations should be wary about sprucing up their reputations with a coat
of green paint. "When a company spends money trying to convince people it's a
good citizen instead of trying to actually alleviate pollution, kids nose it
out," says Peter Bahouth, former executive director of Greenpeace.

THE MOLDING OF THE green mind generally begins at school, where, since the giant
eco-disasters of the early 80's, teachers have been struggling to explain
environmental issues. Ari Raisa, who teaches science at Brooklyn Friends School,
is an example. "I told them to come up with a product they feel is strongly
connected with environmental problems, and then research how it's made and how
it's disposed of," he says.

The strategy seems to work. Tara Satahoo, a sophomore, says her family no longer
buys juice in plastic jugs or coated-paper containers; they make it from
concentrate, in glass jars. When she goes grocery shopping, she carries a
reusable plastic bag. "We talk about products at school, so I know what's okay
to buy," Satahoo says.

When these teen-agers hit college, their activism tends to intensify -- and
occasionally goes right off the rails. When a Shell Oil recruiter visited the
University of Minnesota, Eric Odell, a senior, donned a gas mask and poured
blood-colored paint from a gasoline can over a pile of fake money stacked on a
table in front of a Shell Oil recruiter. "I'm one of those people who needs
reining in at times," he says.

Today, Odell is affiliated with the Student Environmental Action Coalition, the
nation's biggest and bold est youth-run ecological organization. Founded in 1988
by students at the University of North Carolina, the coalition now has 1,500
chapters on college and high-school campuses. In October 1990 it sponsored the
largest gathering of young environmentalists in history, attracting 8,000
students.

The conference kicked off the coalition's Corporate Accountability Campaign, in
which members conduct environmental audits to change the behavior of the
business world. Students at Ohio University plan to boycott British Petroleum,
requesting reforms in its waste-management process. The coalition's members at
the University of Colorado boycotted Coors beer, demanding less pollution in the
Rocky Mountains. Students at the University of New Mexico in Albuquerque
boycotted acid- and stone-washed jeans, which are made with pumice, a
lightweight volcanic rock produced by strip mining. The main target: Levi
Strauss & Company, which holds 49 percent of the jeans market. "We want to use
public pressure to make corporate America clean up its act," says Randolph L.
Viscio, the coalition's national outreach coordinator.

The group recently called for a boycott of Mitsubishi, the giant Japanese
conglomerate, which finances logging in South American rain forests.

Today Mitsubishi, tomorrow the world. "I think S.E.A.C. represents the future of
environmentalism," says Viscio. "We're trying to broaden the definition to
include everything that surrounds us."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Joel A. Rubin, 17, persuaded Star-Kist to stop buying tuna
caught in nets that also trapped dolphins. (Jose Azel/Contact for The New York
Times); Members of Youth for Environmental Sanity strive for a model earth. (J.
B. Diederich/Contact for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Who Shot J.F.K.?

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


To the Editor:

I was truly startled by the closing paragraphs of the essay on the Kennedy
assassination books by Stephen E. Ambrose. When he advocates "a new commission,
appointed by the President," to look into the issues and "reassure people . . .
that whatever happened, there is no cover-up now," he commits one of the great
non sequiturs of history.

What would a new commission do? If it found there was no substantial conspiracy
or no conspiracy at all, it would merely pave the way for a future Oliver Stone
to do a movie on a conspiracy so vast it was able to control investigations 30
years apart. That, of course, could pave the way for another commission to pave
the way for another movie and so on, ad infinitum. The basic point is that a
double negative is involved. It is impossible to prove that there was no
conspiracy.

The Greeks discovered at least 2,500 years ago that negatives cannot be
disproved, no matter how ridiculous they may be. But in the years that have gone
by, no one seems to have taken the lesson seriously except professional
logicians and con men. The uses of the double negative have been more than
mastered by political racketeers. The following example will make my point.

The late and unlamented Joe McCarthy used to floor his critics by saying, "Can
you name one innocent person I have accused of being a Communist spy?" Of
course, no one could, since generalized innocence cannot be proved. The question
was such a stunner, however, that the critic would forget to ask whether
McCarthy had found one guilty person who was a Communist spy.

I am afraid Mr. Ambrose believes that a commission of sufficient prestige would
be reassuring. How could one appoint a commission of greater prestige and
integrity than the Warren Commission? Its members were the Chief Justice of the
United States; a conservative Southern senator (Richard Russell) who was noted
for his high intelligence; a liberal Senate Republican (John Sherman Cooper)
whose integrity could not be questioned; a Democratic leader in the House (Hale
Boggs) and a Republican leader in the House (Gerald Ford) who later became
President; a Republican lawyer (Allen Dulles), regarded as one of the nation's
better legal minds, who had been appointed Director of Central Intelligence by
President Dwight D. Eisenhower, matched by an equally prestigious Democratic
lawyer (John McCloy) who had been appointed High Commissioner to Germany by
President Harry S. Truman after World War II. Anybody who believes that a group
of men like that deliberately participated in a "cover-up" can believe a million
impossible things before breakfast. Unless Mr. Ambrose has established
communications with the Twelve Apostles, I challenge him to name someone more
prestigious.

So that I do not sound too anti-Ambrose, I wish to congratulate him on a very
important point. Operating largely out of intuition, he expresses the opinion
that Kennedy would probably have acted the same way that Lyndon Johnson did in
Southeast Asia. I can take him one step farther. Johnson acted the way he
thought that Kennedy would have acted. I have read Roger Hilsman, who said that
J.F.K. was getting set to pull out of Vietnam, and while I believe in Mr.
Hilsman's honesty, I think he was ordered to go through a "contingency"
exercise. If J.F.K. was preparing to pull out of Vietnam after the election, his
top assistants in the White House failed to inform L.B.J. of that fact. I sat in
on many meetings where it was taken for granted that the war would be
prosecuted.

One final word. When the word "conspiracy" is used, it must be realized that
people are not looking for a couple of other nuts with whom Lee Harvey Oswald
may have been associated. That is not the real issue. The real question is
whether it was a nut killing or a vast conspiracy of great forces. As Mr.
Ambrose points out, it is hard for most Americans to believe that something as
important as a Presidential assassination was done by a crackpot. I wish they
could spend a little time with the Secret Service. When I was in the White
House, the "nut" assassin was the greatest worry of the agents. He doesn't mind
being caught, and you don't know where he is coming from.

GEORGE E. REEDY
Milwaukee

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Clinton, in Black and White

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


Of all the numbers pouring forth from Super Tuesday, an exemplary one stands
out. While winning half the total Democratic vote in Florida, Bill Clinton,
white Southerner, won approximately 75 percent of the black vote.

Governor Clinton may or may not go on to win the Democratic nomination, and he
may or may not give President Bush a hard run in the fall. But either way, that
one figure gives healthy evidence, probably for the first time since Robert
Kennedy's Indiana primary campaign in 1968, that it is politically possible to
bring poor blacks and blue-collar white voters together. It is finally possible
for Americans to transcend racial division and look instead to mutual interest.

When the Democratic campaign began last fall, Bill Clinton looked like fortune's
child. As a progressive Arkansas Democrat, he knew from the start he could hope
to do well on Super Tuesday, with all its Southern contests. The problem was how
to get from here to there.

How to loosen Jesse Jackson's hold on black voters? Gov. Douglas Wilder of
Virginia took care of that by announcing his candidacy. How to resist Mario
Cuomo's national appeal? Governor Cuomo took care of that by checking out at the
last minute.

How to neutralize the early psychological effect of the Iowa caucuses? Senator
Tom Harkin took care of that; no one could compete with a native son. How to
minimize the momentum of New Hampshire? Paul Tsongas was not exactly a favorite
son but his Lowell, Mass., home is barely 10 miles from the border.

Then good fortune suddenly collapsed into what rivals called a scandal a week.
Governor Clinton was beset by accusations of marital infidelity -- and
skepticism about some of his rebuttals. Days later he came under criticism for
supposedly dodging the draft, even though he behaved no less honorably than
millions who despised the Vietnam War.

Now the tide has turned again. Last week, on the way to Super Tuesday, he won
his first primary, in Georgia. And now, on the big day, he has won and won and
won, most notably in Florida, where Mr. Tsongas, trying to mobilize momentum
against money, fought the hardest.

The triumphs pile up a formidable heap of Clinton delegates to the Democratic
Convention. And they vindicate the vision of a political analyst named Al From,
who in 1985 founded the Democratic Leadership Council as a vehicle to drive
Democrats back to middle-class voters. Governor Clinton was one of its founding
members.

This council espoused pragmatic positions on national defense, national service
and other subjects, but on none has it, or Bill Clinton, been wiser than race.
Consider what he said last fall, and repeated during the campaign: For years,
when times get tough, the Hard Right finds "the most economically insecure white
people and scare[s] the living daylights out of them. . . . We want to be part
of a nation that's coming together, not coming apart."

The Clinton campaign may suffer further jolts; the relationship he and his wife
had to a failed savings and loan operator remains to be better understood. Or
perhaps next week's Illinois primary will give him a decisive lead. But either
way, the Clinton campaign has already accomplished something worth remembering:
It has enabled Americans once more to say, without irony or bitterness, black
and white together.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 11, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment;
Super Tuesday Transforms Campaign

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1578 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 10


Southern Democratic leaders achieved today what they sought in vain to do four
years ago: They gave a mighty heave forward to the Presidential bid of a
moderate candidate from their own region.

Whether the heave will prove decisive, and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas will
capture the nomination in New York this summer, remains to be seen, of course.
But his sweep of the Southern states on Super Tuesday 1992 established him as
his party's undisputed front-runner with a big lead in convention delegates and
gave him a shot at clinching things for all intents and purposes this month.

It was a grim day for former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts. Having
failed even to come close in Florida, the only Southern state where he had a
fighting chance, he must now win next week in either Illinois or Michigan, with
their big blue-collar voting blocs, both ethnic and black.

Neither today nor in earlier primaries have those voters been much attracted to
him, and one of his advisers, Ted van Dyk, said tonight that Mr. Tsongas was
facing "a Stalingrad in the Midwest" in whose snows his candidacy could easily
perish.

The Democrats' system of proportional representation insured the former Senator,
even in defeat, of some delegates from all the major Super Tuesday states. Even
if he lost both Michigan and Illinois, he would probably get delegates there,
too, and Mr. Clinton would not be able to put a mathematical lock on the
nomination until many more states had voted.

But without at least one victory in the big Great Lakes states next week, Mr.
Tsongas would run short of money quickly and Mr. Clinton might look unstoppable.
Mr. Tsongas's next chance to win a dramatic, image-reversing victory would not
come for three weeks, in the New York primary on April 7.

The question that lurked in many minds, even as Mr. Clinton won six primaries in
the South, including the hard-fought contest in Florida, was whether the
Democrats were playing into the Republicans' hands. The Arkansas Governor, in
the view of many political professionals, would be highly vulnerable to assault
by the Republicans this fall because of questions about his extramarital
relations, his draft status during the Vietnam war and his financial dealings
while Governor.

"He looks like Jack Dempsey at the moment," said a Senator from a border state,
"but the Republicans haven't started punching yet."

Situation in the Fall

Richard Murray, a professor of political science at the University of Houston,
said that "fear about jobs trumps concerns about character in really hard
times." But with Mr. Clinton as its nominee and the economy ticking along a bit
better, he continued, the Democratic Party might find itself this fall "having
problems not with its message but with its messenger."

As if in response to such comments, Mr. Clinton said in a victory speech in
Chicago tonight, "The true measure of character in politics can never be
perfection, because if it were, no one could pass."

President Bush also won everywhere in the South, but once again, he failed to
decisively dispatch his main challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan. In the two
electoral powerhouses of the region, Texas and Florida, the President once again
lost 30 to 35 percent of the vote, as he has around the country. Only in
Tennessee was Mr. Bush able to overwhelm his rival's protest votes.

As a result, he is closer to the nomination, in a numerical sense, but no closer
to party mastery.

Voters who backed Mr. Buchanan in Texas and Florida were mostly people who think
the economy is stumbling, who are angry about Mr. Bush's breaking his pledge not
to increase taxes and who want "to shake things up." But nowhere were there
enough of them to put him close to victory, and Republican Congressional leaders
began urging Mr. Buchanan tonight to fold his campaign.

In this campaign as in most, expectations and perceptions play a large part, and
at the moment they are working against Mr. Bush and for Mr. Clinton.  For the
President to lose a third of the vote in state after state, most of it to a
television commentator who has never run for office, seems a signal of weakness
to many. But for Mr. Clinton, a much less well-known figure than Mr. Bush,
winning 50 or 60 percent of the vote constitutes quite a success.

Why Super Tuesday

Super Tuesday was created as an antidote to the tendency of early-voting states
to make inevitable the nomination of liberals like former Senator George
McGovern, in 1972, and former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, in 1984.
Convinced that they were unelectable, the Southerners grouped their primaries
early in the political year as a means of getting leverage. But in 1988 the
Southern hope, Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, was buried in the South by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, both liberals.

Mr. Clinton learned something from Mr. Gore's experience. Although he never
seemed likely to beat Senator Tom Harkin in Iowa and knew he faced a fight from
Mr. Tsongas in New Hampshire, he plunged into a number of early tests, unlike
Mr. Gore, who hung back until Super Tuesday, allowing his rivals to become far
better known.

Even when he was taking a daily battering in the newspapers and on television on
the character issue, even when it was all but impossible to get any attention
for his substantive points, Mr. Clinton gritted his teeth and carried on,
knowing that every day brought him closer to the South.

Like Mr. Dukakis, he invested money and manpower in Florida and Texas, creating
an organization that Mr. Tsongas, like Mr. Gore before him, could not match.

Mr. Tsongas lacked a skill that proved valuable to Mr. Dukakis: his ability to
appeal in Spanish to Hispanic voters. Mr. Dukakis scored heavily among such
voters four years ago, but a poll of Texas voters leaving the booths by Voter
Research and Surveys, a cooperative venture by four television networks, showed
Mr. Tsongas gaining the support of only about 20 percent of the Hispanic
electorate.

Surprisingly, the same survey showed Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton splitting the
Jewish votes in Florida, one of the main building blocks of the Dukakis victory
here in 1988. Mr. Clinton had sought to convince Jewish retirees, of whom tens
of thousands are clustered in South Florida, that the former Senator was
lukewarm in his support of Israel and Social Security.

In some ways, Florida was a demographically ideal state for Mr. Tsongas,
certainly far more suited to him than Illinois or Michigan, with their urban
wards filled with Polish-, Ukrainian- and Italian-Americans.

According to the exit poll, more than 60 percent of the participants in the
Democratic primary in Florida had some college education. Those were the kinds
of voters among whom the former Senator had done best in previous elections. He
easily carried those with undergradute and graduate degrees, but Mr. Clinton
trounced him among the large group with only some college.

In the end, Mr. Clinton appeared to have won the bitter debate over whose
economic plan would do more for the country; in both Texas and Florida, the
Governor got a majority of the votes of those who said they thought the economy
was in poor shape.

About 20 percent of the voters in the Democratic primaries said that Mr.
Clinton's draft experiences made them think less of him, and it cost him some
support. Even so, he managed to capitalize on an electoral schedule that was
created to help put someone like himself in the White House.

Mr. Clinton's sweeping triumph in the day's eight primaries, broken only by Mr.
Tsongas's victories in Massachusetts and Rhode Island, means trouble not only
for Mr. Tsongas but also for the third Democratic contender, former Gov. Edmund
G. Brown Jr. of California. He, too, needs to make a better showing next Tuesday
than he did today to avoid seeming irrelevant.

A handful of influential figures will now come into focus as power brokers in
the Democratic race.

One is Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago, a less commanding presence than his
father, but still, even without a machine, a good man to have on one's side.
Another will be Mayor Coleman Young of Detroit, one of the nation's leading
black politicians. And then there are the leaders of the trade unions who had
been backing Mr. Harkin before he pulled out and who are now hard-pressed to
find a candidate.

Mr. Tsongas has offended organized labor by advocating the right of companies to
hire permanent replacement workers for striking employees. And Mr. Clinton, who
comes from a right-to-work state, has never been popular with the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
at home, which accuses him of promoting low-paying jobs.

Although Mr. Brown causes labor few ideological problems, he is a long way
stylistically from the kind of lunch-bucket voter the unions represent.

Owen Bieber, the head of the United Auto Workers, rattled by news of plant
closings at General Motors and by the slump at all of the Big Three
manufacturers, has kept his counsel so far. But the 15 national unions that had
backed Mr. Harkin are planning to meet Thursday to see if they can agree on a
new candidate.

Both Jay Mazur, the president of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union,
and William Bywater, president of the electrical workers, have suggested that
labor would eventually see Mr. Clinton as the lesser of two evils. But if their
support is lukewarm, it may produce few votes for him.

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edmund G. Brown Jr. signing a campaign poster for a supporter
yesterday at a rally at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. (Peter Yates
for The New York Times)

Table: "Voter Turnout: Seven Early States" -- Percentage of all registered
voters who cast ballots in any party's Presidential primary, and the delegates
at stake and votes cast in each state. In Maryland and South Dakota, only voters
registered in a party may vote in that party's primary.

Date                              State        Turnout     Votes cast
Feb. 23                   New Hampshire
                    Delegates: 18D, 23R          66.9%        341,987
Feb. 25                    South Dakota
                                15D,19R          25.9%        104,458
March 3                        Colorado
                                47D,37R          25.5%        435,241
                                Georgia
                                76D,52R          35.2%        905,957
                               Maryland
                                67D,42R          41.3%        798,162
                                   Utah
                      23D, no R primary             4%         31,604
March 7                  South Carolina
                                43D,36R          20.3%        262,321

                       TOTAL - 7 STATES          31.3%      2,879,730


D = Democratic
R = Republican.

(Source: Associated Press) (pg. A19)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 12, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democratic Voters;
Polling Shows Top Candidates Are Vulnerable

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, March 11


Both Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas have significant weaknesses among
Democratic voters even in the states where they won primaries on Tuesday,
according to surveys of voters leaving the polls.

About 20 percent of the voters surveyed, not only in the South but also in
Massachusetts and Rhode Island, said they planned to vote for George Bush in the
general election.

Moreover, a third of the Democratic voters in the two New England states and a
fifth in the five Southern states that held primaries on Super Tuesday said they
thought less favorably of Mr. Clinton, the Governor of Arkansas, because he
managed to avoid being drafted in the Vietnam War. Mr. Tsongas picked up a
disproportionate share of the voters who said they felt that way, indicating the
issue might be a fertile one for Republicans should Mr. Clinton win the
Democratic nomination.

Cancer Worries Cited

As for Mr. Tsongas, a significant number of Democrats said they were worried
that his battle with cancer might make him unable to serve effectively. Mr.
Tsongas, a United States Senator from Massachusetts from 1979 to 1985, retired
at the end of his term because he had lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system.
He and his doctor now say he has been cured.

About an eighth of the Democratic voters in Massachusetts and a tenth in Rhode
Island said they were concerned about the cancer, as did about one-fifth in the
South. Fewer than 40 percent of such voters in New England, and only a small
fraction of such voters in the South, voted for Mr. Tsongas.

There is often a big difference between what voters say in the spring and what
they do in November. So voting patterns in the primaries are often not as
relevant to the probable outcome of the general election as they might appear.
About a third of the voters in Tuesday's Democratic primaries in the South and
about a quarter of those in Massachusetts and Rhode Island said they voted for
Mr. Bush over Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic nominee, in 1988.

One surprise in the voting patterns was the strength of Edmund G. Brown Jr.
among voters who decided on whom to vote for in the last few days before the
election. For example, in Massachusetts, Mr. Brown won only 15 percent of the
overall Democratic vote, but he won 18 percent of those who decided how they
would vote on Election Day and 30 percent of those who decided in the last three
days.

Threat to Front-Runners

Mr. Brown seems to have drained strength away from the front-runners -- Mr.
Tsongas in New England and Mr. Clinton in the South. The capacity of the former
California Governor to win over those who decide at the eleventh hour could
prove important in Illinois and Michigan next week. Preliminary polls in those
states last weekend showed about a third of the voters still undecided.

As has been the case throughout the primary season, Mr. Tsongas ran strongly
among highly educated, affluent white voters, but was generally unable to cut
into Mr. Clinton's support among all other Democrats.

Mr. Clinton won three-quarters of the black vote in Florida and about 80 percent
elsewhere in the South. Outside of New England, he ran especially well among
voters who said their own financial situation was worse than it was four years
ago.

In Florida, the closest of Tuesday's contests, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas more
or less split the Jewish and white Roman Catholic vote, but Mr. Clinton won
solidly among white Protestants.

Mr. Tsongas did relatively poorly among blue-collar voters even in
Massachusetts. He won only 52 percent of their vote, the exit polls showed, as
against 67 percent of the overall vote.

The economy was the overriding issue in voters' minds. Given a list of issues,
48 percent of the Democratic voters in the South and more than half in New
England said the economy was among the one or two issues that mattered most to
them. Medical care, the next most important issue, was mentioned by about 3
voters in 10.


LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Democratic Voters: How Leading Democrats Fared"

                             Union          White
                        households      Catholics         Blacks

Florida
Clinton                        58%            41%            74%
Tsongas                        33             45             14
Brown                           8             13             10

Louisiana
Clinton                         77             67            86
Tsongas                          6             18             3
Brown                          11              7              7

Massachusetts
Clinton                         13             12            --*
Tsongas                         57             66            --
Brown                          20             14             --

Mississippi
Clinton                         78             --            78
Tsongas                          8             --             3
Brown                           5             --             10

Oklahoma*
Clinton                         71             70            --
Tsongas
Not on ballot
Brown                          19             21             --

Rhode Island
Clinton                         19             24            --
Tsongas                         57             54            --
Brown                          19             18             --

Tennessee
Clinton                         78             --            82
Tsongas                         12             --            13
Brown                           6             --              4

Texas
Clinton                         71             59            86
Tsongas                         13             22             6
Brown                           7             11              4
* Dash means that the number of respondents in this state who said they belong
to this category was too few for reliable analysis.

(Based on 8 polls with voters leaving polling places on Tuesday conducted by
Voter Research and Surveys.)

Table: "Democratic Voters: Economy and Character"


                         Say family's financial
                             situation is worse
...and they voted for
                            than four years ago   Clinton   Tsongas    Brown

Florida                                     48%       27%       15%       6%
Louisiana                                   48        37         5       35
Massachusetts                               53         6        35        4
Mississippi                                 45        34         4        5
Oklahoma                                    46        35       --*        7
Rhode Island                                52        11        27       12
Tennessee                                   43        31         6        3
Texas                                       49        36         8        3

                            Say Clinton's draft
                            behavior made their
                         opinion less favorable

Florida                                     22                  17
Louisiana                                   15                   8
Massachusetts                               34                  33
Mississippi                                 16                   9
Oklahoma                                    25                  13
Rhode Island                                34                  32
Tennessee                                   18                  10
Texas                                       18                  11

(Based on 8 polls with voters leaving polling places on Tuesday conducted by
Voter Research and Surveys.)

How the Poll Was Conducted

The Election Day exit polls were based on questionnaires completed by voters
Tuesday as they left voting stations throughout eight states: Florida,
Louisiana, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, Tennessee and
Texas.

The polls were conducted by Voter Research and Surveys, an organization created
in 1990 by ABC News, CBS News, CNN, and NBC News.

In Florida, results are based on 1,794 Democratic primary voters and 1,509
Republican primary voters leaving 60 polling places throughout the state; in
Louisiana, 1,086 Democratic voters and 811 Republican voters in 40 polling
places; in Massachusetts, 1,359 Democratic voters and 963 Republican voters in
40 polling places; in Mississippi, 1,074 Democratic voters and 783 Republican
voters leaving 30 polling places; in Oklahoma, 1,206 Democratic voters and 650
Republican voters in 25 polling places; in Rhode Island, 1,020 Democratic voters
and 376 Republican voters in 19 polling places; in Tennessee, 1,021 Democratic
voters and 895 Republican voters in 30 polling places. And in Texas, results are
based on 1,847 Democratic primary voters leaving 60 polling places and 1,504
Republican primary voters leaving 47 polling places throughout the state.

In the Democratic primaries, the margin of sampling error was plus or minus
three to four percentage points.

In the Republican primaries, the margin of sampling error was plus or minus
three to five percentage points except in Rhode Island, where it was seven
percentage points.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by
only a few percentage points in either direction from what would have been
obtained by seeking to interview all primary election voters who turned out. In
addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey
of voter opinion on Election Day may introduce other sources of error into the
poll.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 6; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 501 words



Life After 'Bugsy'

Barry Levinson says he is feeling good about those 10 Oscar nominations,
including the ones for best picture and best director, for "Bugsy."

"We're really excited about it," he said of the outpouring of accolades the
nominations represent.

But Mr. Levinson, who co-produced and directed the film about the gangster Bugsy
Siegel, isn't resting on his laurels.

Instead, he is finally making the film he set out to make even before he
directed the ones that established his reputation: "Diner," "The Natural," "Good
Morning, Vietnam," "Tin Men" and "Rain Main."

The new movie is "Toys," and production of the 20th Century Fox film is yet
another illustration of the old saying "if at first you don't succeed, try, try
again."

Mr. Levinson outlined the film's story this way: "A toy company is taken over by
a retired military general, and he begins to see the potential of the
miniaturization of toys as military weaponry."

Robin Williams plays the son of a toy manufacturer who dies. Michael Gambon
plays the general. Joan Cusack plays Mr. Williams's sister, and Robin Wright
plays an employee with whom Mr. Williams becomes romantically involved.

Mr. Levinson said he wrote the screenplay in 1979 and 1980, so long ago that he
no longer remembers its genesis. "It would have been the first movie I
directed," he said. The start of filming was seven weeks away, he said, when a
new administration took over at 20th Century Fox and put the project in limbo.

Mr. Levinson proceeded to write "Diner," but even after the success of that 1982
film, no one wanted to let him make "Toys." "It was always something I wanted to
do," Mr. Levinson said, but "things would keep coming up." He said he wanted to
make "Toys" after "The Natural" in 1984 and after "Tin Men" in 1987. The
studio's answer -- no -- didn't change until after "Good Morning, Vietnam," in
1987.

"We were looking into the possibility of doing it," he said, "and then I
happened to read the 'Rain Man' script and did 'Rain Man.' I actually was going
to do 'Toys' before 'Bugsy,' but then we needed a lot of time to set up a lot of
aspects of the movie" -- he was referring to the making of computerized toys --
"so I thought I would do 'Bugsy' in front of it, while we were in
preproduction."

"Toys," appropriately, is planned as a Christmas release.

An Australian Opener

"Proof," a first feature by Jocelyn Moorhouse, an Australian director, is to
open the 21st year of the New Directors/New Films series on March 20 at the
Museum of Modern Art.

Before the series, at the Roy and Niuta Titus Theaters, at 11 West 53d Street in
Manhattan, ends on April 5, it is to present 22 programs of feature-length and
short films from 14 countries, including the United States, Japan, Cuba, France,
Greece, Iceland and Russia.

Schedules, including descriptions of the films, are available from the Film
Society of Lincoln Center, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10023.
Information: (212) 875-5610.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Courting Labor;
Tsongas Tells Auto Workers Of 'Problem With Democrats'

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, March 12


Paul E. Tsongas ventured into labor territory today wearing an automobile union
windbreaker, but his message at an auto parts plant here was one that workers
are not used to hearing.

Only during questioning from workers did the former Massachusetts Senator
acknowledge his opposition to legislation championed by labor that would bar
employers from permanently replacing striking workers. He also told them he
supports the free trade agreement with Mexico that most unions oppose.

And Mr. Tsongas sounded like a Republican when he called for more venture
capital investment and took issue with traditional Democratic economic policies.

"The problem with Democrats," he said, "is that they give all these things away.
It doesn't create jobs. The Democratic Party's got to get its act together and
understand how you can bring the economy back."

'Problem Is Not Past'

Mr. Tsongas recalled his high ratings with labor during his Congressional career
but said relations soured over his opposition to the striker replacement bill,
which is backed by Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

"The problem is not the past," Mr. Tsongas said at a news conference at the
Hermes Automotive Manufacturing Corporation, which has laid off more than half
its workers in recent years. "The problem is the issue of striker replacement."

Insisting that arbitration was a better remedy, he said: "If there's a strike,
if there's a lockout, the community gets killed. People lose their jobs."

Perhaps sensing that he does not go over well with union audiences, Mr. Tsongas
abandoned talk of striker replacement and other topics critical to organized
labor at a gathering later today in union hall at Rockford, Ill. Not once did he
even mention the word labor. His only effort to identify with the audience on
labor was in recounting the decline of his hometown, the "great textile city" of
Lowell, Mass.

"Lowell's decline is what I grew up with," Mr. Tsongas said. "It's not a memo."

But his staff distributed flyers saying that Mr. Clinton "had one of the worst
records on labor issues of any Governor," and noting that Arkansas is a
"right-to-work state." The flyers offer a taste of television commercials that
the Tsongas campaign plans to begin broadcasting on Friday in Michigan and
Illinois that go after Mr. Clinton's labor record.

Mr. Tsongas has not been timid about criticizing Mr. Clinton on the issue. In
conversations this week, he said, union officials told him they were nervous
about whether Mr. Clinton could win a general election after accusations of an
extramarital affair and efforts to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

Given his economic philosophy, it was far from clear that Mr. Tsongas could win
labor support by finding fault with his chief rival.

"He's got some courage in walking into Michigan and auto worker territory and
talking like he's talking, since his economic message is not that much different
from George Bush's," said Donald R. Sweitzer, a senior campaign adviser to
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa before he withdrew from the race this week. "But the
bottom line is he'll be rejected Tuesday by the people he's talking to today.
Labor folk have a problem with both of these guys but less of a problem with
Bill Clinton."

While Mr. Tsongas was greeted politely at the Hermes plant, at least one worker
was not impressed with him or Mr. Clinton. "I favor Mr. Brown," Anthony
Zentarski, who works in the paint shop, said of former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.
of California. "He just seems more in touch with the common worker."

At both labor events today, listeners said they wanted to hear what Mr. Tsongas
had to say but were reluctant to commit their vote to him.

Greg Reiter, a firefighter in Rockford, noted that Mr. Tsongas did not say much
about labor. "I like his ideas on rebuilding the country," said Mr. Reiter. "But
there are questions he hasn't answered."

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul E. Tsongas campaigning at the Hermes Automotive
Manufacturing Corporation in Detroit. He flexed his biceps for Joe Palucki, a
worker. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE STREET

SECTION: Section 13; Page 36; Column 1; Spring Times Supplement

LENGTH: 2090 words


Here is a sampling of fairs, festivals and parades that are planned in New York
City in the spring. Many dates and times are tentative, since these events
require permits from the Mayor's Office. Information was gathered from festival
sponsors as well as the Community Assistance Unit at the Mayor's Office. Major
holiday parades are listed on page 26.

Today

WEST SIDE ANTIQUARIAN BOOK FAIR, Congregation Rodeph Sholom, 7 West 83d Street,
Manhattan. Sponsored by Congregation Rodeph Sholom. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission:
$5. Information: (212) 254-4710.

SPRING CRAFTS MARKET, Ferris Booth Hall at Columbia University, 115th Street and
Broadway, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Also March 20, 2 to 8 P.M., and March 21
and 22, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the American Arts and Crafts Alliance.
Admission: $5, which allows entry for all days ($4 for the elderly, free for
children). Information: (212) 866-2239.

March 22

IRISH-AMERICAN PARADE, Seventh Avenue and Union Street to Prospect Park West and
15th Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn. 1 P.M.

March 29

GREEK INDEPENDENCE DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue, from 62d to 79th Street, Manhattan.
1 P.M.

April 4

EAST SIDE NEIGHBORS FAIR, Fourth Avenue, between Fifth Street and Astor Place,
Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by the East Side Visiting Neighbors.

STATEN ISLAND SIDEWALK FAIR, Bay Street, between Ferry and Hanna Streets and
Richmond Terrace and Central Avenue between Hyatt and Bay Streets, St. George. 8
A.M. to dusk. Through April 25. Sponsored by the Staten Island Partnership.

April 5

CARING COMMUNITY STREET FAIR, Washington Square North, between University Place
and Macdougal Street, between West Eighth Street and Washington Square North,
Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by Caring Community.

HOLY NAME SOCIETY PROCESSION, Fifth Avenue, from 47th to 55th Street and Avenue
of the Americas, from 47th to 53d Street, Manhattan. 7 A.M.

April 11

WEST SIDE SPRING FESTIVAL, Broadway, from 96th to 106th Streets, Manhattan. 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the Bloomingdale House of Music.

April 18

VILLAGE VISITING NEIGHBORS FAIR, Washington Square East, between Washington
Square North and South and La Guardia Place, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.

ANNUAL CHILDREN'S PARADE, Amsterdam Avenue from 145th to 173d Street, upper
Manhattan. Noon. Sponsored by the F. Alfonso Juvenile Baseball League.

April 19

STUYVESANT PARK FESTIVAL, Second Avenue, from 14th to 23d Street, Manhattan. 10
A.M. to 8 P.M.

April 25

DELTA PHI FRATERNITY STREET FAIR, Washington Place between Broadway and
Washington Square East, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.

EAST SIDE ANTIQUARIAN BOOK FAIR, Hunter College Auditorium, Lexington Avenue at
68th Street, Manhattan. More than 70 exhibitors. 3 to 10 P.M. Also April 26, 11
A.M. to 5 P.M. Admission: $10, which is good for both days; $4 for just April
26. Information: (212) 684-5970.

SIKH PARADE, Broadway, between 38th Street and Union Square Park. 1 P.M.

April 26

LOWER SECOND AVENUE STREET FAIR, from Fourth to 14th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M.
to 6 P.M.

GREENWICH VILLAGE SPRING FESTIVAL, La Guardia Place from West Fourth to Houston
Street, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

May 1

NEW YORK ANTIQUARIAN BOOK FAIR, Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th
Street, Manhattan. 6 to 10 P.M. Also, May 2, noon to 2 P.M., and May 3, 11 A.M.
to 4 P.M. Admission: $15 for May 1 preview (ticket good for all three days); $8
each for May 2 and 3. Information: (212) 757-9395.

May 2

GREENWICH AVENUE FESTIVAL, from Seventh to Eighth Avenue, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to
6 P.M.

UPPER BROADWAY SPRING FESTIVAL, Broadway from 110th to 117th Street, Manhattan.
11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

STATEN ISLAND SATURDAY SIDEWALK FAIR, Bay Street, between Ferry and Hannah
Street; Richmond Terrace, between Ferry and Wall Street; and Central Avenue,
between Hyatt and Bay Streets. 8 A.M. to dusk. Through May 30.

May 3

SALUTE TO ISRAEL PARADE, Fifth Avenue, from 57th to 79th Street, Manhattan.
Noon.

PARK AVENUE FESTIVAL, between 23d and 32d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

AVENUE M STREET FAIR, between Ocean Parkway and McDonald Avenue, Midwood,
Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.

MILL-BERGEN AVENUE N FAIR, between Utica and Flatbush Avenues, Mill Basin-Bergen
section, Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.

May 9

WELCOME HOME CELEBRATION OF VIETNAM VETERANS, Water Street, from Fulton to Wall
Street, lower Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the Vietnam Veterans of
America.

BACA SPRING ANNUAL CRAFTS SHOW, Columbia Heights, between Montague and Clark
Streets, Brooklyn Heights. 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. Also May 10, same hours. Sponsored
by the Brooklyn Arts Council.

FRATERNITY PHI GAMMA DELTA STREET FAIR, Washington Place, between Washington
Square East and Broadway, Manhattan. 9 A.M. to 8 P.M.

May 10

CUBAN INDEPENDENCE PARADE, Madison Avenue, between 37th and 56th Streets,
Manhattan. Noon.

May 13

ST. DEMETRIOS FESTIVAL, 30th Drive, between 30th and 31st Streets, Astoria,
Queens. 5 to 11 P.M. Also May 14 to 17, same times.

ST. GEORGE UKRAINIAN FEAST, East Seventh Street, between Second and Third
Avenues, Manhattan. 8 A.M. to 11:30 P.M. Also May 14 to 18 same times.

May 14 to 25

ST. ANTHONY FEAST, Mott Street, between Grand and Canal Streets, Manhattan.
11:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.

May 15

SACRED HEART FEAST, 84th Street, between 77th and 78th Avenues, Glendale,
Queens. 6:30 to 11:30 P.M. Also May 16 and 17 same times.

"ROOTS IN PRINT" BOOK FAIR, Small Press Center, 20 West 44th Street, Manhattan.
A multi-cultural exhibition of more than 600 books from 300 publishers. May 15
to June 25. Free. Hours: Monday to Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Friday, 9 A.M. to
5 P.M.

May 16

BEDFORD BARROW COMMERCE FAIR, Bedford, Barrow and Commerce Streets, between
Seventh Avenue and Hudson Streets, Manhattan. Noon to 10 P.M.

CHRISTOPHER STREET CENTRAL FAIR, Christopher Street, between Seventh Avenue
South and Hudson Street, Manhattan. 8 A.M. to 11 P.M.

CHILDREN'S FAIR, Bleecker Street, between Avenue of the Americas and Macdougal
Street, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Sponsored by the Little Red School House.

GATEWAY COMMUNITY STREET FAIR, Greenpoint Avenue, between 42d and 48th Streets,
Sunnyside, Queens. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

NINTH AVENUE FOOD FESTIVAL, between 37th and 57th Streets, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to
7 P.M. Also May 17 same times.

PETER COOPER VILLAGE-STUYVESANT TOWN FLEA MARKET, sidewalks surrounding Peter
Cooper Village and Stuyvesant Town, from 14th to 23d Streets on First Avenue and
outdoor spaces within the apartment complexes, Manhattan. 9 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Also May 17, same times.

May 17

AMSTERDAM AVENUE FESTIVAL, between 77th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M to 6
P.M.

ARGENTINE INDEPENDENCE DAY PARADE, 37th Avenue, between 69th and 94th Street,
Jackson Heights, Queens. 11 A.M.

FABULOUS FIFTH AVENUE STREET FAIR, Fifth Avenue, between Flatbush Avenue and
Ninth Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn. 9 A.M. to 7 P.M.

MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. PARADE, Fifth Avenue, between 44th and 86th Streets,
Manhattan. 1 P.M.

NORWEGIAN-AMERICAN PARADE, Fifth Avenue, between 67th and 89th Streets, Bay
Ridge, Brooklyn. 1:30 P.M.

GRAMERCY STUYVESANT FESTIVAL, Irving Place from 14th Street to Gramercy Park,
Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

May 21

FEAST OF ST. JOSEPH, St. Mary's Avenue, between Tompkins Avenue and Tilson
Place, Rosebank, S.I. 6 to 11:30 P.M. Also May 22 to 24 same times.

May 23

TURKISH PARADE, Madison Avenue, between 47th and 55th Streets to Dag
Hammarskjold Plaza at the United Nations, Manhattan. 2 P.M.

WASHINGTON SQUARE OUTDOOR ART EXHIBITION, streets surrounding Washington Square
Park, Manhattan. Noon to sundown. Also May 24, 25, 30 and 31, same times.

LIVABLE WEST SIDE FESTIVAL, Broadway, from 72d to 86th Streets, Manhattan. 11
A.M. to 6 P.M.

May 24

COJO STREET FAIR, Bay Parkway, between 78th and 84th Streets, Bay Ridge,
Brooklyn. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.

FIFTH AVENUE MERCHANT'S ASSOCIATION, between 44th and 59th Streets, Sunset Park,
Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.

LOISAIDA STREET FAIR, Avenue C, between Third and 10th Streets, Lower East Side.
8 A.M. to 11 P.M.

May 25

SECOND AVENUE FAIR, between 42d and 53d Streets, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.

May 30

PLANTATHON AND CRAFTS FAIR, Broadway, from 72d to 86th Street, Manhattan. 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the Federation of West Side Block Associations.

UNITED AIDS RELIEF STREET FAIR, Second Avenue, between Fifth and 14th Streets,
Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the United AIDS Relief Effort.

May 31

LOWER SECOND AVENUE SUMMER FESTIVAL, Second Avenue, between Fifth and 14th
Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

LEXINGTON AVENUE FESTIVAL, from 34th to 42d Street, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

NEW YORK STATE WINE FESTIVAL, Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage. Noon to 9 P.M.
Sponsnored by the New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets; the New
York Wine and Grape Foundation; the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn and the
Council on the Environment of New York City. Free. Information: (718) 855-7882.

MIDWOOD MARDI GRAS, Avenue M, between Coney Island and Ocean Avenues, Midwood,
Brooklyn. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.

BAYSIDE CHAMBER STREET FAIR, Bell Boulevard, between 35th Avenue and Northern
Boulevard, Bayside, Queens. 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.

June 4

FEAST OF ST. ANTHONY, East 187th Street, between Cambreleng and Arthur Avenues,
Belmont, the Bronx. 8 to 11 P.M. Through June 14.

ST. ANTHONY OF PADUA FEAST, Sullivan Street, between Houston and Spring Streets,
SoHo. Noon to 11:30 P.M. Through June 14.

June 5

STATEN ISLAND SATURDAY SIDEWALK FAIR, Bay Street, between Ferry and Hannah
Streets; Richmond Terrace, between Ferry and Wall Streets; Central Avenue,
between Hyatt and Bay Streets, St. George. 8 A.M. to dusk. Through June 26.

June 6

MURRAY HILL STREET FAIR, East 35th Street, between Madison and Lexington
Avenues, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

UPPER COLUMBUS AVENUE STREET FAIR, between 86th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 11
A.M. to 6 P.M.

VILLAGE INDEPENDENT DEMOCRATS STREET FAIR, West Fourth Street, between Seventh
Avenue South and West 11th Street, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.

FENCE ART SHOW, Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Crown Heights.
A display of botanical drawings, paintings and photographs on the fence
overlooking the Cranford Rose Garden and the Cherry Esplanade. 10 to 6 P.M. Also
June 7 same times. Free with admission to the garden: $2 ($1 for students,
children and the elderly).

June 7

BRONX UNITY DAY PARADE, Grand Concourse, between East Tremont Avenue and 153d
Street, Tremont, the Bronx. Noon.

LATIN AMERICAN STREET FAIR, Fourth Avenue, between 43d and 50th Streets, Sunset
Park, Brooklyn. 1 to 8 P.M.

LATIN AMERICAN FOURTH AVENUE PARADE, Fourth Avenue, between 60th and 43d
Streets, Sunset Park, Brooklyn. Noon.

LOWER EAST SIDE JEWISH FESTIVAL, East Broadway, between Essex and Clinton
Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

PARK AVENUE SOUTH STREET FAIR, Park Avenue South, between 14th and 23d Streets,
Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.

PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY PARADE, Madison Avenue, between 38th and 46th
Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M.

PHILIPPINE INDEPENDENCE DAY STREET FAIR, 45th Street, between Madison Avenue and
Avenue of the Americas, Manhattan. 8 A.M. to 8 P.M.

SECOND AVENUE STREET FAIR, between 68th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 8 A.M. to 7
P.M.

SMITH STREET FAIR, from Atlantic Avenue to Carroll Street, Carroll Gardens,
Brooklyn. 8 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.

JUNE BALLOOOON FESTIVAL, Brooklyn Children's Museum, 145 Brooklyn Avenue,
Prospect Heights. Workshops, games, entertainment and food. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.

June 12 to 14

DOMINICAN FESTIVAL, East 162d Street, between Jerome and River Avenues, Melrose,
the Bronx. 9 A.M. to 11 P.M.

June 13

BROADWAY SUMMER FESTIVAL, between 86th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6
P.M.

VILLAGE REFORM DEMOCRATS FAIR, Washington Place, between Broadway and Washington
Square, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.

EL ABRAZO DEL BARRIO STREET FAIR, 116th Street, between Park and First Avenues,
Manhattan. 8 A.M. to 9 P.M.

June 14

CHELSEA EIGHTH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue, between 15th and 18th Streets,
Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by the Chelsea Visiting Neighbors.

NEW YORK PUERTO RICAN DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue, between 44th and 86th Streets,
Manhattan. 11 A.M.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 975 words



International     A3-11

DETAILS MURKY, FOCUS CLEARER

The details of the South Africa of tomorrow are murky and distant, but power is
expected to gain new impetus from the overwhelming vote this week in favor of
continuing to dismantle apartheid.  A1

IRAQ INVESTIGATION THWARTED

In 1989 and 1990, while Washington was wooing Iraq to balance the scales with
Iran, the Administration repeatedly threw obstacles in the way of investigators
examining Iraq's role in a multibillion-dollar bank fraud scheme.  A1

TAKING RISKS WITH IRAQ

The risks of military action to prevent Iraq from backing its cease-fire
responsibilities are many, but this time, the U.S. says, Security Council
authority is implicit.  A8

SECURITY COUNCIL GIVES A PUSH

The Security Council urged Iraq to reach rapid agreement with the United Nations
on arrangements for selling oil to pay for humanitarian supplies and for
compensation to Kuwait.  A8

PUTTING ASUNDER A ROYAL PAIRING

Whether it's perceived as a romantic tragedy, a threat to a dynasty or merely
the nadir of royal public-relations, the impending separation of the Duke and
Duchess of York is juicier than the election news, at least in Britain.  A11

AMERICANS URGED TO LEAVE LIBYA

The Government urged all American citizens in Libya to leave immediately because
an embargo may be imposed by the United Nations and air links severed.  A10

FAILURE IN HAITI

Efforts to undo the military coup that ousted Haiti's elected President have all
but collapsed after Parliament failed to ratify a settlement, diplomats said.
A3

MARCH OF PROTEST IN ARGENTINA

An estimated 70,000 people, including Argentina's President, marched 10 blocks
today to protest the bombing on Tuesday of the Israeli Embassy in Buenos Aires.
A3

TRADING IN INVECTIVE IN FRANCE

Bernard Tapie and Jean-Marie Le Pen are slinging invective rather than
discussing the issues as French regional elections near.  A11

VANCE HEADED TO AZERBAIJAN

A cease-fire accord had been reached in the disputed Caucasus enclave of
Nagorno-Karabakh, and Cyrus R. Vance will travel there as a special U.N. envoy.
A6

Kabul Journal: After a lean winter, survival supersedes peace.  A4

National     A12-20, A34, B6

TSONGAS ABANDONS CAMPAIGN

Former Senator Tsongas withdrew from the race for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, a decision that many in his party said all but assured the
nomination of Governor Clinton.  A1

PREPARING FOR CLINTON VS. BUSH

News analysis: The withdrawal of Mr. Tsongas set the stage for a fight between a
self-described agent of "fundamental change" and a longtime champion of the
status quo, a fight between a World War II generation and a one that grew up
during the Vietnam War.  A1

A TORTUOUS PATH STRAIGHTENS

Two weeks ago Clinton aides believed the campaign was in desperate straits, but
now they see a nearly clear path to the nomination.  A20

What led to the day of reckoning for Tsongas.  A14

Brown kept his critical edge sharp and pointed.  A16

MORE UNTIDINESS AT THE HOUSE

The House leadership suffered another embarrassment when the House postmaster
resigned amid charges of embezzlement at the lawmakers' post office.  A17

Gingrich and Michel divided further in their triumph.  A17

THE QUIET AMMUNITION INDUSTRY

The nation's ammunition industry has been humming along in quiet obscurity, all
but ignored by opponents and supporters of gun control.  A20

BUSINESS STRATEGY FALTERS

Employee leasing, an innovative management technique that is supposed to save
small businesses money and provide low-cost health benefits to workers, is
backfiring, costing employers, workers and insurers tens of millions of dollars.
A1

DOW EXPLAINS IMPLANT DECISION

The chief executive of Dow Corning Corporation said the company was ending its
trade in silicone gel breast implants for purely business reasons, not because
it was "hounded out of business" by doubts about the implant's safety.  A12

INCREASE IN ANTI-GAY VIOLENCE

Incidents of violence against homosexuals rose 31 percent last year, according
to a survey by a homosexual rights group.  A12

A TOOTHLESS WINTER

Spring arrived before many Americans even reached for their long underwear. It
was the warmest in the 97 years that the National Weather Service has kept
records.  A1

FREE TO SPEAK FOR MONEY

A Federal district judge struck down a law that had prevented thousands of low-
and mid-level Federal workers from earning outside income for writings and
speeches unrelated to their work.  A17

Flawed research at the Environmental Protection Agency.  A13

Law Page   B16
There's Yale Law School, and then there are the others

At the Bar

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

Business     Digest, D1

Weekend   C1-32
The sweet smell of nature.  C1
Films about offbeat relationships.  C1
Theater: "The Master Builder." C3
Film: "Shadows and Fog." C6
"Basic Instinct." C8
"Noises Off." C10

Sports   B7-14
Basketball: Seton Hall survives scare.  B7
Georgetown advances.  B7
Knicks beat Bucks.  B10
Horse Racing: Arazi's haute training.  B7
Baseball: Magadan keeps trying.  B11

Obituaries   A21
Bernard Lasker, chairman of big board in '70 crisis
Paul Ylvisaker, educator and urban planner

Editorials/Op-Ed   A32-33
Editorials A32
If Israel sold Patriot secrets.
 Tsongas departs, gracefully.
Now you see it . . .
Brent Staples: Chicago.

Letters A32
A. M. Rosenthal: Evans-Novak & Popeye.  A33
Leslie H. Gelb: The anti-Israeli leaks.  A33
Susan Estrich: Let the mud fly.  A33
From South Africa: White voices, black voices.  A33
Marjorie Garber: Joe Camel, an X-rated smoke.  A33

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The ammunition industry hums along in quiet obscurity. (Ed
Sedej) A20

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 29; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 221 words



 Dennis Balk
 American Fine Arts
 40 Wooster Street
 SoHo
 Through tomorrow

Dennis Balk's first solo show introduces an artist for whom history is paramount
but also unfixed, a series of facts, concepts and personalities to be juxtaposed
and woven together at will.

The artist's drawing surface of choice consists of cloth table napkins, which
are pinned to the wall in uneven grids or laid out on folding tables. On these
he draws lengthy diagrams, charts and notes, like a dinner guest whose ideas
won't keep.

Over the course of five white napkins, "Ho Chi Minh/Cave at Pac Po" jumps back
and forth between the North Vietnamese leader's life and Abraham Lincoln's,
making obtuse connections about fathers of countries. "Sex and Class," a
29-napkin work, starts with the rise of private property in the Middle Ages and
ends with Norman Mailer's notorious 1970 Harper's Magazine article, "Prisoner of
Sex."

Mr. Balk is one of several young artists who place great importance on language.
(Nicholas Rule, Sue Williams and Sean Landers are others.) His leaps of
imagination can be funny, poetic and rather lovely to look at in their own
slight way. It helps to think of his pieces as a kind of abstract history; they
take the same liberties with reality that the early modern artists took with its
forms.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Congressional Roundup;
Bill Would Open Kennedy Death Files

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


Leading lawmakers from both houses of Congress today introduced legislation to
make public almost everything in Government files on the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy in 1963.

Representative Louis Stokes, the Ohio Democrat who headed the House
investigation into the killing in the late 1970's, said the measure was
supported by Congressional leaders and had no discernible opposition. "This
resolution is going to sail through," he predicted.

Senator David L. Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who heads the Senate Intelligence
Committee, said he had been assured of cooperation by the directors of the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He
predicted that "99.999999999 percent of the documents" in Government files would
be fully released.

Under the legislation, a five-member commission would be appointed by Federal
judges to rule on whether information could be deleted or withheld.  None of the
panel members could be Government employees or have been involved with previous
investigations of the assassinations.

2 Years for Disclosure

The commission would have two years to see to the release of files from the
House Assassinations Committee, the Warren Commission and any material held by
other Government agencies. The bill urges Russian authorities to make public
information in the files of the defunct K.G.B. and the G.R.U., domestic and
military intelligence agencies of the Soviet Union.

The only grounds allowed for continued secrecy would be to protect personnel
records of previous investigations, cases in which a current intelligence agent
or informer's identity would be disclosed, where a current intelligence
gathering method would be compromised, and where there would be a severe
invasion of privacy of a living person. Some details of the autopsy of President
Kennedy would also be kept from public display, Mr. Boren said.

Both leaders, and others of both parties who joined them, said it was important
to make the information public to dispel suspicion, especially among young
people whose view of the event came from Oliver Stone's movie "J.F.K.," which
suggests that the assassination was plotted by the Government to keep the
President from halting the Vietnam War.

Mr. Stokes said he doubted the files would provide any sensations. "I can assure
you we didn't seal up any smoking gun in our files," he said.

Measure on Forests

On the Senate floor today, an overwhelming majority approved a measure that
could begin to decide the fate of the nation's last stands of virgin forests. It
would carve up more than six million acres of timberland in Montana into tracts
to be preserved and other tracts eligible to be cut.

The ambitious proposal sets out broad goals for managing timberlands in 10
national forests in the state. The compromise measure was adopted by a vote of
75 to 22.

This bill was developed by Montana's two Senators, Max Baucus, a Democrat, and
Conrad Burns, a Republican. But Montana's Representatives, Ron Marlenee, a
Republican, and Pat Williams, a Democrat, have both expressed reservations. Both
environmentalists and timber companies have said they were disappointed in this
bill.

The measure joins several others the House is set to consider this spring over
cutting the old growth forests of the West.

The Senate bill calls for setting aside 1.2 million acres as permanent
wilderness, diverting another one million acres as recreational areas and
regions off limits to cutting, and designating 4 million acres to be managed by
the Forest Service for timber harvesting and other industrial development.

America's 'Marshall Plan'

Congress's Joint Economic Committee called for a "Marshall Plan for America" to
strengthen the nation so it can compete more effectively against Japan and
Germany.

The committee said cuts in the military budget should be invested in areas like
high-speed rail, air traffic control systems and a nationwide data
communications network. Under the 1990 budget act, such shifts from military
spending cannot be made until next year; the Senate tonight killed a Democrtaic
effort that would have allowed the transfers this year. House leaders have
repeatedly put off votes on a companion proposal because they cannot find enough
support to pass it.

Also today, the Congressional Budget Office issued a report analyzing President
Bush's budget, saying it would have little effect on the outlook for the Federal
deficit. It said the President's proposals would slow the accumulation of the
Federal debt by just $3 billion over the next five years.


LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
White House Sees Trips As Way to Revive Bush

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


The White House is counting on a series of foreign trips and diplomatic events
in coming months to resurrect foreign policy as a campaign issue and reassert
President Bush's primacy in world affairs before the fall election.

For Mr. Bush and his advisers, the effort is in part an attempt to redirect the
political debate as the White House veers between campaign themes in its search
for an approach that will cure Mr. Bush's political problems.

It is also an exercise in repairing the damage from frittering away Mr. Bush's
greatest political strength on a disastrous trip to Japan, a hesitant approach
to the breakup of the Soviet Union and by continuing to permit Saddam Hussein to
thumb his nose at Mr. Bush from Baghdad.

The White House's attempts to exploit trade, the Persian Gulf war and other
foreign-policy issues in the campaign have fallen flat. But so has its retreat
into domestic affairs. Weeks of talking about the economy have failed to help
Mr. Bush recover from his political plunge, a problem driven painfully home once
again to Bush advisers by the 33 percent vote against him in the Connecticut
primary on Tuesday.

Push for Foreign Affairs

Once criticized for spending too much time on foreign affairs, Mr. Bush is now
under fire from critics who say he has gone too far in the other direction, that
his fear of Patrick J. Buchanan's isolationist campaign has, for example,
hobbled the Administration's efforts to produce an aid package for the former
Soviet republics.

Mr. Bush is being urged to re-engage in foreign affairs by some of his advisers
and outsiders, including former President Richard M. Nixon, who chastised Mr.
Bush recently for being too slow to provide aid to the former Soviet republics.

Mr. Nixon's prodding, which clearly irritated the White House, was all the more
sharp since Mr. Nixon proved so adept at using his diplomatic schedule in the
1972 campaign, during which he went to China, signed a treaty with the Soviet
Union on limiting nuclear weapons and moved to wrap up negotiations to end the
Vietnam War.

Some Administration officials said political considerations had distracted the
White House from foreign affairs, putting issues like aid to Russia on a "back
burner." One official said, "The domestic side of the White House and the
political operation are really driving things in a way they never did before."

Words of Uncertainty

The White House strenuously denies that the campaign is hurting foreign policy.
But Administration officials acknowledge that politics is now more tightly woven
than ever with foreign affairs.

The President is clearly uncertain how much he can afford to concentrate on
foreign affairs and travel abroad during this election year. His indecision was
evident this week as he mused aloud about how hard it was to make up his mind
about going to the United Nations environmental conference in June in Brazil,
where Democratic lawmakers and a host of foreign leaders want him to sign an
antipollution treaty that he does not want to sign.

Many Republican strategists say they believe it is imperative that foreign
policy return to the political stage and that the worst thing Mr. Bush could do
is to appear hesitant again.

"They got snake bit, but they have to get back into it," said a senior
Republican adviser. "It's his strength and it's a perfect way to show you are
governing. He ought to lead with it and do it in a style to which he's
accustomed, really stepping out front and center and acting like the leader of
the world."

Between mid-June and mid-July, Mr. Bush will meet with President Boris N.
Yeltsin in the first Russian-American summit meeting, go to Munich for a meeting
of the seven biggest industrialized democracies, visit Poland and probably
attend the Brazil conference and a European security meeting in Helsinki,
Finland. Campaign strategists make no secret of their delight that that schedule
will end just before the Democratic National Convention in New York City.

"We need to spend the next months talking about the domestic agenda, but we need
at some point in the campaign to emphasize his foreign-policy accomplishments
and credentials," said Charles Black, senior adviser to the Bush campaign.
"There's enough on the plate that we can have a few weeks of foreign policy, and
the timing is just right."

But Administration officials fear the Brazil conference could prove to be a
political trap.

'A North-South Fight'

"For political reasons, we'll probably have to go to show he's got an
environmental program," an official said. "But we're afraid of the conference
turning into a North-South fight with us cast as the ogre of the North with no
environmental agenda."

The Munich meeting should be an opportunity for Mr. Bush to play the role of
leader in the club of industrialized nations. But Mr. Bush is facing political
and policy problems that could taint the conference.

For one thing, the meeting is likely to be dominated by the subject of aid to
the former Soviet Union, and Mr. Bush's political advisers are worried about
inflaming the strong sentiment against foreign aid that has been evident in the
campaign so far.

The White House is reviewing State Department proposals for further financial
assistance to the former Soviet republics, including a proposed ruble
stabilization fund. But such a fund would require hundreds of millions of
dollars more from an Administration that is already having trouble coming up
with the $645 million in aid it pledged in January.

Not only is the White House concerned about how additional aid could affect the
election, but the Administration and Congress will also be hard pressed simply
to find any more money. Mr. Bush has committed himself to the 1990 budget
agreement, which prevents him from taking it from one obvious source, the
Pentagon budget.

Beyond that, Mr. Yeltsin is clamoring to attend the meeting in Munich, backed by
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany. Mr. Bush does not want to snub Mr. Yeltsin,
but officials said the United States is not very enthusiastic about inviting
him, since it would merely open the door for the leaders of Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakhstan to demand invitations as well.

Mr. Yeltsin's visit to the United States in mid-June seems tailor made as a
campaign photo opportunity, Republican strategists said, as long as Mr. Bush can
pull it off without making it seem like too crass an attempt to create a photo
opportunity.

"An event like that shows Presidential stature on a turf that Bush is familiar
with and comfortable with, not like domestic policy," one said. "But he must not
give it a partisan or political orientation. He must govern. He must not
campaign with foreign policy. When he goes overseas, or sees Yeltsin, he has to
be President."

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Foreign Policy;
Clinton Uses Loose Circle of Advisers

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 27


Even at this stage in the Presidential campaign, Gov. Bill Clinton's foreign
policy advisory team is still a loose collection of unpaid volunteers,
distinguished by the absence of any single dominating guru and by the presence
of a spectrum of traditional Democratic Party hawks and doves.

The unusually loose arrangement for advising Mr. Clinton on foreign affairs is
no accident. In part it is a reflection of a campaign still primarily focused on
domestic issues. In part it is a reflection of Mr. Clinton's own thinking that
"we can no longer afford to have separate foreign and domestic policies," since
economic policies at home increasingly determine any President's reach abroad.
And in part it is a deliberate attempt by the candidate to defuse the
ideological feuds between the Henry Jackson-type conservatives and George
McGovern-type liberals that have dogged the Democratic Party since the beginning
of the cold war.

"What Clinton is trying to do is to construct a foreign policy that can first
bring the Democratic Party together and then the country," said Anthony Lake,
director of policy planning at the State Department in the Carter Administration
and the man who has been coordinating the foreign policy advice that goes to Mr.
Clinton.

'Ideological Arguments Over'

"In the 1970's and 1980's, every four years we refought the Vietnam War within
the party," Mr. Lake said. "Every position a candidate took was a victory for
either the conservative wing or the liberal wing. With the end of the cold war,
those ideological arguments are finally over. This means the center has widened
enormously -- in the party and in the country -- and we want to keep expanding
that middle."

That inclusive approach to foreign policy goes for Mr. Clinton's advisers as
well. The structure that the Arkansas Democrat has set up begins with Mr. Lake,
working out of his office at Mount Holyoke College, where he is a professor of
international relations, armed with a phone and a fax machine, and fans out from
there into three circles.

Mr. Lake heads a volunteer working group that consists of out-of-power
Democratic foreign policy "wise men" from the Carter Administration and new-wave
party foreign policy thinkers who were still in graduate school when Jimmy
Carter was President. They are Samuel Berger, David L. Aaron and Richard C.
Holbrooke -- all former Carter Administration officials now working in the
private sector -- and Janne E. Nolan, a defense specialist at the Brookings
Institution; Michael Mandelbaum, an expert on East-West issues at the Johns
Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, and Will Marshall from the
Progressive Policy Institute, a centrist Democratic research center.

This working group pulled together Mr. Clinton's first major foreign policy
address, delivered Dec. 11 at Georgetown University, and provides him with daily
advice and papers on major foreign policy issues.

"If you look at the people working with Clinton on foreign policy, it is hard to
summarize where they stand philosophically for the same reason that it is
difficult to summarize the new world -- nobody has figured it out yet," Mr.
Mandelbaum said. "I think what the group has in common is a conviction that this
is a new world, and that we need someone who can think about it in a new way."

Along with the core working group is what Mr. Lake calls the "consulting group,"
another loose collection that both advises the working group and speaks to Mr.
Clinton regularly on its own. This group consists of Senator Sam Nunn of
Georgia, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee; Representative Dave
McCurdy of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Permanent Select Committee on
Intelligence; Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Asia; Representative Lee H. Hamilton of
Indiana, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Europe and the
Middle East; Warren M. Christopher, former Carter Administration Deputy
Secretary of State, and Richard N. Gardner, Ambassador to Rome under Mr. Carter

Beyond this circle, Mr. Lake said, are "at least 100 and growing" experts in
various specific foreign policy issues, from South Africa to United Nations
resolutions on Iraq, who will provide specific answers or position papers for
the Clinton campaign. This group of 100 includes academics, friendly
Congressional staff members -- many of whose own bosses have not endorsed Mr.
Clinton -- and others sprinkled throughout the Government and private business.

"Clinton likes to tap a lot of resources," Mr. McCurdy said. "No one or two
people have a lock on shaping his views on foreign policy. Sometimes he'll call
me, and we'll talk over a policy. Sometimes I will call him or his staff and say
they need to be on top of this developing issue. Clinton understands that he
needs to have a strong and credible foreign policy component, because when the
economy improves, the foreign policy debate is going to come back."

It is with that in mind that Mr. Clinton is planning a second major foreign
policy address in New York on April 1, at the Foreign Policy Association. Aides
say he will use that address to put into much more specific terms his previously
very general and vague support for aiding Russia to make the transition to a
free-market democracy.

In a way, Mr. Clinton and President Bush are now in a race. Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d, prodded in part by criticism from former President Richard M.
Nixon, is also trying to put together a more serious package of support for
Russia. It, too, could be revealed sometime next week, and it will be
interesting to see who gets his on the table first.

As for some of the other foreign policy issues of the day, Mr. Clinton has
argued that he "certainly would support" the use of force against Iraq again "if
that were the only way to stop the development of nuclear capacity."

On the question of whether to extend loan gurantees to Israel, Mr. Clinton has
adopted the politically comfortable position that he is both for the loan
guarantees and for upholding longstanding American policy that views settlement
building by Israel as an obstacle to peace.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Struggling for Youth While Dying in Old Age

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 29


The bleak news that Punch would print its last issue next week, after more than
150 years of continuous publication, came as no surprise to most. The
circulation of England's most famous satirical review had plummeted in recent
years to only 33,000, and critics ritually complained that as a humor magazine,
it suffered a serious flaw: it wasn't very funny anymore.

But even if Punch had lost most of its readers, the news of its impending demise
induced a sudden flood of mourners. In letters, columns and commentaries over
the last few days, hundreds have come forward to lament the passing of one of
Britain's enduring cultural icons.

Just as there are those who cannot imagine an England without those little red
telephone booths and barristers in wigs, there are those who now say England
will never be the same without Punch.

"I'm sad and I'm also infuriated," said Alan Coren, a former editor of Punch,
and now a columnist with The Times of London. "Punch had an absolutely enormous
impact on the culture, and I'm unhappy the culture cannot sustain a magazine
like that."

Among the current staff, a dwindling band of about a dozen led by David Thomas,
a 33-year-old who was hired three years ago to give Punch a younger and hipper
image, such sentiments are bittersweet solace.

"It's a classic British problem, isn't it?" said Sean Macauley, the magazine's
feature editor, referring to the sudden flood of praise and tribute, now that
Punch has been pronounced moribund. "The British only tend to value things once
they're gone."

Mr. Macauley said the new editors had struggled vainly in recent years to adapt
to changing fashions in humor and attract a younger audience, although the
strategy resulted in an editorial shift of jarring proportions, as if The New
Yorker had suddenly been recast as the National Lampoon.

To United Newspapers, the company that took over Punch's dwindling subscriber
list in 1969, it was just smart marketing: not only was Punch losing its
audience to ruder, more mean-spirited satirical publications like Private Eye
and Viz, its subscriber base was being eroded by what one staffer called
"biological leakage" -- the gradual dying off of faithful older readers.

But the magazine's turn toward the young and hip provoked more animus than
admiration, and a steady barrage of criticism from older readers -- not to
mention writers and critics -- who said they were offended by all the new jokes
about car telephones and BMW's. One unnamed detractor, quoted last year in The
Guardian, said Punch's strategy was akin to diluting a case of Chateau-Lafite
with raspberry juice so it could be sold to young people on their way to school.

"I believe there is still a market for a high-quality magazine aimed at a
literate market," said Mr. Coren, one of those who believe the magazine's blind
pursuit of the younger reader helped to do it in. "There are people out there
who want to read discursive comic essays and enjoy quality cartoons."

Observer of Manners

For most of its century and a half Punch had cast itself, sometimes brilliantly,
as a wry and whimsical observer of English manners and society. Its cartoons and
essays not only helped to reshape British sensibilities, but had an impact
across the Atlantic as well. The New Yorker was conceived in 1925 by Harold
Ross, its founder, as a kind of an urban, American version of Punch.

But as is the case with the monarchy, another British institution that evokes a
fair degree of nostalgic rumination, there are a lot of people determined to
celebrate Punch more for what it has been than for what it has become, even if
nobody seems able to agree on what, exactly, Punch was supposed to be.

During the Vietnam War, recalled Miles Kington, a humorist who was a member of
the Punch staff at the time, "someone would bound in and say, 'What are we going
to say about Vietnam this week?' And the answer would be: 'Nothing. It's not
that sort of magazine.' Which led to the question 'Well, what sort of magazine
is it?' "

The answer is not altogether clear.  When it was founded in 1841 by Mark Lemon,
the son of a London publican, Punch had an aggressive social conscience. The
little character who was the magazine's namesake wielded a cudgel to beat down
the enemies of society, and articles regularly inveighed against the conditions
in London's sweatshops and the corruption of its courts.

In later years Punch took a less defiant turn. It became a showcase for the best
British satirical writers, successful enough that the editors ritually rejected
the submissions of Charles Dickens. But William Thackeray was a regular
contributor, and A. A. Milne, the creator of Winnie-the-Pooh, was once an
assistant editor. Sir John Tenniel, who furnished the drawings for "Alice in
Wonderland," provided illustrations.

Epitomized Middle-Class Virtue

In the years following World War II, Punch reached its zenith as a popular
magazine. In 1948 its circulation topped out at 175,000, and the magazine's
ubiquitous place in dentists' waiting rooms and on the coffee tables of earnest
London professionals served to certify its subscribers as persons of stolid
middle-class virtue. Punch was, after all, a magazine for people of taste and
quiet dignity; its cartoons and essays strove for the wry chuckle, rather than
the loud guffaw.

Lord Deedes, a former editor of The Daily Telegraph and a long and loyal reader
of the magazine, goes even further. He describes Punch, in its prime, as "a
humorous magazine primarily for the upper class." One recurrent theme, he wrote,
was what he described as "the upstairs-downstairs joke." He recounted this
cartoon example: two well-dressed women are taking tea together in a
well-appointed room. One is saying to the other, "She was not a bad cook as
cooks go; but as cooks go, she went."

At the same time essays in the magazine tended to reflect an upper-class
fascination and befuddlement over even the most routine of household
accessories. As The Times recalled last week, "May I permit myself the luxury of
a general reflection on saucepans?" might well be the opening sentence of a
typical Punch article.

Over the years the magazine's long and eminent past weighed considerably on its
editors and writers, who could never quite escape the sense that Punch had been
a lot better, and funnier, in the past. Mr. Kington recalled that such
sensibilities "hung over the magazine like a nostalgic cloud of poison gas."

150 Years of Memorabilia

Mr. Macauley said there was still a slim hope that someone might buy the
magazine before April 8, when its final edition is to appear.

Mr. Macauley says the magazine's most valuable asset may be its 150 years' worth
of memorabilia. This includes not only original drawings, paintings and essays,
but also the vast wooden table where a procession of royalty, actors and
politicians, ranging from Mark Twain and Garibaldi to Margaret Thatcher, have
been invited over the decades to carve their initials, as honored guests at
Punch's fortnightly lunches.

One of the stories being told last week recalled the time Prince Charles came to
dine, and his police bodyguard, seeing the heavily scored table, looked aghast.
"My God!" he said. "You've certainly had your trouble with vandals."

As The Daily Telegraph concluded last week: "Punch's idiosyncrasies, like its
humor, were always lost on some."

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook;
Brown Rally Draws Tie-Dyed Crowd

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words


Aron Kay fired his first pie in anger in the Vietnam War.

From the 1960's through early 1980, when he "retired" after "pieing" McGeorge
Bundy during a speech at City College, Mr. Kay roamed the nation lofting
cream-fill confections at national figures like Phyllis Schlafly, William F.
Buckley Jr. and former Mayor Abe Beame of New York.

"I have only one regret," said Mr. Kay, who turned up Saturday at a rally for
former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California in Manhattan's Union Square. "If I
had it to do all over again I would have never pied Jerry."

The rally, delayed by nearly two hours while Mr. Brown's entourage inched
through the Lincoln Tunnel, proved that history can indeed be repeated, though
whether as farce, tragedy or something else was not clear.

The rally was held among the organic vegetables, meats and wines at the open-air
green market, and nearly 1,000 people -- an unusually large number sporting
berets and wearing tie-dyed clothing -- braved the harsh wind to hear their
version of the un-candidate at what seemed like a Grateful Dead concert without
the drugs or the music.

"We are all floating back to the surface here," said Charles Raisch, a graduate
of the 1960's who now publishes a mystery magazine in Manhattan. "Jerry speaks
the language we thought America had forgotten."

What language is that, he was asked.

"The language that rejects politics as linear consciousness," he replied,
shouting over the crowd that had begun chanting Mr. Brown's toll-free number.
"The language that connects animal activists to the people of the earth, and
global politics to housing in New York."

At least two members of the Amish community of Lancaster, Pa., were not
impressed by the politically correct nature of the crowd. They stood fuming on
14th Street, furious that police barriers were keeping many regular customers
from shopping at their store. At dawn every Saturday, the men journey to New
York to sell their hydroponically grown tomatoes, jams, jellies and baked goods.

Amos Vishnetter, shaking his head and preparing to leave early, said of Mr.
Brown, "If this man is so much a friend of the earth, why did he have to choose
the one decent organic market to disrupt for his speech?"

Return of an Un-Candidate

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, the Hellenic un-candidate,
rolled back into town yesterday. He marched tentatively up Fifth Avenue as
thousands cheered, insisting all the way that he was no longer running for
President.

It did not seem to be a popular, or entirely credible, notion among the crowd
that appeared at New York's annual Greek Independence Day Parade, which Mr.
Tsongas served as grand marshal.

"Aristotle, Plato, Homer, Tsongas," read one brightly colored placard,
suggesting perhaps a novel lineup for a Greek Mount Rushmore.

"Bring back the man who has shown this country the integrity and honesty we
need," said a slightly less Olympian poster, from the Calavarytan Fraternity.

Dozens of volunteers distributed leaflets in Greek and English, reminding all
who cared that despite his stated intentions, Mr. Tsongas will still be on New
York's primary ballot on April 7.

Mr. Tsongas, who has now joined Mr. Brown in advertising an "800" number and who
was also nearly two hours late yesterday, seemed slightly unnerved by his
raucous welcome.

As has often been the case, he made a silent entrance, waiting patiently in a
limousine for more than 10 minutes while George Vassiliou, the President of
Cyprus, first emerged from his car and entered the Pierre Hotel, where Mayor
David N. Dinkins and other local politicians were waiting.

When Mr. Tsongas, who was accompanied by his wife, Niki, and three children,
finally began striding up the center of the blustery avenue, he was mobbed so
thoroughly by supporters and the press that twice he turned back.

"Do it! Do it! Do it!" barked Chris Kakoulas, a Brooklyn marine surveyor and
self-proclaimed "Tcitizen for Tsongas." "We need you badly -- very, very badly."
As soon as he said it, one of the many high school bands present began playing a
popular Disney theme.

"It's a Paul world after all!" shouted Mr. Kakoulas, taking delight in
substituting the name of his candidate for the world "small" in the title. "I
told you -- it's a Paul world after all!"

Dueling Leaflets

The battle for Zabar's has been joined.

There were more leafleters massed outside the Upper West Side culinary citadel
yesterday afternoon than there are Democratic delegates from the Virgin Islands.

"You know the Upper West Side is just a symbolically essential proving ground,"
said Jim Armenakis, the New York state coordinator for Mr. Tsongas's on-again
off-again candidacy. "It isn't that there are so many votes at stake. It's just
who would want to lose the West Side?"

Certainly not Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas or Mr. Brown. Mr. Clinton had nearly
a dozen visible volunteers working Broadway just between 72d Street and 81st
Street alone. Five Brown workers were also spotted in a random search, along
with two people passing out Tsongas leaflets.

"The Upper West Side of Manhattan is filled with the most liberal, populist and
intellectual voters in the world," said Mike Doss, a 28-year-old lawyer who was
working for Mr. Brown outside Fairway Market at 74th Street yesterday. "This is
a crowd we really need to capture."

Nobody actually entered that always-crowded store to canvass voters. "That would
be rude," Mr. Doss said.

"If we let them in here we wouldn't have shoppers," said the day manager at
Zabar's, who cited store policy in insisting on anonymity. "We would only have
politicians. And instead of selling food we would have to spend all day sweeping
up their pamphlets."

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

What's Behind Suicides In Bergen County Jail?

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


To the Editor:

What is disturbing about the high suicide rate for the Bergen County Jail in
Hackensack (news article, Feb. 29) is the apparent failure of precautions
instituted in 1988 that involved training for county correction officers in
spotting suicide-prone inmates and in preventing suicides or attempts at
suicide.

Selected inmates were given 20 hours of training as suicide observation aides to
spot and deter potential suicides. The combined program of increased training
for correction officers and inmate observation aides resulted in no suicides in
the jails from Jan. 1, 1988, to April 28, 1991, the date of the first of the
four recent suicides.

Bergen County authorities do not seem able to give a logical explanation why a
jail that has a smaller inmate population than many of its counterparts should
have the highest suicide rate in New Jersey. What is going on?

ROBERT R. HERB
Maywood, N.J., March 11, 1992

The writer was Sheriff of Bergen County from 1988 to 1991.

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tom Harkin's Old-Time Religion

BYLINE: By Judith Miller;  Judith Miller is the staff writer for The New York
Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4134 words


On a cold day in Manchester, N.H., in January, Senator Tom Harkin was preaching
to the converted. He was talking to the board of the International Brotherhood
of Electrical Workers, many of whom were already wearing blue-and-white "Harkin
for President" buttons. The stop at the end of a hard day of campaigning was
billed as a courtesy call, since the union local had already endorsed his bid
for the Democratic Presidential nomination. But Harkin was neither tired nor
going through the motions.

As the union leaders gazed up at their standard-bearer adoringly -- the women in
sensible shoes, the men in plaid flannel shirts, blue jeans and beards -- Harkin
made a heartfelt pitch for help.

This Presidential race would be like a boxing match, he told them. "I know I can
whip George Herbert Walker Bush," he said, slowly reciting Bush's four-part name
to emphasize the President's patrician origins. "But I need you to open the
ropes and give me a shove in the butt to get me into the ring. Once I'm in the
ring, I know I can flatten him," Harkin said, his fists flailing the air. "But
first, I gotta get there."

Despite a promising start and a large campaign war chest, Harkin, a
craggy-faced, 52-year-old Horatio Alger-style populist, is having trouble
getting into the ring. Bill Clinton, the Arkansas Governor, has been the
front-runner since mid-January -- momentum that not even widely published, and
vehemently denied, allegations of marital infidelity have significantly slowed.
Meanwhile, opinion polls in December and January continued to register a steady
slide in support for Harkin. A poll sponsored by The Boston Globe in late
January ranked him next to last in the race, ahead of only Edmund G. Brown Jr.,
the former Governor of California. According to the Globe poll, Harkin, who has
fashioned a campaign based on the theme that he is the only "real" Democrat in
the race, was favored by only 8 percent of prospective New Hampshire voters.

While political professionals caution that Harkin cannot be written off yet,
they also agree that his campaign has yet to catch fire. The question being
debated among political pros is why. The dispute says much about the state of
the Democratic Party today. It also provides some initial indicators about the
kind of candidate Americans are most likely to be drawn to even during a period
of intense economic distress and growing pessimism about the country's future.
Moreover, Harkin's candidacy has crystallized into a tug of war among the party
faithful over campaign strategy.

Harkin supporters argue that to win, Democrats must excite their traditional
base and expand upon it by pushing the old-fashioned Democratic values --
support for the working class, the elderly, women, blacks and minorities,
society's traditional underdogs against big business.

"I, for one, would like to see a campaign with a meat-and-potatoes Democrat, a
campaign in which the traditional Democratic message is finally tested," says
Lane Kirkland, the head of the nation's largest union group, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.,
which is remaining neutral in the race, at least until after New Hampshire.

But supporters of Clinton, of Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and even of Paul E.
Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator, maintain that to recapture the White
House, Democrats must abandon the hackneyed Harkin rhetoric and articulate a
more centrist political message that speaks to the amorphous "middle class." If
Democrats are to win in November, the argument goes, they must stop frightening
voters; they must recognize that many Americans today are as apprehensive about
what Government can do to them as for them.

Because the first test of the 1992 campaign, the Iowa caucus tomorrow, has
virtually been conceded to Harkin, the state's favorite son, the New Hampshire
primary, which will be held Feb. 18, is shaping up as a critical referendum on
the future direction of the Democratic Party and the message Democrats will
present to Americans this November in their effort to beat George Bush.

CRITICS OF THE HARKIN CAMPAIGN FALL into three sometimes-overlapping categories:
those who argue that Tom Harkin is a poor messenger with a winning political
message; those who like the messenger but complain about the way the message is
being packaged, and those who don't like the message at all.

Basically, Harkin's message is the old Democratic Party gospel with a Midwestern
twang straight out of "The Grapes of Wrath." While the other Democratic
candidates are selling what Harkin would call Republicanism with a heart, he
declares class warfare. He portrays himself as the champion of "the little guy,"
of "the average working man and woman," battling against "the fat cats" who use
their influence to grab an unfair share of the nation's goodies for themselves
and their friends.

His is a latter-day prairie populist's blend of individualism, coupled with
compassion for the less fortunate. He advocates a more active role for
Government in rebuilding America's infrastructure and redressing the nation's
economic and social ills, and a far less intrusive Government in citizens'
private lives. Though he is a veteran of five terms in the House and the only
Iowa Democrat to have won re-election to two consecutive terms in the Senate,
there is something of the loner, the outsider, the radical in Harkin's voice.

"If you want a Democrat who is gonna tinker with the system, make some small
changes in Reagan-Bush trickle-down economics, don't vote for me," he says in
interviews and on camera. "But if you want a President who is gonna make major
changes, invest in America to create jobs and get this country moving again, I'm
your man."

Harkin is a man of liberal principle. Although a Catholic and personally opposed
to abortion, he is staunchly for abortion rights. "For the life of me," Harkin
says, "I can't understand why people who want to get the Government off our
backs are perfectly content to see Government involved in the most intimate
decision a woman can make." While Clinton and Kerrey (and apparently a majority
of the electorate) favor capital punishment, Harkin denounces the practice as
"uncivilized," noting that the United States joins the former Soviet Union and
Libya in sanctioning the death penalty. Except for gun control -- he claims to
like hunting -- he has what many liberals consider a nearly perfect record on
civil liberties and civil rights issues.

In 1974, he offered and won approval for legislation banning foreign aid to
countries that consistently violate human rights, a measure hailed for having
put the Democrats squarely in favor of restoring "morality" in foreign policy.
But his protectionist trade policies and isolationism -- he opposed the Gulf
war, aid to the Nicaraguan contras and American involvement in Central America
-- have alienated several liberal activist Democrats who would have been
expected to support him.

"What you see is what you get," says his wife, Ruth, a tough-minded and
well-liked lawyer at the influential Washington firm of Akin, Gump, Hauer &
Feld. A former prosecutor and the first woman elected county attorney in Iowa,
she is her husband's chief political adviser, or more accurately, she insists,
the "longest serving."

Much of what Harkin is today is rooted in his harsh, impoverished childhood,
which he flaunts. The son of a coal miner who did not finish eighth grade and an
immigrant mother from Slovenia, he grew up in Cumming, Iowa, population 139, in
a two-bedroom house without hot running water and a proper furnace. His mother
died when he was a boy; his father died of black-lung disease. His brother Frank
went deaf at the age of 9. "I came from the wrong side of the tracks," Harkin
says proudly.

Actually, there is only one side of the tracks in Cumming, now virtually a
suburb of Des Moines. Most of the people who live there are Harkins, or related
to them. A totally Roman Catholic enclave, Cumming, founded in 1888, is the kind
of town where lawn statues of the Virgin Mary vie for space with those of Mickey
Mouse. There are only two streets in town; the school closed down years ago, and
there is no longer a local grocery store. The busiest spot in town is the
tavern.

What one neighbor, Ruth Knosby, remembers is his determination, even as a young
boy. "Tom used to work for us pitching hay," she recounted. "The family always
needed money. One day I looked out the window and saw young Tom standing atop a
truckload of hay, catching the bales. All of a sudden, he lost his balance and
fell -- it must have been more than 20 feet. He was all white and really had the
breath knocked out of him. But when I suggested he rest and call it a day, he
flatly refused. He jumped back up on that truck and finished the working day.
That's Tom."

After his mother died, Harkin, an altar boy, went to Dowling Catholic High
School in Des Moines and won a Navy R.O.T.C. scholarship to college. As a Navy
pilot, he ferried supplies and planes between Japan and Vietnam. Contrary to
some statements early in his political career, he never saw combat. And his
early criticism of the Vietnam War and American foreign policy in general led
Barry Goldwater and others to complain that he had fabricated, or at least
exaggerated, his war record.

Harkin cites as his proud est legislative accomplishment the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, which guarantees some 43 million disabled Americans
freedom from employment and housing discrimination. On the floor of the Senate,
Harkin delivered part of his impassioned speech for the bill in sign language --
a special message to his brother.

In this campaign, Harkin has faced frequent accusations of being long on
rhetoric and short on substance. Critics note that he has yet to provide the
kind of detailed plan for national health care that Bob Kerrey and Paul Tsongas
have proposed. Is Harkin's reluctance to offer a specific plan for the
comprehensive health care he advocates related to his base in Iowa, home of some
of the nation's largest insurance companies, many of which oppose publicly
financed national care and which contribute heavily through political action
committees to his campaign?

"No," the Senator says calmly. "I haven't done so because I'm not smart enough
or knowledgeable enough to put together such a plan. I'm not a health-care
specialist. What I've done is outline objectives that any system should meet.
It's the job of a President to provide leadership -- to get the specialists in a
room and tell them to devise a workable plan -- and to get that plan enacted
within a year."

Harkin instinctively recoils from Clinton's turgid recitation of Census Bureau
statistics, from Kerrey's penchant for autobiography, from Tsongas's pessimism
and little gray guide to reindustrializing America. His is a world not of
complex, international problems but of good guys and bad guys, of the
long-suffering poor and the greedy, undeserving rich. All that is required,
Harkin maintains, is a leader strong enough to give the Government back to the
people. That does not necessarily mean spending more money, he says repeatedly.
"The B-2 bomber was a huge public-works program," Harkin says, "but what has the
average American gotten out of it?"

Besides comprehensive health and day care, he favors a national youth corps that
would enable every qualified young American to attend college; extended
unemployment benefits; national job retraining for victims of technological
obsolescence, and $35 billion worth of infrastructure investment in his first
year of office. All this can be financed, he claims, through defense cuts and by
eliminating Government waste and corruption -- an assertion critics contest.

"Tom Harkin is the real McCoy, a true populist," says Erwin Knoll, editor of The
Progressive Magazine, the nation's second-oldest political magazine, founded by
another prairie populist, (Fighting) Bob LaFollette. "But I'm not sure the
Democratic Party is populist any longer. The Democrats have moved so far to the
right. They've marginalized people like Harkin."

WILLIAM SCHNEIDER, A political analyst at the Washington-based American
Enterprise Institute, insists that there is still a vast potential audience for
what Harkin is saying. According to a Time magazine-CNN poll last month, 55
percent of Democrats and independents who leaned toward the Democratic Party
said they would support a candidate who favors "traditional Democratic goals of
helping people through Government programs." By contrast, only 38 percent said
they would prefer a candidate who espoused "limited and less costly Government
programs."

But so far, Tom Harkin does not seem to have reached or convinced this audience.
That, according to some analysts, is because of flaws in the messenger, not the
message. While Harkin's flamboyant style, his salty, down-home, Trumanesque
"plain talk" and even his highly personal attacks on George Bush may have won
him applause on the stump early in his campaign, they don't play well on
national television. "Americans have enormous respect for the office of the
Presidency. They don't want to see their President as foulmouthed, as a guy
yelling a barnyard profanity as Harkin did from the podium," says Schneider.
Americans, apparently, despite their jokes about George Bush's convoluted
speech, would really prefer to hear their Presidents say "doo-doo."

In focus group after focus group, Harkin gets higher negative ratings than the
other candidates. Ann F. Lewis, former political director of the Democratic
National Committee and now an independent analyst, says the often humorous but
sometimes vulgar talk is partly responsible.

Harkin's new television ads, the first of which shows excerpts from a
stem-winding oration on the campaign trail, have also come in for criticism.
"It's just too hot for television," says Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the
Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. The second
ad, in which a more subdued Harkin softly delivers his message to a nonvisible
interviewer, also falls flat, Jamieson says. "We call his more subdued effort
the 'tie in the crotch' ad," she says. "Because what people mentioned was not
what he said, but that tie dangling between his knees."

Some argue that Harkin's campaign was also hurt by the man-of-the-people's
retreat from New Hampshire over the Christmas holidays to his family vacation
home in the Bahamas. Others say that his staff lacks sufficient experience in
national political races, and that he started his radio and television
advertising far too late. There also seems little doubt that Harkin has paid a
price for not cultivating close friends and champions in the news media and the
professional political fraternity.

By all accounts, the Harkins, along with their two daughters, Amy, 15, and
Jenny, 10, are a close-knit and private family. Harkin appears to prefer the
company of his children to that of political and media celebrities.  But his
social aloofness has fostered the impression that he is testy, arrogant and hard
to get along with.

"In Iowa, he is more respected for his voting record than liked," says David A.
Yepsen, chief political correspondent for The Des Moines Register. "Most people
feel they would rather vote for him than have dinner with him."

For all Harkin's philosophical consistency and eloquent conviction, there are a
lot of Democrats, even in Iowa, who simply don't care much for him. While those
who know and like him describe him as an honest, tough-minded and very decent
man, Harkin often comes across to those who don't know him as sour and small, as
the man who shows up to repair your washing machine. Not Presidential.

Some party officials still contend that Mario Cuomo could have delivered a
version of Harkin's message with far greater credibility and effectiveness.
"Mario is, well, Presidential," says one Democratic official. "And Harkin just
isn't."

But others in the party disagree. The problem, they say, is not the messenger or
his delivery. The problem is the message itself, particularly in New Hampshire,
among the nation's most conservative states.

"The message plays well in Iowa because it comes from there and because Iowans
are old," says Yepsen, pointing out that the state is demographically the
third-oldest in the country. The average Iowa voter is more than 50. The average
age of New Hampshire voters, by contrast, is almost five years younger.

Since he declared for the Presidency, Harkin has tended to attract older crowds
than either Kerrey, 48, or Clinton, 45. Even the candidates' music reflects a
generation gap. Harkin kicked off his campaign to the strains of country music
from a local Iowa band, while Kerrey initiated his to Bruce Springsteen's "Born
to Run." And while the age difference among them is not that great, Harkin comes
across, as does Paul Tsongas, as far older, from another generation.

During a recent campaign stop at a high school in Dover, N.H., the eyes of the
student body collectively glazed over as Harkin recounted the glorious
achievements of his Democratic forefathers -- Roosevelt, Truman and Kennedy.
"Who's Truman?" one gum-chewing blonde asked her girlfriend.

"The audience for Harkin's message is literally and figuratively dying," says
Mike McCurry, the senior communications adviser to Kerrey. "It's just not
appealing to the baby boomers, the geodemographic bulge that accounted for the
Republican ascendancy of the 80's and that might signal a new Democratic
resurgence in the 90's. These are people with virtually no party affiliations.
The imagery of Roosevelt's New Deal simply does not resonate with them."

Because Iowans know their home-grown populism when they hear it, they are also
less likely than most Americans to mistake it for the dreaded Northeastern
liberalism. "I think part of the reason that Harkin doesn't seem to be catching
on," says Peter Fenn, a Washington-based independent political consultant, "is
that people in New Hampshire don't see Harkin as a populist, but as a knee-jerk,
dyed-in-the-wool, big-spending liberal."

The subtle but critical difference between Harkin's populist message and
standard liberalism -- his emphasis not so much on expanding Government
programs, which all the candidates favor to some degree, but on class warfare --
is all but lost on most voters.

When Harkin speaks, what comes across is the big "L" word, as Jamieson puts it,
which is particularly disabling in New Hampshire, home of John H. Sununu and a
license plate that reads "Live Free or Die." Polls show that across the country
five times the number of people surveyed think that liberal is a dirty word
rather than a positive one. But the ratio is 13 to 1 in New Hampshire. "Liberal
there is tantamount to sodomy," Jamieson says.

Moreover, while Harkin identifies himself as the only real Democrat in the race,
45 percent of those who voted in the New Hampshire Democratic primary in 1984
and 1988 identified themselves as independents or Republicans, says Stan B.
Greenberg, a poll taker for Clinton. This was particularly true of younger
voters. "So he's running as a real Democrat when 45 percent of the electorate by
definition doesn't care," he says.

Harkin argues that while New Hampshire Republicans may be more conservative than
their counterparts in other states, the state's Democrats are not. Former United
States Representative John Durkin, the co-chair of Harkin's New Hampshire
campaign, agreed. "In 1988, New Hampshire would have elected Jack the Ripper if
he were a Republican," he says. "But in 1992, the 'L' word stands for only two
things: 'laid off' or 'losing my job.' " Much of the state's high-tech industry
has been ravaged by the recession; some 50,000 jobs have left the state; five of
the largest banks have folded; personal bankruptcies rose an estimated 75
percent last year, and even the state chairman of the Democratic Party, Chris
Spirou, is in danger of having his home mortgage foreclosed.

Despite the intense voter anger, alienation and economic misery, concerns about
Harkin's message have surfaced repeatedly. In January, Susan Vallone Joyce, a
Harkin supporter, invited 35 neighbors to her home in Epping to meet the Iowa
Senator. (She also invited Clinton, but was told that the Governor would not
attend any function that could not guarantee a crowd of at least 100.) After
Harkin left, several people said that although they liked him and found much of
what he had to say appealing, they feared that higher taxes would be required to
pay for the ambitious Federal projects he had outlined. "I don't think pulling
our troops out of Europe is going to be enough to finance all those programs,"
Mark Kucera, an independent, said afterwards. Bonnie M. Meroth, a freelance
journalist and marketing consultant in New Hampshire, had similar fears. "The
ideas are terrific and he expresses them well, but who is going to fund these
enormously expensive programs?"

Paradoxically, Harkin's populist razzmatazz might have been more appealing to
Democrats when President Bush was soaring in the polls and the party had little
to lose by nominating a candidate who reflected its conscience and tradition.
"The Bush bashing and the old-time Democratic religion worked better when it
stirred people's memories and seemed a healthy nostalgic indulgence," says
Schneider. But as Bush started falling in the polls and the Democrats smelled
possible Republican defeat, the party leadership began looking for a more
electable candidate.

A bitter reality for Harkin is that his message may be working far more than his
competitors care to admit -- but not for him. Robert Kuttner, a writer who
specializes in economic issues, argues that the most appealing themes of
Harkin's populism are turning up more frequently in the speeches of the other
candidates.

But Harkin's words in the mouth of Bill Clinton or Bob Kerrey come across
differently. "When you hear Harkin talk about investment in infrastructure,"
says Greenberg, "you automatically think brick and mortar and construction jobs.
But New Hampshire is very suburban, so a message that comes across as
blue-collar working-class doesn't work."

Kevin Phillips, the Republican political analyst Harkin most admires, agrees.
Phillips has argued that Republicans will eventually pay for their policies of
the 1980's, which produced extraordinary concentrations of wealth at the top of
society and neglected the middle class. But Harkin has not got his message
across, Phillips contends, because "prairie populism has little resonance among
the middle-class inhabitants of the cities and suburbs, where most Americans now
live," he says. "Harkin doesn't talk to George Wallace country, or to people in
Silicon Valley, or to people with low-paying jobs in Syosset, L.I."

Harris Wofford's stunning upset in Pennsylvania's Senate race in November showed
that a more polished middle-class version of Tom Harkin, coupled with a populist
and protectionist message, can win. What is needed, says Phillips, "is a
populist message grafted onto a basically middle-class appeal" -- middle-class
populism, in other words.

Harkin asserts that the leaders of his party are simply not as responsive to his
message as rank-and-file Democrats. But some labor leaders who would normally be
supporting Harkin overwhelmingly, given his solid union credentials, are leaning
toward Clinton's more moderate, pro-business message.

Again, electability is the key. Gerald W. McEntee, international president of
the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, recently
praised Clinton, despite the Arkansas Governor's often-fractious relations with
public employees in his own state. "I knew we could get 90 percent of our agenda
with Tom Harkin and only about 60 to 65 percent with Clinton," says McEntee.
"But with George Bush we would get only single digits. So because our people are
hurting, gaining the White House is critical to me."

He loved the Senator's message, McEntee added, "but Harkin's speech is the
speech I give, and I can't be elected President."

Jeff Faux, president of the Economic Policy Institute in Washington, a liberal
think tank with ties to labor, says the Democratic Party is suffering from a
debilitating lack of self-confidence that works against candidates of conscience
like Harkin. "Tom Harkin looks like a Democrat and sounds like a Democrat and
makes the faithful feel like Democrats, so there must be something wrong with
him, they think," Faux says.

A succession of Democratic losses in Presidential bids has created what he calls
"the Groucho Marx syndrome" within the party -- "the feeling that any club that
would have us as members can't be worth joining."

NAME: Tom Harkin

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Harkin talking to members of the International Brotherhood of
Electrical Workers, among the few friendly faces he has found while campaigning
in New Hampshire. Addressing students at Dover High School in Dover, N.H.
(Photographs by Edward Keating/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Profile;
No Longer Target of Jokes, Brown Becomes a Force

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1865 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif., March 8


Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, the butt of so many Republican
jokes, is no longer a joke.

The introspective, ascetic Mr. Brown has developed a loyal, even passionate,
following with his message of disaffection and calls for a national health care
system and a program for nonpolluting energy sources. Yet he has a campaign
staff of only seven paid workers, only two of them with political experience, no
paid political consultants or speech writers, little advertising and almost no
money because he has imposed a limit of $100 per contributor, a 10th the legal
limit for individuals.

Mr. Brown has now emerged as a potent force after winning the Nevada caucuses
today, the Colorado primary last Tuesday and making strong showings in Maine,
Utah, Washington and other states.

Many political experts are beginning to say that he could well go to the
Democratic National Convention in New York with enough delegates to play a
pivotal role should neither of the front-runners, Gov. Bill Clinton and former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas, have enough votes to win the nomination. Just what Mr.
Brown might want in exchange for his support remains uncertain.

All this has been achieved by one of the most unlikely major political campaigns
in many a year. His new prominence comes less than half a year after he dropped
out of the race for a United States Senate seat from California, a race, experts
said, in which he stood to win the nomination but lose the race to a Republican
candidate. Mr. Brown, who will turn 54 years old on April 7 and has been in
politics for more than 20 years, has portrayed himself as an "insurgent"
outsider against the established system. As of March 3, he had raised only
$1,070,108, most of it through a toll-free telephone number, from 19,406 small
contributors. This is less than a fifth of what Mr. Clinton has raised.

'A Natural Constituency'

"Because Jerry is so irritating to many people, offensive to many in the press,
there is a proclivity to say he's a jerk," said Richard Maullin, a Los Angeles
political strategist who Mr. Brown appointed chairman of the California Energy
Commission when he was Governor. "But there is a segment of the electorate that
is a natural constituency for him."

That constituency, according to recent exit polls conducted at state primaries,
tends to be those voters who have grown up in the post-Vietnam, post-Watergate
era of political cynicism. "It tends to be a person who has not voted before,"
said Mr. Brown's campaign manager, Jodie Evans, his long-time aide and
fund-raiser.

An exit poll conducted by Voter Research and Surveys of voters leaving polling
places in Colorado last Tuesday found significant differences between Brown
voters and those who preferred Mr. Clinton or Mr. Tsongas. The Brown voters
tended to be younger, better educated, more liberal and far more concerned about
the environment.

Joseph Scott, a Los Angeles political commentator, calls it the "MTV vote." For
example, of the Colorado voters who cited the environment as a top issue
influencing their votes, 55 percent supported Mr. Brown, 19 percent Mr. Tsongas
and 12 percent Mr. Clinton. On the other hand, the much larger number who cited
the economy and jobs as the top issue were much less likely to vote for Mr.
Brown. Polls of voters in Georgia and Maryland showed he did not have strong
appeal among black and minority voters.

Mr. Brown has commissioned only two polls, one in Iowa and the other in New
Hampshire. Donald D. McDonough of Evans/McDonough Inc., which did the surveys,
said the results showed Mr. Brown benefits from cynicism and pessimism over
government.

Slightly Disorganized

The national Brown campaign operates out of a high-ceilinged ground-floor suite
of offices in a modernistic office park in this seaside Los Angeles suburb.
About 50 volunteers, most of them too young to remember the Vietnam War, do the
drudge work. The mood reflects the candidate's personality: slightly
disorganized and easily distracted.

The operation is hand-to-mouth, orders for television time and other decisions
being made day to day depending on how much money comes in daily through the
toll-free number. "Operators standing by and so is media consultant," joked the
media consultant, Sidney Galanty, whose Santa Monica firm, Galanty & Company,
produced a 30-minute documentary-style commercial on Mr. Brown that is being
shown on television and cable channels in crucial states.

But what the campaign lacks in money and professional support is offset by Mr.
Brown's intellect and energy. "People who write off Jerry Brown do not realize
he's the brightest guy running for President," said Tom Quinn, who managed some
of his earlier campaigns. "He's willing to work day and night."

Unlike the other campaigns, the small Brown entourage usually travels by
commercial flight, though in recent days that has become more difficult with the
addition of newly interested news crews. To save money, Mr. Brown usually sleeps
at the homes of supporters rather than in hotels.

For political advice, Mr. Brown relies mainly on Ms. Evans, his campaign
manager, and Michael Ford, a political strategist from Maryland. Aides say he
also regularly consults with the political strategist who engineered Jimmy
Carter's 1976 race for President, Patrick H. Caddell, who is not paid.

During the recent Colorado race, Mr. Brown talked about his race with the
mixture of religion and introspection that have long marked the political career
of this former Jesuit seminarian. He said he meditated in a Trappist monastery
for a few weeks before beginning his bid and that he searched his soul to make
sure of "purity of intention." Asked if he succeeded in being pure, he
responded, "That's the goal -- the ego is always intruding."

Friends say Mr. Brown, the son of former Gov. Edmund G. Brown of California, has
eyed the Presidency since 1971, soon after he was elected California Secretary
of State when he was 33. Four years later, he was elected Governor and while in
office ran for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1976, winning six late
primaries but losing to Jimmy Carter. After re-election in 1978, he again tried
for President in 1980, but won no primaries. In 1982, his political career went
into eclipse after he lost a race for the United States Senate to Pete Wilson,
who is now the Republican Governor of California.

Having a cushion from a substantial financial base provided by his wealthy
father, Mr. Brown, who is not married, took seven years after that defeat to
work with Mother Teresa in ministering to the poor in Calcutta and study Zen
Buddhism in Japan. His return to politics came in 1989 when he sought and won
the chairmanship of the California Democratic Party, then quit that post in
March 1991 to run for the Senate, only to drop out of that race in September to
run for President.

As Governor, Mr. Brown was seen a visionary thinker by some, a flake by others.
His insistence on living in a $250-a-month apartment with a mattress on the
floor rather than the Governor's mansion and driving an old Plymouth rather than
riding in a limousine struck some as virtuous, others as immature and
self-indulgent. (Campaigning in New Hampshire, he said he would live in the
White House.)

As Governor, he pushed for passage of a landmark bill giving farm workers the
right to collective bargaining, created the California Conservation Corps and
pressed for using less-polluting energy sources. His airy spiritualism and focus
on blue-sky technology earned him the derisive nickname "Gov. Moonbeam."

To this day, Mr. Brown elicits strong reactions among Californians, both
positive and negative. According to the most recent California Poll, which is
conducted by an independent private organization, 45 percent of California
Democrats were inclined to vote for him for President and 47 percent were not,
with only 8 percent having no opinion.

He has long elicited strong opinions. In 1981, before his Senate loss, the
California Poll found 53 percent of all Californians rated Mr. Brown's
performance favorably and 42 unfavorably. By August 1986, with Mr. Brown out of
office and away, the rating turned negative, 50-44. By February 1991, just after
he announced his intention to run for Senate, the rating was 40-40, and it had
hardly changed by the time he dropped out of the Senate race to run for
President, standing at 42 percent favorable to 41 unfavorable. (The margin of
sampling error ranged from 3 to 5 percentage points either way, depending on
size of sample.)

Message of Change

His campaign for President rests on several pillars. The main one is a vague
attack on the system in which he promises to "deliver a message to those who run
the United States of America like a private club that we are going to work
change." His platform includes a flat 13 percent Federal tax on income and goods
and services, with deductions only for charitable giving, home mortgage interest
and rent; a national health care system, and a vigorous program to develop
energy sources that are nonpolluting.

For now, the goal is to stay alive in the primaries. Without money to buy much
television advertising, Mr. Brown relies mainly on free broadcast tiem, like
radio talk shows. In addition, Mr. Galanty has bought television time for the
30-minute commercial in primary states and some unconventional national outlets,
like the Discovery science channel on cable. He spent only $65,000 on media in
New Hampshire and $38,000 in Colorado, compared with hundreds of thousands by
the Clinton and Tsongas campaigns.

The progam confronts directly the "Gov. Moonbeam" problem, saying that
conventional politicians and big companies began to call him names because he
would not go along with their game.

Mr. Brown's main vulnerability is the charge that he is a hypocrite because, in
previous campaigns and as Democratic chairman, he raised millions from the
special interests he now denounces. As recently as Sept. 24, 1990, when he was
chairman, he applauded a Federal judge's ruling that struck down a initiative
voters passed to put limits on campaign contributions, calling it a "pernicious"
measure that aids incumbents. Now he says such limits are needed to oust
incumbents.

His explanation for the apparent discrepancy is that he learned the corrupting
influence of major contributors when he was chairman.

While many leading Democrats here are dubious about this change of heart, few
dismiss the Brown candidacy. "All of us laughed at Paul Tsongas 10 months ago,"
said Phil Angelides, who succeeded Mr. Brown as chairman of the California
Democratic Party.

The experts are divided over whether Mr. Brown, given his high negatives in his
home state, can win the June 2 primary here. But almost all agree he has a
rock-solid support of one-third to one-half of Democrats, assuring him a good
portion of the delegates from the largest state.

And given the low cost of his campaign, there is every reason to believe he will
stay for the duration. As Mr. Quinn put it: "If Clinton or Tsongas think Jerry
will be out soon, they've got a big surprise coming."

NAME: Edmund G. Brown Jr.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edmund G. Brown Jr. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Staying Alive;
How a Battered Clinton Has Stayed Alive

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1646 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


They call him the Terminator. The robo-candidate. A torpedoed battleship that is
still afloat. A Civil War soldier leaning against a tree, bleeding from a
stomach wound.

Of all the issues raised in this scalding political season, one of the most
interesting is this: How did Bill Clinton take so many shots and keep on coming?

In 1988, two Democratic candidates, Gary Hart and Joseph R. Biden Jr., quit the
race after getting enmeshed in character questions. And while the political
cognoscenti believe that Mr. Clinton has been hurt by dust-ups about marital
infidelity, the Vietnam draft and financial dealings -- issues that seem certain
to reappear if Mr. Clinton is the Democratic nominee -- they also express
admiration for his steadiness and self-confidence under fire.

Surviving the Crash

"I've never seen anybody come back from being attacked in that fashion," said
Ian Weinschel, a media consultant for Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative
Republican candidate who knows something about negative attacks. "It's like
going through a car crash with no seat belts and then going through the window
and hitting a wall and walking away. It's absolutely astounding."

But Mr. Weinschel argues that the accusations will eventually doom Mr. Clinton,
as does Edward Rollins, a Republican consultant. Mr. Rollins said Mr. Clinton
had done better than many could have predicted because "he's obviously planned a
campaign without any naivete."

"He's been able to bluff everyone else out. It's a very strategic, calculated
campaign in which the guy doesn't flinch," Mr. Rollins said.

'Jittery' Democrats

Nonetheless, the revelations about Mr. Clinton "have left people jittery," said
Karen Marchioro, the Democratic Party chairman in Washington State. "We're just
living it day by day, waiting to see what happens."

Even Mr. Clinton's mild-mannered rival, Paul E. Tsongas, has gotten nasty on the
character issue. The other day in Michigan, talking about his position on
abortion rights, Mr. Tsongas began a sentence, "I want women -- " and then
stopped to slide in a quick stiletto: "No, that's the other guy."

But whatever his fate, whatever the truth of rumors of new bombshells, Mr.
Clinton has so far beaten the odds and kept the money rolling in for these
reasons: He is prepared, charming and facile; in a weak field, he is, as
Claibourne Darden Jr., a poll taker in Atlanta, put it, "the tallest pine in the
desert," and, as the Arkansas Governor himself likes to point out, being in 17
primaries and general elections in 17 years in the barbed-wire politics of the
South has taught him how to take and give a punch.

"I don't know how many lives he has," said Charles Graves, the Democratic Party
chairman in Wyoming. "But it's great to have a candidate who can land on his
feet."

Calming Backers

Mr. Clinton has kept a troubled candidacy alive by force of will, organization
and the ability to act as if things are fine when they are decidedly not. His
talent for striding over a rickety bridge while seeming to ignore the ravine
below has quelled panic among contributors and important backers, and even won
converts among the politically cynical.

After watching Mr. Clinton in New Hampshire as he fought off accusations of an
extramarital affair, Joseph Grandmaison decided to help Mr. Clinton because he
appreciated his seeming serenity under incredible pressure.

"I went to see him at a rally in Portsmouth on the Sunday afternoon after he
taped the interview with '60 Minutes,' and he laid out the single most
thoughtful, comprehensive economic policy that anybody could and tied it
directly into the needs of the New Hampshire seacoast," recalled Mr.
Grandmaison, the former Democratic party chairman. "I was in awe that, when the
pressure becomes absolutely fierce and intense, he gets stronger."

Gov. Zell Miller of Georgia, who has been friends with the candidate for years
and helped deliver a saving victory in Georgia, said: "This is a person who has
thought more about campaigning and being President than anybody I have ever
seen. He and his adviser, Jim Carville, are people who don't go dark easy. By
that, I mean, they don't get easily discouraged."

Like George Bush, Mr. Clinton is a man of enormous ambition who spent decades
creating a political network based on friendships, gestures, phone calls and
letters, sedulously wooing the Democratic establishment and journalists.

Like Lyndon B. Johnson and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Mr. Clinton loves to press
the flesh and work the phone. "Oh, Lord, the phone calls come at midnight or in
the middle of the night," said George Jernigan, the Arkansas Democratic
chairman.

Like John F. Kennedy, Mr. Clinton knows how to court the press. His early
anointment as the winner of the invisible primary of reporters and Democratic
insiders -- proclaimed last winter in magazines like The New Republic, New York
and Time -- was crucial in giving him ballast when the negative stories began in
January.

Reporters at the Altar

And much of the press corps is still smitten and worshipful, according to
Hendrik Hertzberg's informal poll in a recent issue of The New Republic. "The
real reason members of The Press like Clinton is simple, and surprisingly
uncynical; they think he would make a very good, perhaps a great, President.

"Above all, they are awed by his fortitude (and his wife's, too)."

Charles Peters, the editor of The Washington Monthly who worked for the Kennedy
campaign in 1960, said he had not seen anything like it in 30 years: "The appeal
of Clinton is similar to what went on with Kennedy, who was tremendously
seductive. And the effect that had on the reporting and the suppression of
criticism, helped us a lot in the Kennedy campaign."

Bill Kovach, the head of the Nieman Foundation at Harvard University, agreed
that the Clinton campaign had played the press masterfully. "Bill Clinton has
worked Washington as though it were a precinct in his home town," Mr. Kovach
said. "And a lot of these journalists who think that maybe this will be their
Camelot gave him a head of steam before any vote was cast."

Call a Clinton supporter, and you'll hear a story about the candidate's power of
political seduction.

Take James Anderson, a 37-year-old lawyer in Montgomery, Ala., who is on the
Clinton campaign state steering committee. In 1979, when he was a senior at
Cumberland Law School in Birmingham, Mr. Anderson wrote the young Governor of
Arkansas and asked if he would be a speaker at the school's law day banquet.

After hanging out with the students for hours, Mr. Clinton gave his speech and
then went to the airport to catch a plane back to Little Rock. When the pilot
came out to ask who the Governor was, Mr. Clinton pointed to Mr. Anderson and
the group went along with the gag for a few moments.

"Bill Clinton probably wouldn't know me from Adam's house cat now," the lawyer
said. "But ever since that day he pulled the practical joke, I felt he was one
of us, our kind of people."

When the tabloid stories first hit, Mr. Clinton battled desperately to turn the
problem into an opportunity, and he began presenting himself as an outsider who
was being unfairly attacked by the press and the Republican Party.

As Mr. Carville, the jagged-edge Clinton strategist, began blasting reporters
traveling on the Clinton plane about how horrible they were, many of them
nodded, reflecting the tender feelings left by criticism of the press role in
bringing down two Democratic candidates in 1988.

When Mr. Tsongas began to benefit from Mr. Clinton's problems, the Arkansas
Governor, a leader of the conservative Democratic Leadership Conference, slid to
the left. Mr. Clinton took the role of another candidate, Senator Tom Harkin of
Iowa, as friend of the working man, painting Mr. Tsongas as a proponent of
Reaganomics.

"He's returned to the old Democratic formula in primaries of pandering to
special interest groups," said Roger Stone, a Republican consultant who got his
start working for Richard M. Nixon.

Those who criticize Mr. Clinton as being too glib often compare him to the
classic traveling salesman -- out there on a smile and a shoeshine.

One of the steps the campaign took to keep their supporters on board during the
worst moments of the tabloid scandal was to have the candidate make his own
sales pitches to supporters. Clinton advisers credited a conference call in
which Bill and and his equally confident wife, Hillary, spoke to a group of New
York contributors with halting any erosion of support.

In the undertow of doubt, Mr. Clinton takes care to give an appearance of
openness -- even when he is declining to to illuminate aspects of his personal
life or finances, such as what happened to the records of Whitewater
Development, a real estate corporation in which he was a partner.

Even when he is slipping away from direct answers, the candidate conveys an air
of calmness and directness, standing for long periods to take questions, never
stalking away from cameras or ducking into cars with his arms raised to fend off
inquiries.

But Republicans like to point out that, after enough blasts, crashes, zaps and
shocks, even Arnold Schwarzenegger in "Terminator" was finally compacted into
21st-century slag.

"A Clinton-Bush battle would be one of the all-time great negative campaigns,"
Mr. Rollins said. "In the final analysis, there will be enough significant
doubts about him that President Bush would beat him."

As he closes on the nomination, Mr. Clinton's Democratic detractors have become
equally blunt.

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr., campaigning in Michigan last week, said that
Mr. Clinton's seeming durability may be an optical illusion. "He looks like he's
going forward," he said, "but a good strong wind out of the press, or Bush, or
the Democrats, may blow him right over."


NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 17, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A picture of Gov. Bill Clinton marching carried an incorrect caption in some
editions yesterday. It showed him participating in Chicago's St. Patrick's Day
Parade, not meeting with patrons in a Chicago restaurant.


GRAPHIC: Photo: In spite of questions about his character, including marital
infidelity, the Vietnam draft and financial dealings, Gov. Bill Clinton remains
steady in his quest for the Democratic nomination for President. Mr. Clinton
marched yesterday in a St. Patrick's Day parade on Chicago's South Side. (Jose
R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A15)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Independents;
Perot, the 'Simple' Billionaire, Says Voters Can Force His Presidential Bid

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, March 27


In a year in which half the cards in the political deck seem to be jokers, the
ultimate wild card may be playing out in a corporate suite full of Norman
Rockwell paintings in a high rise here.

"I'm a very simple person," said H. Ross Perot, the Texas entrepreneur and
billionaire, who the telephone company says has received more than a million
calls from would-be volunteers over the past three weeks since he discussed a
possible Presidential bid on the Larry King Show. "I told the people if they do
their job, I'm obligated to do my job, and I will not come up with some
limp-wristed excuse because it's unpleasant."

The people's job, as Mr. Perot has explained it, is to put his name on the
ballot in all 50 states. Committees in every state seem intent on trying to do
that. He has said he will use as much as $100 million of his own money to put
together a third-party Presidential bid if they do.

Offering America a Vision

By any standard measure, Mr. Perot's potential third-party candidacy is the
longest of long shots. But more than a few political observers see the potential
for an explosive form of political combustion in the combination of an angry,
frustrated electorate and Mr. Perot's iconoclastic, take-no-prisoners, persona
and anti-politics politics.

In a year of angry, resentful politics Mr. Perot offers not ideology but a
vision that is one half-angry Jeremiah and one half corporate Mr. Good- wrench
willing to slash government spending and work with businesses to revamp the
economy.

"I think people are underestimating what a phenomenon he's going to be," said
Peter Elkind, editor of the weekly Dallas Observer here. "He is the most
single-minded man on the face of the earth, and he seems to have decided he
wants to be President of this country."

There are ample reasons to be skeptical. No third-party candidate has ever been
elected President, and over the last half century only George C. Wallace has
received more than 10 percent of the vote when he got 13.5 percent in 1968.

There is no guarantee he will get on all 50 state ballots. Skeptics say Mr.
Perot, who in the past has dismissed talk of a possible Presidential bid by
saying, "Jeez, I've never run for dogcatcher," may look better in the abstract
than he will when his specific positions are scrutinized.

"Ross Perot is the untested wild man, and while that may be attractive here at
the beginning, I'm not sure it will be attractive at the end," said Karl Rove, a
Republican consultant and party loyalist in Austin. "What's his message? I'm the
zillionaire that built his company on government contracts?"

But over the last week, Mr. Perot added a phone system with an open capacity to
his 100-line phone bank here. Phone company officials say he got 257,139 calls
on Wednesday alone after he appeared on the Phil Donahue show that day and has
received 1.1 million calls since March 16 when he appeared on the King show.

Volunteers in Tennessee say they already have enough signatures to get him on
the ballot there, and Mr. Perot said there was "a very strong indication" of
meeting his goal of getting on the ballots in every state.

At the least, Mr. Perot has the potential to radically change the political
arithmetic in some major states like Texas.

Republicans Chief Worriers

Some analysts think Mr. Perot's could gather enough of the anti-incumbent vote
to hurt a Democratic challenger more than President Bush. But it is the
Republicans who seem most worried about Mr. Perot's appeal to disgruntled
conservatives.

"If he takes votes from the President in sufficient numbers to deliver the state
to Bill Clinton, then we've got big problems." said Jim Oberwetter, chairman of
the Bush campaign in Texas.

At the most? Admirers say in this political year of living dangerously, anything
is possible.

"The response we're getting is overwhelming; it's like a holy war," said Thomas
O'Neil, a consultant coordinating the effort to get Mr. Perot on the ballot in
New Jersey. "At this point, in this country, to have someone come forward who
could have been designed by an engineer trying to solve the problems of this
country, it's almost mystical."

Mystical is not a word often applied to the 61-year-old Mr. Perot, who first
gained public attention when he turned a $1,000 investment in his own computer
company, Electronic Data Systems, into a $220 million fortune in six years and
has since evolved into something of a Texas billionaire populist.

Texas Folk Hero

Mr. Perot was labeled a right-wing superpatriot when he spent $1.5 million in
1969 to take mail, medicine and Christmas meals to American prisoners of war in
North Vietnam. He became a folk hero in 1979 when he mounted an expedition that
freed two employees from an Iranian prison.

And in recent years, he has developed a reputation as a maverick beyond
political categorization in efforts to improve education in Texas, an
unsuccessful attempt to revamp General Motors, and as a critic of government
waste and the Persian Gulf war.

Mr. Perot, whose 17th-floor office is full of Norman Rockwell Americana, the
painting of "The Spirit of '76," and mementos from exploits like the rescue
mission in Iran, is a pint-sized, jug-eared man who talks in a rapid-fire East
Texas twang so insistent that The Fort Worth Star-Telegram columnist Molly Ivins
once compared him to a Chihuahua.

Mr. Perot insists he has no desire to be President, a job he has described as
"the toughest, dirtiest, most thankless job in the world." But in a steady
stream of television appearances in recent weeks he has fanned the flames of his
prospective candidacy.

He calls for the development of strategic plans, industry by industry, to revive
the economy; a new tax system; taking away Congress' ability to raise taxes
without popular approval; a line item veto; strict limits on the ability of
former public officials to serve as lobbyists; the elimination of political
action committees and dramatic cuts in the perquisites available to both
Congress and the executive branch.

"What we have now is a system where if you have potholes in your city, all the
politicians hold conferences on potholes," Mr. Perot said. "If and when I ever
have to do this job, we're going to get hot asphalt, get a shovel, fill
potholes, move on to the next one and skip the press conference."

Still, most of the specifics of his program remain unclear.

Mr. Perot talks insistently about an "electronic town hall," in which he would
explain issues in detail to people on television, and they would express their
views to the members of Congress, cutting special interests out of the process.
But on most specific issues like changes in the tax system or health care, he
said, he would convene panels of the most knowledgable people to develop
solutions.

He voices disdain at the idea voters would want to know his position on specific
issues, saying the positions offered in a campaign are necessarily so vague as
to be meaningless. "If you want a position paper, I'll give you a position
paper, but it will be a total waste of time," he said.

Skeptics say that is a sign of someone unlikely to make the transition very well
from business to politics.

"As smart as the guy is, he has never run for public office before and that can
be a very dangerous thing in politics," Mr. Oberwetter said. "That's why he has
to have some good advice, and, get this, he actually has to take advice from
someone else, which will be hard for him to do."

Still, Mr. Perot finds himself in the unique position this year of an angry man,
who is able to draw support from across the political spectrum.

In fact, despite Mr. Perot's conservative pedigree, Mr. Rove assails him from
the right, while George Shipley, a Democratic consultant in Austin, almost
gushes: "This is about public service in its pure terms; it's not Mr. Smith goes
to Washington, it's Horatio Alger goes to Washington."

Question of Scrutiny

Not everyone sees so pristine a picture. Mr. Perot is not believed to be utterly
bereft of ego himself, and Republicans are quick to accuse Mr. Perot of
harboring a longstanding grudge toward President Bush.

Mr. Rove said Mr. Perot's across-the-board appeal is not likely to stand up
under scrutiny. "He can't be the conservative to conservatives, the moderate to
moderates and the liberal to liberals," Mr. Rove said.

Still, in a year when voters seem to be screaming for a break with politics as
usual, Mr. Perot may be presenting the clearest break yet.

"We've got a patient whose heart has stopped beating and has broken fingers and
toes, and all the politicians want to talk about is the fingers and toes," he
said. "I want to go straight to the heart."

NAME: H. Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: H. Ross Perot, who has paved the way for a possible run for the
Presidency, in his office in Dallas. Behind him was a model of a statue by
Frederick E. Hart that is part of the Vietnam War Memorial. (Mark Graham for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Governor of Colorado Finds Success By 'Telling It Straight,' Even to Bush

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: DENVER, March 29


In the Dust Bowl town of Holly, just a speck on the map of the harsh Colorado
plains, people learn early that life can hit hard. The ones who survive learn
how to hit back.

When the town's most famous native son, Gov. Roy Romer, went to the White House
for a meeting last month, he brought some of Holly with him. He listened
dutifully as President Bush delivered his budget proposals to the nation's
governors.

But before anyone could raise a contrary word, the reporters were told to leave.
Mr. Romer, a Democrat, became irked. He felt that the governors were being used
as props for an election-year pitch.

Speaking Up

"Could I ask the press not to leave yet?" Mr. Romer interjected to the surprise
of everyone, not the least being the President. He went on to criticize
"gimmicks" in the President's budget.

Not many politicians would speak so boldly in a White House setting. But the
brash Mr. Romer, whose name often surfaces when speculation turns to a
Vice-Presidential nominee, has a way of saying what he thinks and winning points
for it.

He won a second term in 1990 by taking 64 percent of the vote against a
Republican challenger. During his tenure, the unvarnished Mr. Romer has
antagonized cattle interests, environmentalists and labor leaders, among other
groups. He opposed gambling in Colorado, though the state's voters legalized it
anyway, allowing casinos in some towns. And lately he has been calling for
increases in taxes. And yet his popularity only soars.

Some Democrats might wonder at Mr. Romer's magic, especially in a Western state
that has not voted Democratic in a Presidential election since 1964.

'Telling It Straight'

"The only way I've survived is by absolutely telling it straight," the
63-year-old Mr. Romer said during an interview in his office, where the walls
are covered with pictures of philosophers and farmers, including one of the
8-year-old future Governor driving a tractor. "People don't expect to agree with
you on all the issues. But if you tell it straight, they respect you."

The underpinnings of Mr. Romer's philosophy are almost always found in the
fields of his youth. Living smack in the middle of the Dust Bowl, Mr. Romer
remembers hanging wet sheets on the windows in the 1930's to fight the raging
dust.

"In Holly," he said, "you lean over the fence and sell your cows with a
handshake, and if you go bad on your word, you've got to live with it for 40
years."

In his confrontation with the President, the Governor said two strains of his
Holly background came into conflict. On the one hand, rural people place
enormous value on decorum and respect. "You don't shout in church," he said.
"And if my mother had been alive" to see him embarrass the President, "she would
have spanked me."

But people from the back country, he added, do not abide condescension. "You
don't let someone take advantage of you," he said. "And I felt I was being
manipulated."

The Governor's office received 16,000 phone calls and 1,000 letters about the
White House flap. Mr. Romer said more than 80 percent of them supported him.

Mr. Romer's Republican critics have described him as a publicity hound who
spends too much time gallivanting around the nation. He became a hot property
last year after he intervened between teachers and school administrators to
avoid a strike at the Denver schools.

He also added to his national reputation with his work as co-chairman of the
National Council of Education Standards and Testing, an advisory group of
educational and political leaders that called last year for voluntary national
curriculum standards and national tests for American schoolchildren.

Education Spending

But in Colorado, Republicans say the Governor has no new ideas on education
other than spending more money. They scoff at Mr. Romer's proposal to increase
school spending by $200 million next year.

"This emperor, when it comes to education, has no clothes, unless they are under
the cloak of higher taxes," wrote State Senator Bill Owens, a Republican foe, in
a column in The Rocky Mountain News.

Mr. Romer appeared in Connecticut on Monday with Bill Clinton, and endorsed the
Arkansas Governor's bid for President. The appearance was sure to heighten
criticism among Republicans who say he spends too much time outside of Colorado,
as well as encourage speculation about a Romer Vice-Presidential candidacy.

He has repeatedly denied any interest in a spot on the ticket. "I'm not a
candidate for Vice President," he says flatly. But that has not dampened the
speculation.

The son of I. R. and Betsy Romer, who ran a grain elevator and farm-implements
dealership, young Roy did not know exactly what he wanted to do with his life --
only that he wanted to do it far from Holly.

He studied agriculture at Colorado Agricultural and Mechanical College, now
Colorado State University, where he was elected president of the student body,
then earned a law degree at the University of Colorado. He spent a term in the
Air Force, then attended Yale Divinity school for a year.

"I knew I was going to end up in politics," he said, "so I wanted to study
ethics." He chose Yale because it was an intellectual center for the study of
the philosopher Martin Buber, the Jewish philosopher who advocated cooperation
between Jews and Arabs. A picture of Buber hangs on the Governor's wall.

After serving in the State Legislature, Mr. Romer ran unsuccessfully for the
United States Senate in 1965. During that period, Mr. Romer said, he became
nearly obsessed with the Vietnam War. He steeped himself in the history of the
conflict and traveled alone to South Vietnam to see things for himself.

He felt so strongly opposed to the war, he said, that he knew he was
unelectable. "My views on the war took me out of politics for awhile. I didn't
fit."

Taste for Politics

Mr. Romer turned to a series of business enterprises, running a flight school,
operating a ski resort and developing a subdivision in the foothills west of
Denver. For a time, he owned the nation's largest chain of John Deere farm
equipment dealerships. The business ventures made him wealthy, but he still had
a taste for politics.

In 1975, he was named State Agriculture Commissioner by Richard D. Lamm, who was
then Governor, and he later served as Treasurer. Mr. Romer won the Governor's
post in 1986. He is serving as co-chairman of the platform committee of the
Democratic Party.

To Mr. Romer, who is generally regarded as a centrist, the Democratic Party
needs to "regain its credibility," and spend more time listening to the people.

"We all come at things with our own set of rose-colored glasses," he said. "I'm
white. I'm Protestant. I'm rural. I'm middle class. So I'm going to see things
one way. Someone of a different background can look at the very same
circumstances, and see it another way. It means you've got to listen very hard
to what someone is saying."

NAME: Roy Romer

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Roy Romer of Colorado, who is often mentioned in
speculation about a Democratic Vice-Presidential nominee, has a way of saying
what he thinks and winning points for it. He was interviewed in Denver. (Eric
Lars Bakke for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Reorganization at Dow Corning Surprises Experts

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


Business consultants today expressed surprise at the timing of the executive
changes announced at the Dow Corning Corporation yesterday and uncertainty about
how to interpret the demotion of Lawrence A. Reed, the company's chief
executive. But most felt that the changes could help the company's image.

"From what little I know, it looks good," said Gerald C. Meyers, a consultant
based in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., who had been among the sharpest critics of the
company's management of the controversy on breast implants. "They have
identified the crisis manager at the highest level and told everyone else to go
back and run the business."

Dow Corning said yesterday that Keith R. McKennon, a former top executive at the
Dow Chemical Company and longtime member of Dow Corning's board, would become
chairman and chief executive to help the company deal with the controversy over
its silicon gel breast implants. John S. Ludington, Dow Corning's chairman, will
retire, and Mr. Reed, its current chief executive, will become chief operating
officer and president.

Optimism at Meeting

This afternoon, Mr. Reed told Dow Corning executives of the changes in a meeting
at the company's headquarters in Midland Mich., and appeared optimistic, said
one company official who insisted on anonymity. The issue of whether Mr. Reed
might ever resume the chief executive's post was not raised.

"McKennon is concentrating on the breast implant issues but he is now chief
executive in every respect," the official said.

Mr. McKennon is a former head of Dow Chemical's domestic operations and had
experience handling the company's responses to dioxin pollution cases and Agent
Orange, the defoliant used in the Vietnam War that was blamed for injuring
thousands of soldiers.

Dow Corning officials expect him to bring a sympathetic image to the helm. "He
had already made it clear that he puts women with breast implants at the top of
the list of people who have to be satisfied with how this comes out," the
official said.

Consultants Surprised

Nonetheless, the timing of the change surprised many crisis management
consultants.

Mr. Meyers, for instance, said that he had expected executive changes but that,
having waited this long, the smoothest time for such a transition would have
been on the eve of an independent report reviewing the company's handling of the
implants. Griffin Bell, Attorney General under President Jimmy Carter, was hired
late last month by Dow Corning to conduct the review. He has previously been
retained by E. F. Hutton, a Wall Street securities firm, to investigate
financial fraud, and by the independent directors of the Exxon Corporation in
the afermath of Valdez oil spill. Both investigations took several months.

It is uncommon but not unheard of for chief executives to step down at startup
companies when they have technical backgrounds that do not equip them for
handling commercial growth, but demotions like Mr. Reed's at major industrial
companies are exceedingly rare. They are almost always followed by the quick
departure of the demoted executive. But experts said that may not happen in this
case.

"They are basically saying that this guy is capable of running the company but
not who we want at the front of the line in a crisis," said Prof. Stephen A.
Greyser, a public relations expert at the Harvard Business School. "It's a vote
of limited confidence, not no confidence."

One executive who will be affected by the change is J. Kermit Campbell, the
executive vice president whom Mr. Reed had asked to take primary responsibility
for managing the implant issue.

Dow Corning was uncertain what effect the announcement might have on the stock
of its parents, the Dow Chemical Company and the Corning Corporation. The
announcement was delayed until after the stock markets closed.

Robert Rylee, the Dow Corning executive who supervises the medical products
business, said the company had had fewer than 1,000 suits against it and
insurance to cover anticipated legal costs.

NAME: Keith R. McKennon; Lawrence A. Reed

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

William A. Arrowsmith, 67, Dies; Scholar and Critic of Universities

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 538 words


William A. Arrowsmith, a scholar and translator of the classics and modern
literature who became a widely quoted critic of American higher education, died
on Thursday at his home in Brookline, Mass. He was 67 years old.

He died apparently of heart failure, an assistant said.

Dr. Arrowsmith gained his widest audience with his attacks on graduate education
in the humanities in the 1960's. He blamed "the hideous jungle of academic
bureaucracy" for making the humanities irrelevant to modern life and sacrificing
education to trivial research, "the cult of the fact" and career training.

In the keynote address to the American Council on Education in 1966, he accused
educators of creating a "vacuum of leadership." The 1,400 delegates, which
included university presidents, deans and trustees, applauded. That same year he
wrote an article in Harper's entitled "The Shame of the Graduate Schools."

Translated Aristophanes

Against the backdrop of campus ferment over the Vietnam War and racism, he
called for the creation of "universities of the public interest" to develop a
moral compass to address social issues.

He served on a National Endowment for the Humanities panel that issued a report
in 1984 voicing similar views. He was also on the board of the American
Association for Higher Education and the International Council on the Future of
the University.

Among the classics he translated into English were dramas by Euripides and
Aristophanes. He was the general editor of the 33-volume "The Greek Tragedy in
New Translations" (Oxford, 1973) and of Nietzsche's "Unmodern Observations"
(Yale, 1989).

The modern works he translated included "The Storm and Other Things" (Norton,
1985) by Eugenio Montale, the Nobel laureate Italian poet; "Hard Labor"
(Grossman, 1976) by Cesare Pavese, and "Six Modern Italian Novellas" (Pocket
Books, 1964). The New York Times said that his "fine, precise English keeps more
of Montale's crackling energy than would seem possible," and that his Pavese
translation had "flashes of brilliant poetry."

As a critic, his subjects ranged from the classics to the films of Michelangelo
Antonioni, for whom he translated a book. Prolific in journals, he was a
founding editor of The Hudson Review, The Chimera and Arion, and an editor of
Delos, Mosaic, American Poetry Review and Pequod.

His two longest teaching tenures were 12 years at the University of Texas at
Austin, where he was chairman of the classics department, and 11 years at Boston
University. He also taught at Princeton, Wesleyan, the University of California
at Riverside, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Yale, Johns Hopkins,
Georgetown, Emory and New York University.

Born in Orange, N.J., he grew up in Wellesley, Mass. He received a bachelor's
degree and a doctorate at Princeton University and a bachelor's and master's at
Oxford University in England. He was a Rhodes Scholar and received Wilson,
Guggenheim and Rockefeller fellowships.

His companion for the last several years was Marianne Meyer. His marriage to
Jean Reiser ended in divorce in 1980. Surviving are two daughters, Beth, of
Colorado Springs, and Nancy, of Gfohl, Austria, and a sister, Roberta Mills of
Middletown, N.Y.

NAME: William A. Arrowsmith

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William A. Arrowsmith (1970)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

At 88, an Undiminished Dr. Spock

BYLINE: By CAROL LAWSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 6; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words


THE author of one of the most popular books ever published did not waste time
with a stiff, formal introduction. He simply extended a big, firm hand, smiled
and said, "Hi, I'm Ben."

Benjamin Spock, M.D., to be official.

Nearly half a century ago, as a struggling pediatrician in New York City, he
wrote a chapter heading, "Trust Yourself," and an opening sentence: "You know
more than you think you do." Then he proceeded to lay out, in encyclopedic
detail and an understanding tone, everything else he thought parents needed to
know about raising children.

The result was "Dr. Spock's Baby and Child Care." It was an instant success when
it was published in 1946, radically altering popular ideas about child rearing
in an era that had been dominated by cold, rigid attitudes toward children. The
book went on to influence generations of parents and children, selling about 40
million copies around the world.

The latest edition of "Baby and Child Care," the sixth (Pocket Books, $6.99
paperback), has just arrived in bookstores. The author left his winter home in
Tortola in the British Virgin Islands last week to come to New York to stir up
interest.

For a moment Dr. Spock's attention was diverted by a tray of luscious-looking
fruit that was being rolled into his gilded hotel suite by two waiters in crisp
white jackets. He looked at it longingly, but kept his distance. He was under
orders from his wife, Mary Morgan, who was a toddler when his book came out.

"I wouldn't mind cheating," said Dr. Spock, who is two months away from his 89th
birthday, and who has been married to Ms. Morgan, his second wife, since 1976.
"But Mary has me on a strict macrobiotic diet. It's all grains and vegetables.
I'm hungry all the time. Our meals in New York are coming from a macrobiotic
kitchen in Brooklyn. Mary thinks she is saving me from the grave."

He laughed. "It really surprises me that I'm still alive."

Dapperly dressed in his trademark three-piece navy suit and gold watch chain, he
folded his large frame, which he says has shrunk in old age from 6 feet 4 inches
to a little over 6 feet, into a plumply cushioned love seat. He went on about
the influence of his 48-year-old wife, making her sound like a live-in personal
trainer.

"Mary heard that meditation leads to longevity, so we meditate," he said.  "Mary
is a great swimmer, so we swim every day."

Their regimen also includes psychotherapy at least twice a week. "We have had a
psychoanalytic consultant ever since we were married," he said. "This is not at
all unusual if you are psychoanalytically inclined."

Indeed, he credits his own psychoanalytic training for much of his success. He
wrote his book at the urging of a publisher who was looking for a pediatrician
who also knew something about Freud. "At the time, I was the only pediatrician
in New York, and in the United States as a matter of fact, who had that kind of
training," he said. After his pediatrics training, he had done a psychiatry
residency for a year, then attended the New York Psychoanalytic Institute for
five years.

"For the first 10 years I was in practice, before I wrote the book, I was trying
desperately to reconcile Freudian concepts with what mothers told me about their
babies," he said. "You have no idea how difficult that was at the time. Nobody
was interested in it. I couldn't turn to anybody."

Dr. Spock developed the advice in his book in his medical office, using patients
and their parents as guinea pigs to test his ideas.

When the book sold 750,000 copies the first year, Dr. Spock recalled, he was not
immediately overjoyed. "I was scared to death," he said. "I was scared that the
book would be misunderstood, that somebody, thinking she was following my
advice, would do something that would make a child worse, or even kill a child."

Today, child development experts credit Dr. Spock with having profoundly
influenced child rearing in the United States. Until he came along, parents were
advised to follow rigid schedules and rules. The behaviorist John B. Watson, a
popular author in the first half of the century, warned parents to "never hug
and kiss" children, and "never let them sit on your lap."

Dr. Spock disagreed. "Don't be afraid to kiss your baby when you feel like it,"
he wrote.

Dr. Spock is also credited with having paved the way for later authors of
parental advice books, including Dr. T. Berry Brazelton, the Harvard
pediatrician, and Dr. Penelope Leach, the British psychologist. Both are quick
to praise Dr. Spock's pioneering role.

"He was one of my gurus," Dr. Brazelton said. "Before he came along, advice to
parents was very didactic. He opened the whole area of empowered parenting. He
gave parents choices and encouraged them to think things out for themselves."

Dr. Leach called Dr. Spock's book "my Bible when I was bringing up my own
children." She added, "He was the first person who seemed to understand parents'
feelings and infants' feelings."

For two decades after "Baby and Child Care" came out, Dr. Spock was popularly
known as "the baby doctor." But in the 1960's, when he became involved in
protests against the Vietnam War, he gained notoriety as a peace activist. In
1968 he was convicted of conspiracy to aid resistance to the military draft. The
conviction was overturned on appeal.

It was in that period that Dr. Spock's nemesis, the Rev. Norman Vincent Peale,
entered his life. Mr. Peale angrily blamed Dr. Spock for the rebelliousness of
young people who opposed the war. He charged that Dr. Spock had encouraged their
parents to be permissive and offer instant gratification.

"I have spent an inordinate amount of time denying this since 1968," said Dr.
Spock, his voice suddenly firm and loud. "It is so annoying. I always believed
in giving a child firm, clear leadership. It's not remotely my idea that you
give a child what he wants or let him do what he wants. Even if I go to England
or France, they still say, 'What about the permissiveness?' "

By now Dr. Spock was on the edge of his seat. "You can see I'm frustrated," he
said. "The sale of the book was depressed a great deal during the Vietnam
period. It has gradually crept back up."

Dr. Spock's defenders say that his political activism, which included a run for
the presidency in 1972 on the People's Party ticket, muddied his medical
reputation. "There are people today who mistrust his book because of his
position on social issues," said Dr. Edward F. Zigler, a Yale University child
psychologist.

Even so, the book provides Dr. Spock with about $150,000 a year in royalties.
For many years, he and Ms. Morgan, whom he married after he divorced his first
wife, Jane Cheney, lived aboard sailboats in Maine and the Virgin Islands, but
recently they came ashore.

Dr. Spock has turned over most of the work of continuously updating his book to
Dr. Michael B. Rothenberg, a pediatrician and child psychiatrist from Seattle,
Wash., who collaborated on the 1985 edition of "Baby and Child Care." But Dr.
Spock, who has had a mild stroke and has a pacemaker, said he intends to keep a
hand in the enterprise "as long as I live."

"I am proud that the book has sold 40 million copies," Dr. Spock said. "No other
book has come near it, except for the Bible. And I am proud that parents think
of it as reassuring. The best letter I ever got was from a woman who said, 'It
sounds as if you're talking to me, and you think I'm a sensible person.' "

His eyes were teary behind his thick glasses. "That almost makes me weep," Dr.
Spock said. "It sounds so simple. But it is hard for a doctor who has been
taught that he knows it all, that patients are ignoramuses.

"To talk to parents as if they are sensible people. That's all I ever wanted."

NAME: Benjamin Spock

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dr. Benjamin Spock, the man who influenced generations of
parents and children. (pg. C1); Dr. Spock, left, and collaborator, Dr. Michael
Rothenberg. (pg. C8) (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 14, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Rev. Paul Abels Dies at 54; Gay Pastor Lead 'Peace' Church

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 475 words


The Rev. Paul M. Abels, a former Greenwich Village pastor who was the first
openly gay minister with a congregation in a major Christian denomination in
America, died on Thursday at his home in Rensselaerville, N.Y. He was 54 years
old.

He died of complications from AIDS, said Thomas Hunt, his companion for the past
14 years.

Mr. Abels was the pastor of the Washington Square United Methodist Church from
1973 to 1984. It was known by some as the Peace Church for its opposition to the
Vietnam War, and it had a large membership of gay men and women.

Object of Criticism

Controversy arose when he publicly acknowledged his homosexuality in 1977 and
began performing "covenant ceremonies" for gay couples who were unable to have
legal weddings.

Citing a Biblical passage against homosexuality, critics called for his removal.
His bishop urged Mr. Abels to take a leave, but he declined, and a regional
Methodist body voted in his favor. The bishop appealed to a national church
council, which decided Mr. Abels could retain his congregation.

But the criticism continued, and he retired shortly before a 1984 national
church conference voted to bar actively gay men and women from ordination or
service as clergy. That is still the policy of the Methodists and most other
denominations. Mr. Abels remained a Methodist and became active with
Affirmation, a national group of gay and lesbian church members.

After leaving the ministry, he ran Equinox, a nonprofit organization in Albany
for runaway teen-agers, battered women, the homeless and drug and alcohol
abusers. Since 1989 he worked as a consultant and, with Mr. Hunt as partner,
opened Catalpa House, a bed-and-breakfast tourist home in Rensselaerville.

He was a past president of the Rensselaerville Historical Society and
Rensselaerville Historic District Association. He was a founder of Provo Muse, a
performing arts organization, and the Gay and Lesbian Emergency Fund in New York
for victims of anti-gay violence.

Mr. Abels was born in Xenia, Ohio. He graduated from Drew University and its
seminary and also earned a master's degree in sacred music from Union
Theological Seminary. He was an organist and pianist.

He worked for the National Council of Churches in New York from 1964 to 1969, as
a program assistant in music ministry and later as director for the arts. He
compiled and edited the "Anthology of Religious Folk Music" and "New Hymns for a
New Day," which the council published. Some of his own hymns were included in
the books. From 1969 to 1972, he worked in performing arts management. In 1972
and 1973, he was the general administrator of the Westbeth artists' housing
center.

He had been married and divorced. He is survived by two sisters, Leola Abels and
Alberta Paul, and two brothers, Stanley and Lowell, all of the Cedarville, Ohio,
area.

NAME: Paul Abels

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev.Paul M. Abels (The New York Times, 1979)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Second-in-Command at Tenneco

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 825 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, March 15


Struggling to recover from a huge loss last year, Tenneco Inc. has again turned
to a senior executive from another big manufacturing company to bolster its top
management.

The diversified industrial company said today that Dana G. Mead, an executive
vice president of the International Paper Company and a retired Army colonel who
wrote several sections of the Pentagon Papers in the late 1960's, would become
the chief operating officer and a director at Tenneco on April 1. Mr. Mead, 56
years old, will add the president's title in May.

Since September, Tenneco has been led by Michael H. Walsh, a tough-minded chief
executive who came to the company after five years as the head of the Union
Pacific Railroad.

Two Late Starters

In Mr. Walsh and Mr. Mead, Tenneco, the nation's 38th-largest industrial
corporation, has a pair of leaders who got a comparatively late start in their
corporate careers.

A Yale-educated lawyer, Mr. Walsh was the United States Attorney for the
Southern District of California in San Diego when, at age 38, he was lured into
a management post with the Cummins Engine Company. In 1978, Mr. Mead, then 42,
resigned from a tenured professorship at the United States Military Academy to
join International Paper as a project director.

Mr. Walsh, 49, has pledged a quick turnaround for Tenneco, which lost $732
million last year mainly from restructuring charges at its J. I. Case unit, a
maker of farm and construction machinery. He will add the chairman's title when
James L. Ketelsen, 60, who has led Tenneco since 1978, steps down at the
company's annual meeting on May 12.

In an interview today from his home in Houston, where Tenneco is based, Mr.
Walsh said Mr. Mead's main assignment would be to push Tenneco's six operating
companies to meet goals for higher productivity, efficiency, quality and
profits.

In addition to the troubled Case unit, Tenneco operates a big natural gas
pipeline; the world's largest shipyard in Newport News, Va., and three other
companies each with more than $1 billion in sales in packaging, chemicals and
auto parts.

Explaining why he had switched to the business world, Mr. Mead said in an
interview today from Tenneco's headquarters: "The West Point professor's
position was appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate, but after a
few years, I found that my adrenaline was pumping faster than being a professor.
I left it reluctantly, but I just wasn't able to do what I wanted with the
cadets."

In his 14 years at International Paper, Mr. Mead contributed to a substantial
improvement in the company's performance, analysts said. Costs of fiber used in
making paper fell 30 percent and the energy costs dropped 40 percent, while
output for each employee rose by a minimum of 3 percent a year.

Mr. Mead negotiated separate deals in which International Paper acquired
Zanders, a major producer in Europe of coated papers, and Aussedat-Rey, France's
largest maker of copy papers. He also was a frequent spokesman for the domestic
paper industry in its frustrated campaign to sell more products in Japan.

International Paper, based in Purchase, N.Y., improved its profit as a
percentage of shareholders' equity in the 1980's, reaching a peak of 17.6
percent in 1989. Its stock price, which closed up $1, to $74.375, on the Big
Board on Friday, rebounded from a low of $16.50 in the recession in 1982.

"My leaving I.P. had nothing to do with that company," he said. "I had a great
job. But Tenneco represents a challenge, with basic businesses that are
excellent. Mike Walsh is one of the top C.E.O.'s in the country, and I subscribe
to the kind of things that he's trying to do."

A Distinguished Officer

Mr. Mead spent 21 years in the Army. After graduating from West Point with an
engineering degree, he earned a doctorate in political science and economics
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

After a year as a White House fellow, he rose to deputy director of the Nixon
Administration's domestic policy council, under Paul H. O'Neill, now chief
executive of Alcoa. He returned to West Point for four years in 1974 as one of
two tenured professors at the military academy, teaching government,
international relations and economics.

In 1968, he wrote the final four volumes of the Pentagon Papers, covering the
history of American ground forces in Vietnam. He also drafted the plans the
Marines followed in their withdrawal from Vietnam's demilitarized zone late in
1969. He then headed Army combat operations in the zone for the first half of
1970.

Mr. Mead joined International Paper as a program director in 1978, headed the
human resources department for two years and was senior vice president until
being named one of two executive vice presidents in 1988.

"When you put it all together, he's got a combination of leadership skills and
consistent pattern of success," Mr. Walsh said. "He's a real get-it-done guy."

NAME: Dana G. Mead

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:
Tenneco said Dana Mead (Randy Masser), left, an executive vice president of
International Paper, would become its chief operating officer. He will join
Michael Walsh, who became Tenneco's chief executive in September. (F. Carter
Smith)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Americans as America's Own Worst Enemy

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1010 words


Anti-Americanism
Critiques at Home and Abroad, 1965-1990
By Paul Hollander
515 pages. Oxford University Press. $35.

After plowing through the thickets of a dense and depressing sociological tract
titled "Anti-Americanism," the only good news is that the new year has nowhere
to go but up. It's an unwittingly anti-American book that is actually intended
to be a defense of what the author considers to be the one true patriotic
American way: his vision of a squeaky-clean, uncritical acceptance of the
government and the country.

Paul Hollander, a professor of sociology at the University of Massachusetts and
a fellow of the Russian Research Center at Harvard, subtitles his book
"Critiques at Home and Abroad, 1965-1990." Nearly all of his criticism is
directed against those people and institutions in the United States who come
under his loose tar-brush label "left of center," but who really fail to run up
the flag for his undisguised neoconservative cheerleading.

Among the scores of individuals he accuses of having "liberal values" and
"well-worn left-of-center political attitudes" is Walter Cronkite. Walter
Cronkite, the most trusted anchor in television history? Say it isn't so,
professor! Not Uncle Walter!

What is Cronkite accused of? The author links him to disapproval of military
action in Grenada and Tripoli, objection to "Star Wars" and for warning that
"the real threat to democracy is . . . poverty." What's more, he says Cronkite
has combined "the exaltation of the journalist's public role with a questionable
equation of 'the left' with opposition to authority and established
institutions." The professor's own questionable equation here might be called
guilt by assumption.

In a major section of his book about the mass media, the author follows the old
Red-brick road to some never-never land where newspapers, broadcasters and film
makers are blamed for telling the public about the nation's ills and for daring
to suggest possible remedies.

Here, in Professor Hollander's words, is what he considers to be
"anti-Americanism":

"The media sustains the adversarial world view and climate of opinion in the
following ways:

"1. By providing space or time to social critics, both domestic and foreign
(e.g. Soviet spokesmen . . .);

"2. By the ceaseless ventilation of the social problems and deficiencies of
American society;

"3. By constantly reminding its audience of the discrepancy between the ideal
values and hopes of American society and its day-to-day practices which fall
short of these ideals and by the associated emphasis on the gap between
appearance and reality; and

"4. By generally exposing the audience to a universe of bad news or negative
information of a wide variety."

If Professor Hollander's 1-2-3-4 were heeded by newspapers, thecarefully
reported but often-depressing front page news, the editorial page, the op-ed
page, letters to the editor, the columnists, cartoonists and just about
everything but a birdwatching column would be printed blank, unless, of course,
the birds, too, were deemed ecologically or politically incorrect. Only the most
naive students of the First Amendment have proposed that only good news be
published or broadcast. As a book, "Anti-Americanism" is, unfortunately, bad
news.

Similarly, the author finds television and movies delivering dangerous
un-American messages. He says it doesn't take much effort "to discern the
outlines of the adversarial, left-of-center sensibility" in some broadcasts. His
vigilant eye finds that certain Public Broadcasting Service documentaries have a
"slanted socialist-realist style." He suspects commercial programs, too. "In an
episode of the popular 'Miami Vice' television show," he writes, "the producers
combined critiques of both domestic aspects of American society and U.S. foreign
policy."

After blinking at these words, a reader is inclined to respond: Lighten up,
professor, American viewers aren't as gullible as you think. They know "Miami
Vice" and the rest of the shoot-'em-ups and car chases are simply entertaining
shows delivered between endless commercials.

Professor Hollander sees even deeper and darker plots of anti-Americanism in the
movies. He finds that "anti-establishmentarian or adversarial films" fall into
several categories, all bad for the public's mental health.

One group addresses "U.S. sins abroad with special reference to Vietnam and
Central America." Among those he includes are "Apocalypse Now," "Full Metal
Jacket," "Platoon," "Born on the Fourth of July" and "The Killing Fields."

Another group of "adversarial" films seeks to "romanticize and rehabilitate the
1960's, to provide retroactive idealization of the period, its movements,
protagonists and beliefs," or to romanticize the American Communist movement. In
his view, un-American films which idealize the wrong side include "The Big
Chill," "The Return of the Secaucus 7," "Running on Empty," "Reds" and "The
Front."

Still another group dwells on "the corruption of American life and domestic
institutions: corporations, law enforcement, the political process, and so on."
These sinful movies include "All the President's Men," "Silkwood," "The China
Syndrome," "Wall Street," "Norma Rae," "The Candidate" and "E.T."

Et tu, "E.T."? Yes, Professor Hollander writes: "Even a science-fiction film
like 'E.T.' had social-critical implications: the creatures from outer space
were decidedly superior to humans and their social arrangements prevailing in
the United States." And all along we thought it was only a sweet fantasy about a
young boy who bonded with a gentle alien stranded on earth.

"Anti-Americanism" also covers the churches as new voices of social protest,
higher education as a reservoir of the adversary culture, Mexican and Canadian
intellectuals and various foreign critiques of the United States. The author's
main failure is that he confuses 200 years of devoted, and often idealistic,
American self-criticism in politics, the arts and other forums with
anti-Americanism.

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Hollander

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reflections on the Grassy Knoll

BYLINE: By Stefan Kanfer;  Stefan Kanfer is theater critic of The New Leader.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 531 words


As Thoreau pointed out, sometimes the circumstantial evidence is overwhelming,
as when you find a trout in the milk. In the case of the film "J.F.K.," the
trout glistens and stinks by moonlight.

Under my supervision, a group of investigators went over the locations that
Oliver Stone used in directing "J.F.K.," among them Dealey Plaza and the Book
Depository in Dallas. On the first take, several pedestrians got in the way. On
the second, the film was out of focus. On the third, I forgot to take off the
lens cap. In no case did we get precisely the same results that Oliver Stone
did. It seems fair to conclude that one person, unaided, could not possibly have
made "J.F.K." I call this the Second Director Theory -- that is, Oliver Stone
shot the film with others. Perhaps one of them was on the Grassy Knoll. Once I
looked closely, other incriminating pieces fell into place.

The film's co-producer is listed as A. Kitman Ho. This is obviously an invented
name. It is an anagram for "Nam Hit O.K.," a reference to Mr. Stone's two
previous films about Vietnam, "Platoon" and "Born on the Fourth of July." The
war had been over for a generation when the movies were made. No doubt the
Federal Government, certain that the horse was safely dead, allowed Mr. Stone to
beat it.

Then there is the Hollywood connection. The name Warner Brothers (the studio
that released "J.F.K.") was derived from the late Jack, Harry and Sam Warner,
whose autopsies have never been released to the general public. Warner Brothers
made its reputation in the 30's with gangster films starring, among others,
Edward G. Robinson.

Later it was responsible for cinema biographies, among them "A Dispatch From
Reuters," starring the same Robinson. This was a profile of the man who founded
the syndicate that feeds information to newspapers around the world. Warner was
also the studio that produced "Mission to Moscow," about Joseph Davies, then
U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union. The star of this film was Walter Huston,
whose son John Huston appeared with Frank Sinatra in the film "The List of
Adrian Messenger."

Mr. Sinatra was the star of "The Manchurian Candidate," a thriller whose plot
centered around the assassination of a U.S. President. This film was released
one year before the assassination of J.F.K. The self-same Warner Brothers is now
a partner with Time Inc. (Time-Warner). Time magazine has recently put "J.F.K."
on its cover. A 4-year-old child could spot the associations of organized crime,
the Soviet Union, the Government and the press. Unfortunately, there were no
4-year-olds on the Warren Commission, and the connections have gone unreported
until now.

I am prepared to face the ridicule of historians. Let them scoff at my Second
Director Theory. Let them call me self-important, dishonest, irresponsible,
scurrilous, manipulative. After all, they said the same thing about Oliver
Stone.

But I stand ready to offer a generous reward to anyone who can refute my theory.
Furthermore, on the basis of research and innumerable interviews, I believe, and
I think I can prove, that in the making of this lurid and shallow film Kevin
Costner did not act alone.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Quiz

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 14; Column 1; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 408 words


The global village being what it is, Americans have become familiar, if not
exactly cozy, with neighbors and neighborhoods thousands of miles away. Soweto
and Managua, Chamorro and Bhutto, Mugabe and Mubarak -- these names, often
mistaken for exotic spices just a few years ago, today elicit nods that say, "I
know you, read about you, saw you on TV." Now you just have to place them, when
they entered your life and your living room, and why. After all, it's the
neighborly thing to do.

(Answers on page 16)

1. What are the former names of the following countries: Bangladesh, Sri Lanka,
Zimbabwe?

2. What do the following acronyms stand for: DMZ, A.N.C., O.A.S., F.M.L.N.?

3. Match the following current and former leaders with their Central and South
American countries:

Patricio Aylwin                    Argentina
Oscar Arias Sanchez                Chile
Isabel Peron                       Costa Rica
Anastasio Somoza Debayle           Chile
Alfredo Cristiani                  El Salvador
Augusto Pinochet                   Nicaragua

4. From what South American countries do the following writers come? Gabriel
Garcia Marquez, Pablo Neruda, Jorge Luis Borges, Mario Vargas Llosa.

5. Match the names of the places listed here with the countries in which they
are situated:

Ifni Province                      Nicaragua
Tabriz                             Afghanistan
Phnom Penh                         Vietnam
Jalalabad                          India
My Lai                             Cambodia
Khafji                             South Africa
Tripoli                            Iran
Managua                            Morocco
Bhopal                             Saudi Arabia
Soweto                             Libya

6. Mohandas Gandhi was either Indira Gandhi's grandfather or uncle: True or
false?

7. What do Corazon Aquino, Benazir Bhutto and Violeta Barrios de Chamorro have
in common?

8. The following countries were colonies of which European countries? Suri name,
Zimbabwe, Angola.

9. Where is Entebbe and what happened there in 1976?

10. What were the names of the islands that Britain fought over in 1982? That
the United States fought over in 1983?

11. Who is Lisa Halaby?

12. What are the Tontons Macoute?

13. All but one of the following are players in the Middle East arena. Who is
the exception? Hosni Mubarak, Hafez al-Assad, King Hassan II, Teddy Kollek,
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Muammar el-Qaddafi?

14. Match the following people and the African countries with which they are
associated:

Idi Amin                           Namibia
Mobutu Sese Seko                   Uganda
Robert Mugabe                      Zaire
Kenneth Kaunda                     South Africa
Julius K. Nyerere                  Zimbabwe
Archbishop Desmond Tutu            Zambia
Sam Nujoma                         Tanzania


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Quiz photos of Latin American leaders (Steve Brown)

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Answers

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 16; Column 5; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 304 words


1. East Pakistan, Ceylon, Rhodesia.

2. Demilitarized Zone, African National Congress, Organization of American
States, Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front.


3. Patricio Aylwin                 Chile
   Oscar Arias Sanchez             Costa Rica
   Isabel Peron                    Argentina
   Anastasio Somoza Debayle        Nicaragua
   Alfredo Cristiani               El Salvador
   Augusto Pinochet                Chile

4. Colombia, Chile, Argentina, Peru.


5. Ifni Province                   Morocco
   Tabriz                          Iran
   Phnom Penh                      Cambodia
   Jalalabad                       Afghanistan
   My Lai                          Vietnam
   Khafji                          Saudi Arabia
   Tripoli                         Libya
   Managua                         Nicaragua
   Bhopal                          India
   Soweto                          South Africa

6. False. Mohandas Gandhi was not related to Indira Gandhi; her name came from
her husband, Feroz Gandhi, who was also not related to Mohandas Gandhi.

7. These three women were elected leaders of their countries, respectively the
Philippines, Pakistan and Nicaragua.

8. Suriname, in South America, was a colony of the Netherlands; Zimbabwe, then
known as Rhodesia, in Africa, was a colony of Britain; Angola, in Africa, was a
colony of Portugal.

9. It is the capital of Uganda; an Israeli raid freed more than 100 hostages
held at the Entebbe airport.

10. The Falkland Islands off the coast of Argentina; Grenada in the Caribbean.

11. Now called Queen Noor, she is married to King Hussein of Jordan.

12. The feared militia of the Duvalier family in Haiti.

13. Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, former star of the Los Angeles Lakers basketball team.


14. Idi Amin                       Uganda
    Mobutu Sese Seko               Zaire
    Robert Mugabe                  Zimbabwe
    Kenneth Kaunda                 Zambia
    Julius K. Nyerere              Tanzania
    Archbishop Desmond Tutu        South Africa
    Sam Nujoma                     Namibia


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Benazir Bhutto, at left, Idi Amin and Corazon Aquino (Steve
Brown)

Diagram: Answer key to quiz photos

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

28 Years After Kennedy's Assassination, Conspiracy Theories Refuse to Die

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2307 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Nearly three decades after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the
film director Oliver Stone has revitalized an American obsession with
conspiracies.

Mr. Stone's movie "J.F.K." liberally mixes fiction with fact, and some have
dismissed it as an outrageous distortion of history. But the monstrous web of
political, government and corporate interests that the film portrays as being
behind the killing does reflect widely held suspicions that more than a single
gunman was responsible for the slaying.

Public opinion polls taken over the last several years have shown that fewer
than one-third of the American people accept the findings of the Warren
Commission that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. Unanswered questions about the
investigations and the disposition of certain evidence, like autopsy notes that
were burned, have only fed the doubts.

A Lawmaker's Doubt

"Will we ever know all the facts and circumstances?" asked Representative Louis
Stokes, Democrat of Ohio, the chairman of the former House Select Committee on
Assassinations, which conducted its investigation into the slaying in the late
1970's. "No. We don't know all the facts and circumstances about the Lincoln
assassination."

Conspiracy theories began to circulate almost immediately after President
Kennedy was shot, when broadcast commentators reporting the shooting speculated
that Dallas right-wingers might have plotted to kill him on that sunny Friday
afternoon in November 1963.

Since then, the Mafia, Cuba, the Soviet Union, the Central Intelligence Agency
and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have been linked to the crime, both in
purportedly serious investigations as well as in various expressions of pop
culture over the years.

"MacBird!", a 1960's off-Broadway play, held Lyndon B. Johnson responsible. A
recent documentary broadcast by the A&E cable television network asserted that
Oswald was innocent and that three mob contract killers from France shot the
President.

A Hasty Investigation

Arthur Schlesinger Jr., a historian and former adviser to Kennedy, noted that
"Americans have been susceptible to conspiracy theories" since at least the
1830's when many Americans thought Masonic plotters were trying to take over the
country. He said this susceptibility to paranoia was fortified in the Kennedy
case by the fact that the Warren Commission investigation was hasty and
incomplete.

"Whether a more adequate investigation would have produced a different
conclusion," Mr. Schlesinger said, "is a matter of question."

A kaleidescope of possible motives for the assassination ranges from right-wing
disgust at Kennedy's civil rights record to left-wing anger at his
Administration's attempts to kill President Fidel Castro of Cuba. Complicating
the task of determining a motive are the varying interpretations ascribed to the
actions of both Kennedy and Oswald.

Much of the available evidence clouds the issue. James J. Humes, the surgeon who
performed the autopsy on Kennedy, burned his notes from the procedure, saying
later that he did not think they were important. In addition, the President's
brain was lost after it was examined by doctors. Some witnesses to the
assassination told investigators they heard three shots; others said they heard
four, one of which was fired from a grassy knoll. Then there is the question of
why Jack Ruby, a strip-tease club owner with mob connections, killed Oswald if
not to protect a conspiracy.

Conspiracy buffs say a home movie filmed by Abraham Zapruder, a dress
manufacturer at Dealey Plaza the day of the assassination, dispels the Warren
Commission contention that one gunman could have hit Kennedy and Gov. John B.
Connally of Texas with the same bullet. But scientific tests commissioned by
Congress have shown that fragments found in the Governor's wrist match a bullet
that passed through Kennedy.

Official Versions
Panel Is Named With Goal in Mind

Johnson appointed a commission headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren to
investigate the assassination and calm the public. After interviewing more than
500 witnesses and reviewing hundreds of documents, it concluded that Oswald
fired all three shots at Kennedy from the sixth floor of the Texas School Book
Depository Building overlooking Dealey Plaza. Citing among other things his
palmprint found on the rifle used in the shooting, the commission concluded that
Oswald acted alone.

The Warren Commission report has been much maligned over the years as a rush job
at best and a piece of a grand Government conspiracy at worst. Critics have
noted that the C.I.A. withheld much relevant information from the commission to
avert revelations of its efforts, using Mafia connections, to kill Mr. Castro
and destabilize his Government.

Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennsylvania, who was an assistant counsel
to the commission, said in a recent interview: "I think the commission did a
good job. Had there been a conspiracy, I think it would have come to light long
ago. You can't keep secrets in America."

A 1979 report by a House Select Committee on Assassinations agreed with the
commission that there was no conspiracy involving the Soviet Union, Cuba or a
Federal agency, but it suggested that organized crime might have been involved.
It also raised doubts about the one-gunman theory. After examining audio tapes
taken from a police motorcycle in Dealey Plaza, in combination with testimony
from witnesses, it concluded there was a second gunman, who fired a fourth shot
from the grassy knoll. That shot missed.

But three years later a panel of the National Academy of Sciences suggested that
the audio tape did not support the theory of a second gunman. It reported that
the noises earlier said to be gunshots had actually been made a minute after
Kennedy was shot. It also suggested that the noises might have been nothing more
than radio static.

Representative Stokes, however, said he stood by his panel's findings.

Mafia Conspiracy
Mob Had Reasons And the Ways

Conspiracy theorists have long noted that the Mafia had a motive to destroy the
Kennedy Administration. Several Mafia leaders were openly upset with the
President's failure to overthrow Mr. Castro, who had closed their lucrative
casinos in Havana. In addition, Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy had begun an
aggressive campaign against James R. Hoffa, the president of the International
Brotherhood of Teamsters who was closely associated with the criminal
underworld.

The House assassinations committee suggested that the most likely mob leaders to
have participated in the plot were Carlos Marcello of New Orleans, a close
associate of Mr. Hoffa who was briefly deported to Central America by the
Kennedy Administration, and Santo Trafficante of Havana, who was once jailed by
Mr. Castro.

Both Oswald and Ruby had Mafia ties. In his book "The Crisis Years,"
(HarperCollins, 1991) Michael R. Beschloss noted that in the months before the
assassination Oswald stayed at the New Orleans home of his uncle, Charles
Murret, a bookmaker with mob connections. When Oswald was arrested during a
street fight arising out of a pro-Castro demonstration in August 1963, he was
probably bailed out of prison by a Marcello associate, Mr. Beschloss wrote.

According to a 1950's Senate investigation of the underworld, Ruby was a liaison
between various groups in the Chicago mob. He evidentally ran guns for the Mafia
to anti-Castro guerrillas. As the conspiracy theory goes, Ruby was sent by the
mob to kill Oswald before he could talk. In a polygraph test taken in prison,
however, Ruby denied that he was part of a conspiracy and that he knew Oswald.

"There is one key fact at the center of this," said Jonathan Kwitny, an
investigative reporter who said he based his conclusions on documents gathered
by the House committee and independent inquiries in which he took part.  "Once
you learn that Jack Ruby and Lee Oswald were both working for the Marcello
organization in the months before the assassination and you know that Marcello
had the strongest motive for killing Kennedy, it may not be proof, but you have
to start there."

Senator Specter said he did not think it was plausible that the mob hired either
Oswald or Ruby because they were "unstable and unreliable."

Communist Conspiracy
Assassin's Ties To Soviet World

Oswald's shady connections extended as far as Moscow, although few analysts have
taken seriously the possibility that the Soviet Union ordered Kennedy killed.
After serving in the Marine Corps, Oswald defected to the Soviet Union in 1959
for two years. There he married a Russian woman named Marina whose uncle was
reportedly an officer in the secret police. Disillusioned with the drabness of
Soviet life, he applied for readmission to the United States with his wife.

Back in the United States, Oswald expressed interest in the activities of the
Communist Party and a pro-Castro organization. He passed out pro-Castro
literature in the streets of New Orleans and traveled to Mexico in an
unsuccessful effort to gain entrance to Cuba.

At a news conference at the Brazilian Embassy in Havana only two months before
Kennedy was killed, Mr. Castro said, "United States leaders should think that if
they are aiding terrorist plans to eliminate Cuban leaders, they themselves will
not be safe."

In her Castro biography, "Guerrilla Prince" (Little, Brown, 1991), the columnist
Georgie Anne Geyer wrote, "There are simply too many 'accidents' not to assume
that there could have been some Castro involvement. Oswald was seen at private
parties conversing with Mexican Communists and with Cuban diplomats."

In a variation on Ms. Geyer's contention, Daniel Schorr, the broadcast
journalist, noted in his 1977 book "Clearing the Air" (Houghton Mifflin) that
Oswald could have read a news service dispatch in a New Orleans newspaper
reporting Mr. Castro's vague threat and taken it upon himself to kill Kennedy to
help Cuba.

Johnson said on various occasions that he thought Mr. Castro was behind the
assassination, a charge the Cuban leader has repeatedly denied.

Mr. Stokes, who as chairman of the assassinations panel traveled to Cuba in 1978
to question Mr. Castro, returned saying he believed the Cuban leader's
disclaimers. "Castro summed it up best himself," Mr. Stokes said, "He said, 'I
would have to be crazy. They would blow my little country off the map.' "

Government Conspiracy
Intriguing Links In a Bizarre Theory

Of all the conspiracy theories, the most bizarre allege a sweeping plot that
included the F.B.I., the C.I.A., the Pentagon or the Secret Service, or all of
the above. One variation, promoted by Mark North in his book "Act of Treason"
(Carroll & Graf, 1991), argues that J. Edgar Hoover, Director of the F.B.I.,
learned of the plot in advance but did nothing to protect the President.

In "J.F.K." Mr. Stone has popularized what his critics argue is the most
paranoid vision of America, one in which a fascistic elite murdered the
President. The film dramatizes the investigations of Jim Garrison, a former New
Orleans District Attorney who asserted that the Warren Commission report was a
tissue of lies, a coverup for an intelligence agency cell consisting largely of
right-wing Cubans who carried out the assassination. Their motive was both to
propel the Vietnam War and to establish a more vigorous policy to overthrow Mr.
Castro.

Mr. Garrison's 1967 prosecution against Clay Shaw, a New Orleans businessman who
he said had plotted with Oswald and others to kill Kennedy, ended when a jury
found Mr. Shaw not guilty.

But some conspiracy theorists still argue that he was on to something. They
point out that Mr. Shaw is now known to have been a C.I.A. contact although he
had denied having dealings with the agency. They note that the man Mr. Garrison
accused of being a co-conspirator, David Ferrie, a former airline pilot who
dropped dead during the investigation, had been seen consulting with Carlos
Marcello shortly before the Kennedy assassination. And, finally, they argue that
it is more than coincidence that a third man accused of being a co-conspirator,
Guy W. Banister, a former F.B.I. agent and anti-Castro worker, had an office in
a building whose address was on pro-Castro literature passed out by Oswald.

Disparaged by Analysts

Such theories are disparaged by an assortment of analysts. Mr. Kwitny said the
Garrison and Stone school "convert Kennedy into a flower child" when he was
really a cold warrior. Mr. Kwitny suggested that the intelligence agency and
other Federal agencies covered up evidence to avert disclosure of their contacts
with the Mafia to kill Mr. Castro, as well as information linking Oswald to
American intelligence. "But that doesn't mean they were involved in the crime,"
he said.

Mr. Kwitny said Oswald, who learned Russian as a marine, was probably inserted
in the Soviet Union as a spy, a fact the Government would not have wanted the
public and the Soviets to know.

For "J.F.K." to be true, Robert Kennedy, as Attorney General, "would have had to
have been a part of or indifferent to the conspiracy," Senator Specter said,
adding, "That's ridiculous."

Conspiracy theories will swirl until the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and Congress release
all files related to the assassination. Saying that much of the information in
the reports it gathered is full of rumors that will only muddy the matter
further, the House plans to disclose all its documents only in 2029.

Even after all the documents are made public, many analysts said, there will
still be people who believe there has been a Government coverup.

"There isn't a single witness left to bring in," said G. Robert Blakey, the
chief counsel to the House investigation. "The people out there are all people
with theories."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oliver Stone's film "J.F.K." has revitalized widely held
conspiracy theories in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy despite
the findings of the Warren Commission. Above, a photo taken by a parade
spectator showed President Kennedy slumped over after being shot. (United Press
International)


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'J. F. K.';
An Adviser Speaks Out

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 315 words


To the Editor:

Tom Wicker castigates the former District Attorney of New Orleans, Jim Garrison,
for trying to do what Texas law officers and courts have studiously avoided. Mr.
Garrison attempted to the best of his ability to prove what men like Lyndon B.
Johnson had come to believe: that the assassination in Dallas had been part of a
conspiracy.

Because Mr. Garrison's account of that trial provides Oliver Stone with a
complete panoply of "assassination lore," it gives him an excellent foundation
for that part of his broad drama. From that base Mr. Stone goes on to present a
full spectrum of facts, such as President Kennedy's documented plan to withdraw
all Americans from Vietnam by the end of 1965 and to bring 1,000 of those men
home by Christmas 1963. That Presidential directive created enormous pressures
within the United States political and industrial complex.

Tom Wicker writes: "I know of no reputable historian who has documented Mr.
Kennedy's intentions." He could quite easily have acquired this information from
"Vol. IV, 1961-1963, Foreign Relations of the United States," published by the
United States Government Printing Office in 1991. Rather, Mr. Wicker blames this
"speculation" on an "unnamed former military officer who sounds like any of a
number of hawkish fanatics hanging around Washington."

I happen to be that "fanatic" whom Oliver Stone asked to serve as an adviser to
him and his screenwriters, for the simple reason that I had lived through that
era and had been working for the Joint Chiefs of Staff when President Kennedy
ordered the publication of National Security Action Memorandum No. 263 of
October 1963 saying precisely those things that I have written above.

L. FLETCHER PROUTY
Alexandria, Va.

Col. L. Fletcher Prouty, United States Air Force (Retired), was an adviser to
Oliver Stone during the filming of "J. F. K."

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Memories of Mother and the Time She Ran Away

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 951 words



Fugitive Spring
A Memoir
By Deborah Digges
221 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.

The title of Deborah Digges's haunting memoir, "Fugitive Spring," refers to the
time that her mother, at the age of 65, left her father for a short while. As
Ms. Digges -- the author of two books of poetry, "Vesper Sparrows" (Atheneum,
1986) and "Late in the Millennium" (Knopf, 1989) -- writes near the end of this
volume, her mother had grown weary of looking after her husband's sick mother.

Late in March, she "fled, as she would tell it, to our lake house in the
Ozarks." She broke into it by smashing a pane of glass near a door lock. And she
lived there by herself "on the money she received by returning Nehi and Pepsi
bottles, an accumulated 20 years' worth, which she systematically loaded into
the trunk of the car and delivered to the tiny grocery on the highway."

"I can imagine my mother in some faded muumuu sitting in an aluminum deck chair
on the paint-stripped dock in early April," Ms. Digges continues, "her hair
pulled neatly back, her cheeks bright from the afternoon sun. From there she
could watch the trees across the cove take on foliage, the first dusting of pale
green deepening, filling in the twiggy shadows above the shallows where the
crappie eggs hatched among sunken tree limbs and the huge carp that ate the
shoreline garbage swung their bright tails in and out of the sunlight."

This portrait of the author's mother, even more poignant in the chapter's
context, is the most vivid of any that appear in the book. One can easily
understand why, since the author did not often get her mother alone to herself,
even figuratively, long enough to concentrate on the details of her appearance.

"Fugitive Spring" has the look of a nostalgic memory book about the experience
of growing up in the Midwest (Jefferson City, Mo.) in the 1940's and 50's as the
6th of the 10 children of stern, enterprising Dutch immigrants, the father a
doctor specializing in cancer. It was a world of wonders that Deborah gazed out
upon as a child, with an apple orchard out back to which inmates from a local
prison would come annually to help with the harvest; with a pond beyond that
would attract every sort of creature from hoboes to seagulls, and with a
three-legged dog named Pete who could run home faster than any car that tried to
drive him far enough away to get rid of him.

It was a world of terrors too, with children and drunks occasionally drowning in
the pond; with her father nearly falling off the roof once when he was replacing
his beloved weathervanes that the region's periodic tornadoes would lift up and
throw down; and with the nearby cancer clinic her father had established, where
all the children were expected to help out, though the author would grow faint
at even the preparation for a procedure.

But woven into all the brilliantly colored scenes is the story of the author's
struggle to separate from her family and find her own identity.  This was not an
easy task. As she writes: "You might say I'd had a very long childhood, a
childhood I couldn't help but confuse with my brothers' and sisters'. Even now,
whether I look ahead of me to Eva, Gena, Rena, Paul and Everett, or behind me to
Connie, David, Beth and Steve, it is sometimes hard to distinguish what happened
to whom, and when."

And when she reached adolescence, she found it difficult to accept her sex.  "It
was as if" the "small physical alteration had meant sudden, irrevocable
commitment to a sex I hadn't had time to consider yet. Hadn't my parents said it
all along? I'd weighed 11 pounds at birth. They'd been sure I was a boy."

The author's first major identity crisis occurred when she was sent off to
college in Michigan and became so paralyzed by homesickness that she had to
force her parents to let her come home by appropriating her own tuition money.
Curiously, the hermetic world of her childhood was shattered during that trip
back to Missouri when, riding in a taxi through Chicago on Sept. 1, 1968, she
asked the driver why mounted policemen were chasing a rock-throwing youth. "
'Read the papers, girl,' he said as we sped down the parkway to the airport."

But the keys to herself were not supplied by the culture of the 1960's, into
which she was plunged when she married a young man training to fly fighter
planes in Vietnam and moved to California to bring up their two young children
while he was away on assignment.

One of the keys came to her when she read an essay by Emerson defining the
character of the poet. "That Emerson addressed the poet as 'he' bothered me not
at all. I have always read myself relentlessly and without reproach into the
masculine, perhaps because as a child I'd believed myself to be, somehow, a boy,
a boy arrested at adolescence."

And the other key she had grasped when during the birth of her first son -- "the
first thing I'd ever done by myself" -- it came to her that "We die alone."
"It's not morbid," she insisted to her husband over the next weeks. "It's not,
truly. Facts can't be morbid. They're just facts." It is then in the chronology
of her memoir that she is finally able to visualize her mother alone in her
fugitive spring.

In her opening chapter Ms. Digges muses on the apple and its role in Eve and
Adam's fall. In her final chapter she takes a glider lesson and turning on an
axis over the Pacific imagines herself falling toward home. Midway through the
book she meditates on mankind's fear of falling. The worst trauma of her
childhood was falling through the ice of her pond and nearly drowning. Falling
has been a near obsession with her. But always in this book of striking scenes
and images she is falling into life.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Deborah Digges

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Offers a Proposal to Battle Pollution in Asia

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


Hoping to exploit American leadership in environmental protection in a part of
the world where rapid population and economic growth is creating some of the
worst industrial pollution and depletion of natural resources, the Bush
Administration unveiled an environmental initiative for Asia today.

The program, involving 18 United States Government agencies working jointly with
as many as 29 developing nations, territories or island groups in Asia and the
Pacific, will attempt to match American expertise with the needs of nations
where anti-pollution measures are not keeping pace with industrial development.

American consultants and companies will be assisted in marketing their skills
and technologies to Asian and Pacific nations. Asians interested in learning
more about environmental policy and technological advances will be offered
places in a new United States Environmental Training Institute scheduled to open
in April, jointly supported by the Government and private enterprise.

Several Asian cities, including Bangkok and New Delhi, are among the world's
most polluted urban areas, without emissions controls or enforceable laws
regulating industry. At the same time, some Asian nations are beginning to be
more willing to spend money on cleaning the enviroment, American officials say.
Taiwan and South Korea are planning anti-pollution programs that could cost up
to $12 billion.

Problems Called Serious

"The problems of urban Asia are terribly, terribly serious," said Tom Fox,
director of the Center for International Development and Environment at the
independent World Resources Institute here.

"There are all kinds of health-related environmental issues that grow from the
confluence of population growth and poverty," Mr. Fox said in an interview. "Air
quality, water, waste disposal, the whole range of sanitation issues are all
susceptible to technology transfer. American technology leadership in these
fields has been demonstrated in our cities."

"This program may not be the whole answer, but it's a good start," he added.

The United States-Asia Environmental Partnership, the first pan-Asian public
policy effort to be undertaken by the Bush Administration, was first announced
by President Bush in a speech Saturday in Singapore.

U.S. Warns Countries

The United States has informed the following countries and territories that they
are eligible for the new environmental program:

Bangladesh, Brunei, Cambodia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia,
Fiji, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Kiribati, Laos, Malaysia, Maldives, Marshall
Islands, Mongolia, Nepal, Niue, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Philippines,
Singapore, Solomon Islands, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, Tonga,
Vanuatu and Western Samoa.

Afghanistan, Myanmar, North Korea and Vietnam were not included because the
United States refuses to deal with those countries. But neither was China, with
which the Administration has tried to maintain ties.

A notable inclusion on the list was Pakistan, which is under an American aid
embargo.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Political Premonitions Born of 30's Despair

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2393 words


THE Archangel Gabriel is said to have foretold the birth of John the Baptist
and, a little later, to have made the Annunciation to the Virgin Mary. It is the
gospel according to Gregory LaCava, in his astonishing 1933 film, "Gabriel Over
the White House," that, a couple of milleniums later, Gabriel takes command of
the United States during the darkest months of the Great Depression.

The conceit of this woozily prescient neo-fascist Hollywood movie is that God,
funneling His wishes through an off-screen Gabriel, transforms the fictitious
Judd Hammond (Walter Huston), the party hack just elected President, into an
iron-fisted if benevolent dictator who saves America from the worst economic
crisis in its history.

You might say, "It can't happen here," which is what you're supposed to say. "It
Can't Happen Here" is the title of the Lincoln Center Film Society's richly
provocative films-of-the-Depression retrospective, which begins today at the
Walter Reade Theater and runs through March 2.

Chief among the retrospective's odd-ball glories is "Gabriel Over the White
House," which will be shown today, tomorrow and Monday.

The society will present a total of 29 programs of features, documentaries and
short subjects, all made either during the Depression or, later, about the
Depression. Three separate programs will be shown once each day. Each program
will be screened at least twice, sometimes as many as four times, each day at a
different hour.

This weekend's other selections, all equally important in their own way: Frank
Capra's "American Madness" (1932), a buoyant forerunner of the terminally
sentimental "It's a Wonderful Life"; Mervyn LeRoy's "Gold Diggers of 1933"
(1933), in which chorus girls dressed in over-sized gold coins sing "We're in
the Money," and King Vidor's "Our Daily Bread" (1934), in which collective
action on a farm triumphs over drought and other adversities.

Scheduled for the weeks ahead: Mervyn LeRoy's "Hard to Handle" (1933), which
features a smashingly funny James Cagney performance; LaCava's screwball take on
Depression manners, "My Man Godfrey" (1936); Preston Sturges's "Sullivan's
Travels" (1942), a satire of films like "Our Daily Bread" and of the people who
make them, and Sydney Pollack's "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?" (1969), an
extraordinarily effective tale of existential despair, set in the depressed
1930's, though the sensibility is of the Vietnam era.

Good or bad, these films are never indifferent. They are history in the raw,
history before the historians have squeezed the life out of it. They are
unself-conscious reports from the winter of our heritage.

"Gabriel Over the White House," one of the retrospective's most significant
artifacts, is not ineffective movie making. It is technically slick, and Huston
is fine as both the initially bumbling President, a character seemingly inspired
by Warren Harding, and as the born-again Judd Hammond, the demonic, undead White
House presence whose will is that of his creator.

As politics, "Gabriel Over the White House" is an informed scream. It is
hilarious in its naivete. At the same time, it is appalling for the casual way
in which it glorifies Presidential death squads, the possibly permanent
dismissal of Congress and the suspension of all Constitutionally guaranteed
civil liberties.

"Gabriel Over the White House" was no fringe movie. It was a mass-market
entertainment, produced by William Randolph Heart's Cosmopolitan Pictures and
released by M-G-M.  It was even a hit. As much as any film in the retrospective,
"Gabriel Over the White House" reflects the degree of American bewilderment at
the time it was made.

After the 1929 stock market crash, and after one brief bull market in 1930, the
business of this country, which Calvin Coolidge so sagely said was business, had
slipped into chaos. Wall Street was discredited. Brokers were seen to be crooks.

By the middle of 1932, American industry was operating at less than half of its
1929 volume. The market economy was stalled. Banks were failing. Hobo jungles
and so-called "Hoovervilles" sheltered a huge floating population of the
economically disenfranchised. The number of unemployed, which had been 5 million
in 1931, rose to 13.7 million in 1932, about one-quarter of the work force.  The
pop anthem of the day: E. Y. Harburg's "Brother, Can You Spare a Dime?"

The desperate measures required in desperate times were frontally addressed by
"Gabriel Over the White House." Though it opened at the Capitol Theater here on
March 31, 1933, less than four weeks after Franklin D. Roosevelt had been
inaugurated as this country's 32d President, the movie seems to predict the kind
of programs Roosevelt would push through Congress in his first 100 days in
office.

Huston's President Hammond starts a Federally sponsored work corps called the
Constructionist Army, and anticipates the repeal of Prohibition by opening
Government-run liquor stores. When bootleggers object by staging a drive-by
shoot-out at the White House, the President has them lined up against a wall and
shot.

At the time of its release, the movie fulfilled a lot of dreams. It also
confirmed the worst nightmares of those who saw Roosevelt as a would-be
dictator, the sort of President who, a few years later, would brazenly attempt
to "pack" the Supreme Court, that is, to enlarge it with additional appointees
to ensure approval of his legislation.

The "It Can't Happen Here" show is clearly intended to draw parallels between
yesterday's Depression and today's recession and, one supposes, to sound a
warning. Yet parallels are often superficial. They are deceiving.

Though angry, most of the characters in these films are remarkably trusting.
They are idealists. They exalt the possibilities of the future even in
retrospect, as in "Union Maids" (1976). In this fine Julia Reichert-James Klein
documentary, three women look back with satisfaction and pride at their
activities as militant trade-union organizers. The times, being grim, gave their
lives brilliant focus.

As in the documentaries, the people in the fiction films earnestly want to
believe in something, which is usually collective action. The men who organize
the farm cooperative in "Our Daily Bread" agree to form a socialist government.
Says one man, "The Government must control everything, even the profits."

William Wellman's "Wild Boys of the Road" (1933) is about three "nice"
teen-agers who run away from home to spare their hard-pressed familiies the cost
of their upkeep. They become hobos, bums. They see life in the raw: a young
woman is raped in a box car, a young man loses his leg under the wheels of a
freight train. At the end, the kids are arrested and brought into court on
charges of attempting a holdup.

The judge turns out to be a Roosevelt surrogate. Robert Barratt, the actor who
plays the judge, wears Rooseveltian pince-nez, talks in Roosevelt's cadences and
promises them, in effect, a New Deal.

Roosevelt's first inaugural address ("The only thing we have to fear is fear
itself") is quoted in the final sequence of a second 1933 Wellman movie, "Heroes
for Sale." This is a crazy mixture of bitterness and hope about a man unjustly
deprived of his war medals, falsely accused of being "a Red," whose wife is
killed in a labor demonstration and whose invention (a combined washing machine
and mangle) is stolen by a Communist agitator, who then becomes a rich
capitalistic pig.

One can't go too fast in synopsizing this plot. The story makes no sense except
for the desperation of its politics. In 1933, people wanted a savior and
Roosevelt was their man. No other American President has ever been so quickly
beatified.

For all of their talk of joint action, the 1930's films are never very militant
in their liberalism. With the exception of the right-wing "Gabriel," none of the
films seek to change the system. In Capra's "American Madness," Walter Huston
plays an idealistic bank president who alienates his board of directors by
making loans to people without collateral. The profit motive is not questioned.

"We've got to get the money back in circulation," he tells the stingy directors.
He says that "a man's character is his collateral," which turns out to be true
when there is a run on his bank and all of the little guys he ever helped rush
over to deposit their money with him. Sound familiar?

The retrospective does have its moments of deadly uplift and pre-fabricated
social conscience, especially in William Wyler's "Dead End" (1937), whose faults
lie not in Wyler's direction but in the stylized source material (the Sidney
Kingsley play adapted by Lillian Hellman) that doesn't fit easily on the screen.

There is also something sort of phony about John Ford's adaptation of John
Steinbeck's "Grapes of Wrath" (1940). Though beautifully photographed, the movie
reeks of self-importance, which Frank Galatti managed to avoid in his recent
Broadway stage adaptation.

The most successful films in this show are either insistently downbeat or comic.
"Gold Diggers of 1933," with its kaleidescopic Busby Berkeley production
numbers, is a nonstop delight. The seldom-seen "Hard to Handle," in which Cagney
plays a hustling public-relations genius, is laugh-out-loud funny. Like Cagney,
the film has immense spirit. In "Sullivan's Travels," Sturges acknowledges the
realities of the Depression while sending himself and Hollywood sky-high.

Also worth seeing are Robert Altman's "Thieves Like Us" (1974) and Nicholas
Ray's "They Live by Night" (1949), both adapted from the same Edward Anderson
novel. The Altman has the tougher edge. The Ray is more romantic. "They Shoot
Horses, Don't They?" remains a stunner. The dance marathon, which is a joke as
viewed in the 1933 "Hard to Handle," becomes a bleak, merciless evocation of
Depression America in the Pollack movie.

Equally clear-eyed is Ken Burns's "Huey Long" (1985), a superior documentary
about the assassinated Louisiana politician. In this retrospective, Huey Long
represents all of the fast-talking, panacea-promoting hustlers who enriched the
1930's landscape.

The Depression is said to have begun with the market crash of 1929. Though
conditions improved somewhat as the 30's went on, the Depression was never
really conquered. Instead, World War II came along and magically removed the
conditions that had paralyzed the economy. That may be the grimmest lesson to be
learned from "It Can't Happen Here."

When to See the Films in the Lincoln Center Series

"It Can't Happen Here: Films of the Great Depression" opens today and will run
through March 2 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th Street, Manhattan.
All programs are single screenings except one: a double-bill of "Union Maids,"
and "With Babies and Banners" Feb. 16 to 18. Admission to each screening each
day is $7 ($5 for Film Society of Lincoln Center members and the elderly).
Information: (212) 875-5600 or 875-5601. Here is a schedule.

Today

"AMERICAN MADNESS" (1932), directed by Frank Capra, 2 P.M., with "Film and Photo
League Program I, a screening of three 1930's newsreels (also Sunday, 6 P.M.);
"GOLD DIGGERS OF 1933" (1933), directed by Mervyn LeRoy with Busby Berkeley, 6
and 10 P.M. (also tomorrow, 2 P.M.); "GABRIEL OVER THE WHITE HOUSE" (1933),
directed by Gregory LaCava, 8 P.M. (also tomorrow, 10 P.M. and Monday, 2 P.M.)

Tomorrow

"OUR DAILY BREAD" (1934), directed by King Vidor, 6 P.M., with "Film and Photo
League Program II, a screening of three 1930's newsreels (also Sunday, 2 P.M.
and Monday, 6:45 P.M.).

Tuesday

"WILD BOYS OF THE ROAD" (1933), directed by William Wellman, 2 P.M. (also
Wednesday, 6:30 P.M.).

Wednesday

"FAITHLESS" (1932), directed by Harry Beaumont, 4:15 P.M. (also Jan. 17, 7:45
P.M.).

Thursday

"ONE THIRD OF A NATION" (1939), directed by Dudley Murphy, 2 P.M. (also Jan. 17,
5:45 P.M.).

Jan. 17

"DEAD END" (1937), directed by William Wyler, 2 P.M. (also Jan. 18, 3:45 P.M.).

Jan. 24

"HEROES FOR SALE" (1933), directed by William Wellman, 2 P.M. (also Jan. 25,
3:45 P.M.); "MY MAN GODFREY" (1936), directed by Gregory LaCava, 3:45 P.M. (also
Jan. 27, 8:45 P.M.); "I AM A FUGITIVE FROM A CHAIN GANG" (1933), directed by
Mervyn LeRoy, 5:45 P.M. (also Jan. 27, 2 P.M.).

Jan. 28

"LOVE ON THE DOLE" (1941), directed by John Baxter, 2 P.M. (also Jan. 29, 4:15
P.M.).

Jan. 29

"THE LOST SON/DER VERLORENE SOHN" (1934), directed by Luis Trenker, 6:30 P.M.
(also Jan. 30, 2 P.M.).

Jan. 31

"SCARFACE" (1932), directed by Howard Hawks, 2 P.M. (also Feb. 2, 6 P.M. and
Feb. 3, 2 and 9P.M.).

Feb. 4

"HARD TO HANDLE" (1933), directed by Mervyn LeRoy, 2, 8:15 and 10 P.M. (also
Feb. 6, 4:30 P.M.).

Feb. 5

"THE GRAPES OF WRATH" (1940), directed by John Ford, 6:45 P.M. (also Feb. 6, 2
P.M. and Feb. 9, 4:15 P.M.).

Feb. 7

"A CARTOON SOUP KITCHEN," with a selection of Depression-era cartoons, 9:30 P.M.
(also Feb. 8, 2, 6:15 and 10:15 P.M.).

Feb. 10

"SULLIVAN'S TRAVELS" (1942), directed by Preston Sturges, 2 P.M. (also Feb. 11,
4:15 and 8:30 P.M.).

Feb. 13

"THEY LIVE BY NIGHT" (1949), directed by Nicholas Ray, 2 P.M. (also Feb. 14, 6
and 10:15 P.M. and Feb. 15, 10:15 P.M.).

Feb. 15

"WILD RIVER" (1960), directed by Elia Kazan, 2 and 8:15 P.M.

Feb. 16

"UNION MAIDS" (1976), directed by Julia Reichert and Jim Klein, and "WITH BABIES
AND BANNERS" (1978), directed by Lorraine Gray, 4:15 P.M. (also Feb. 17, 7 P.M.
and Feb. 18, 4 P.M.).

Feb. 17

"BOUND FOR GLORY" (1976), directed by Hal Ashby, 2 and 9 P.M. (also Feb. 18, 6
P.M.)

Feb. 19

"NATIVE LAND" (1942), directed by Leo Hurwitz and Paul Strand, 2 and 6 P.M.
(also Feb. 20, 8:15 P.M.).

Feb. 20

"BONNIE AND CLYDE" (1967), directed by Arthur Penn, 4 P.M. (also Feb. 21, 2 and
6:15 P.M.).

Feb. 24

"THEY SHOOT HORSES, DON'T THEY" (1969), directed by Sydney Pollack, 4:45 and 7
P.M. (also Feb. 26, 2 P.M.).

Feb. 27

"PENNIES FROM HEAVEN" (1981), directed by Herbert Ross, 2 P.M. (also Feb. 28,
4:15 P.M., March 1, 4 P.M. and March 2, 6:30 P.M.; "HUEY LONG" (1985),directed
by Ken Burns, 4:15 P.M. (also Feb. 28, 6:30 P.M. and March 1, 2 P.M.).

Feb. 28

"THIEVES LIKE US" (1974), directed by Robert Altman, 2 P.M. (also March 1, 6:15
and 8:45 P.M. and March 2, 4 P.M.).

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joel McCrea and Veronica Lake in "Sullivan's Travels."
(Paramount Pictures Inc.)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
North Korea and Cambodia Cited

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 381 words


American travelers are warned by the State Department against signing up for
tour groups bound for North Korea without first checking with the United States
Treasury Department. The warning, which points out that financial transactions
by Americans in North Korea are restricted by the United States Government,
follows the signing last month of a nonaggression pact by North Korea and South
Korea. The agreement, providing for economic exchanges, was the first step
toward a full peace treaty since the Korean armistice was signed 38 years ago.

American passports are valid for travel to North Korea, a travel advisory from
the department said, but United States regulations prohibit the use of credit
and other charges there, even for traveling expenses. Visitors also need a North
Korean visa. The advisory pointed out that United States companies are
prohibited from arranging tours to North Korea unless specifically licensed by
the Treasury for groups involved in academic, sports, cultural or family
reunions.

People contemplating travel to North Korea are advised to contact the Office of
Foreign Assets Control, Department of Treasury, 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.,
Washington, D.C. 20220; (202) 535-9449.

The State Department has also warned that nonessential travel to Cambodia be
deferred because of recent violent anti-government demonstrations that have
resulted in several deaths. The warning follows a peace agreement in Cambodia
and the lifting by the United States of the ban on travel to neighboring
Vietnam, two factors that have spurred interest in visiting Cambodia and its
most famous attraction, the Angkor temple complex.

While foreigners have not been targeted, they could get caught up in a
demonstration or riot, a travel advisory from the department says. Citing
sporadic military operations and widespread banditry, the department reports
that many areas, including the area around the Angkor temples, and the Phra
Viharn temple ruins near the border with Thailand, are considered unsafe.

American passports are valid for travel to Cambodia, but Cambodian visas cannot
be obtained in the United States. The advisory points out that the United States
Mission in Phnom Penh cannot accord Americans the protective services it
normally would.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
The April Surprise

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Last week, approaching the first anniversary of Desert Storm, George Bush again
called on the Iraqi people to "take matters into their own hands and get [Saddam
Hussein] out of there . . ."

That caused much wincing among the Kurds and Shiites who rose up in the
aftermath of our stop-short victory last winter.

They trusted Mr. Bush to suppress the Iraqi helicopter gunships, but Gen. Norman
Schwarzkopf, in his own word, was "suckered." Mr. Bush, persuaded by Brent
Scowcroft and James Baker on March 26, 1991 -- the turning point of his
Presidency -- that a Kurdish victory would lead to "dismemberment" of Iraq,
allowed the rebels who answered his oust-Saddam invitation to be slaughtered.

We will hear much this week about the wisdom of the war. Democrats who opposed
it were at first embarrassed by its success, and will now disparage its results.
Thanks to the moral cowardice of March 26, Mr. Bush snatched defeat from the
jaws of victory: Saddam remains in power, persecuting his people, and the Kuwait
we restored remains a feudal fiefdom.

Through all the posterior-covering denigration, let us remember what would
surely have happened had we not struck decisively to drive Iraq from Kuwait. Bad
enough that Saddam Hussein would have dominated the world's supply of oil,
driving up the price, adding inflation to recession; much more important, he
would now be a nuclear power.

That, lest we forget, was what the war was about. Not for the noble spirit of
collective security, though that was a part; not for "jobs," as Secretary Baker
insisted, a political bleat echoed thrice in Mr. Bush's recent Japanese
rejection; not to allow the royal family in Kuwait to force an exodus of its
Palestinians, and not to exorcise our Vietnam syndrome, making us feel good by
flexing our muscular technology.

When the debate was going on before we struck, the single argument that got
through to the American people was this: Saddam Hussein, a ruthless murderer and
aggressor, was within a year of developing a nuclear device. American security
would be at stake, and ultimately American cities at risk of atomic destruction.

Though that was pooh-poohed at the time as deliberate disinformation to
stimulate war hysteria (and the C.I.A., misleading most of our media, was still
in its dream world of "5 to 10 years away"), we now have on-site proof that
Iraqi scientists were well on their way to bomb production. Riyadh, Tel Aviv and
Cairo would be under nuclear blackmail today, with Paris and New York vulnerable
to Baghdad's nuclear-tipped missiles next year.

Thanks to George Bush's courageous initial decision, overriding Sam Nunn's
wrongheaded talk of delays for unworkable sanctions, the world dodged that
bullet. Iraqi nuclear production was set back.

But not destroyed. The threat -- not as immediate, but now more widely
understood to be real -- has once more begun to grow. Both Iraq and Iran are
obtaining technology and materials from China and from K.G.B. renegades, easily
hiding it from U.N. inspection teams.

Mr. Bush knows that he will have to return to Saddam Hussein. As Manuel Noriega
can testify, this American President is better the second time around. He has
asked the Joint Chiefs for a plan to strike again. The Pentagon replies: for the
coup, try the covert boys across the river next time -- test ye everlasting
Gates.

Perhaps we will see a U.N. relief column to the starving, freezing Kurds through
Iraqi territory, with an aerial counterattack if it is stopped; or a similar
reaction to a refusal to allow inspectors into areas where mass-destruction
weapons are being made. The military punishment would be accompanied this time
by a coordinated internal Arab-Kurdish uprising (with a freelance Mossad backup
if all else fails; the Scud attacks have not yet been answered).

A majority of Americans may not support a war to save the Kurds from genocide.
But most Americans would cheer overt-covert aid to a Kurdish-Shiite uprising to
drive Saddam from Baghdad -- if convinced the overthrow will stop a terrorist
threat to American cities. Even America-Firsters can handle that. And Iranians
planning a similar nuclear buildup would get the message.

When? An October "surprise" would be too obviously political. Much depends on
Saddam's cooperative recalcitrance, but some of our spooks expect a balloon up
in April or May.

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

METRO DIGEST

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 696 words



NEW YORK CITY

A FREE RIDE THAT COSTS A LOT

Fare beating has long plagued the New York City subways, but in the last 18
months it has reached epic dimensions. Despite stepped-up police efforts, parts
of the city have become virtual no-fare zones. One recent day, 11 people entered
the 135th Street station in a 15-minute period. Two paid the fare. A1.


A MOTHER SPEAKS OUT, ON HER OWN TERMS

Nellie Wilson, the mother of two children who were attacked by four young white
men who squirted them with a white liquid, has guarded her children's privacy
even while speaking out on her fury over the attack. Her decision, along with
efforts by the Dinkins administration and Borough President Fernando Ferrer of
the Bronx, seems to have kept down the level of public hysteria that has
characterized other bias attacks. B3.

MEMORIAL SERVICE BREAKS OUT IN PROTEST

A memorial service at City College for the nine young people who died there two
weeks ago turned into a heated political rally. Organizers chanted "Whose
school? Our school!" as they denounced college and city officials and rushed the
guarded doors of a student center. The only bereaved family to attend it did not
approve of the speakers' statements. "I don't see any need for hatred," said the
father of Yul Dargan, one of the victims. B4.

AN EMIGRE'S DEATH STIRS HIS COMMUNITY

The slaying of Leonid Vinokur on Jan. 5 in Brighton Beach has revealed a new
willingness among the neighborhood's 35,000 Russian immigrants to participate in
the political and social life of their Brooklyn community. Michael Tartakovsky,
a cousin of Mr. Vinokur, who was shot and killed as he struggled with a man
trying to mug his wife, addressed a crowd of 250 people yesterday in Brighton
Beach. "We will not let this happen again," he declared. "We demand justice."
Brighton Beach Journal. B3.

A popular pastor who increased membership but clashed with church elders resigns
from Fifth Presbyterian Avenue church. B3.

REGION

A RISE IN DEATHS OF HARBOR SEALS

For the last several years, more and more harbor seals have been stranded or
washed up dead on Long Island beaches. While some of the increase may be from
natural forces, biologists have begun to explore the possibility that man-made
pollution, particularly PCB's, may be responsible for the condition of animals
like NY-870, a harbor seal who died despite being cared for by the Okeanos Ocean
Research Foundation. A1.

NEW YORK DEMOCRATS HUNGRY FOR A WIN

New York's 1992 Democratic Presidential primary campaign formally begins this
week with two factors missing besides Gov. Mario M. Cuomo. So far, this year's
campaign in New York has been dominated by electoral mechanics rather than by
ideological jousting. No gut issue like the war in Vietnam or the vivid
symbolism of a vigorous black candidate divides Democrats. Hungry after 12 years
out of the White House, most want to win. Metro Matters. B2.

PASTOR AIDS POLICE IN ARREST

The Rev. Calvin O. Butts 3d knew his part-time handyman as a young man from a
fine churchgoing family. But the police told him that the man was wanted in a
robbery that left an ice-cream store manager shot in the head. Two New York City
detectives asked for the pastor's help in arresting the man, and yesterday he
turned himself in to Mr. Butts. B2.

A CLASH OF PARTIES IN LONG ISLAND

Nassau County Democrats are flexing their newly won strength and are closely
monitoring the impact of 3,000 layoffs and painful cuts in services as
Repbulicans fret over their losses and squabble over who is blame for the budget
woes. Both sides agree, however, that old approaches, like raising taxes, will
not sell in the depths of recession. B7.

RAILROADS A NEW THREAT TO HARBOR

The amount of cargo that once steamed into New York harbor from Asia has been
cut in half over the last four years. The reason is high-tech railroad flatcars,
hauled on trains often a mile in length, that dash in from the West Coast in
three days. It is a trend, experts say, that rivals the impact of the
development of containerizing cargo three decades ago. B7.

The Traffic Map B6
Neediest Cases B3

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 15, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodians to Free 290 Political Prisoners

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 186 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 14


The government announced plans today to free 290 political prisoners on
Wednesday and to allow the formation of political parties and other
liberalization measures.

Meanwhile, the Khmer Rouge and two other guerrilla armies announced they would
give the International Committee of Red Cross free access to the territory they
control, said Jean-Jacques Fresard, chief Red Cross representative in Cambodia.

The moves appeared to advance United Nations efforts to end the nation's 13-year
civil war and hold democratic elections next year.

At a meeting of the Supreme National Council -- which includes representatives
of the Government and the three guerrilla factions -- the Vietnam-backed
administration said it would open prisons to foreign inspection.

Since the peace accord was signed in October, the Government of Prime Minister
Hun Sen has curbed street demonstrations and other forms of political
expression.

The other factions on the council are the non-Communist rebel army of Prince
Norodom Ranariddh, the non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front
and the Communist Khmer Rouge.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words


How about Danny Glover as a lion? And Tracey Ullman as a cat? When Rabbit Ears
Productions or Lightyear Entertainment, two producers of children's videos, tape
their animated stories, they hire movie actors to narrate. While that approach
may not dislodge Disney, it has helped earn a following in video stores.

For example, Lightyear's "Beauty and the Beast," part of its "Stories to
Remember" series and narrated by Mia Farrow, is especially popular now because
Disney's animated film "Beauty and the Beast" is in movie theaters.

Rabbit Ears videos scheduled for this year include "The Monkey People," with
Raul Julia; "Rip Van Winkle," with Anjelica Huston; "Koi and the Kola Nuts,"
with Whoopi Goldberg; a lively, French-accented "Puss in Boots" with Ms. Ullman,
and "Brer Rabbit and Boss Lion," with Mr. Glover.

The actors don't appear on camera. Their job is to tell stories chosen from
children's literature and similar sources, accompanied by illustrations and
musical scores by well-known artists and musicians. For instance, "The Tiger and
the Brahman" from Rabbit Ears, told by Ben Kingsley, has a score composed and
performed by Ravi Shankar.

Videos from the two companies, which are not connected, are about a half-hour
long and sell for less than $10 in book and record stores as well as video
stores.

Rabbit Ears productions are semi-animated, with about 200 drawings moving in
sequence, sometimes rapidly enough to produce character movement. Stories to
Remember videos are more fully animated. "Beauty and the Beast," for instance,
has about 1,000 drawings.

"It's not how many drawings you have, but what you do with them," said Joshua
Greene, the producer of Stories to Remember. "A picture book is a very intimate
experience for a child. You have to project that onto the screen."

Rabbit Ears began producing its stories in 1985. "I wanted people who could tell
them like my mother," said Mark Sottnick, the executive producer. Professional
storytellers were often too theatrical for his taste, so he turned to actors,
most of whom, Mr. Sottnick said, read similar stories to their own children or
were struck by them as works of literature.

"I love the stories," said Mr. Glover, who has narrated three videos for Rabbit
Ears. "Kids see that it's not only me in 'Lethal Weapon,' but this is the guy
who tells them stories."

Rabbit Ears actors, who have included Jack Nicholson and Jodie Foster, are paid
for what is usually about a half-day's work. Mr. Sottnick wouldn't say how much,
but he said the amount was comparable to what the narrator might earn for a
half-day on a film set.

Mr. Greene, who has been creating "Stories to Remember" since 1987, said he paid
a good wage. Often he goes far afield for illustrators. Two stories now in
production, both to be narrated by Sigourney Weaver, are being illustrated by a
studio in Moscow. "We have to send them paper, pencils, erasers and paints," he
said.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Jungle Fever
1991. MCA/Universal. $94.95. Laser disk, $39.98. 2 hours 15 minutes. Closed
captioned. R.

At the core of Spike Lee's film is the doomed affair between Flipper (Wesley
Snipes), a young black architect, and Angie (Annabella Sciorra), his white
secretary. From there the story moves out to record the reactions of family and
friends. There are Flipper's angry wife (Lonette McKee), his befuddled parents
(Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee), his cavalier brother, a crack addict (Samuel L.
Jackson) and his reflective best friend (Mr. Lee). On the other side, behind
aluminum storm doors in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, are Angie's outraged father
(Frank Vincent), her robustly bigoted brothers (David Dundara and Michael
Imperioli) and her detached neighborhood boyfriend (John Turturro). Mr. Lee's
anger complements his competence as a film maker, resulting in a "splendid,
serious social comedy" (Vincent Canby).

Point Break
1991. Fox. $94.98. 2:02. CC. R.

Scrounging around for clues after a bank stickup in Southern California, agents
from the Federal Bureau of Investigation turn up a suspicious substance in a
footprint at the scene of the crime: surfboard wax. Well, it's a start, so
Kathryn Bigelow's film sends a young lawman (Keanu Reeves) to infiltrate a
surfing group suspected of the heist. There he encounters the group's leader, a
sort of beach boy Svengali named Bohdi (Patrick Swayze), who leads the law on
frantic chases that display Ms. Bigelow's "real talents as a director of
fast-paced, high-adrenaline action" (Janet Maslin).

Victor Borge in London
1991. Kultur. $29.95. 50 minutes. No rating.

Cornball wears well on the sophisticated Dane, who in this 1972 concert
repeatedly bounces off the piano stool to pass along his own angles on life and
the musical scene. Among other things, we learn how Chopin used his "Minute
Waltz," played three times, as an egg timer and why people screamed "Bravo!" at
early Borge recitals. (Bravo was a better pianist.) Here also, in a famous
routine, Mr. Borge and a partner climb all over each other on a piano bench
while performing a duet. Accompaniment, whenever anybody can get a note in, is
provided by the London Philharmonic.

Carnegie Hall at 100
1991. BMG. $29.98. LD, $34.98. 57 minutes. No rating.

From Tchaikovsky, who opened the hall on the podium in 1891, to Garrison
Keillor, about everyone (or so it seems) who performed there is given coverage
in this rapid-fire documentary, broadcast last year on PBS. A stream of
recollections from artists as diverse as Agnes de Mille and Frank Sinatra are
mixed with clips of performances taken from film archives -- the most remarkable
by Vladimir Horowitz and Jascha Heifetz -- to make up the "ultimate souvenir
program" (John J. O'Connor).

DECEMBERS PAST

As films from "Hook" to "J. F. K." illustrate, Hollywood goes into the new year
on the strength of its big holiday releases. Here are some movies from other
Decembers, some of which were bigger than others, available on tape.

BROADCAST NEWS. William Hurt, Holly Hunter and Albert Brooks contend with
careers and personal agendas. 1987. Fox. $19.98. 2:13. CC. R.

DIRTY ROTTEN SCOUNDRELS. The suave Michael Caine is the Riviera's top con man
until Steve Martin shows up to compete for the bankroll of the heiress Glenne
Headly. 1988. Orion. $19.99. 1:42. CC. PG.
 GANDHI. Ben Kingsley is the spiritual leader in Richard Attenborough's film,
which won eight Oscars. 1982. Columbia Tri-Star. $29.99. 3:11. CC. PG.

OUT OF AFRICA. Karen Blixen (Meryl Streep), better known as the writer Isak
Dinesen, finds her true life in Kenya. Robert Redford and Klaus Maria Brandauer
also star in the Sydney Pollack film, which won an Oscar. 1985. MCA/Universal.
$29.99. 2:44. CC. R.

PLATOON. Oliver Stone's account of Vietnam combat is particularly realistic.
Charlie Sheen, Willem Dafoe and Tom Berenger star. 1986. LIVE. $19.98. 1:59. CC.
R.

RAIN MAN. Dustin Hoffman won an Oscar as the autistic brother of Tom Cruise, a
crass car salesman who learns about love and sacrifice. Barry Levinson's film
won as best picture. 1988. MGM/UA. $19.99. 2:13. CC. R.

REDS. Warren Beatty directs and stars as the journalist John Reed during the
Russian Revolution. Maureen Stapleton won an Oscar as the anarchist Emma
Goldman, Jack Nicholson is Eugene O'Neill and Diane Keaton is the writer Louise
Bryant. 1981. Paramount. $29.99. 3:19. CC. PG.

THROW MOMMA FROM THE TRAIN. Contending with a domineering mother, Danny DeVito
gets an idea on how to correct the situation. With Anne Ramsey and Billy
Crystal. 1987. Orion. $19.99. 1:28. CC. PG-13.



LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A scene from Lightyear's version of "Beauty and the Beast."
(Lightyear Entertainment); Wesley Snipes in "Jungle Fever." (David Lee/Universal
Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


A TRAIL OF HEART'S BLOOD WHEREVER WE GO, by Robert Olmstead. (Avon, $11.) A
Vietnam veteran who has become the undertaker in a small New England town learns
some surprising lessons about the way people die. The result is "a kind of prose
'Spoon River Anthology' " notable for "the intelligence and humaneness of the
voice, the grace and clarity of the prose," Michael Malone said here in 1990.

BAGHDAD WITHOUT A MAP: And Other Misadventures in Arabia, by Tony Horwitz.
(Plume, $10.) Tony Horwitz knew he was adrift in an unfathomable land when, at
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's funeral, a man who had been chanting "Death to
America" confessed that his dream had always been to visit Disneyland and take
his children on the teacup ride. From his "wacky, often hair-raising,
experiences, [the author] has fashioned 'Baghdad Without a Map,' a very funny
and frequently insightful look at the world's most combustible region," Barry
Gewen said here last year. "Fearlessness is a valuable quality in a travel
writer, and Mr. Horwitz, who is now a reporter for The Wall Street Journal,
seems as intrepid as they come."

A GRAVEYARD FOR LUNATICS: Another Tale of Two Cities, by Ray Bradbury. (Bantam,
$10.) Two childhood friends, a pulp science fiction writer (much like the young
Mr. Bradbury) and a special effects wizard, are hired by a big Hollywood studio
to make a horror movie. " 'A Graveyard for Lunatics' combines elements of the
detective story, the Hollywood novel and the monster fable in a manner that is
intermittently effective, nearly unique and frequently charming," Tom Nolan said
here in 1990. Bantam has also republished Mr. Bradbury's DEATH IS A LONELY
BUSINESS ($10), in which the same young writer investigates murders at a
decaying amusement park on the old Venice Beach pier. In 1985 our reviewer,
Geoffrey O'Brien, said, "Ray Bradbury's most devoted readers, who are many, will
enjoy this close-up of his mind."

MARS BECKONS: The Mysteries, the Challenges, the Expectations of Our Next Great
Adventure in Space, by John Noble Wilford. (Vintage, $12.) It was disappointing
to learn on the first Mariner voyage that there were no canals on Mars, but
later visits showed a volcano twice as high as Everest and a canyon stretching
the width of the United States. "Mr. Wilford provides a highly readable summary
that also captures the manned-mission-to-Mars debate," Marcia Bartusiak said
here in 1990.

STONE HEART, by Luanne Rice. (Ivy, $5.99.) Returning home to Connecticut to
start her life anew, an archeologist named Maria Dark is disturbed by hints that
her younger sister is trapped in a pathological marriage. This novel is "a
remarkably understated account of domestic violence," Alice McDermott said here
in 1990.

THE GOOD RAIN: Across Time and Terrain in the Pacific Northwest, by Timothy
Egan. (Vintage, $10.) A correspondent for The New York Times in Seattle
describes the magic that makes this corner of the United States one of the most
beautiful places on earth -- and one of the most threatened. In 1990 our
reviewer, Sarah Boxer, said the book "is not only furious but quite lovely."

ICY CLUTCHES, by Aaron Elkins. (Mysterious Press/ Warner, $4.99.) On a trip to
Alaska a forensic anthropologist investigates a 30-year-old murder involving
members of a scientific team buried in an avalanche. "Aaron Elkins's new mystery
sparkles aplenty with those eye-catching scenic descriptions he does so well,"
Marilyn Stasio said here in 1990.

BENJAMIN O. DAVIS JR., AMERICAN: An Autobiography. (Plume, $13.) After becoming
the first black to graduate from West Point in the 20th century, the author
found that his struggles against institutionalized racism had only begun. Last
year The Times's Herbert Mitgang called this book "an important addition to the
shelf of civil rights and military literature."

MURDER AT THE NATIONAL CATHEDRAL, by Margaret Truman. (Fawcett Crest, $5.99.) A
playboy priest is found dead in Washington's landmark Episcopal church. "Miss
Truman may be a stodgy writer, but she has always been a stickler for
authenticity," Marilyn Stasio said in The Book Review in 1990. "Accordingly, she
does well here with her close descriptions of her imposing setting and with the
details of the religious business conducted there."

A PARROT WITHOUT A NAME: The Search for the Last Unknown Birds on Earth, by Don
Stap. (University of Texas, $14.95.) After accompanying two ornithologists on
expeditions in the Peruvian jungle, the author shows that there is nothing
especially sedate about bird watching. In 1990 The Times's Gerald Gold said,
"The book, though packed with intellectual and emotional joy and high jinks and
humor, engenders a feeling of sadness that the earth will not remain filled
forever with such endless mysterious frontiers; that our great-grandchildren and
beyond will not know the wonder of the unknown."

THE SKEPTIC DISPOSITION: Deconstruction, Ideology and Other Matters, by Eugene
Goodheart. (Princeton University, $12.95.) In 1985 our reviewer, Morris
Dickstein, said this book about contemporary literary criticism is "a
fair-minded, generous critique of the deconstructionist theories of Jacques
Derrida, Paul de Man and their followers."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tony Horwitz (Josh Horwitz)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook;
Sound Bites Are Tuned Out, And Clearer Images Emerge

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


The producers of last night's two-hour get-together of contending Democrats on
C-Span evidently learned something from NBC's 90-minute sound-bite festival last
month. Instead of trying to squeeze a few words from all the suspects on every
subject in the world, Cokie Roberts, presiding, focused on three big domestic
matters: the economy, education and crime. She pressed the candidates politely
if not always successfully for direct answers without trying to upstage them.

Although viewers may have been left with only a fuzzy notion of the specific
proposals to which most laid claim, differences of message and of personality
did come through. To be sure, the candidates were united in their put-downs of
President Bush for getting the country into its present predicament, three of
them spoke of their young daughters and all celebrated their superior
compassion. But along the way they began to turn themselves into distinctive
figures.

This time the cast is now reduced to five. Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia,
the most obviously distinctive, is gone. Contrary to the conventions of the
television mystery, the most obstreperous character was not the first to vanish.
Edmund G. Brown Jr., who in the first debate got into a fight with his host, Tom
Brokaw, over his insistence on soliciting contributions on camera, ended last
night's program by reading from a fund-raising solicitation. Ms. Roberts
complimented him on saving 29 cents per letter.

Mr. Brown, former Governor of California, has been much joked about, but he does
not seem to mind being considered, as Ms. Roberts reported, "Governor Moonbeam."
He returns to politics with the reputation of something of a flower child in a
time warp and with a commercial that he delivers in response to just about every
question: Political corruption, a kowtowing to big contributors, is at the heart
of the nation's troubles, and his opponents are all part of it.

His main proposal last night, a flat 13 percent tax to replace the present
income tax, had the same pure or simple quality. Whatever one's response to such
an approach, there is no mixing up Mr. Brown with anybody else.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa seemed equally determined to set himself apart from
"these fellows right here." Three of them, he accused, had in one way or another
supported Reaganomics (omitting Mr. Brown, who has not been in office for almost
a decade). Wagging a finger smack at the audience, he announced, "I'm the only
real Democrat in this race." He also produced again a dollar bill, maybe the
same one he displayed the first time around, to show how little the middle-class
tax cut proposed by Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas, whom Senator Harkin went after with particular bite, would mean to the
little man.

Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, too, carried a prop. Three times he
held up a pamphlet that bore his name, titled "A Call to Economic Arms." He
pleaded guilty to not being a movie star ("Even my dog knows that," he
cracked.), and his hangdog look conforms to his sober message. Like Mr. Brown,
he has a single big truth: the need to halt America's economic decline. He makes
a gloomy messiah. If you are in any doubt which one he is, look for the man with
the worried expression.

Senator Kerrey did not mention Vietnam last night. Possibly in deference to
criticisms of his dependence on his heroic war record, he made an effort to
establish himself in some other way. Mr. Kerrey kept referring to his proposal
for national health insurance, to which none of his competitors seemed to take
exception. He also apparently has an industrial policy and a plan for
restructuring the Federal Government. "I know how to do that!" he declared. That
is more than any viewer can know; for television purposes, Senator Kerrey is
mostly distinguished for energy of expression and remains a bit hard to place.

As the apparent front-runner, Governor Clinton is assuming the statesman's role.
He does less picking on the others, rising only occasionally to the barbs of
Senators Kerrey and Harkin, and last night he found a way to bring his
accomplishments in Arkansas into almost every answer to Ms. Roberts's questions.
The sure mark of the man who thinks he is ahead, he is already talking about
bringing people together.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ernest Pendrell Dead; TV Producer Was 78

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 185 words


Ernest Pendrell, a producer of television documentaries and a playwright in
television's early years, died yesterday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx. He
was 78 years old and lived in Manhattan.

He died of throat cancer, said his wife, Dorothy.

From 1965 to 1978, Mr. Pendrell wrote and produced more than 30 documentaries
for ABC News, examining welfare, drug addiction, abortion and the energy crisis.
In the prize-winning 1966 documentary "To Save a Soldier," he followed a wounded
G.I. from the rice paddies of Vietnam through several military hospitals to his
life with his family after returning home.

His dramas for "United States Steel Hour," "Du Pont Show of the Week," and "Play
of the Week" included "Seven Times Monday," the story of a factory supervisor
striving for respect from his colleagues, starring Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee.

Mr. Pendrell, who was born in London, worked as a reporter for The Philadelphia
Inquirer and managed a children's clothing factory before entering television.
He was also a board member of the Writers Guild of America, East.

He is survived by his wife.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A MOVE TO UNSEAL THE KENNEDY FILES

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 21


The chairman of a Congressional committee that investigated the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy said today that he would ask Congress to order the
release of all Government documents on the slaying. He said such a move would
serve to relieve public suspicions that the Government had been involved in a
conspiracy to kill the President.

But the chairman, Representative Louis Stokes, an Ohio Democrat, said the
release of intelligence agency files and other documents could strengthen
evidence that organized crime figures were involved in the assassination.

The committee's files could be released if the House votes to do so, and Mr.
Stokes's support would be influential in such a vote. But secret material held
by other Government agencies can be made public only with the approval of the
House, Senate and the President, and prospects for such approval are unclear.

The former House Select Committee on Assassinations sent 848 boxes of
unpublished documents it had collected to the National Archives, where they were
to be sealed until the year 2029. But the idea of unsealing the files has gained
momentum with the recent endorsement of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts. Mr. Stokes said recently that he was leaning in favor of
releasing the committee's files, although he added that he believed they would
add nothing important to public knowledge of the case.

But today he said documents assembled by the Central Intelligence Agency and
Federal Bureau of Investigation should be released, too. These documents are not
part of Mr. Stokes's committee's files, although the panel saw some of them in
its inquiry.

These files include transcripts of conversations among prominent members of
organized crime that were secretly, and in some cases illegally, taped by law
enforcement authorities in the six months before the assassination, said G.
Robert Blakey, a University of Notre Dame law professor who served as counsel to
the House assassinations committee.

"In the interests of everything being disclosed," Mr. Stokes said in an
interview, "let's get everything out that is sealed anywhere."

Today he began to consult with House leaders and staff lawyers to consider what
for the legislation to open the files should take.

Concerns on Files' Content

While a House vote could release the committee's files, there are concerns that
they, and the intelligence agencies' information, could reveal intelligence
sources and methods, as well as rumors that could needlessly harm the
reputations of innocent people.

A senior aide to Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate Majority
leader, said Mr. Mitchell supported the fullest disclosure possible of
Government documents related to the assassination. "If Mr. Stokes comes forward
with any proposal," the aide said, Mr. Mitchell "would review it."

A White House spokeswoman, Judy Smith, said of Mr. Stokes's comments:
"Presently, the White House has no position. We will of course review any
request when presented."

Mr. Stokes expressed particular interest in the release of three tapes of
secretly recorded conversations between F.B.I. undercover agents and Carlos
Marcello, a New Orleans organized-crime figure, in the late 1970's in which Mr.
Marcello reportedly said that he was involved in the assassination. The tapes
were sealed by Judge Morey Sear of United States District New Orleans in 1981 in
order not to prejudice Mr. Marcello's trial for bribing a Louisiana official to
receive state insurance contracts.

Mr. Marcello, who is 82 years old, was released from prison two years ago and
lives in New Orleans, where Mr. Blakey says he is in poor health. When Mr.
Marcello testified before the committee, he denied any involvement in the
assassination. But he also expressed intense dislike for former Attorney General
Robert F. Kennedy, whom Mr. Marcello held responsible for his brief deportation
in 1961.

No Word From C.I.A.

In a telephone interview, Judge Sear said he did not remember the contents of
the tapes and would not discuss them even if he had. Thomas F. Jones, an F.B.I.
spokesman, said he was not aware of the existence of the three tapes.

When asked at a news conference today whether he would support Congressional
release of documents relating to the case, the F.B.I.'s director, William S.
Sessions, said, "The law, of course, will be followed."

Mark Mansfield, a spokesman for the C.I.A., said, "I don't have any immediate
comment on Congressman Stokes's remarks, but the agency has fully cooperated
with various bodies that have investigated the assassination of President
Kennedy and will continue to do so."

Mr. Stokes's committee, which investigated the assassinations of President
Kennedy, Robert F. Kennedy and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.  between 1976
and 1979, did not obtain the three tapes. But in its findings, the panel stated
that Mr. Marcello "had the motive, means and opportunity to have President John
F. Kennedy assassinated, though it was unable to establish direct evidence of
Marcello's complicity."

The committee's report also noted links between Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby
to Mafia figures, including some with ties to the Marcello organization and to
Jimmy Hoffa, the labor leader who was being investigated on orders of Robert
Kennedy.

Effect of Movie

Unlike the Warren Commission, which conducted the Government's official review
of the assassination and concluded in 1964 that Lee Harvey Oswald, acting alone,
killed Kennedy, the House panel found in its 1979 report that Kennedy "was
probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy." But the House panel decided
that neither the American nor any foreign Government were involved.

Conspiracy theories implicating the Soviet Union, Cuba, the Mafia, right-wing
Cuban exiles and even the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Central
Intelligence Agency have long been in abundance. But they have been popularized
anew by the movie "J.F.K.," which posits that the Government plotted to kill
Kennedy to prevent him from withdrawing American troops from Vietnam.

Interest in Mr. Marcello was fanned earlier this month when Frank Ragano, a
lawyer who represented Mr. Hoffa, told The New York Post that Mr. Hoffa had
ordered him to tell Mr. Marcello and another mob leader that "They had to kill
the President. Hoffa said to me, 'This has to be done.' "

Mr. Stokes said F.B.I. transcripts of conversations of several Mafia leaders
before the assassination had been reviewed by his committee but were returned to
the F.B.I. and copies were not in the committee's sealed files. "It seems to
me," he said, "that anyone doing any further investigation ought to get hold of
those wiretaps and analyze them for themselves."

Mr. Blakey said the conversations that were taped by the Government and reviewed
by the committee included no conclusive evidence, but they indicated that the
Mafia hated the Kennedys and believed the Kennedy Administration was a serious
threat to the mob's operations. He said the F.B.I. files "have all the
circumstantial evidence that leads to the judgment that the Mafia was involved."

Mr. Stokes said he also thought the C.I.A. files on Mr. Oswald's defection to
the Soviet Union in 1959 and his 1963 trip to Mexico City would also be of
interest to investigators.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative Louis Stokes, head of the former House Select
Committee on Assassinations, said he would ask Congress to order the release of
Government documents on the assassination of John F. Kennedy. (Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times); Assassination records are shown at the National Archives.
(Michael Geissinger for The New York Times) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
A Play That Improves as It Travels From Place to Place

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


Caryl Churchill's "Mad Forest" is a rare case of a play that has been
strengthened in its travels from theater to theater. Despite that fact and the
enthusiasm of the audience, which has filled the Perry Street Theater ever since
the work opened in December, "Mad Forest" is scheduled to end its brief run next
weekend. Producers have apparently been unable to arrange for a move to another,
equally hospitable theater. But the premature closing should not detract from
the process that brought the play to this highly creative point.

With a quick response to a volatile political situation, Miss Churchill used her
playwright's art to clarify the chaos of the Romanian uprising. Several months
after the dictator Nicolae Ceausescu was executed for crimes against the state,
Miss Churchill, the director Mark Wing-Davey and a group of students from the
Central School of Speech and Drama in London went on a fact-finding mission to
Romania. On location, they explored the roots and the effects of the revolution
that toppled the Ceausescu Government from power. By the summer of 1990, Miss
Churchill had completed "Mad Forest," and the students performed it in London
for a limited run.

In that initial engagement, "Mad Forest" had rough edges, but it was riveting
political theater, with a firsthand sense that the events were still happening
as the audience watched. We became witnesses to social upheaval and to the
tremors that continued to shake Romania. With intelligent equanimity, the
playwright probed a crisis that seemed as impenetrable as the forest outside
Bucharest that gave the play its title.

One of several theatrical steps might have followed. Miss Churchill could have
labored over the play so much that it would have lost its harsh immediacy, or it
could have been recast and redirected to make it more commercially viable.
Instead, the work was allowed to gestate, and the playwright and the director
gave the most careful consideration to the next stage of development during the
play's subsequent run at the Royal Court Theater in London. In its New York
Theater Workshop production at the Perry Street Theater, "Mad Forest" proves to
be even more compelling than it was in its first incarnation.

This is in contrast to so many other plays. Theatrical history is filled with
works that have lost something, either concrete or ephemeral, between London or
regional theater and New York, or between Off Broadway and Broadway. Plays as
strong as Harold Pinter's "Betrayal" and David Hare's "Secret Rapture" suffered
in their New York premieres because of imprecision in casting or direction.

Earlier this season, there was the case of "A Piece of My Heart," by Shirley
Lauro, in which the change of theater -- of physical space -- proved to be
crucial. In a proscenium house Off Broadway, this play about women who served in
Vietnam severed the bond of intimacy that had been established between the
audience and the actors when the drama was performed on an open stage at the
Actors Theater of Louisville. Miss Churchill herself was a victim when "Serious
Money" was recast for its move from Off Broadway to Broadway in 1988. The new
actors were unable to capture the production's original improvisational air.
With "Mad Forest," all such pitfalls have been averted.

Although there are no major textual alterations, there has been a general
tightening of the script, and the removal of one of the two intermissions has
given the work a tauter structure. The actors in the American cast are two steps
removed from the Romanian revolution, but they have a visceral awareness that
they are performing fact before it marches into myth.

The students in London were a young and evolving ensemble. In the present
company, the actors vary in age and have greater professional experience. Eleven
actors are called upon to play dozens of characters, young, old and imaginary,
and the American actors prove to be more malleable in shifting from role to
role, including Randy Danson as both a worried mother and the ghost of a
grandmother, and Joseph Siravo as a doctor, a priest and a bloodthirsty vampire.
From the intensity of the performances (and even of the cigarette smoke that
clouds the stage), one can almost feel that the actors have lived the events in
the play. In the Caryl Churchill tradition, they have in effect relived them,
under the astute supervision of Mr. Wing-Davey.

In its first production, the play was staged in a theater that resembled a
school gymnasium. Scenery and lighting effects were kept to a minimum.
Theatergoers sat on cinder blocks; actors and audience seemed to share
discomfort. While there was justification for the approach, it also added an
element of clinical distance.

At Perry Street, in a confined space, the audience is closer, psychologically
and physically, to the characters. We are caught up in the confusion and
deprivation of the people depicted on stage. When a father intentionally smashes
a raw egg to the floor during a period when any food is a most precious
commodity, his action becomes even more jolting. Some of the most moving scenes
are brief silent vignettes illustrating the extremities of everyday life.

Marina Draghici's new scenic design is an important enhancement. Sliding and
shifting panels quickly move the play from home to hospital, from street to
church, where the audience can catch glimpses of religious frescoes in the
background. The matchbox design has an Expressionistic tinge, as if ominous
events are unfolding just out of sight.

The play's resilience is, of course, directly traceable to the author's method
of work. When she undertakes a project, whether it deals with the English civil
war in the 17th century ("Light Shining in Buckinghamshire," which also had its
local premiere last year at the New York Theater Workshop) or the plight of
modern farm workers ("Fen"), she begins as the theatrical equivalent of an
investigative journalist. She amasses evidence and collates interviews and
opinions. Then she takes a further step into interpretation. Eventually, her
process moves far beyond the documentary and represents a bold leap of the
imagination into a world that can approach magic realism.

In the course of her distillation process, she lets her mind roam freely. One of
the most haunting aspects of "Mad Forest" is the paralleling of two fantastical
conversations, one between a priest and an angel who has chosen to walk on
earth, the other between a Transylvanian vampire and a flea-bitten dog (played
by Christopher McCann). The dog, a stand-in for the oppressed common man,
desperately wants to be adopted, even if it means eternal servitude to a
vampire.

These scenes are examples of Miss Churchill's search for context. This was true
in "Serious Money," her satiric broadside about London's financial market and
Wall Street. The author found a precursor in "The Volunteers, or, the
Stockjobbers," a 1692 comedy by Thomas Shadwell, and began with a borrowed scene
from that play. Similarly, in writing about problems of women in the workplace
in "Top Girls," she cast her imagination back to heroines through the centuries.
By relating present to past and by focusing on individuals caught up in
revolutionary change, she has become a dramatizing historian of her time.

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The 1992 Campaign: Democrats;
Candidates Court Jackson Supporters

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


Six Democratic Presidential candidates met with the Rev. Jesse Jackson's
National Rainbow Coalition today, hoping to tap the grass-roots support that
fueled Mr. Jackson's own 1988 bid for the nomination.

But if any hoped to capture the whole rainbow, he was disappointed, as support
was fragmented. All the candidates had a similar message but spent considerable
time trying to demonstrate their differences, and that led to some prickly
responses.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas was booed when he spoke in support of
right-to-work laws. Edmund G. Brown Jr., former Governor of California, swiped
at Mr. Clinton by calling for a moment of silence for a man whom the Governor
allowed to be executed in Arkansas on Friday night. And Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska got enthusiastic applause for his national health care plan.

Paul E. Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts, outlined his tough-love
economic message. Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa captivated the audience with his
unabashedly liberal oratory, and Eugene McCarthy, the former Senator from
Wisconsin, told charming stories of his previous runs for President.

Thoughts on Candidates

Among the roughly 500 delegates, there were those who said they liked the
message of Mr. Brown but said they did not think he was electable. Others said
they thought Mr. Clinton looked and sounded presidential but wondered if
questions about his personal life could harm him in voters' eyes. Still others
said they thought that Senator Kerrey, with his emphasis on health care and his
personal attractiveness, looked like a winner.

But as Mr. Jackson pointed out, immediate support was not the reason for the
forum. The coalition will not endorse any particular candidate, though Mr.
Jackson said he would endorse a candidate at some point in the future.

"This is the broadest based forum the candidates can appear before," Mr. Jackson
said. "Here you have mayors of big cities and small, women, Hispanics, gays,
Native Americans asking the questions. These are the people who have to be
energized and I think there has been a message gap in the debates. My sense is
that people are looking for concrete plans."

Panel Questions Candidates

Each of the candidates gave a short speech and was then questioned by a panel of
labor, civic and education experts and officials.

The forum was held in an auditorium at the Omni Shoreham Hotel here.

Mr. Brown got a standing ovation for his support of statehood for the District
of Columbia and his suggestion that Mr. Jackson would make a good running mate.
But afterward several delegates who said they agreed with many of Mr. Brown's
views expressed doubt that he could be elected.

"I like Brown's philosophy, but, really, who is going to vote for him?" said Mel
Fallis, a vice president of marketing for American Visions magazine.

Mr. Clinton's presentation was upbeat and appeared to capture the audience's
attention, until he ran into criticism for his positions on a middle-class tax
cut, the death penalty and support for right-to-work laws.

Mr. Clinton defended his support for a tax cut for middle-class taxpayers,
saying that only by expanding the middle class could the poor be helped. And he
seemed to win the sympathy of the audience when he talked about his emotional
turmoil when he decided to allow the execution of Rickey Ray Rector, a black
mentally impaired murderer, to proceed.

Mr. Clinton, however, ran afoul of some members of the audience when he said he
would not oppose right-to-work laws. He said that the issue was divisive and
that it was one of the reasons that Democrats had not won recent Presidential
elections. A handful of people stood up and booed and then walked out of the
hall.

"He can forget about support from trade unionists," said Ron Richardson, vice
president of the Hotel Employees Restaurant Employees International Union, who
had asked the question.

Mr. Kerrey, who spoke about education, health care and his experience in the
Vietnam War, appeared to win the most enthusiasm from the audience.

"His platform is more about my concerns," said Andre Thompson, from Glen Arden,
Md., who said he was put off by Mr. Clinton's smooth delivery. "He's too
plastic."

Mr. Tsongas gave his economic bootstrapping message, something that appealed to
Christine Welch, a representative of the American Federation of Government
Employees. "He's truthful," she said. "He's upfront."

Mr. Harkin lashed out at Republicans in general and President Bush in
particular, promising that if he won the Democratic nomination he would not hold
Mr. Bush's "feet to the fire" in the general election campaign.

"I'm going to put his feet in fire," he said, adding, "I'm going to make them
accountable for the despair and the depression we have in the land."

Mr. Harkin also took Mr. Clinton to task on his record on issues like education,
civil rights and employment. He said Mr. Kerrey was for health care, but "none
of his employees have it."

By the end of his speech, some of the delegates were chanting the Senator's
name.

Annette Rainwater of Detroit said she was leaning toward Senator Harkin but had
not made up her mind.

"Something is missing, I don't know what," Ms. Rainwater said. "Maybe I'm
looking for the excitement I had with Jesse. But when the dust settles, I think
I'll be going with a winner."

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 1, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Sunday about a meeting of Democratic Presidential candidates with
the Rev. Jesse Jackson's Rainbow Coalition misidentified the state represented
by former Senator Eugene J. McCarthy. He is from Minnesota.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Edmund G. Brown Jr., right, Democratic candidate for President,
greeting Mayor David N. Dinkins and Representative Charles B. Rangel, center,
before the National Rainbow Coalition meeting in Washington. (George Tames for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Kuwaitis Urge U.S. to Press Iraq on P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 415 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


A delegation of Kuwaiti human-rights advocates spent the last week in Washington
urging the United States to step up efforts to win the release of Kuwaitis still
held captive in Iraq, and to determine the fate of other missing Kuwaitis.

The group won a promise from Army Secretary Michael Stone to lend forensic
specialists from military laboratories to aid in the identification of bodies
buried in Kuwait.

The Army Central Identification Laboratory in Hawaii, which handles the bodies
of missing members of the armed forces returned from Vietnam, is considered one
of the leading centers for such work.

The delegation was organized by the Kuwaiti Association for the Defense of War
Victims, an independent group whose activities are tolerated but not directed by
the Kuwaiti Government. The association has conducted exhaustive research into
reports of missing people since the end of the war, when the group was founded
by Kuwaitis who had been held prisoner in Iraq.

The group said it now knows the names and descriptions of 546 missing people who
have been seen in detention in Iraq or were seen being abducted during the
occupation of Kuwait, and another 507 people who disappeared during the
occupation and have not been seen or heard of since.

Dr. Ghanim al-Najar, a political-science professor at Kuwait University who is
chairman of the association, said many of those cases might be closed if medical
experts could exhume and examine the bodies of unidentified people buried at
Kuwait's Riqqa cemetery.

The association has also received a detailed proposal from the group Physicians
for Human Rights to help in the identification of those bodies, he said.

Dr. Najar, in an interview, called on the United Nations to search for missing
people inside Iraq with as much energy as it has devoted to looking for Iraqi
nuclear weapons production equipment since the end of the war.

At the group's request, Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, wrote a letter to the American representative to the United
Nations, Thomas R. Pickering, asking the United Nations to press Iraq more
vigorously to comply with Security Council resolutions calling for the release
of any prisoners it holds.

The International Committee of the Red Cross estimates that between March and
December 1991, some 6,702 people were released by the Iraqis. The Government of
Kuwait has estimated that as of November, the number of people held by the
Iraqis was 2,101.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STATE OF THE UNION;
Transcript of President Bush's Address on the State of the Union

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4897 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Following is a transcript of President Bush's State of the Union Message
tonight, as recorded by The New York Times.

Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. President. Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, distinguished
members of Congress, honored guests and fellow citizens, thank you very much for
that warm reception.

You know, with the big buildup this address has had I wanted to be sure it'd be
a big hit, but I couldn't convince Barbara to deliver it for me. I see the
Speaker and the Vice President are laughing. They saw what I did in Japan and
they're just happy to be sitting behind me.

I mean to speak tonight of big things, of big changes and the promises they hold
and of some big problems and how together we can solve them and move our country
forward as the undisputed leader of the age.

And we gather tonight at a dramatic and deeply promising time in our history,
and in the history of man on earth. For in the past 12 months, the world has
known changes of almost biblical proportions. And even now, months after the
failed coup that doomed a failed system, I am not sure we've absorbed the full
impact, the full import of what happened.

But Communism died this year. And even as President, with the most fascinating
possible vantage point, there were times when I was so busy helping to manage
progress and helping to lead change that I didn't always show the joy that was
in my heart.

But the biggest thing that has happened in the world in my life, in our lives,
is this: By the grace of God, America won the cold war.

I mean to speak this evening of the changes that can take place in our country
now that we can stop making the sacrifices we had to make when we had an avowed
enemy that was a superpower. And now we can look homeward even more, and move to
set right what needs to be set right.

A 'Roll-call of Honor'

I will speak of those things. But let me tell you something I've been thinking
these past few months. It's a kind of roll-call of honor. For the cold war
didn't "end" -- it was won.

And I think of those who won it, in places like Korea and Vietnam. And some of
them didn't come back. Back then, they were heroes, but this year they were
victors. The long roll-call, all the G.I. Joes and Janes, all the ones who
fought faithfully for freedom, who hit the ground and sucked the dust and knew
their share of horror.

This may seem frivolous, and I don't mean it so. But it's moving to me how the
world saw them.

The world saw not only their special valor but their special style, their
rambunctious, optimistic bravery, their do-or-die unity unhampered by class or
race or region. What a group we've put forth, for generations now, from the ones
who wrote "Kilroy was here" on the walls of the German stalags to those who left
signs in the Iraqi desert that said, "I saw Elvis." What a group of kids we've
sent out into the world.

And there's another to be singled out, though it may seem inelegant. And I mean
a mass of people called the American taxpayer. No one ever thinks to thank the
people who pay a country's bill or an alliance's bill. But for half a century
now, the American people have shouldered the burden and paid taxes that were
higher than they would have been to support a defense that was bigger than it
would have been if imperial Communism had never existed.

But it did.

It doesn't anymore.

Ending of an Era

And here is a fact I wouldn't mind the world acknowledging: The American
taxpayer bore the brunt of the burden, and deserves a hunk of the glory.

And so, now, for the first time in 35 years, our strategic bombers stand down.
No longer are they on round-the-clock alert. Tomorrow our children will go to
school and study history and how plants grow. And they won't have, as my
children did, air-raid drills in which they crawl under their desks and cover
their heads in case of nuclear war. My grandchildren don't have to do that, and
won't have the bad dreams children had once in decades past. There are still
threats. But the long drawn-out dread is over.

A year ago tonight I spoke to you at a moment of high peril. American forces had
just unleashed Operation Desert Storm. And after 40 days in the desert skies and
4 days on the ground, the men and women of America's armed forces and our allies
accomplished the goals that I declared, and that you endorsed: We liberated
Kuwait.

And soon after, the Arab world and Israel sat down to talk seriously, and
comprehensively, about peace, an historic first. And soon after that, at
Christmas, the last American hostages came home. Our policies were vindicated.

Much good can come from the prudent use of power. And much good can come of
this: A world once divided into two armed camps now recognizes one sole and
pre-eminent power, the United States of America.

And they regard this with no dread. For the world trusts us with power, and the
world is right. They trust us to be fair, and restrained. They trust us to be on
the side of decency. They trust us to do what's right.

And I use those words advisedly. A few days after the war began, I received a
telegram from Joanne Speicher, the wife of the first pilot killed in the gulf,
Lieut. Comdr.  Scott Speicher. Even in her grief, she wanted me to know that
some day, when her children were old enough, she would tell them "that their
father went away to war because it was the right thing to do."

She said it all. It was the right thing to do.

And we did it together. There were honest differences right here in this
chamber. But when the war began, you put partisanship aside and we supported our
troops. And this is still a time for pride, but this is no time to boast. For
problems face us, and we must stand together once again and solve them -- and
not let our country down.

Reduction of Military

Two years ago, I began planning cuts in military spending that reflected the
changes of the new era. But now, this year, with imperial Communism gone, that
process can be accelerated.

Tonight I can tell you of dramatic changes in our strategic nuclear force. These
are actions we are taking on our own, because they are the right thing to do.

After completing 20 planes for which we have begun procurement, we will shut
down further production of the B-2 bomber. We will cancel the small I.C.B.M.
program. We will cease production of new warheads for our sea-based ballistic
missiles. We will stop all new production of the Peacekeeper missile. And we
will not purchase any more advanced cruise missiles.

This weekend I will meet at Camp David with Boris Yeltsin of the Russian
Federation. I have informed President Yeltsin that if the commonwealth, the
former Soviet Union, will eliminate all land-based multiple-warhead ballistic
missiles, I will do the following:

We will eliminate all Peacekeeper missiles. We will reduce the number of
warheads on Minuteman missiles to one and reduce the number of warheads on our
sea-based missiles by about one-third. And we will convert a substantial portion
of our strategic bombers to primarily conventional use.

President Yeltsin's early response has been very positive, and I expect our
talks at Camp David to be fruitful.

I want you to know that for half a century, American presidents have longed to
make such decisions and say such words. But even in the midst of celebration, we
must keep caution as a friend.

For the world is still a dangerous place. Only the dead have seen the end of
conflict. And though yesterday's challenges are behind us, tomorrow's are being
born.

The Secretary of Defense recommended these cuts after consultation with the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. And I make them with confidence. But do not misunderstand
me:

The reductions I have approved will save us an additional $50 billion over the
next five years. By 1997 we will have cut defense by 30 percent since I took
office. These cuts are deep, and you must know my resolve: This deep, and no
deeper. To do less would be insensible to progress, but to do more would be
ignorant of history.

Rejection of Isolationism

We must not go back to the days of "the hollow army." We cannot repeat the
mistakes made twice in this century, when armistice was followed by recklessness
and defense was purged as if the world were permanently safe.

I remind you this evening that I have asked for your support in funding a
program to protect our country from limited nuclear missile attack. We must have
this protection because too many people in too many countries have access to
nuclear arms. And I urge you again to pass the Strategic Defense Initiative,
S.D.I.

There are those who say that now we can turn away from the world, that we have
no special role, no special place. But we are the United States of America, the
leader of the West that has become the leader of the world.

And as long as I am President I will continue to lead in support of freedom
everywhere, not out of arrogance and not out of altruism, but for the safety and
security of our children.

This is a fact: Strength in the pursuit of peace is no vice; isolationism in the
pursuit of security is no virtue.

Now to our troubles at home. They are not all economic, but the primary problem
is our economy. And there are some good signs. Inflation, that thief, is down,
and interest rates are down. But unemployment is too high, some industries are
in trouble and growth is not what it should be.

And let me tell you right from the start and right from the heart: I know we're
in hard times, but I know something else: This will not stand.

In this chamber, we can bring the same courage and sense of common purpose to
the economy that we brought to Desert Storm. And we can defeat hard times
together.

I believe you'll help. One reason is that you're patriots, and you want the best
for your country. And I believe that in your hearts you want to put partisanship
aside and get the job done, because it's the right thing to do.

The power of America rests in a stirring but simple idea: That people will do
great things if only you set them free. Well, we're going to set the economy
free, for if this age of miracles and wonders has taught us anything, it's that
if we can change the world, we can change America.

We must encourage investment. We must make it easier for people to invest money
and create new products, new industries and new jobs.

We must clear away the obstacles to growth: high taxes, high regulation, red
tape and, yes, wasteful government spending.

None of this will happen with a snap of the fingers, but it will happen. And the
test of a plan isn't whether it's called new or dazzling.

The American people aren't impressed by gimmicks. They're smarter on this score
than all of us in this room. The only test of a plan is, Is it sound and will it
work?

We must have a short-term plan to address our immediate needs and heat up the
economy. And then we need a longer-term plan to keep the combustion going and to
guarantee our place in the world economy.

There are certain things that a President can do without Congress. And I'm going
to do them.

Revamping of Government

I have this evening asked major Cabinet departments and Federal agencies to
institute a 90-day moratorium on any new Federal regulations that could hinder
growth. In those 90 days, major departments and agencies will carry out a
top-to-bottom review of all regulations, old and new, to stop the ones that will
hurt growth and speed up those that will help growth.

Further, for the untold number of hard-working, responsible American workers and
businessmen and women who've been forced to go without needed bank loans, the
banking credit crunch must end. I won't neglect my responsibility for sound
regulations that serve the public good, but regulatory overkill must be stopped.
And I have instructed our government regulators to stop it.

I have directed Cabinet departments and Federal agencies to speed up pro-growth
expenditures as quickly as possible. This should put an extra $10 billion into
the economy in the next six months. And our new transportation bill provides
more than $150 billion for construction and maintenance projects that are vital
to our growth and well being. That means jobs building roads, jobs building
bridges and jobs building railways.

And I have this evening directed the Secretary of the Treasury to change the
Federal tax withholding tables. With this change, millions of Americans from
whom the Government withholds more than necessary can now choose to have the
Government withhold less from their paychecks.

Something tells me a number of taxpayers may take us up on this one. This
initiative could return about $25 billion back into our economy over the next 12
months, money people can use to help pay for clothing, college, or to get a new
car.

And finally, working with the Federal Reserve, we will continue to support
monetary policy that keeps both interest rates and inflation down.

Now these are the things I can do.

And now, members of Congress, let me tell you what you can do for your country.
You must, you must pass the other elements of my plan to meet our economic
needs.

Everyone knows that investment spurs recovery.

Proposals on Taxes

And I am proposing this evening a change in the alternative minimum tax, and the
creation of a new 15 percent investment tax allowance. This will encourage
businesses to accelerate investment and bring people back to work.

Real estate has led our economy out of almost all the tough times we've ever
had. Once building starts, carpenters and plumbers work, people buy homes and
take out mortgages.

My plan would modify the passive-loss rule for active real estate developers.
And it would make it easier for pension plans to purchase real estate. For those
Americans who dream of buying a first home but who can't quite afford it, my
plan would allow first-time home buyers to withdraw savings from I.R.A.'s
without penalty and provide a $5,000 tax credit for the first purchase of that
home.

And, finally, my immediate plan calls on Congress to give crucial help to people
who own a home, to everyone who has a business, or a farm or a single
investment.

This time, at this hour, I cannot take 'No' for an answer. You must cut the
capital gains tax on the people of our country.

Never has an issue been more demagogued by its opponents. But the demagogues are
wrong. They are wrong, and they know it. Sixty percent of the people who benefit
from lower capital gains have incomes under $50,000. A cut in the capital gains
tax increases jobs and helps just about everyone in our country.

And so I'm asking you to cut the capital gains tax to a maximum of 15.4 percent.
And I'll tell you, I'll tell you, those of you who say, "Oh, no, someone who's
comfortable may benefit from that," you kind of remind me of the old definition
of the Puritan, who couldn't sleep at night worrying that somehow someone
somewhere was out having a good time.

The opponents of this measure and those who've authored various so-called
soak-the-rich bills that are floating around this chamber should be reminded of
something: When they aim at the big guy, they usually hit the little guy. And
maybe it's time that stopped.

This then is my short-term plan. Your part, members of Congress, requires
enactment of these common-sense proposals that will have a strong effect on the
economy, without breaking the budget agreement and without raising tax rates.

And while my plan is being passed and kicking in, we've got to care for those in
trouble today. I have provided for up to $4.4 billion in my budget to extend
Federal unemployment benefits, and I ask for Congressional action right away.

And I thank the committee ---- Well, at last.

And let's be frank. Let's be frank; let me level with you.

I know, and you know, that my plan is unveiled in a political season. I know,
and you know, that everything I propose will be viewed by some in merely
partisan terms. But I ask you to know what is in my heart. And my aim is to
increase our nation's good. And I'm doing what I think is right; I'm proposing
what I know will help.

I pride myself that I'm a prudent man, and I believe that patience is a virtue,
but I understand that politics is, for some, a game and that sometimes the game
is to stop all progress and then decry the lack of improvement.

But let me tell you, let me tell you, far more important than my political
future -- and far more important than yours -- is the well-being of our country.
And members of this chamber, members of this chamber, are practical people, and
I know you won't resent some practical advice: When people put their party's
fortunes, whatever the party, whatever side of this aisle, before the public
good, they court defeat not only for their country, but for themselves. And they
will certainly deserve it.

And I submit my plan tomorrow. And I am asking you to pass it by March 20. And I
ask the American people to let you know they want this action by March 20. From
the day after that, if it must be, the battle is joined.

And you know, when principle is at stake, I relish a good fair fight.

Plan for Long-Term Growth

And I said my plan has two parts, and it does. And it's the second part that is
the heart of the matter. For it's not enough to get an immediate burst. We need
long-term improvement in our economic position.

We all know that the key to our economic future is to insure that America
continues as the economic leader of the world. We have that in our power.

Here, then, is my long-term plan to guarantee our future.

First, trade: We will work to break down the walls that stop world trade. We
will work to open markets everywhere.

And in our major trade negotiations I will continue pushing to eliminate tariffs
and subsidies that damage America's farmers and workers. And we'll get more good
American jobs within our own hemisphere through the North American Free Trade
Agreement, and through the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative.

But changes are here, and more are coming. The workplace of the future will
demand more highly skilled workers than ever, more people who are computer
literate, highly educated.

And we must be the world's leader in education. And we must revolutionize
America's schools.

My America 2000 strategy will help us reach that goal. My plan will give parents
more choice, give teachers more flexibility and help communities create new
American schools.

Thirty states across the nation have established America 2000 programs. Hundreds
of cities and towns have joined in. Now Congress must join this great movement.
Pass my proposals for new American schools.

That was my second long-term proposal. And here's my third: We must make
common-sense investments that will help us compete, long term, in the
marketplace.

We must encourage research and development. My plan is to make the R and D tax
credit permanent, and to provide record levels of support, over $76 billion
dollars this year alone for people who will explore the promise of emerging
technologies.

On Crime and Education

And fourth, we must do something about crime and drugs.

And it is time for a major renewed investment in fighting violent street crime.
It saps our strength and hurts our faith in our society, and in our future
together.

Surely, a tired woman on her way to work at 6 in the morning on a subway
deserves the right to get there safely. And surely, it's true that everyone who
changes his or her life because of crime -- from those afraid to go out at night
to those afraid to walk in the parks they pay for -- surely these people have
been denied a basic civil right.

It is time to restore it. Congress, pass my comprehensive crime bill. It is
tough on criminals and supportive of police, and it has been languishing in
these hallowed halls for years now. Pass it. Help your country.

And fifth, I ask you tonight to fund our Hope housing proposal and to pass my
enterprise zone legislation, which will get businesses into the inner city. We
must empower the poor with the pride that comes from owning a home, getting a
job, becoming a part of things.

My plan would encourage real estate construction by extending tax incentives for
mortgage revenue bonds and low-income housing.

And I ask tonight for record expenditures for the program that helps children
born into want move into excellence: Head Start.

Step six: We must reform our health-care system, for this, too, bears on whether
or not we can compete in the world.

American health costs have been exploding. This year America will spend over
$800 billion on health, and that is expected to grow to $1.6 trillion by the end
of the decade. We simply cannot afford this.

Tackling Health Insurance

The cost of health care shows up not only in your family budget, but in the
price of everything we buy and everything we sell. When health coverage for a
fellow on an assembly line costs thousands of dollars, the cost goes into the
products he makes. And you pay the bill.

We must make a choice.

Now some pretend we can have it both ways; they call it play or pay. But that
expensive approach is unstable. It will mean higher taxes, fewer jobs and,
eventually, a system under complete Government control.

Really, there are only two options. And we can move toward a nationalized
system, a system which will restrict patient choice in picking a doctor and
force the Government to ration services arbitrarily. And what we'll get is
patients in long lines, indifferent service and a huge new tax burden.

Or we can reform our own private health-care system, which still gives us, for
all its flaws, the best quality health care in the world.

Well, let's build on our strengths.

My plan provides insurance security for all Americans while preserving and
increasing the idea of choice. We make basic health insurance affordable for all
low-income people not now covered. We do it by providing a health insurance tax
credit of up to $3,750 for each low-income family. The middle class gets help,
too. And, by reforming the health insurance market, my plan assures that
Americans will have access to basic health insurance even if they change jobs or
develop serious health problems.

We must bring costs under control, preserve quality, preserve choice and reduce
the people's nagging daily worry about health insurance. My plan, the details of
which I will announce shortly, does just that.

Deficit-Control Plan

And seventh, we must get the Federal deficit under control.

We now have in law enforceable spending caps, and a requirement that we pay for
the programs we create. There are those in Congress who would ease that
discipline now. But I cannot let them do it. And I won't.

My plan would freeze all domestic discretionary budget authority, which means no
more next year than this year. And I will not tamper with Social Security, but I
would put real caps on the growth of uncontrolled spending. And I would also
freeze Federal domestic government employment.

And with the help of Congress, my plan will get rid of 246 programs that don't
deserve Federal funding. Some of them have noble titles, but none of them is
indispensable. We can get rid of each and every one of them.

You know, it's time we rediscovered a home truth the American people have never
forgotten: This government is too big and spends too much.

And I call upon Congress to adopt a measure that will help put an end to the
annual ritual of filling the budget with pork-barrel appropriations. Every year,
the press has a field day making fun of outrageous examples, a Lawrence Welk
museum, a research grant for Belgian endive.

We all know how these things get into the budget, and maybe you need someone to
help you say no. And I know how to say it. And you know what I need to make it
stick. Give me the same thing 43 Governors have -- the line-item veto -- and let
me help you control spending.

We must put an end to unfinanced Federal Government mandates. These are the
requirements Congress puts on our cities, counties and states without supplying
the money. And if Congress passes a mandate, it should be forced to pay for it
and balance the cost with savings elsewhere. After all, a mandate just increases
someone else's burden, and that means higher taxes at the state and local level.

Step Eight: Congress should enact the bold reform proposals that are still
awaiting Congressional action, bank reform, civil justice reform, tort reform
and my national energy strategy.

And finally: We must strengthen the family, because it is the family that has
the greatest bearing on our future. When Barbara holds an AIDS baby in her arms
and reads to children, she's saying to every person in this country, "Family
matters."

Help for Families

And I am announcing tonight a new commission on America's urban families. I've
asked Missouri's Governor, John Ashcroft, to be chairman, former Dallas Mayor
Annette Strauss to be co-chair.

You know, I had mayors, the leading mayors from the League of Cities in the
other day at the White House, and they told me something striking. They said
that every one of them, Republican and Democrat, agreed on one thing: That the
major cause of the problems of the cities is the dissolution of the family. And
they asked for this commission, and they were right to ask, because it's time to
determine what we can do to keep families together, strong and sound.

There's one thing we can do right away: Ease the burden of rearing a child. I
ask you tonight to raise the personal exemption by $500 per child for every
family. For a family with four kids, that's an increase of $2,000. This is a
good start, in the right direction, and it's what we can afford.

It's time to allow families to deduct the interest they pay on student loans.
And I'm asking you to do just that.

And I'm asking you to allow people to use money from their l.R.A.'s to pay
medical and education expenses, all without penalties.  And I'm asking for more.
Ask American parents what they dislike about how things are going in our
country, and chances are good that pretty soon they'll get to welfare.

Americans are the most generous people on earth. But we have to go back to the
insight of Franklin Roosevelt who, when he spoke of what became the welfare
program, warned that it must not become a narcotic and a subtle destroyer of the
spirit.

Welfare was never meant to be a life style. It was never meant to be a habit. It
was never supposed to be passed from generation to generation like a legacy.

It's time to replace the assumptions of the welfare state and help reform the
welfare system.

States throughout the country are beginning to operate with new assumptions:
That when able-bodied people receive government assistance they have
responsibilities to the taxpayer. A responsibility to seek work, education, or
job training. A responsibility to get their lives in order. A responsibility to
hold their families together and refrain from having children out of wedlock.
And a responsibility to obey the law.

We are going to help this movement. Often, state reform requires waiving certain
Federal regulations. I will act to make that process easier and quicker for
every state that asks our help.

And I want to add, as we make these changes, we work together to improve this
system, that our intention is not scapegoating or finger pointing. If you read
the papers or watch TV you know there's been a rise these days in a certain kind
of ugliness: racist comments, anti-Semitism, an increased sense of division.

Really, this is not us. This is not who we are. And this is not acceptable.

And so you have my plan for America. And I am asking for big things, but I
believe in my heart you will do what's right.

And you know, it's kind of an American tradition to show a certain skepticism
toward our democratic institutions. I myself have sometimes thought the aging
process could be delayed if it had to make its way through Congress.

But you will deliberate, and you will discuss, and that is fine.

But, my friends, the people cannot wait. They need help now.

And there's a mood among us. People are worried. There has been talk of decline.
Someone even said our workers are lazy and uninspired.

And I thought, "Really? Go tell Neil Armstrong standing on the moon. Tell the
men and women who put him there. Tell the American farmer who feeds his country
and the world. Tell the men and women of Desert Storm."

Moods come and go, but greatness endures. Ours does.

And maybe for a moment it's good to remember what, in the dailyness of our
lives, we forget.

We are still and ever the freest nation on earth, the kindest nation on earth,
the strongest nation on earth.

And we have always risen to the occasion.

And we are going to lift this nation out of hard times inch by inch and day by
day, and those who would stop us had better step aside. Because I look at hard
times and I make this vow: This will not stand.

And so we move on, together, a rising nation, the once and future miracle that
is still, this night, the hope of the world.

Thank you. God bless you.

And God bless our beloved country. Thank you very, very much.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush receiving a standing ovation from members of
Congress and guests as he arrived for his State of the Union Message. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Middle Class Hang-Up

BYLINE: By Ted Van Dyk;  Ted Van Dyk is a longtime Democratic strategist.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


With style and shrewdness, Gov. Bill Clinton appears to have beaten the rap on
his philandering and emerged stronger than he was before the Gennifer Flowers
episode came up. Unless a second shoe (or bedroom slipper) drops to indicate
he's a liar, his national exposure during his troubles has helped establish him
more clearly as the Democrats' front-runner and likely nominee.

Now he faces a real challenge: to move beyond poll-driven boiler plate to
presentation of a strong, relevant agenda that will genuinely address the
country's problems and give voters a real reason to elect him.

Governor Clinton enters the New Hampshire primary homestretch with far more
money and a stronger organization than his competitors. The media, perhaps
overcompensating for window-peeping, are giving him more generous and ample
coverage than the other Democrats. If he wins, as expected, his competitors may
well be down and broke. This would provide an opportunity to forget parts of his
platform that falsely promise voters pleasure without pain, and to draw real
differences between President Bush and himself.

First, the Governor should abandon his shameless pandering to the middle class.
Hardly a sentence passes his mouth without use of the words "middle class." The
first two economic planks of his Plan for America's Future are naked tax cut
appeals to voters that would do justice to Ronald Reagan. The first, titled Tax
Relief for the Forgotten Middle Class, says "we should cut middle class taxes
immediately by 10 percent." The second, an expanded children's tax credit, would
provide an immediate $480 annual tax saving for each child in an "average
income" family.

To provide billions of dollars to pay for these cuts, the Governor proposes
vaguely to close unspecified tax loopholes for the rich, soak high income
individuals and cut the Federal bureaucracy. In other words, he has no idea
where he'd find the money but is making promises anyway and socking easy targets
in the bargain.

More disturbing than the tax cut grandstanding is the shorthand at work in the
repetitive use of "middle class." In 1980's and early 1990's political parlance,
the term has been a code phrase used by moderate and conservative Democratic
candidates to mean "taxpayers, not tax-eaters." Repeated and emphasized often,
it signals 1980's Reagan Democrats that it is safe to come home to their party
because poor, black, Hispanic, urban, homeless, hungry, and other people and
problems out of favor in Middle America will no longer get the favored treatment
they got from mushy 1960's and 1970's Democratic liberals.

The Governor also needs to clean up his act on trade. Leading Arkansas,
dependent on international trade, he began his campaign by resisting the
protectionism preached by Tom Harkin and Bob Kerrey. But he recently has used
"getting tough on trade" and other code phrases, sprinkled with references to
Japan, all meant to imply that foreign devils rather than our own failings are
to blame for our economic weakness.

America needs a modern infrastructure; better educated, housed and nourished
people; training and retraining for its workforce; an all-out attack on the
homelessness, crime and drugs crushing urban areas, and a plan for economic
investment and growth that will keep us competitive in changing world markets
while reducing the red ink of the Reagan-Bush years. It will get none of these
things through tax cut grandstanding, pandering to the middle class and easy
protectionist jargon.

I've known Bill Clinton since 1972, when he joined the McGovern Presidential
campaign as a young organizer. That Bill Clinton was filled with idealism,
wanted to end the Vietnam War and was committed to justice for people without
power. He has adjusted those views to succeed in populist but conservative
border-state politics. Now he needs to think and act in a broader setting.

With the hard part nearly behind him, he needs to get serious -- beginning with
tomorrow night's nationally televised prime-time debate among the Democratic
Presidential candidates on the Public Broadcasting Service.


LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Long Conflict Deeply Marked the Self-Image of Americans

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words


The cold war, gone but not lamented, had a powerful effect on America, not only
on government, politics and military strategy, but also in a subtler and even
contradictory way on what might be called the national psyche, the collective
consciousness.

Fear of the sort suggested in Sidney Lumet's "Fail Safe," a 1964 movie ending
with the nuclear destruction of Moscow and New York, certainly reflected at
least one element of the American mind during the cold war, and anxiety over the
possibility of annihilation may be one of its permanent legacies.

But the effect of the superpower conflict on the American psyche was neither
uniform nor uncomplicated.

Instead, it moved minds in various ways. Certainly, it affected emotions and
attitudes about the United States and the world; it could inspire fear or
exultation, patriotism or national self-loathing. Scholars, looking back
particularly on the early years of the superpower confrontation, have seen its
influences on such divergent elements of American life as the organization of
the family and even the success of modern abstract painting.

Even the matter of nuclear dread is full of complexity. While popular fiction
over 40 years showed the threat or the effects of a nuclear holocaust, it is
difficult to tell how many Americans actually spent much of their time worrying
about about the danger of nuclear war.

A Sense of Fragility

Did the cold war permanently change the way Americans think or look at the
world? For many, it gave purpose to national life, arising out of the perceived
need to defend American freedom and values. For others it created powerful
skepticism about America's role in the world and about the goodness and
integrity of the American Government.  Even as the confrontation with the Soviet
Union inspired many to patriotic fervor and a belief in American superiority,
others found it alienating. These people saw the conflict as a grand and
convenient excuse to blame national shortcomings on an external enemy of
exaggerated importance -- not the first or last time Americans have displayed
this trait. The national view of Japan right now is a vivid example.

If there is a single permanent effect, it is probably in the pervasive sense of
the globe's fragility, an awareness of mankind's capacity to self-destruct that
has been compounded by environmental degradation and the theory of global
warming. As a result of the cold war, Americans may actually be less confident
that science, technology and enlightened control of nature will lead to
constantly improving lives -- a belief that prevailed for much of this century.

"The cold war was a major organizing principle of American life, politically and
culturally and in other ways as well," said Alan Brinkley, a historian at
Columbia University. "But that doesn't mean it cut in one direction."

"On the one hand, the existence of nuclear weapons and of a clear, distinct and
powerful enemy with those weapons created an undercurrent of anxiety that found
its way into films, novels and presumably into ordinary life," Mr. Brinkley
said. Part of that anxiety, he said, translated into "a strengthened sense of
mankind's capacity for evil" and "a great skepticism about the human capacity to
make wise decisions."

A Boost for 'Triumphalism'

But, Mr. Brinkley added, "the cold war also gave an enormous boost to American
exceptionalism and triumphalism, the idea that America was carrying the banner
of freedom in a world in which freedom was threatened."

But however fraught with anxieties, the very predictability of the superpower
confrontation provided a certain reassurance, particularly in the later years
when the threat seemed less immediate. The enemy was easy to identify -- a
single country run by unlikable men who seemed nonetheless to be psychologically
stable and in control. In this sense the end of the cold war and the dissolution
of the Soviet empire could produce a new unease stemming from a more
complicated, less predictable world order.

Moreover, the ultimate instruments of cold war terror, nuclear weapons, are far
from being eliminated. Weapons of mass destruction existed in a handful of
stable countries, but now the prospect is that they will be held by a larger
number of countries, not all of them stable, some of them newly created out of
the Soviet Union's disintegration. New conflicts in a less predictable world
could revive old nuclear anxieties.

Optimism and Disillusion

Certainly, it is not difficult to see the cold war's imprint on American
attitudes during the various major events of the post World War II world. And in
each of these events, contradictory effects blend in the collective mind --
insecurity, exaggerated self-love, polarization and bitterness in political
debates, as well as the nation's tendency to swing from moods of optimism and
hope to darker days of anger and disillusionment.

The anti-Communist witch hunts of the McCarthy period, for example, would have
been inexplicable without the fears provoked by the perceived Soviet threat. The
sense that a powerful, evil and messianic force bent on world conquest was loose
in the world led to a misguided search for enemies and traitors within. The
paranoia was reined in, and Senator Joseph McCarthy, the most prominent figure
in it all, was censured in the Senate. The McCarthy witch hunts had a
disillusioning effect, however. They convinced many people that the nation had a
a susceptibility to paranoia and demagoguery.

The Vietnam War produced probably the most intense domestic conflict since the
Civil War, but it too would have been inconceivable outside the context of
superpower conflict. It ended with the most powerful episode of self-doubt, of
questioning America's role in the world, that the country had ever experienced.

That self-doubt, the ambivalence about America's nature, remains a part of the
collective heritage even now. In particular, many who came of age during the
1960's protest years have never regained the confidence in the essential
goodness of America and the American Government that prevailed in earlier
periods.

But the global confrontation had other implications, including the tendency to
see almost every world event as part of a broad contest in which scores were
always being kept -- how many countries in the United Nations, for example,
voted with "us" and how many with "them. The Olympic Games moved the superpower
conflict onto the playing field.

Sports as National Conflict

"There was a time when whatever the Soviet Union could aim at us was ominous,
whether it was missiles or athletes," said Robert Hope, president of Whittle
Events, a sports entertainment marketer. "At the Olympics the meanest team in
the world was always there. Now, there won't be this sense of countries
comparing themselves. The interest will be much more focused on individual
performance."

In these attitudes, some scholars have seen deep consequences for everyday life.
Elaine Tyler May of the University of Minnesota, for example, has written
"Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era," a book in which she
argues that pervasive insecurity and the ideological contest with the Soviet
Union had a major influence on the family. She argues that the traditional
family with the woman as homemaker became a "glamorized, professionalized and
eroticized" symbol of America's claim to a superior way of life, with its
abundance of labor-saving devices, its comforts, its warm security.

Another scholar, Serge Guilbaut, an art historian at the University of British
Columbia and the author of "How New York Stole the Idea of Modern Art," argues
that the cold war changed the nature of modern art. Before the cold war, he
says, national opinion tended to regard modern painting as an individualist
rebellion against conformity.

Shifting Views of Art

After the cold war began, Mr. Guilbaut says, Americans began to warm to the
notion that abstract painting embodied the freedom of the West, in contrast to
the artistic controls of the Soviet Union.

But perhaps the sharpest paradox of the cold war's impact comes in the mixed,
ambiguous view of America that was so often revealed in literature. If optimism
and a certain trust in what used to be called "the American way of life"
remained strong, a countercurrent of ambivalence grew at the same time. The
enormously successful spy novels of John Le Carre, for example, always depicted
the cold war conflict as a grim and cruel affair in which there were few moral
differences between the two sides.

The contrast between many of the cold war-era thrillers and the depictions of
World War II are striking in this regard. War movies like, say, "Patton" showed
crusty, patriotic heroism in action. Cold war films like "The Spy Who Came In
From the Cold" showed both sides locked in a deadly game in which nobody was
pure and from which nobody really benefited.

"The cold war was very good fodder for drama, because you had what was perceived
as a clearly virtuous position against what was seen as clearly bad," said
Sidney Pollack, director of "Three Days of the Condor," in which the C.I.A. is
more villainous than heroic. "But then you come along and try to muddy the
waters a bit to try to see an issue from both sides, and that makes good drama."

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 2, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Coins

BYLINE: By Jed Stevenson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 55; Column 1; Style Desk; Pastimes Page

LENGTH: 711 words


When the Japanese began their invasions of countries in Southeast Asia 50 years
ago, they brought their own money, notes printed in Japan for use in local
markets using local denominations. Today, these occupation notes turn up in
collections or as souvenirs, and sometimes they are valuable. But most are worth
only a few dollars, no matter how good their condition. Still, they make
marvelous reminders of World War II and of Japan's dream of empire.

In 1930, Britain and the Netherlands controlled most of Southeast Asia, while
the United States controlled the Philippines and France governed Vietnam. Japan
wanted a larger part of the region's economy and so began developing what it
called the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, a title that may be more
euphonious in Japanese than in English. Japan wanted to establish puppet
governments to rule each country within an economic system dominated by Japan.
While Draconian, that system at first appealed to many nationalists in the
various countries, who hated European rule.

By the end of 1942, Japan had either conquered or had treaties with every
country in Southeast Asia except Australia and New Zealand. And with the
Japanese came the occupation notes. The first were printed in Japan and
numbered. Later, lithographed series without the serial numbers were made in the
occupied countries.

Five countries were involved, and each country's notes can be distinguished by
the first of two code letters on each. Malaya was M; Burma was B; the Dutch East
Indies was S (for Sumatra); the Philippines was P and the British islands of the
Southwest Pacific were O (for Oceania).

The second letter in the code indicated which printing the note came from. For
example, PD means the note was for use in the Philippines and was the fourth
printing of that style of note.

The Japanese distributed different printings in different areas of a country as
a way of keeping track of the comings and goings of the population. The notes,
in essence, served somewhat as passports in these countries, where travel was
usually restricted. For example, if a note distributed in Manila appeared on the
island of Mindanao, the person carrying it was immediately under suspicion.

When the war began going badly for the Japanese, the value of the notes
decreased, so larger denominations were printed. In the Philippines inflation
increased when the Allies parachuted thousands of dollars' worth of counterfeit
Japanese occupation notes to guerrilla armies.

These counterfeit notes are so good that they are indistinguishable from the
originals. Such good quality was possible because the United States discovered a
quantity of Japanese note-grade paper in a warehouse in this country. Also, an
officer serving with Filipino guerrillas provided samples of the inks used and
copies of the original printing plates. Both the United States and Australia
began printing the notes and, in effect, became branch mints for Tokyo.

As the Allied armies began taking island after island in the Pacific, they
captured large quantities of Japanese occupation money and began overprinting
the notes with these words: The Co-Prosperity Sphere: What Is It Worth? These
propaganda notes were dropped over Japanese-controlled areas to demoralize the
Japanese and rally the Filipinos.

Today, these marked notes are rare and more valuable than unmarked ones.
Counterfeits of marked notes began appearing almost immediately and were sold as
souvenirs to American soldiers. These are easily detected, as they were stamped
with a rubber stamp and the phrase appears in quotation marks. The counterfeiter
apparently never saw real propaganda notes but read about them in a newspaper.
Thinking the quotation marks were part of the real slogan and not just
punctuation added by a newspaper editor, he simply copied them onto his rubber
stamp.

When the Allies entered Manila they found tons of real uncirculated occupation
notes and burned most of them. But caches of notes turned up later in bank
vaults and in remote Japanese compounds, and these became the basis of a strong
souvenir trade. Today, most of the Japanese occupation notes are worth only a
few dollars each. But a few of the rarest series may sell for about $100.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Occupation currencies for the Philippines, top left, Malaya,
lower left, and British islands of Oceania, above.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 968 words



Busy Becomes Busier

Jeremy Irons's life isn't Kafkaesque. It's just busy.

Not only is he currently starring in Steven Soderbergh's "Kafka," but he has
also completed a feature film and a television project and, in a week or so, he
will begin work under the direction of Louis Malle in "Damage."

That film is based on a 1991 first novel of the same name, by Josephine Hart, a
best-selling tale of erotic obsession in which an aristocratic member of
Britain's Parliament falls in love with a mysterious woman who is his son's
fiancee.

"I thought it was a wonderful story, full of very dark passion, and I wanted to
work with Louis Malle for a long time," said Mr. Irons, who won an Academy Award
last year for his portrayal of Claus von Bulow in "Reversal of Fortune."

Mr. Irons said his involvement in "Damage" began early last year, when he and
Mr. Malle met in Los Angeles, where the director of such films as "Au Revoir les
Enfants," "Atlantic City" and "Lacombe, Lucien" gave him a copy of Miss Hart's
novel.

"He got David Hare, the English playwright, to write the script," Mr. Irons
said. And then Mr. Malle cast Juliette Binoche, perhaps best known as Tereza in
"The Unbearable Lightness of Being," as the mysterious woman, and Rupert Graves
("A Room With a View") as the son.

Filming is to take place in London, Paris, the South of France and Brussels, Mr.
Irons said.

He added that he had just finished appearing in the feature film "Waterland" and
in the television production "Tales From Hollywood." In "Waterland," he said: "I
play a history teacher who lives in Pittsburgh and comes to a crisis point in
his marriage because of not facing up to a momentous event that happened very
early in their relationship. He averts, or maybe has, a nervous breakdown by
talking his class through his life."

And in "Tales From Hollywood," written by Christopher Hampton, Mr. Irons appears
with his wife, Sinead Cusack, and Alec Guinness, in a story about the German
writers who went to Hollywood before World War II.

Mr. Irons said he was a bit reluctant to talk about future projects. But he
ventured a guess that he would next turn up in "M. Butterfly," directed by David
Cronenberg, for whom Mr. Irons portrayed the eerie twin gynecologists in "Dead
Ringers."

On 'Untitled 1992'

Try, for the moment, to put yourself in the shoes of Mike Leigh, even though he
is probably in London right now.

Mr. Leigh is the English film maker whose movies -- including "High Hopes" and
"Life Is Sweet" -- win critical acclaim and prizes. "Life Is Sweet," for
example, captured awards from the National Society of Film Critics for the best
film of 1991, best actress (Alison Steadman) andbest supporting actress (Jane
Horrocks).

But "High Hopes," an indictment of Thatcherite England, and "Life Is Sweet," a
gastronomic comedy about a family in a London suburb, were not made in a
conventional way. They are the product of long rehearsals in which the actors
help to discover and create the characters.

It's not a process that makes it easy for Mr. Leigh to raise money, because
often he is not in a position to tell potential investors what his next film
will be about.

"You're lucky in a sense," he said of his film-making method. "I've never made a
film before where I could answer anything but, 'No, I don't,' because that's
usually the case.

"I sort of keep it as open as possible," he said, "and spend a lot of time with
actors, investigate character and relationship and build the whole thing up. And
the film comes out of that in a very disciplined way.

"It's different this time, because people are reluctant to part with money
anyhow for films, even if you give them a script that shows them every single
shot. Far less eager are they to part with a bean if you refuse to tell them
anything, and that's always been the problem.

"So because of that, there's been a sort of low-budget ceiling on the amount of
money I've been able to get to make films. There's nothing wrong with that, but
to do something with a slightly different canvas, it's hard to raise the dough.
I've got to give them a bit.

"The notion I've sort of come up with is it's a film that will in some way
involve flight attendants, people working on planes. It's 'Untitled 1992.' 'Life
Is Sweet' was called 'Untitled '90.' "

"Life Is Sweet" cost about $2.8 million. "Untitled 1992" would cost about $5
million, he said, adding that he had no cast and nothing in writing, but that he
expected to begin filming in the fall.

"Having said that," he went on, "I'm not going to tell you anything else,
because there's nothing else to tell you."

Decade From Hong Kong

"Cinema of Blazing Passions: Hong Kong Films in the 80's."

That's the title of the retrospective that will begin on Wednesday at the Eighth
Street Playhouse in Manhattan, where 12 films selected from more than 2,000 Hong
Kong films made during the 1980's are to be presented. Included in the series,
ending Feb. 25, are dramas, ghost stories, comedies, action films and mixtures
of the genres.

Under the auspices of Asian Cinevision, the nonprofit Asian-American media arts
center at 32 East Broadway, the retrospective will consist of double features
beginning with Tsui Hark's "Shanghai Blues," a love story with a bitter
political edge that was selected by the Hong Kong critics as one of the 10 best
films of 1984, and Ann Hui's "Boat People."

"Boat People," an expose of the Communist years in postwar Vietnam, won awards
as the best Hong Kong film of 1982, the award for the year's best director and
the Hong Kong Film Critics award as 1 of that year's 10 best.

"Cinema of Blazing Passions" will travel to San Francisco, Los Angeles, Boston,
Houston and Washington.

Information: (212) 925-8685.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jeremy Irons

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 83 words



Indiana Crash Kills 16

At least 16 people were killed in Evansville, Ind., when an Air National Guard
transport plane lost power and crashed into a motel. Page A12.

New Headache for Clinton

A news account suggested that Gov. Bill Clinton had manipulated the draft
process to avoid Vietnam-era service. He denied it. Page A16.

Holtzman's Quest

Elizabeth Holtzman has a single driving ambition: to unseat Senator Alfonse M.
D'Amato of New York. And her tone is bitter. Page B1.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: New Hampshire;
Running for President, Kerrey Charts a Path of His Own

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 7


Facing a crowd of polite but impassive high school students, Senator Bob Kerrey
was talking about the importance of knowing right from wrong. To demonstrate his
point, he offered the story of a fat young man named Thompson:

The year is 1967, and Mr. Kerrey and a group of his friends have just completed
underwater training for one of the Navy's elite units, the SEALs. As they are
about to be inducted into the unit and head for Vietnam, the commander offers
the young men a last chance to change their minds. Out of the group of 150, only
one, Thompson, stands up and says that he wants out.

No explanation is offered for this act. In fact, Mr. Kerrey later acknowledged,
he does not know whether Thompson left out of fear or conviction, and he has
never seen him since. Nevertheless, he told the students: "It was an act of
conscience of a young man saying, 'No, I don't like this.' It was a very
powerful political act."

The story -- unsettling, poignant, but ultimately perplexing -- could easily
serve as an allegory of Mr. Kerrey's Presidential campaign. For weeks, Mr.
Kerrey has resisted advice to offer a clear, bite-sized message, choosing
instead to speak in broad and occasionally mystical terms about the need for
"fundamental change." In place of a standard speech with obvious applause lines,
the Nebraskan has offered an often-changing meditation on the urgency of the
nation's situation.

Waiting for Deserters?

While the Senator's almost metaphysical approach to politics does not seem to
turn voters off -- a recent survey shows him viewed favorably by half the
Democrats here -- so far, at least, it has failed to win him much firm support.
The result is that with just 11 days to go before the New Hampshire primary, the
fate of Mr. Kerrey's candidacy rests largely with his rivals. His best hope, it
seems, is not to win converts for himself but to prepare to receive deserters.

Recent accusations that Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas tried to avoid the draft
have provided Mr. Kerrey with a new opening and improved the prospects of his
receiving deserters from the Democratic front-runner. But this opportunity is
shadowed by his failure to capitalize on the last one.

The earlier chance came 10 days ago, when charges of marital infidelity
threatened Mr. Clinton's campaign. Mr. Kerrey not only failed to benefit from
these charges, his poll numbers went down even while the Clinton campaign
threatened to be engulfed. In the meantime, Paul E. Tsongas, a former
Massachusetts senator, solidified his position in front of Mr. Kerrey, and
according to many polls now has a 10-point lead over him.

Just what Senator Kerrey should do to bolster his position as the understudy in
the primary campaign is a matter of intense debate among his advisers. At the
same time that they are contemplating using negative advertising, aides to Mr.
Kerrey are worried that efforts to undermine Mr. Clinton could backfire and end
up helping another candidate, like Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa or Mr. Tsongas.

Who Is 'Electable'?

Probably the most important thing for Mr. Kerrey to do in the week ahead is to
persuade voters that he could convincingly play the lead. To capitalize on Mr.
Clinton's travails, analysts say, Mr. Kerrey must show that he has the elusive
but seemingly all-important quality: electability.

"If Bill Clinton starts to look less electable and more risky, that ought to be
Kerrey's opportunity," said Ann F. Lewis, a Democratic consultant. "The point is
to position himself as the stronger alternative."

Today in Boston, the Senator delivered a speech on foreign policy. The speech
was well received, but the question remains whether Mr. Kerrey can project the
kind of weightiness usually required of a nominee.

Such weightiness clearly does not come easily to Mr. Kerrey, who often seems to
regard even his own candidacy with a bemused detachment. Just within the last
week, the candidate's engaging but risky candor and his refusal to be scripted
have produced several awkward moments.

A Line Not Delivered

One of these moments occurred on Tuesday, when Mr. Kerrey, speaking in South
Carolina, delivered what was billed by his aides to be a "major economic
address." The written text of the speech contained several coded, yet pointed,
gibes at Governor Clinton.  "My campaign is not based on slickly packaged
proposals, and I haven't worked for years to line up political endorsements,"
the text said. He never delivered the line.

Another awkward moment occurred last Saturday, when Mr. Kerrey told Newsweek
magazine that one of his first television spots had been a "mistake." The spot,
which showed him standing on an ice hockey rink talking about trade, was
supposed to appeal to voters' anger at the Japanese.

"The reason I say the hockey spot is a mistake is I believe in examining the
truth," he said. "And the truth is the hockey spot drove my numbers down and not
up."

Wait Till It's Over

The remark appeared to violate an unspoken rule: Never admit to bad judgment
during a campaign.

Also in the same interview, Mr. Kerrey suggested he might have to drop out of
the race if he did not finish near the top in New Hampshire. While the comment
amounted to a statement of the obvious, it violated campaign convention, which
demands that a candidate never admit the possibility that he might lose.

Asked about these comments later, Mr. Kerrey said that even if did have to drop
out, the campaign would not have been in vain. "I have learned a lot about
myself," he said.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey, left, has to convince voters in the week
ahead that he could play the lead well if given a chance. He spoke on Wednesday
to students at Memorial High School in Manchester, N.H., in a classroom
decorated with old political posters. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Layoffs Called No Big Threat To a Recovery

BYLINE: By SYLVIA NASAR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1402 words


Although many of the country's biggest companies have announced plans to cut
staggering numbers of employees, economists say the layoffs alone do not add up
to a threat that could demolish the chances for an economic recovery this year.

What most people forget, the economists say, is that the sheer size of the
overall United States labor market dwarfs even sweeping cuts planned by the
I.B.M.'s, G.M.'s and Lockheeds. No matter how devastating plant cutbacks and
mass layoffs are for the communities and individuals directly affected, new
research shows that surprisingly large job losses amount to business-as-usual
for the flexible American economy even in the best of times.

Danger Is Psychological

The gravest danger the corporate cutbacks pose is psychological. Layoff
headlines could frighten those with jobs into thinking that they might be next
and cause them to stop spending, a statistic measured as consumer confidence.
Policy makers from Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, on
down have consistently underestimated the power of low consumer confidence in
the last two years. Collapsing confidence helped knock a sluggish economy into
recession a year and a half ago, and another panic attack, prompted by the
layoff surge, strangled the fledgling recovery last fall.

At the same time, "jobs are the key to confidence," said Gail Fosler, chief
economist of the Conference Board, a business organization in New York that
tracks consumer confidence.

And Jill Thompson, an economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill, a research company based in
Lexington, Mass., commented, "Unless consumers start hearing some positives too,
the recovery could abort."

Weak Recovery Expected

To be sure, most forecasts are for an anemic recovery in the second half of this
year anyway and already assume continued cutbacks in military spending and
contraction in some important industries like banking.

Yet economist foresee a slower pace of layoffs as the overall business climate
improves. Nothing like the huge job losses of fall of 1990 and winter of 1991,
when the overall economy was contracting, are expected now.

Consider the following points:

The tens of thousands layoffs can certainly be swallowed up in a nationwide
labor market of 109 million payroll jobs and several thousand self-employed when
the economic cycle turns up.

Even if the economy creates jobs at the slowest rate since the 1950's, as some
forecasters expect, the economy would generate 100,000 to 200,000 jobs a month
once a recovery was under way. In other words, a single month's worth of job
growth would offset the combined G.M. and I.B.M. cuts.

Normal Ebb and Flow

"The economy is quite capable of accommodating large amounts of people being
laid off," said Steven Davis, an economist at the University of Chicago. In the
1980's, the total number of payroll jobs grew about 3 percent a year, but that
aggregate increase masked a far greater amount of flux. While 20 million net new
jobs were created, 10 percent of existing manufacturing jobs and 13 percent of
service jobs disappeared each year, most of them for good.

What will be decisive for the economy now is the decline in interest rates,
inflation and some costs of doing business. Economists say these broad
macroeconomic forces should revive home buying and consumer spending over the
coming months, as well as ease the squeeze on business cash flow. Thus they
expect most employers will be encouraged to stop trimming payrolls and more
people will be inspired to start new businesses.

Historically, the role of the broad forces almost always matters more in the
highly diversified American economic than the troubles of individual industries.

"Recessions increase the pressure for restructuring and recoveries take some of
the pressure off," said Thomas Nardone, an economist at the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. "Some industries have stabilized, even though they haven't turned
up."

Apart from the health-care industry, which has been growing robustly throughout
the recession, the declines in nondurable manufacturing and business and
personal services have leveled off.

The consensus among economists says the worst has already happened. Even with
the latest layoff wave and the net job losses of recent months, payrolls are no
lower now than they were last spring. By contrast, payrolls fell by a 2.3
million jobs between July 1990 and April 1991. That's almost as many jobs as
were lost in the 1981-82 recession.

"A lot of the walls have fallen," said Samuel Ehrenhalt, the commissioner of the
Bureau of Labor Statistics for the New York region. "What's gone is gone and
you're not going to go through that again."

Because many of the recent layoffs have been in the service industries,
economists see fewer cutbacks ahead.  "At some point when you cut workers, you
cut the capacity of company to deliver the services," said Stephen Roach, an
economist at Morgan Stanley. "There's a limit to how far you can slash."

Economists also caution against focusing too exclusively on the Fortune 500, the
nation's largest companies, which collectively shed one in four jobs in the
1980's.

"If we had counted on the Fortune 500 to create jobs in the 80's, we wouldn't
have added a single one, " said Bruce Steinberg of Merrill Lynch & Company.
"Nonetheless, the U.S. economy generated 20 million new jobs."

And Daniel Lewin, director of the Institute for Industrial Relations at the
University of California at Los Angeles said, "The prospects for job growth are
there but in small and medium-sized businesses." I.B.M., for example, has lopped
off more than 50,000 jobs since 1986 and plans to trim 20,000 more. But, Mr.
Lewin said, I.B.M.'s joint ventures with other companies have created 400,000
jobs since 1986.

Outline of an Upturn

Here is how a slow recovery in the job market could take place:

"Over the next six months," Mr. Steinberg said, "construction just should begin
to rise with new housing starts, manufacturing employment should begin to
stabilize as auto production improves and temporary agencies should lift
services employment. As sales gradually recover, retail and wholesale, which
already made deep cuts, will have to stop cutting."

The recovery is likely to be weaker and later in California and New England, the
two parts of the country hurt most by troubles in real estate, banking and
defense.

"Things that could be neutral for the United States will be downers for
California," said David Hensley, director of the U.C.L.A. Business Forecasting
Project. The California economy will not start adding jobs until this fall, if
then, he predicts.

Regional Variations

In New England, "we're not talking about very ambitious job growth," said
Nicholas Perna, chief economist at the Shawmut National Corporation, based in
Hartford and Boston. "We're talking about 1 or 2 percent a year. In the 80's we
could do that in a couple of good months." Mr. Perna expects the region's
economy to stabilize by year-end.

Tens of thousands individuals, including many high-paid managers and
professionals, whose jobs are likely to disappear in coming months and years
could face a rough time, depending on the buoyancy of the overall job market,
how portable their skills are and how old they are. The hardest hit are likely
to be the over-40 workers who cannot relocate or learn new work, as well as
less-educated workers.

"There's going to be a significant degree of disruption in terms of people
displaced," said Wolfgang Demisch, a military contracting analyst at UBS
Securities.

"There's going to be a significant degree of disruption in terms of people
displaced," said Wolfgang Demisch, a military contracting analyst at UBS
Securities. "If you've been designing signal processors for radar warning
systems, it's not obvious that you can design PC's."

White collar workers -- middle managers, engineers and administrative workers --
are getting hit harder than at any time since the Vietnam war ended in the early
1970's. The toll of corporate reorganization is even harsher for blue collar and
clerical workers. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of
proessional and managerial jobs in the United State economy edged up by one
million in the last year and a half. The number of clerical and technical jobs,
by contrast, have shrunk by one million.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tables: "Largest Cutbacks," shows the largest permanent layoffs
announced by U.S. corporations in the second half of 1991; "What's Depressing
Consumers," lists private jobs lost and percentage change in private payrolls in
recessions of 1973-75, 1981-82 and 1990-Jan. 1992 (Source: Merrill Lynch);
"Forecasting Uneven Job Growth," lists forecasts of job growth for different
U.S. regions, showing number of jobs created, % change in number of jibs and
average employment rate (Source: DRI/McGraw-Hill) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Treasury Lifts Cambodia Ban

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


The United States Treasury Department has lifted restrictions on travel to
Cambodia. The move allows American companies to arrange transportation to
Cambodia and organize tours and conduct business there, activities that were
previously banned. Another limitation removed was a ceiling of $200 that
Americans could spend per day after arranging a visit through a third country.

Cambodia's major attraction is its ancient temples, particularly the Angkor
temple complex near Siemreap. Most tourists go on day trips by air to the
temples. Despite the Treasury announcement, the State Department is maintaining
a warning discouraging trips to Cambodia because of military activity, hidden
land mines and "widespread banditry" near tourist sites. The United States does
not have full embassy and consular operations in Cambodia.

Some tour companies offer visits to Cambodia. Abercrombie & Kent, (800)
323-7308, has an 18-day escorted tour to Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia starting
Feb. 20, March 26 and on dates to be set in October, November and December. The
price is being worked out, the company says, but will be under $5,000. That does
not include air fare from the United States but does include some internal air
fares.

Another company with experience in Southeast Asia is Adventures in Paradise,
(212) 595-5782, which arranges visits to Cambodia from Bangkok.

A two-night stay in Phnom Penh with round-trip flight from Bangkok and
round-trip flight from Phnom Penh to Siemreap, and all meals, is $1,590.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Radio Free Asia

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Television junkies have a hard time getting their squared eyes focused on this
fact: The rest of the world gets most of its information from radio. The
short-wave set remains most people's lifeline to news they are confident is
truthful.

For world news, people who live in present or former Communist nations turn to
the BBC or the Voice of America. For local news, despite frequent jamming, they
turn to the stations of Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty, which act as surrogates
-- and lately, exemplars -- for free local media.

The V.O.A.'s editorials are under the control of our State Department, with the
U.S.I.A. as its bureaucratic intermediary. When Saddam Hussein in 1990 objected
to a broadcast that predicted Iraqis would someday be free, our Ambassador in
Baghdad cravenly apologized, and Secretary of State Baker ordered all such
V.O.A. encouragement of freedom censored at Foggy Bottom.

But R.F.E.-R.L., though taxpayer supported, is insulated from political control
by a board, now ably headed by Steve Forbes. Without the burden of being our
official voice, it can speak frankly about what is happening inside the country
to which its signal is beamed. Dissidents and refuseniks throughout the former
Soviet world now fervently bless R.F.E.-R.L. for breaking through their
isolation.

Its truth-purveyors have now set their sights on the two areas most in need of
the good word: Central Asia, where most country names seem to end in -stan, and
the Far East. In both areas, Mr. Baker's State Department is fighting to snatch
R.F.E.'s funds and block its mission.

To beam to Central Asia's mainly Muslim republics, the U.S. prevailed on Israel
seven years ago to provide the site for a huge transmitter. No other ally wanted
that responsibility, and migratory-bird fanciers in Israel are still suing; but
at our urging, agreements were signed, a highway re-routed and power lines
brought to the Negev site, and $54 million was spent toward completion in 1996.

Now Mr. Baker wants to pull the plug on the project. State seeks to move the
R.F.E. radio relay station out of Israel, perhaps to make it solely a V.O.A.
transmitter in some other unspecified country. Because Mr. Baker is piqued at
Israel and R.F.E. at the moment, construction of a facility urgently needed to
engage in the propagation of democracy may be delayed until the millennium --
even as our chief diplomat junkets through the pan-stans to show our interest in
the coming crises in that vast area.

Only a month ago, President Bush's task force on international broadcasting,
headed by the Christian Science Monitor columnist and former V.O.A. director
John Hughes, recommended the R.F.E. transmitter in Israel (which would also
transmit V.O.A. signals) go forward. But the funding is set to be ambushed by
State at Darman Gulch.

The Hughes task force urged another project that has Foggy Bottom apoplectic:
It's called Radio Free Asia, a new and needed effort to carry truth about local
events into China, Vietnam, North Korea and Laos (I would add Singapore).

Members including hard-liners Richard Allen, David Abshire, Peggy Noonan and Ben
Wattenberg produced the most sensible, timely and best-written (Peggy and Ben
know how) pro-freedom report to come out of Washington in years. This is how it
reaffirms R.F.E.'s independence of the striped-pants set: "The history of the
past few decades suggests that diplomacy helped keep the world safe; ideas
helped make the world free."

State manipulated a minority to counter with: "China today is notably open . . .
people have numerous sources of information . . . word-of-mouth travels very
fast . . ." If that were true or relevant, why does Beijing frequently jam even
the egg-walking V.O.A. service?

Congress and the President have just appointed a new commission to follow up on
Radio Free Asia. A majority of the eight Congressional appointees seem
pro-R.F.A.; Mr. Bush has chosen John Hughes (on the record, for), David Anderson
(a State China hand likely to be against) and has one more pick that should
indicate his policy.

Campaigners will be asked: Are you for the R.F.E. transmitter in Israel to
broadcast to Central Asia, and for a new service carrying the truth to the
Communist nations of Asia? I hope the Republican is on the right side of this.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 603 words



International

OPEC's president said he would press for a significant cut in oil production to
prop up prices, which have dropped 20 percent since November. The official, who
is also Algeria's oil minister, said he would ask OPEC's 12 members, which are
scheduled to meet on Wednesday, to reduce production by about 6 percent. The
average price of OPEC crude oil is now about $16 a barrel, compared with the
group's goal of $21. Output has increased to an 11-year high of 24.2 million
barrels a day. [Page D1.]

Argentina has switched currencies, for the fifth time in 21 years. In halting
the use of the austral and returning to the peso, President Menem hopes to
signal that stable times are here. [D1.]

U.S. companies and business groups are seeking an end to the trade and
investment boycott of Vietnam, a country where American companies say they
expect to do well. The quiet lobbying is prompted by a perception that the
Japanese have positioned themselves to grab many contracts. [D2.]

Companies

Big toy companies are playing it safe, despite coming off one of the most
profitable seasons in years. The new toys take their cues from popular
television shows and soon-to-released movies. [D1.] When the American
International Toy Fair opens today, many toy marketers will take the opportunity
to introduce the ads meant to sell the toys to consumers. Stuart Elliott:
Advertising. [D7.]

The Economy

Some executives say the President's health-care proposals could make their
problems worse, because the plan does not go far enough to slow the increase in
U.S. medical spending. [D1.]

Makers of home refrigerators and freezers are likely to face a new and costly
challenge: finding alternatives to ozone-damaging chemicals sooner than they had
planned. They were already trying to meet increasingly strict energy efficiency
requirements. [D2.]

The staff of the State Financial Control Board has told Governor Cuomo that
Mayor Dinkins's four-year fiscal plan "is comprehensive, it is complete, and it
poses a viable approach to solving the city's financial problems." [B1.]

Some Long Island residents have joined a legion of officials who favor the
public takeover of private water utilities. [B1.]

The Media Business

The forced resignation of Granada Television's executive chairman has raised
fears that high-quality programming will be sacrificed in the quest for
short-term profits in Britain's increasingly competitive television industry.
Granada's hits have included "Brideshead Revisited" and "The Jewel in the
Crown." [D1.]

A Turner Network Television executive says the honor of being the first cable
channel to carry the Olympic Games is worth the $20 million it will lose on the
deal. [D8.]

The head of News Communications Inc. remains convinced that he can make money by
expanding in the free-distribution newspaper business in the New York area.
[D8.]

Magazineland has been abuzz over a report that Hearst would pay Elizabeth
Tilberis, the editor of British Vogue, $1.25 million a year to salvage Harper's
Bazaar. The accuracy of the report has not been determined. Deirdre Carmody:
Magazine Notes. [D8.]

Today's Columns

Many credit market analysts say the benefits from the Fed's bold Dec. 20 move to
cut interest rates have been exceedingly modest. Pressure is building for the
central bank to do more. Kenneth N. Gilpin: Credit Markets. [D1.]

The auto parts industry is changing in ways that will benefit some suppliers and
hurt others. Analysts say some smaller companies hold promise for investors.
Market Place. [D4.]

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Journal;
Steady Drum of '92 Ads Takes Toll on Voters

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1235 words

DATELINE: GOFFSTOWN, N.H., Feb. 9


Campaign fatigue may be setting in at the D'Angelo Sandwich Shop here.

Each morning, just after Georgette Seguin starts slicing the bread at precisely
9:30, the same commercial attacking President Bush comes on the radio, and Dan
Deshaies cannot resist the temptation to come out of the back room, look her in
the eye, and begin lip-syncing to the President's voice: "Read my lips: No new
taxes."

"I've probably done it 25 times now, and Georgette still laughs every time,"
said Mr. Deshaies, the shop's manager, but he allowed that the joke might be
wearing thin. "Personally, I think all these campaign ads are kind of stinky,
because they won't stop playing the same ones. The Presidency is like a product,
and when you sell a product, you should change the ads."

Actually, they do change some of the ads, but for many people here it is hard to
tell the difference anymore. The campaign is becoming one long audio-visual
blur. The news programs and talk shows are devoted to campaign appearances, to
candidates' health-care plans and candidates' bouts of flu, to the character of
Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, and to the question that mercilessly refuses to
die on talk radio: Will Mario Cuomo run?

And just about anyone who turns on a radio or television, whether for Merle
Haggard's music or the intrigues of "All My Children," is going to be subjected
to a candidate's commercial. The most inescapable message seems to be Mr. Bush's
famous no-new-taxes pledge from 1988 -- the sound bite that is biting back.

Commercials for Mr. Bush's conservative challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan, feature
the pledge over and over on radio and in television spots accompanied by red and
white letters asking, "Can we afford FOUR MORE YEARS of BROKEN promises?" In the
latest version, Mr. Buchanan's commercial ends with a group of what seem to be
kindly country folks sitting at a general store as they recite "Read our lips"
and the announcer says, "Vote Pat Buchanan for President."

So far, the commercials have not won any votes at the sandwich shop -- Mr.
Deshaies and Mrs. Seguin are sticking with the President -- and other Republican
voters say their anger at the President's policies is beginning to be redirected
at Mr. Buchanan's incessant ads.

Another inescapable presence is the smiling face of Mr. Clinton, from the
childhood photos appearing on his commercials to the shots of his campaign
appearances. Many people in Washington think the continuing questions about the
Governor's character -- and the jokes by Johnny Carson and David Letterman --
are bound to cripple his campaign, but here on television Mr. Clinton still
manages to look unperturbed, if not smug.

Mr. Clinton's loudest critic, Gennifer Flowers, secured her status as a butt of
late-night monologues by appearing twice last week on "A Current Affair" to
repeat her accusations that Mr. Clinton had an affair with her. The interviews
were conducted so leeringly and credulously that they must have inspired
sympathy for Mr. Clinton, and Ms. Flowers's singing of "Stand by Your Man" was
possibly a new low even for tabloid television.

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts had his first triumph on
television when he appeared Friday evening live on WMUR-TV's newscast to discuss
a survey by the Manchester station. The poll showed him replacing Mr. Clinton as
the first choice of Democratic voters, and, at least on Friday's newscast, Mr.
Tsongas got front-runner treatment.

"I wish to deny that poll," Mr. Tsongas joked in his low-key style, which is
becoming more endearing as he gets accustomed to the camera and viewers get
accustomed to his droopy presence on the screen. He predictably warned that a
single poll could not be trusted, and he reinforced his image of cautious
dependability by turning sober and saying, "I think the basic point is that the
economic message is taking hold."

Kerrey Tries 'a Change'

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska is running commercials with a slogan of "Courage
for a Change," and the most obvious change is that he is talking to people. In
his first commercials he stood alone gesturing robotically as he spoke sternly
at the camera.

Last week, Mr. Kerrey looked more personable in a commercial showing him at a
kitchen table urging people not to accept his rivals' "counterfeit" health-care
plans. His image may also have benefited from another commercial, showing still
photographs of him in Vietnam and later receiving the Medal of Honor, that
happened to run just before Mr. Clinton appeared live on the news to answer
questions about his draft deferment.

Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa has some of the most striking television advertising.
He appears speaking to a circle of people on the empty floor of an abandoned
factory, which is initially disconcerting, since it is not clear what all of
them are doing in there.

But the camera does a lovely job of catching Mr. Harkin's expressive face as
sunlight streams in through the windows, and he has the flair to make the scene
convincing as he talks about hearing echoes of advice from the factory's past
workers: "Don't forget. Don't give up. Build it again." The commercial seems
nearly as well-ingrained in public consciousness as Mr. Bush's read-my-lips
sound bite.

But some local viewers are distracted from the message because they recognize
the commercial's setting. The building was part of the giant textile mill in
Manchester that went out of business in the mid-1930's -- during the New Deal, a
period that Mr. Harkin praises as the epitome of American productivity. Over the
next half-century, smaller textile businesses used the mill, but they gradually
failed, too, and Mr. Harkin's exhortation to "build it again" sounds odd to some
people.

Locals Are Skeptical

"The idea that any single candidate could do anything to revive the textile
industry here is a fairy tale," said Elizabeth Lessard, a Manchester librarian.
"We've been watching these companies fail for decades because they can't compete
with the new mills in the South and overseas. You look at him standing in that
old factory floor with all the columns in the background, and you think, 'My
Lord, who could ever manufacture anything today in that kind of building?' "

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California is the least conspicuous of the
candidates, because he is not running short commercials. Instead, he is relying
on a 30-minute commercial, "Take Back America," that appears infrequently and
attacks the whole election system as corrupted by money. He also relies on talk
radio, and his disgust seems to resonate with certain listeners.

Some voters say that what they like about this year's Democratic campaign is the
lack of negativity, or at least the absence of negative advertising. There is
still plenty of time before the Feb. 18 primary for things to turn nasty, but so
far the Democrats have generally refrained from singling out rivals by name in
their commercials.

"They're talking about the issues more this time," said Laurence Gott, a
landscaper in Bedford. "People are still mad at the negative advertising from
four years ago, and I think it's good that there hasn't been much of the
negative stuff. Well, except for that read-my-lips one. Now that's one that
stays in your head.

"Yeah, it's getting repetitious. I would also have to say that a lot of people
are looking forward to Feb. 19."

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey, in black sweatshirt and gray sweatpants,
participating in a race called "Run for the Primary" yesterday in Manchester,
N.H. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN;
Kerrey: Promoting Vision and Courage

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Kerrey: Promoting Vision and Courage"

SCRIPT

Narrator: "He came to the Senate to fight for health care for all Americans. Now
his Health U.S.A. bill is the best hope for national health insurance. Bob
Kerrey: He'll never run from a fight. He volunteered for Vietnam, was a Navy
Seal, and leading a commando raid, an enemy grenade cost him his leg. His
bravery6 that night won him the Medal of Honor, the highest award for valor. In
the hospital, he learned to walk again. Home in Nebraska, he ran a marathan, and
starting with nothing, built a business that employs 900 people.

"For him, politics is a cause, not a career. An outsider who defeated an
incumbent governor, he wiped out a deficit, helped his state through a farm
depression, then despite record popularity, refused to run for a second term.

"Now, in a time of crisis, his cause is fundamental change. National health
insurance. Get tough with Japan on trade. A tax cut for the middle class. A
national industrial policy to fight for American jobs. Fight back, America."

ON THE SCREEN

Pictures of the Senator talking to voters, as a Navy Seal, receiving the Medal
of Honor, running and taking the oath as Governor. The commercial ends with the
Senator speaking with New Hampshire residents as statements of his goals flash
on the screen. (60-second commercial).

SCORECARD

The ad seeks to convey that Mr. Kerrey has a vision for the country and the
courage to carry it out, trying to capitalize on voter distaste for conventional
politicians. It is tough not to be impressed by Mr. Kerrey's resume. Several
close-up shots seem intended to emphasize Mr. Kerrey's all-American good looks.

ACCURACY

People who followed Mr. Kerrey's 1988 Senate race in Nebraska say that health
care did not, in fact, figure heavily in the campaign. Details of his personal
history are not the object of debate. It is true that he gave up the Governor's
office when, by all accounts, he could have been re-elected easily.

TYPE: Caption; Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Global Plan To Rescue Species Set For Release

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Science Desk; The Environment Page

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela, Feb. 10


Moving beyond a "Save The Panda approach," an international team plans to make
public here on Tuesday a comprehensive strategy to protect the world's diversity
of plant and animal species and to tap this diversity for human benefit.

The fruit of a three-year effort involving 500 advisers around the world, the
"Global Biodiversity Strategy" addresses growing concern that the extinction of
species will deprive future generations of new medicines and new strains of food
crops.

With as many as 50 plant species disappearing each day, scientists calculate
that the planet's biodiversity could be reduced by 10 percent by the year 2015.

"We have got to realize that next to the human mind, the earth's biological
wealth is the greatest thing about this planet," said James Gustave Speth,
president of World Resources Institute, a Washington organization that was one
of the sponsors of the 244-page report.

A Guide for Policy Makers

Sponsors hope the report's 85 recommendations will guide world environmental
policy makers who are to meet next June in Rio de Janeiro for the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development, a once-a-decade gathering.

Recommendations involve human actors ranging from the United Nations down to
forest tribes.

On the international level, the report recommends the establishment of an early
warning network to identify and protect ecosystems around the world that
suddenly become threatened. The report calls on governments and multilateral
development agencies to devote at least $1 billion a year to conserving
endangered ecosystems.

On the national level, countries are being encouraged to assert control over
their genetic resources and to exact royalties for their commercial uses.

In one pioneering effort, the recently formed National Biodiversity Institute of
Costa Rica has started to conduct an inventory of that Central American nation's
plant and animal species. Merck Pharmaceutical has signed a contract to pay the
institute 2 percent royalties on sales of any new medicines developed from the
institute's samples.

One-fourth of all prescriptions now dispensed in the United States contain
active ingredients from plants. The number of plant species used in traditional
medicine is 2,000 in northwestern Amazonia, 2,500 in the area of the former
Soviet Union and 5,100 in China.

To preserve and to promote such traditional knowledge, the Global Strategy
recommends furthering recognition of local lore and local use of wild products.

Recognizing the development needs of third-world countries, the report steers
away from sentimental appeals for conservation. Instead, it repeatedly
underlines the economic value to genetic diversity.

"A wild tomato, found only in the Galapagos Islands, can grow in sea water and
possesses jointless fruit stalks -- a trait that has been bred into domesticated
tomatoes to make them easier to harvest mechanically," reads the report, which
was also sponsored by the World Conservation Union of Switzerland and by the
United Nations Environmental Program of Kenya.

Noting crop gains in the United States, the report said, "An estimated $1
billion annually has been added to the value of U.S. agricultural output by the
widened genetic base."

In another example, wild species of rice give the world's rice crop its
resistance to two of the four major rice diseases.

Threats to Gene Pool

Threats to the world's gene pool come from headlong expansion of human activity.
These threats include: unsustainably high rates of population growth, a
narrowing spectrum of trade products from farms, fisheries and forests,
ignorance of the value of threatened ecosystems, and legal systems and economic
policies that promote development that is destructive to the environment.

Sponsors hope the report, which is to be issued in English, French, Portuguese
and Spanish, will influence thinking and action at the United Nations conference
in Rio.

"The Global Diversity Strategy is an important contribution to the formulation
of concrete measures to protect our natural heritage," Maurice F. Strong,
Secretary General of the United Nations environmental conference, said of the
new study. "The conservation of biodiversity is one of the key issues for the
United Nations conference."


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: Estimates of the loss of wild habitat in selected countries, based on
1986 World Conservation Union data. Destruction and fragmentation of habitats is
considered a key threat to biological diversity, in both plant and animal
species, around the world.

                                    Original area     Percentage
                           (in square kilometers)           lost

Indonesia                               1,446,430            49%
South Africa                            1,236,500            57%
Ethiopia                                1,101,000            70%
Myanmar                                   774,820            71%
Madagascar                                595,200            75%
Cameroon                                  469,400            59%
Malaysia                                  356,250            41%
Vietnam                                   332,100            80%
Ivory Coast                               318,000            79%
Philippines                               308,200            79%


(Source: "Global Biodiversity Strategy," (World Resources Institute, The World
Conservation Union, United Nations Environment Programme))
Graph: "Threatened Habitats"

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 13, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
A Stone's Throw From Fray, Cuomo Upstages Candidates

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Feb. 12


With all the trappings of a campaign, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo traveled to the New
Hampshire media market today to deliver a speech that won as much attention for
its timing as for its substance.

Six days before the Presidential primary in New Hampshire, where Cuomo
supporters are waging an unauthorized write-in campaign for the New York
Governor, Mr. Cuomo went to Harvard to denounce what he described as a practice
of scapegoating the poor for the country's economic problems.

"In 1932, people blamed the rich, the stockbrokers, the mighty industrial
barons, the bankers and the landowners, the powerful officials and politicians
who failed them," Mr. Cuomo said tonight to an audience of several hundred
students and faculty members.

"This time, the powerful, instead of confessing error and pledging to correct
it, are deflecting the blame from themselves to the powerless: to the poor, to
the child who just had a child, to the new immigrants."

The content of Mr. Cuomo's speech was clearly aimed at the Republicans, both in
his state and elsewhere, who have transformed welfare into an emotional campaign
issue in the last two years.

Upstaging the Candidates

But by the time he walked to the lectern tonight at the John F. Kennedy School
of Government, his message had been largely obscured by his decision to give the
speech when and where he gave it. Although school officials said the date of the
speech was decided on early in January, before the recent troubles of Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas, Mr. Cuomo's address in effect upstaged the candidates who
had failed to catch fire in New Hampshire.

The Governor's visit to Boston put him under the eye of political reporters who
left nearby New Hampshire -- and the Democratic candidates vying for their
attention -- to come hear Mr. Cuomo, as well as Boston television and
newspapers, whose reports are available to most New Hampshire voters.

For Mr. Cuomo, who has a record of overshadowing Presidential campaigns that he
has declined to join, the speech seemed to offer the best of all political
worlds, the chance to act like a candidate without being one.

For the first time in months, he took reporters from Albany on the state plane.
Accompanied by Boston television crews, he paid a call at City Hall on Mayor
Raymond L. Flynn, who recently encouraged him to run.

When he arrived at Harvard, he was greeted by a small band of placard-waving
fans. The speech, which attracted 11 television cameras, was broadcast into much
of New Hampshire by Boston radio stations and was televised live on C-Span.

Lowering Expectations

In an interview on the flight to Boston, Mr. Cuomo even engaged in the
time-honored campaign tradition of lowering expectations. He said his aides had
told him that winning 2 or 3 percent of the vote in a write-in campaign "would
be very high."

The organizers of the New Hampshire write-in effort have set a goal of getting
15 percent of the vote in the Democratic primary on Tuesday.

Despite appearances, Mr. Cuomo reiterated that he had no plans to join the race
and that he faced the same obstacle he faced on Dec. 20, when he said the lack
of a state budget would keep him out of the race. And he said his failure to
discourage the write-in campaign should not be interpreted as encouragement to
his supporters in New Hampshire.

"When you encourage, you encourage," he said. "What more can I do other than
say, 'I'm not running, New Hampshire'?

"I'm not encouraging them, I'm not discouraging them," Mr. Cuomo said.

In answering a student's question after his speech, Mr. Cuomo said: "In my own
state, they're saying lousy things about me. If they want to say nice things
about me in New Hampshire, I'm going to encourage them."

Mr. Cuomo also dismissed the notion that his continued presence on the
Presidential scene might harm the five announced candidates.

"If anyone is beaten, it will not be by a candidate who never showed up," he
said. "It's because they failed to reach the voters. If the other team doesn't
show up, it's very hard to claim that they fouled you."

A Minor Annoyance

Officials with the Democratic campaigns characterized Mr. Cuomo's speech and his
write-in candidacy as a minor annoyance.

Tad Devine, the campaign director for Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, suggested
that Mr. Cuomo's method enabled him to enjoy the glory of a national campaign
without enduring its constant illumination.

"The problem with jumping in the water is that you get wet," he said.

Officials with Mr. Cuomo's office and the Kennedy School said there was no
conspiracy involved in the timing of the Governor's speech.

They said Mr. Cuomo had a standing invitation to speak at the school. Last fall,
they said, two Harvard professors with close ties to Mr. Cuomo -- his former
budget director, Dall W. Forsythe, and his nominee for the state's social
services commissioner, Mary Jo Bane -- suggested a speech on the policy and
politics of welfare.

Delicious Timing

As it happened, the timing was delicious both for the Cuomo aides who still hope
their boss will run and for the Kennedy School, which enjoys the attention.

The speech came at a time when the continuing troubles of Governor Clinton's
campaign in the New Hampshire polls revived speculation that a new Democrat
would join the race. That guessing game accelerated today after Mr. Clinton
released a letter he had written in 1969 expressing his objection to the draft
in the Vietnam War.

It also came as polls showed support growing for the Cuomo write-in movement,
which plans to broadcast its first television commercials on Thursday.

The National Draft Cuomo for President Committee has raised about $90,000. Draft
officials said they had had no contact with the Governor or his staff and had
received no assitance in raising money from the Cuomo political organization.

Mr. Cuomo's visit to Boston came on the day that President Bush officially
declared his candidacy in New Hampshire, allowing the country's top political
columnists to enjoy a mid-February double-header by watching Mr. Bush in
Concord, N.H., this afternoon and then driving to Harvard to catch Mr. Cuomo
this evening.

In his speech, Mr. Cuomo criticized Mr. Bush for relying on low interest rates
to revive the economy and for offering "palliatives" rather than substantive
recommendations for economic growth.

"Even if monetary steroids arouse the economy temporarily in time to fool the
electorate in November, that's not going to do anything to to deal with the
profound weakness that threatens our future," he said.

The real campaign stood little chance when confronted with the circus next door.

J. Joseph Grandmaison, the former Democratic chairman in in New Hampshire and a
Cuomo fan, said he did not think twice about driving to Boston to hear Mr.
Cuomo.

"You're talking to someone who loves political theater," he said, "so therefore
I think it's great."

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Mario M. Cuomo speaking last night at Harvard. (Rick
Friedman for The New York Times) (pg. A24)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters;
It's Indecision vs. Indifference In New Hampshire's Primary

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 13


Pauline Dowd swears it isn't The Draft or The Woman or even The Letter that
makes her grimace when she sees Bill Clinton. It's not the The Health Question
or The Massachusetts Greek Issue that irks her about Paul Tsongas, either.

"These guys just aren't the ones," said the 55-year-old social worker with
certainty and a little sadness. "You know it when you've seen a guy who can be
President. And you know it when you haven't."

Voters in New Hampshire are supposed to be crotchety and difficult to please.
That's their job. Their moods are like Lava lamps: colorful, protean, impossible
to describe. But despite raging political and philosophical differences, the
residents of at least one of this city's neighborhoods clearly agree on one --
and maybe only one -- thing.

'We Don't Have to Like It'

"Somebody's got to be President," said Jodie Banks, a 24-year-old paralegal and
a neighbor of Mrs. Dowd and her husband, Paul, in Manchester's North End, a
solidly middle-class enclave of freshly painted clapboard houses that many
families have passed down for three generations. "But we don't have to like it."

Apparently, few do. In conversations with 27 residents in their homes here over
the last two days, not one showed any real enthusiasm for a candidate or pride
in his choice. Many said they were undecided; others said they were decidedly
uninterested.

The problems of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, including the release Wednesday
of a 1969 letter thanking an Army officer for saving him from the draft, may be
impossible to overcome, but his support among those interviewed seemed weak even
before the letter received wide attention Wednesday night on ABC News's
"Nightline" and in today's newspapers.

New Hampshire is locked in a withering recession. Having lost more than 50,000
jobs in the last three years and with an unemployment rate in many towns nearing
10 percent, the choice this year presents far more than an exercise in people's
rights. Voters who aren't numb are angry.

A remarkable boom was just about to peak for New Hampshire in the last election,
and in this neighborhood -- slightly more Democratic than Republican -- the
antipathy to President Bush emerged in discussions as the issue that drives all
others.

Qualified Backing for Buchanan

Residents of the North End want a change. Of eight people who said they voted
for President Bush in 1988, only one said he would do so again, with deep
reluctance, he hastened to add. Two said they would support Patrick J. Buchanan
just to send a message to Mr. Bush. Both said they could never imagine a day
when Mr. Buchanan would occupy the Oval Office.

And like a princess dreaming of a mattress without a pea beneath it, half of
those interviewed offered wistful views of Democrats who got away, particularly
the one from New York.

"Mario Cuomo would make a hell of a President," said David Deschener, a
41-year-old accountant with a wife and two children.

"These other guys have a lot going for them," he said. "They are smart and they
hustle. But whatever it is you are supposed to have, Cuomo has it."

Many of Mr. Deschener's neighbors disagreed, strongly. They acknowledged the New
York Governor's oratorical gifts, and some said they liked his programs, but
almost all expressed anger at his willingness to encourage a write-in effort
after he refused to enter the race.

"We believe in working for what we get around here," said Margaret Reed, a
78-year-old widow who, except for four years of college in New York, has spent
her life in New Hampshire. "I don't care how smart he is. I don't want a
President who can't bother to spend a few days talking to us, right here in the
cold."

Perhaps because it has been in the news so much or because the people of New
Hampshire get to act like savvy political consultants this time every four
years, the idea of "electability" came up repeatedly.

Most said Governor Clinton seemed to have the money and the power, but they
added that questions about his personal life could only hurt him. Virtually all
insisted, however, that they couldn't care less if he had had an affair. More
people said they admired his stance on the war in Vietnam and the draft than
said they thought he was wrong or deceptive. None suggested he had anything to
apologize for.

"I'm confused," said Bob Harden, 73, retired and a Democrat. "I was leaning
toward Clinton but I just don't know if he's got the stuff to go all the way.
But it sure doesn't bother me that he got out of the draft. What about Elvis
Presley? He went, but he just sang songs the whole time. Is that better?
Muhummad Ali said no and he's a great hero."

Mrs. Harden agreed, up to a point. A Republican, she doesn't see Clinton as a
man who offers the solid direction she says the country desperately needs. But
she joined her husband in defending any resistance to the war. "As if all these
people writing these stories wouldn't have done the same thing in a minute," she
said, sharply. "And they probably did."

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts ran away with the prize for
congeniality, intellect and decency. Many people also mentioned his courage, and
among those who have made their decision, Mr. Tsongas was easily the winner in
at least this small, unrepresentative survey. But Erin O'Shaughnessy, a
22-year-old student at the University of New Hampshire who works part time at a
video store, expressed a common reservation with tart specificity.

"I really like his message," she said. "I just wish we could get somebody else
to give it."

Concerns About Tsongas

Few said they would oppose Mr. Tsongas. But several raised the issue of his
experience with cancer, wondering whether the stress of the Presidency might
make him sick again. All seemed skeptical about his ability to beat President
Bush.

"With Tsongas," said Ms. O'Shaughnessy, "you would want to look hard at the vice
president." But she said she thought too many of her friends were looking around
for a politician who could get elected instead of looking for somebody who
represented their views cogently and with vigor.

"It's just kind of cold to vote that way," she added. "The trouble is nobody
seems able to get us going."

Asked if she would say whom she supported, she declined.

"We don't do that here," she said. She admitted to an early weakness for Senator
Tom Harkin of Iowa that she overcame because of his "Japan bashing." As was the
case with most of her neighbors, she said nothing about Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska and conceded that she "wished" she could feel better about Mr. Tsongas.

"I just don't know," she concluded. "I'm hoping something will come up in the
next few days to help me make a decision."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In conversations over the last two days with 27 residents in the
North End of Manchester, N.H., not one voter showed any real enthusiasm for a
candidate or pride in a choice. "These guys just aren't the ones," said Pauline
Dowd, a 55-year-old social worker, as she stood in her home. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times) (pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Wounded in Battle

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words


When he looks back on the Presidential campaign of 1992, which he may
understandably be disinclined to do, Bill Clinton could well be amazed at how
much he did for America while getting less than nothing in return.

Because of Governor Clinton we have had a national debate about the effect of
private life on public matters, about the relationship between marriage vows and
integrity. We have plumbed our antipathy toward the press and the press's
antipathy toward itself. And we have wondered who decides someone is a
front-runner, and whether that is second cousin to the kiss of death.

We have questioned the question of electability, and what it says about us if we
can acknowledge that some candidates are good on the issues but somehow not
quite right because they cannot punch up the applause buttons in a speech or
grin convincingly.

America is a nation having a massive identity crisis. Without the Soviet Union
to play yin to our yang -- oh, how strange it is to see those Olympic athletes
called the Unified Team, as though there simply had not been time to think up a
real name -- we have resorted to bickering with the Japanese to delineate who we
are not. Who we are, what we care about and what we're made of are more
troubling questions, and we are working some of them out on Bill Clinton's back.

Last week we read the letter the Governor wrote when he was 23 to the officer
overseeing R.O.T.C. at the University of Arkansas, a colonel from whom Mr.
Clinton had secured a draft deferment by promising to join both the law school
and the corps, although he did neither. He was attempting to sit out a war "I
opposed and despised with a depth of feeling I had reserved solely for racism in
America before Vietnam."

It is an intelligent and eloquent letter, and it has made admirers of some who
were not so sure of Mr. Clinton before. I would have been proud to have raised a
child capable of writing it. It describes my own belief: that the war was a
senseless waste. I still recall the day when, as a summer copy clerk at a small
daily newspaper, I haunted the AP wire machine, watching as my boyfriend's
birthday turned up number 365 in the draft lottery. Relief was sweet and tangy
as a lemon drop.

But this is a country populated partly by people who were proud to see their
sons go and by sons now grown who are proud to have served.  They remember the
boys with student deferments, the boys in the National Guard, the boys who
signed up for R.O.T.C. in the hopes of doing what Mr. Clinton describes in his
letter as "saving me from the draft."And they do not necessarily remember them
fondly, particularly if the names of their children and friends are inscribed on
that great dark wall in Washington.

Some may find the timing of Mr. Clinton's agonizings convenient; he came clean
to the colonel about his feelings just two days after he was assigned a lottery
number certain to keep him from being called. And the R.O.T.C. deferment, which
he eventually gave up, covered the period when he was most likely to be drafted,
although the Governor rejects any notion that he knew that at the time.

In his letter Mr. Clinton writes, with calculation rare in one so young and
ambitions unthinkable to many coming of age in the 60's, that he wants "to
maintain my political viability." Even then he was a pragmatist. We accept that
our Presidents should be pragmatic. But in campaigns, we do not like to be
reminded of it. We look for principles, perhaps even perfection.

No one will ever again accuse Bill Clinton of being perfect, although it seems
like the only thing he hasn't been accused of. Instead it's turned out he's like
us. He's like so many who hated the war, who didn't want to serve, who looked
around to find ways to avoid it. He's like so many who've had trouble in their
marriages and a roving eye. He's like so many who've grabbed for the gold ring
and fallen off the carousel horse.

Except that he's done all those things in public and perhaps in the process
watched the dreams he was dreaming even all those years ago be destroyed. He
says that we've got to get back to the issues. Instead we are plumbing our
ethos, perhaps the one issue most worth exploring. And we are doing it, in part,
on Bill Clinton's back. Maybe it is only now, 23 years later, that Bill Clinton
will be wounded in the service of his country.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WINTER GAMES;
Rating the Field, In the Imitable Style of George H.W. Bush

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


One way to understand a political campaign is to put yourself in the place of a
candidate. Maureen Dowd, a Washington correspondent of The Times, last week
asked several Bush advisers to say, as frankly as they could, what they are
telling the President about the Democratic Presidential field in Tuesday's New
Hampshire primary -- and what Mr. Bush himself thinks of his would-be opponents.
Ms. Dowd was inspired to submit the results in the style that has come to be
known as Bushspeak.

Memo from George Bush Re: The Competition

Mother told me not to gloat. Don't use the Big I. Still, got to gloat a little.
In secret. Sure, I know things are looking b-a-a-a-d for the home team right
now. Approval ratings cratering. Voters in New Hampshire very angry at me about
the economy in the ditch and raising taxes and running around with my pals,
Mikhail and Boris and Kiichi and Francois. Pat Buchanan, tattling on me for
being a moderate, says I'm like a 5-year-old and can't handle Congress. Oh yeah?
Serves him right if John Sununu takes his place on "Crossfire."

Didn't think that protectionistic thing and that phony swagger would go over.
Buchanan is saying I'm not Reagan II, I'm Skull and Bones I, and at the campaign
they joke that it's a rumble between the Dead End Kids and Greenwich Dancing
Class. But it won't be too funny if Buchanan gets 37 percent in New Hampshire
and 25 in Super Tuesday, as my friends on the right are predicting. Watching
that guy's "Read My Lips" makes me go ballistic.

But then I look at the Democrats, acting so weird and crazy, and I know we're
going to be able to keep our snorkel above the waterline and get another four
years. My campaign guys say we should feel lucky. Democrats didn't send in their
first team, and the second string is having a power outage.

Clinton -- history. Paul Tsongas? Bring him on. Bye-bye wimp issue. I wish he'd
stop reminding people that I didn't know what a supermarket scanner was. But
anybody who likes the capital gains tax cut can't be all bad. There are a couple
of worry warts in our polling office who say that Tsongas fits the profile of
the kind of candidate voters want: No lies. No excess promises. The fact that he
isn't smooth means he doesn't come across as a real politician, and that's good.
They're worried that Tsongas might have some kind of reverse chic, and then we'd
have to go with reverse reverse chic, but they don't know what that means yet.

Not worried, though. Not worried. Not worried. Message: Not Worried. The voters
had their choice between hyperthyroid and no thyroid in '88 and they chose me.
No one here believes that the Democrats will ever let Tsongas be the nominee
anyhow. Once he goes South, he's dead meat. The South'll never go for another
short, preachy Massachusetts liberal with a funny name who believes in gay
rights. O.K., he wasn't a governor, but are we sure he didn't furlough anybody?

Harkin. What's that Jim Croce song? Meaner than a junkyard dog. He'd be the
easiest to beat, but he'll burn himself up before I get to him. Dinosaur.
Windbag. Don't like him, and hate it when he calls me George Herbert Walker Bush
and the Vice President J. Danforth Quayle. It's bad manners. People should leave
those kind of personal insults to staff.

Jerry Brown has a good message on the outsider thing but he's out there with the
floating rings of Jupiter. I mean, what's with the turtlenecks?

My guys were worried about Bob Kerrey in the beginning. Thought he had the best
story and could get the baby boomer vote.

Got mad at Kerrey for going nasty on the flag-burning thing in 1989. Accused me
of exploiting the issue for my own benefit. I admire the young man's heroism in
Vietnam, but what's with that guy? Think it comes down to desire. I'm willing to
do what I have to do to get re-elected. He doesn't seem to have it in his gut. I
agree with Eddie Mahe, who said, "You can have a kid playing class A or class AA
ball and then they hit the big leagues and it falls apart."

Pamela Harriman will probably be reconvening everybody out at her farm this
week. As Ed Rollins says, "If Clinton goes down, this field ain't it."

Wouldn't mind if Lloyd Bentsen got in. He beat me for the Senate once, but I
could take him this time. He's no George Bush.

Gephardt? Tried to kiss and make up, and he's been helping me out with some
legislation on Capitol Hill. Doro dates his aide, Bobby Koch. Don't know if
he'll be my son-in-law, but there's a connection there. But Dick would get so
personal and cutting. I just wouldn't like it.

Of course, the one who would really drive me nuts is Cuomo. My guys are divided
about him, with some saying he's formidable and others saying he's overrated.

Cuomo is indecisive and geographically undesirable and he can't do retail
politics. Can you see Mario Cuomo sitting on a hay stump in the middle of a
wheat field or eating a tamale at a Texas barbecue? You think my pork rinds and
country music was a stretch? Wait until the South gets a load of Teilhard de
Chardin.

They say I'm thin-skinned and obsessed about the media. Bet he'd spend most of
his time on the trail racing for the papers and magazines to see what was being
written about him.

Using the hot line to Albany to encourage the Republicans up there to keep the
pressure on, to make Cuomo's life as unpleasant as possible. Don't want him
turning my horseshoe pit outside the Oval Office into a basketball court.

He's still flirting with getting in, and if he did, it would be class warfare.
We'd get so far under each other's skin that some people would call it a
transplant.

Cuomo told one columnist that I make him feel like the guy who comes to clean
the swimming pool. Well, he tries to turn me into a cross between Rudy Vallee
and Marie Antoinette. Calls me "the guy in the white shoes." Says I'm "throwing
bon bons to a starving nation." Those kind of snide, cheap attacks send me up
the wall.

But if he could get to me, I could get to him, too. In his Harvard speech the
other night he sounded like just another Doom-and-gloom-o-crat, defending
welfare and tax hikes. If he tried all his semantic voodoo mumbo-jumbo with me
in a debate, all that stuff about "Pelagianism" and "palliatives" and
"econometric models" and "the cyclical gods of the economy," I'd just turn to
him and say, "Lighten up, Mario. Come over to the White House and we'll throw
some 'shoes. And by the way, if you're so smart, why is New York such a mess?"

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WINTER GAMES;
Democrats Dread a Season Without Heavy Hitters

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: HANOVER, N.H.


The not-so-secret secret of this year's Democratic Presidential campaign has
been the reluctance of the party's A Team to take the field.

Is that judgment too harsh? Well, here's what Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska
thinks of his main rivals, according to a radio commercial broadcast in New
Hampshire this weekend: Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas? "His campaign is in
trouble." Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts? "Another
Massachusetts candidate who's strong in the Northeast but has little support in
the rest of the country." Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa? "The kind of old-style
Democrat who's failed before." All this from a candidate who himself has
struggled to attract the support of one Democrat in 10 here -- yet still touts
his electability.

"The campaign in this state began with the perception that this was a
second-rate field," said Richard Winters, a political scientist at Dartmouth
College. "During the last three or four months, the candidates haven't matured
much. They haven't demonstrated a lot of depth. Some of them, like Clinton,
haven't shown much judgment. So the initial impression has not been weakened,
except for Tsongas, who has come into his own precisely because he has seemed
calm and articulate and steady when the others have not."

The exigent voters of New Hampshire may have decided that none of the active
combatants quite fills the bill. That's what many of them tell reporters who
ask, and the polls strongly suggest that they are prepared to deliver an
inconclusive verdict on Tuesday, with no runaway winner and no one knocked
completely out of the race. Muddle, in other words. A much longer campaign than
originally anticipated. And lots of pressure on the non-runners to think about
late entries, as perilous a course as that obviously is.

Missing Personages

Once upon a time, you could make a list of the Democrats' big guns, and it would
be more or less the same as the list of Presidential contenders. In 1960, almost
all the heavy hitters ran -- Johnson, Symington, Humphrey, along with a much
less senior figure named John F. Kennedy. This year, the active field includes a
former senator who left office in 1984, two relatively junior senators, a
small-state governor and Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, a former governor
who left office in 1982.

Absent from that list are Mario M. Cuomo of New York, the ranking Democratic
governor; leading senatorial figures such as George J. Mitchell of Maine, Al
Gore of Tennessee, Lloyd Bensten of Texas and Sam Nunn of Georgia; and the
dominant figures in the House, including the speaker, Thomas S. Foley of
Washington, and the majority leader, Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.

One reason for the weak Democratic field, of course, is the vagaries of
political timing.  When Mr. Gore, Mr. Gephardt, Senator Jay Rockefeller of West
Virginia and others were making their go/no go decisions, President Bush seemed
all but unbeatable; only a few weeks later, he seemed highly vulnerable as the
recession took an ever firmer hold on the country. But a larger factor, surely,
has been the collapse of the party apparatus since 1972. Party elders once
played a key role at several points of the nominating process, discussing among
themselves the available talent, encouraging or discouraging candidates
according to their views of what would appeal to the electorate, looking for
skeletons in candidates' closets.

The process wasn't perfect by any means, but it provided a rudimentary screening
process. Now there is something approaching self-selection for Presidential
hopefuls, limited only by the ability to raise enough money to compete in Iowa
or New Hampshire and some sort of minimal credibility.

With the proliferation of primaries, the role of the convention and the
smoke-filled room has been minimized. The choice has usually been made long
before the delegates assemble. In theory, the importance of primaries might have
put a premium on having a national reputation before the campaign begins, but in
fact television advertising, that maker of instant if insubstantial reputations,
has made that unnecessary. It has also made money-raising one of the principal
if least visible campaign activities.

Candidacies have become poll-driven and consultant-crafted, and those relatively
new technologies have made long apprenticeships less vital. So a man like Bill
Clinton, known only in his small home state and in professional political
circles a matter of months ago, could not only run this year but find himself
widely proclaimed, months before any votes were counted, as the front-runner,
probable early victor and answer to his party's prayers for a new approach.
Clearly, he has outstanding qualities, including an incisive, well-organized
mind and a gift for leadership; the Rhodes scholarship selection committee
recognized that when he was a lad. But under the old system, he would have found
it hard to project them onto the national screen from Little Rock.

Under the old system the party elders would have looked into the reports, which
everyone in politics had heard, about Mr. Clinton's marital problems and draft
record, and at least tried to evaluate whether they were serious impediments to
a candidacy.  Under the old system, in which the candidates tended to be people
already known to the public, the revelations that have undercut Mr. Clinton's
standing might have been less damaging.

Only superficially known or understood, the out-of-nowhere candidate is
vulnerable to being blown off course by the first puff of bad news.

None of this completely explains why many people think Mario Cuomo, say, is a
man of substance and Bob Kerrey, say, is not.  Most Americans, including those
who want him to run, would be hard pressed to name Mr. Cuomo's main
accomplishments as governor, and many Americans know that Mr. Kerrey is an
authentic war hero. Yet the New Yorker is widely seen as the heavyweight.

Some people are natural leaders, whether in football or Wall Street or national
politics, and people sense it. They are born dancers, not awkward yokels who get
through Arthur Murray's and forget the steps the minute they step onto a real
dance floor. And some people seem to embody or at least to make credible
connections to party and national tradition, while others seem manufactured, all
too ready to mouth tomorrow today's poll reports.

It may be that Mr. Tsongas, now widely considered the pace-setter, will move
steadily through the primaries and win the nomination, or that one of his active
rivals will. But that seems unlikely to many, which is one reason why the
"unauthorized" write-in campaign on behalf of Mr. Cuomo, who delights in its
every move, attracted so much attention last week. If he or any of the others is
to jump in, it would have to be soon; many filing deadlines have already passed,
and others lie just ahead.

"If Bill Clinton doesn't weather the storm, you'll see a groundswell for others,
and the best positioned is Gephardt," said Representative Dan Glickman, a Kansas
Democrat. Mr. Bentsen says he's as reluctant as ever, but when he was asked in
Texas the other day whether he was happy with his decision not to run, he said,
"Some days I am and some days I'm not."

For the moment, it's mostly talk. There are reports of discreet inquiries by
"friends" of possible candidates, meaning members of their staffs, as to the
possibilities in South Carolina, Maine and California. The Draft Cuomo Committee
is working on Massachusetts and Illinois and Missouri.

These things usually come to nothing. But in the years since Vietnam fractured
Democratic comity, stranger things have happened. This is the party, after all,
that nominated George McGovern and Jimmy Carter, neither of whom, a year before
the event, seemed to those ubiquitous party leaders to have any business in the
race.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Democratic candidate Bill Clinton at a campaign stop in New
Hampshire last week. (Stephen Savoia/Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Dictatorship That Grew Up

BYLINE: By Nicholas D. Kristof;  Nicholas D. Kristof is chief of the Beijing
bureau of The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4774 words


GLANCING SURREPTITIOUSLY over his shoulder at the crowded bar, Bo Yang lifts up
a trouser leg. He points, with a grin, to a knob that juts from the flesh on his
right knee. "There it is," he says. "When the weather cools abruptly, it gets
all sore and I can't walk."

Bo Yang is 71 years old, maybe 72 -- he doesn't know his birth date -- and his
thick hair is speckled with gray. He is also a social critic whose essays about
Chinese culture have made him one of the most famous writers in the Chinese
language. He spent a decade in a Taiwan prison for supporting a more democratic
society, and his knee was broken by police trying to get him to confess to being
a Communist agent. The injury is an apt symbol of Taiwan's past: an era when the
regime imprisoned, tortured and even killed dissidents, when elections were
meaningless and when -- or so Bo Yang came to believe during his incarceration
-- there was no great moral difference between Nationalist Party rule on Taiwan
and Communist rule in China.

Bo Yang has plenty of reason to criticize the Nationalists, who are still in
power, but this is how he now describes contemporary Taiwan: "China has 4,000,
maybe 5,000, years of history, but it has never had an era like Taiwan today.
There has never been a time when people were so wealthy or so free. Living
conditions are so great! I'm just glad that my wife and I have lived to see this
period. It's a golden age."

As he sees it, this "golden age" is not so much a cultural renaissance as it is
the birth of political freedom in a Chinese context. Ever since Chinese
civilization began some 4,000 years ago along the Yellow River, the state has
been either autocratic or impotent. Today's Taiwan, with its endless political
debates and hotly contested elections, is an exhilarating departure from that
tradition, leading Bo Yang and many others to believe that Taiwan represents a
triumph of Chinese civilization. Other countries ranging from Albania to
Paraguay have also cast off their repressive governments, but one would be hard
pressed to find any place on earth that has so successfully combined an economic
miracle with a political one.

Just a few years ago, Taiwan newspapers were still controlled by the Government,
and people hesitated to say openly that the island should declare itself a
separate country, independent of mainland China. Today, newspapers are
essentially free to say what they want: one opposition paper greeted the
selection of the present Prime Minister with a banner headline that contained an
expletive. Television remains nominally state-controlled, but the authorities
ignore a widespread though illegal cable system (including a "democracy
channel") that sometimes broadcasts anti-Government programs and even mainland
Chinese television news.

Like much of Eastern Europe, Taiwan has endured four decades of authoritarian
rule based on a Leninist party structure. Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, who
fled to the island of Taiwan in 1949 with two million mainlanders after his
defeat by the Communists, had been an ardent student of the Soviet Union in the
early 1920's and sent his eldest son, Chiang Ching-kuo, to study there. When the
autocratic old man died in 1975, Chiang Ching-kuo became the leader of the
Nationalist Party, the Kuomintang, and, under pressure at home and abroad,
launched the democratization process shortly before he died in 1988. Since then,
the pace of change has gathered momentum, the transformation -- unlike that in
Eastern Europe -- accomplished by evolution rather than revolution.

There is another contrast with Eastern Europe: Taiwan is rolling in money. The
business district in northeastern Taipei, the capital, is a forest of gleaming
office towers interspersed with flamboyant nightclubs. The hotels are palatial
(the Grand Hyatt has an underwater sound system in its pool) and the only
vagrants are young American street musicians.

American guitar players panhandling in Taiwan are not the only sign of the way
the world has turned upside down. Today, Taiwan has $82 billion in foreign
exchange reserves -- more than the United States, Japan or any country in the
world. It has signed a tentative agreement to buy 40 percent of the commercial
aircraft operations of the McDonnell Douglas Corporation for some $2 billion.
Taiwan's people, many of whom were peasants a few decades ago, today have per
capita incomes of about $10,000 a year, making them better off than Spaniards
and Greeks and incomparably better off than Poles or Czechs or Russians. Even
during the present international slowdown, Taiwan's economy is growing at the
rate of 7 percent a year and unemployment is steady at 1.4 percent.

Ostracized as a political embarrassment for more than a decade, Taiwan these
days is being courted by foreign governments. It is the 13th biggest trader in
the world economy, slightly ahead of China, and it plans to spend $300 billion
on infrastructure as part of a six-year development plan in the 1990's. That
will include money for highways, railroads, subways, power plants and sewage
systems (the kinds of things that the Nationalists neglected when they were
focusing on recovering the mainland). This package is three times the $100
billion often projected as the cost of rebuilding Kuwait, and makes Taiwan a key
market for international construction companies.

With its economic tentacles spread throughout Asia, Taiwan's impact on some
countries rivals or even exceeds Japan's. In Vietnam, for example, Taiwan is the
largest single foreign investor. Its greatest influence is over mainland China,
which, by official reckoning, has a per capita income of about $350 a year.
There, Taiwan economically and culturally exerts more influence than Japan.

Taiwan has long portrayed itself as a beacon of hope for the mainland, a view
that was laughable during its repressive years. But that vision of itself is no
longer a fantasy. Throughout the mainland, there is a yearning for the island's
freedom and prosperity. In the last few years, the song captivating many Chinese
has not been the "Internationale" but the breezy "Follow Your Feelings" by a
Taiwan pop star, a leather-clad woman named Su Rui.

It may have lost the mainland, but Taiwan seems to have won the mainlanders.

ON A WARM DECEMBER evening outside Lungshan Temple in the old section of Taipei,
the streets are crowded with worshipers going to the temple to burn fake paper
money so that their loved ones will have some cash in the next world, young men
strolling toward the nearby lanes of brothels, elderly couples taking their
grandchildren out for a bite of "stinking tofu," a popular snack.

This is also voting season, two days before Taiwan's first full election in more
than 40 years. Voters will choose delegates to the National Assembly, which in
the past was a rubber-stamp body that nominally chose the President but now is
charged with revising the nation's Constitution. The Kuomintang forced the
retirement, by the end of last year, of all of the aged legislators and National
Assembly delegates who had been elected on the mainland and had served for four
decades without facing re-election in Taiwan.

Soundtrucks from the Democratic Progressive Party, the main opposition, are
cruising the streets, bellowing their denunciations of the Nationalist Party.
The sides of the trucks are covered with slogans demanding a declaration of
independence from China and the creation of a new country called the Republic of
Taiwan. Although this is technically seditious and illegal, the police pay no
heed.

"You want to buy a video?" a hawker asks in Mandarin with a strong local accent,
thrusting forward a handful of cassettes. "Good price!" He is selling from a
table on the sidewalk, some 200 titles arrayed in front of him, about two-thirds
of which are Japanese pornography (the occasional dialogue dubbed in Chinese). A
few are American films or kung fu flicks and the remainder are political videos
supporting the Democratic Progressive Party.

"A few years ago, the Kuomintang would've killed me for selling these, would've
cut my head off," he says dramatically, drawing his hand across his throat. "But
now it's no problem. The cops ignore us, and anyway, we vendors come out only at
night."

The hawker, a squat short man, probably in his late 30's, suddenly realizes that
this sounds like a tribute to the Nationalists. "It's not the Kuomintang that
gave us this freedom," he lashes out furiously, spit flying wildly. "It's the
Democratic Progressive Party that made all the sacrifices, that pushed the
Kuomintang to give us this freedom. The Kuomintang leaders are tyrants, but
finally they had to cave in and free us."

Several days later, on Dec. 21, the people of Taiwan voted and gave a 71 percent
landslide victory to the Kuomintang. The election was marred by vote-buying, a
Taiwan tradition, but it was nonetheless an astonishing victory for the
Nationalists. It also marked a milestone in Taiwan's transition from autocracy
to democracy.

The new National Assembly will meet next month to revise the national
Constitution and choose a form of government for Taiwan. Despite some proposals
for a parliamentary system or for establishing a Republic of Taiwan, drastic
changes are unlikely. However, presidential power may be strengthened somewhat,
and for selecting the president the conference is likely to adopt a variation of
the American system of public elections followed by a vote in an electoral
college.

In the meantime, Taiwan's people are agonizing over how they are to forge an
identity for themselves without inviting an invasion from China. The omnipresent
slogan used to be "Guang fu da lu" (Recover the mainland), but now most people
on Taiwan wouldn't want to recover the mainland if they had the chance. A poll
last fall showed for the first time that fewer than half of the island's 20
million people would like to reunify with China. Even the island's mainlanders
-- emigres and their children who together make up 15 percent of Taiwan's
population -- now seem as attached to Taiwan as to their native provinces.

"Sure, we're Chinese," says a local journalist. "But just because you feel a
bond to your relatives doesn't mean you want them to move in with you.
Especially if they're dirt poor."

A BALDING, ENERGETIC MAN named Hsu Hsin-liang is one reason for the political
ferment in Taiwan. In 1979, Hsu was director of an independent new magazine that
demanded democratic change. In December of that year, the magazine sponsored a
rally calling for the protection of human rights. There were clashes with the
police, and the Government cracked down. Thirty-eight people were arrested,
tried and given sentences ranging from 10 months to life in prison, and torture
was used to induce confessions that the rally was part of a Communist-backed
insurrection.

The magazine's circulation manager, Lin Yi-hsiung, was badly beaten by
interrogators, and when his mother saw his injuries she tried to contact Amnesty
International. The next day, while the police kept Lin's home under 24-hour
surveillance, someone entered and killed the mother as well as Lin's twin
7-year-old daughters. The killings are widely believed to have been arranged by
senior officials. (Lin and the others who were arrested were released during the
1980's.)

Hsu avoided arrest because he happened to be in the United States, where he
sought political asylum. In 1986, inspired by Corazon Aquino's triumph in the
Philippines, he tried to return to Taiwan, but the authorities refused to admit
him or arrest him, and he had to return to America. Hsu's supporters surrounded
the airport and clashed repeatedly with riot police, who showed no compunction
about clubbing protesters with their truncheons.

In 1989, Hsu returned successfully to Taiwan, served 8 months of a 10-year
prison sentence for sedition and was released. Today, he is the 50-year-old
chairman of the Democratic Progressive Party. "Our problem is the same as
Ukraine's," says Hsu on a sunny morning in his office in downtown Taipei. In his
gray pin-striped suit, he looks more like a business executive than a rebel. He
acknowledges there is a risk of a mainland invasion if Taiwan declares its
independence from China and proclaims a Republic of Taiwan, but he says this
risk is greatly exaggerated. Lithuania and Ukraine, he contends, faced a similar
risk when they first broached independence.

The Democratic Progressive Party made independence the major issue of the
December campaign. One of its advertisements, in The Independent Evening Post,
ridiculed the Nationalists' pretensions. It portrayed the Republic of China as
"a babe that refuses to grow up" and presented the national flag as the infant's
diapers. But the Nationalists fought back by suggesting that calls for
independence amounted to inviting the mainland to invade.

The Nationalists' overwhelming victory seems a clear signal that, for now, the
people favor the status quo: neither independence nor reunification. The status
quo, notes Fredrick F. Chien, the Foreign Minister, could probably be sustained
for a long time.

Eleven hundred miles to the north, in Beijing, Tang Shubei is Taiwan's
frustrated suitor. Tang, a genial man who wears well-cut suits and distributes a
name card printed in the traditional Chinese characters used on Taiwan, is in
day-to-day charge of China's courtship of Taiwan. In his office, across the
street from the Zhongnanhai compound where China's politburo meets, he
emphasizes that the mainland would like to reunite with Taiwan peacefully. But
China, he says, reserves the right to use force to settle this "internal
affair."

"If a stalemate continues, of neither independence nor reunification, then that
is a matter of serious concern," Tang says soberly.

No one knows if China will resort to military action. According to one scenario,
during the power struggles that are expected to follow the death of Deng
Xiaoping, one of the factions -- the Army, say -- might provoke some incident in
the Taiwan Strait. A blockade of Taiwan would force rival Communist leaders to
unite behind the Army. In another scenario, Taiwan gradually moves toward
independence, just as Lithuania and Ukraine did. If Taipei were to declare its
independence, many Chinese in Beijing believe the Communists would then attack
Taiwan or impose a blockade.

Few ordinary Chinese on the mainland would be enthusiastic about fighting a war
with Taiwan, and military analysts contend that a conventional assault on Taiwan
would be costly without necessarily being successful. But with China what is
irrational and unlikely is not impossible. "The Chinese Communists sometimes do
things that in the eyes of other people are not necessarily in their pragmatic
interest," says Ma Ying-jeou, a Harvard-educated lawyer who is Taiwan's point
man on relations with the mainland.

It is unclear how the United States or other countries would react if the
mainland were to attack Taiwan. Taiwan is not a member of the United Nations,
and China has a Security Council veto, so United Nations intervention would be
unlikely. Moreover, nearly all countries around the world, including the United
States, regard Taiwan as part of China and so might send Taipei their sympathies
rather than their assistance, particularly if Taiwan were seen to have provoked
the crisis by declaring independence.

The risk of conflict might be reduced if the United States and other Western
nations made it clear that they would stand by Taiwan. But the United States has
been afraid of offending China and has done little to improve diplomatic
relations with Taiwan despite its democratization. Although European ministers
freely visit Taiwan, American policy will not permit a Cabinet member to set
foot on Taiwan. And Taiwan's President, Lee Teng-hui, a Cornell University
graduate, has been pressured not to embarrass the Bush Administration by seeking
to visit the United States.

BOTH THE COMMUNISTS and the Nationalists maintain that Taiwan is an inseparable
part of China. In fact, Taiwan and the Chinese mainland, less than 100 miles
apart at the nearest point, had very little to do with each other until a few
hundred years ago. Chinese settlers began to move in substantial numbers to
Taiwan in the 16th and 17th centuries, pushing the aboriginal population into
the mountains. It wasn't until 1684 that China imposed sovereignty over Taiwan,
and even then it was tenuous.

In the last century, Taiwan's history has been even more detached from that of
the mainland. In 1895, after it was trounced by Japan in the Sino-Japanese war,
China was forced to cede Taiwan to Japan, recovering it only in 1945 after World
War II. But after the Communist victory four years later, in 1949, the
Nationalists turned Taiwan into a refuge for their rival Government.

President Harry S. Truman refused to protect the fleeing Nationalists, and the
Communists prepared for an invasion of Taiwan that very likely would have
succeeded. What saved Taiwan was the Korean War. After the Communist invasion of
South Korea, Truman reversed himself and sent the Seventh Fleet to protect
Taiwan.

From 1949 until the early 1970's, Taiwan -- calling itself the Republic of China
and benefiting from the anti-Communist climate of the cold war -- occupied
China's seat in the United Nations and was recognized as China by most of the
world community. But it became increasingly absurd to have the island of Taiwan
represent the Chinese mainland, and more and more countries switched recognition
to "Red China." In 1971, the United Nations seat went to Beijing. By 1979, even
the United States recognized the People's Republic of China and severed
diplomatic relations with Taiwan.

Despite the lack of international recognition, Taiwan has maintained its trading
network around the globe, and its economy continues to boom. Testifying to its
chaotic and uncoordinated growth is Taipei. Not all of the capital is as glossy
as its business district, and many parts of the city are downright ugly:
sidewalks are cracked, shop signs fight for space overhead and the haze of
automobile exhaust hangs in the air. Taiwan's economy depends not on a few
conglomerates, as is the case with South Korea, but on hundreds of thousands of
mom-and-pop shops and factories making everything from clothing and processed
foods to electronics and plastics. The proprietors work day and night, cheat on
their taxes, reinvest their earnings and fight for export markets.


POLITICAL LIBERALIZATION took off after the 1986 elections. The Democratic
Progressive Party, while nominally illegal, was allowed to compete in the local
elections and did better than expected -- jolting the leadership into hastening
the pace of reform. Martial law, imposed in 1949, was lifted in 1987, and the
press and public debate became less and less restricted. Political parties were
formed, protest marches became common, most of the political prisoners were
released and many exiles were allowed to return.

During democracy's infancy in the late 80's, the opposition offended many
members of the middle class by resorting to physical violence on the floor of
the legislature. Frustrated by the dominance of aged Nationalists who never had
to seek re-election, the opposition felt that force was the only way to block
votes or have an impact.

Ju Gau-jeng, a pudgy young Taiwanese legislator who had earned a doctorate in
philosophy in Germany, won the nickname Rambo for his pugilistic confrontations
with ruling party legislators. Ju has now given up fistfighting, saying that
such tactics are no longer appropriate under a democracy.

A former Democratic Progressive Party member who is now trying to form his own
opposition party, Ju explains that the opposition was brutalized by the
Nationalists for so many years that it became radicalized and does not always
act rationally. The former political prisoners who dominate the Democratic
Progressive Party, he says, do not have ordinary friends or values. He adds:
"Whenever anyone disagrees with them, they say: 'Where were you when I was in
prison? My wife and my children left me. What right do you have to oppose me?' "

Still, both sides seem to have mellowed over the last year or so. The Democratic
Progressive Party has enough hope of eventually assuming power that it seems to
be moving gradually into the role of a loyal opposition and waging its battles
mostly with megaphones rather than fists.

In the meantime, the Government has abandoned most of its restrictions on
contacts with the mainland. There are still no direct flights between Taiwan and
China, but Taiwanese are free to travel to the mainland via Hong Kong, to
telephone people there and to conduct business on the other side of the Taiwan
Strait. While Taipei still refuses to negotiate directly with Beijing, it
periodically sends private emissaries there with verbal messages for China's
leaders.

Paradoxically, as Taiwan's pretensions of ruling China are withering, its
influence is increasing. Mainland Chinese intellectuals search for lessons in
Taiwan's democratization that can be applied in Beijing. Teen-agers emulate
Taiwan fashions and save their pocket money to buy tapes of Taiwan singers like
Su Rui or books by Taiwan writers like the late San Mao. Along the coast of
Fujian Province, ambitious workers pay smugglers hundreds of dollars to be taken
to Taiwan where they can find jobs as laborers or prostitutes. Even the language
is under assault: Taiwan expressions and the traditional Chinese characters used
in Taiwan and Hong Kong (abandoned 40 years ago by the Communists, who thought
simplified characters would promote literacy) are making a comeback throughout
China.

People on the mainland have become much more aware of living standards on Taiwan
since 1987, when the island first allowed its citizens to visit China. Last
year, a million people from Taiwan visited the mainland, and bilateral trade
(which Taiwan requires to be conducted through Hong Kong) amounted to more than
$5 billion. Taiwan companies have established some 2,800 factories in China,
moving entire assembly lines in industries like shoemaking offshore to low-wage
areas in Fujian Province. The result is that among the 30 million people of
Fujian, and to a lesser extent throughout China, it is the mainland that
increasingly seems to be falling into the orbit of Taiwan, not the other way
around.

"When the Taiwanese go back to Fujian, and when the people of Hong Kong go back
to southern China to visit relatives, and they have their fancy shoes and fancy
clothes and fancy luggage, that's the most subversive thing of all," says Andrew
J. Nathan, a China scholar at Columbia University. "It contributes to the lack
of confidence on the part of people within the mainland about the system that
they're living under."

Taiwan still has some way to go before it is fully democratic, but the island is
clearly moving in that direction. It is a rare example of a dictatorship that
grew up. Other countries overthrew tyrants, but in Taiwan it was the despots who
appear to have turned into democrats.

How did that happen? And is there hope that the Chinese mainland can evolve in a
similar way?

Analysts in Taiwan cite several factors that together hastened the process of
change. One was economic growth and increasing contact with the United States
and other countries. Another was embarrassment at criticisms from abroad for its
human rights violations. Perhaps even more important was education. Forty years
ago, only 34 percent of Taiwan's primary schoolchildren went on to high school;
now all do. Today, there are more than 10 times as many high-school students as
in 1952 and more than 40 times as many university students as there were then.
In the Confucian tradition, Taiwan values education like almost no society on
earth, particularly higher education in the United States. Consequently, some 53
percent of Taiwan's Cabinet ministers now have doctoral degrees from the United
States.

These factors are also present in mainland China, though to a much smaller
degree. Therefore, some Chinese and foreigners are hopeful that China may be
traversing a similar path. The Taiwan model, for all the differences with the
mainland, at least is an intriguing reminder that poor and repressive Chinese
states can evolve rapidly and peacefully toward democracy and prosperity.

There is one crucial difference, however. After the Generalissimo's son Chiang
Ching-kuo died in 1988, power on Taiwan passed to younger technocrats who had
little memory of China's civil war and were uninterested in ideology. They were
the agents of change. On the mainland, power is firmly in the grip of Deng
Xiaoping and other octogenarians of the civil-war generation.

QUESTION: WHAT country around the world expanded its borders the most during the
post-World War II era?

Answer: The Republic of China.

Although the Nationalist Government lost 96 percent of its territory in 1949
when it fled to Taiwan, it never acknowledged that loss. Instead, in 1953 the
Kuomintang even "reclaimed" all of Mongolia, which in the 1940's it had allowed
to spin off as an independent country. Taiwan is reluctant to give up its claims
to mainland territory, but no one pays much attention to what exists on paper.
Taiwan businesses are accustomed to keeping at least two sets of accounts, one
for themselves and one for the tax auditors, and the Government seems to be
doing the same.

When I lived in Taiwan in 1987 and 1988, studying Chinese, the myths still
counted for something. The post office temporarily confiscated some books on Mao
Zedong that an editor had mailed to me. At that time, the newspapers were still
controlled and people hesitated to say openly that Taiwan should be independent.
Technically, it is still illegal to advocate independence, and a few political
prisoners remain behind bars for demanding independence. But to be arrested for
sedition these days one practically has to stand with a megaphone and bellow
pro-independence slogans into a police station's windows.

Although it persists in hanging on to some historical fictions, the Nationalist
Government has finally come to grips with one horrific past event. For decades,
Taiwan has been haunted by "two-two-eight" -- the code word for the day in 1947
-- Feb. 28 -- when local Nationalist officials crushed an uprising by Taiwanese
resentful of Kuomintang corruption and repression. Estimates of the massacre
vary widely, but George H. Kerr, then United States vice consul in Taipei, put
the immediate death toll at 10,000 and said that another 10,000 or so were
executed in the next few months. Memories of two-two-eight fuel the resentment
some Taiwanese have long felt for the mainlanders who came over with Chiang
Kai-shek in 1949. Now that issue seems to have been largely defused by a
Government-backed investigation of two-two-eight and by promises that a monument
will be built to honor the dead.

To some extent, the antagonisms between Taiwanese and mainlanders have been
healed by time. The children of mainlanders often speak Taiwanese and feel far
more affinity with Taiwan than with the unseen mainland province that appears on
identity cards as their "native spot." It has also helped that power has been
handed over from the mainlanders to Taiwanese, people like President Lee
Teng-hui, who is a popular and shrewd politician. To most people, his
Taiwanese-accented Mandarin is easier on the ears than Chiang Kai-shek's
Mandarin, which was sometimes rendered almost unintelligible by the accent of
his native Zhejiang Province.

Hsu Hsin-liang, the opposition leader, also a Taiwanese, says that if he takes
power he would like to close the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall -- a vast
imperial-style building and park in the center of Taipei -- and transform it
into something else, perhaps a museum. But he acknowledges that Taiwan's ghosts
have largely been exorcised: "Two-two-eight is over. In the 1990's, the big
issue is democracy."

For both Taiwan and China, the bogeyman used to be Amnesty International, which
campaigned for prisoners like Bo Yang and still seeks to help those who have
been imprisoned for their involvement in the mainland's 1989 democracy movement.
Amnesty International now has a chapter in Taipei, with a 71-year old man as one
of its most fervent members. Or perhaps he is 72. In any case, in the new
Taiwan, people like Bo Yang are no longer Amnesty International cases but
Amnesty International members.


LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 16, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TV VIEW;
Why Politics Is a Lot Like 'Star Search'

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words


Whatever happens in New Hampshire on Tuesday, the television encounters of the
Democratic hopefuls have already set the terms for the primary season. After a
shaky start, the debates -- the fourth of which can be seen tonight at 8 on CNN
-- are proving to be the best such efforts the nation has enjoyed or endured.

In a welcome development, NBC, C-Span and PBS barred the audience claques and
multimoderators that hobbled their 1988 efforts, and the questioning, especially
from the PBS team of Robert MacNeil and Jim Lehrer on the economy, has been
better focused.

Future engagements promise to follow that pattern. Tonight's 90-minute debate,
the last to be held in New Hampshire, will also concentrate on the economy. ABC
will be the host network early in March, by which time the field may have been
slightly reduced, and CBS plans to display the survivors after Super Tuesday,
March 10.

But the debates have also demonstrated the limitations of even well-conducted
sessions in helping voters sort out policies. Each candidate, like an actor who
makes a career out of being typecast, is compelled to find an easily
recognizable, tube-friendly persona to separate himself from the field.

Beyond a certain point, digging substance out of even the best of the
discussions is not easy. In all their get-togethers so far, for example, the
five contenders have come out for bigger cuts in the defense budget than
proposed by President Bush. Enormous sums have been tossed around. Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas says he expects to save $90 billion by the fifth year.
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa ups it to $400 billion over 10 years. Edmund G. Brown
Jr., the former Governor of California, promises $700 billion over 10 years.
Everyone exudes confidence in his own figures. Caught up in the bidding and with
no way to measure the realistic possibilities, viewers can only wait for
somebody to make it a trillion before Election Day.

There is also enthusiasm for some sort of national health plan. The exchange
between Paul E. Tsongas, the former Senator from Massachusetts, and Senator Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska on last month's PBS debate brought out a seemingly clear-cut
difference in approach: Mr. Kerrey wants the states to manage health care; Mr.
Tsongas would entrust the job to private providers operating under Government
standards. But that is about as far as they took the subject. Position papers
were flashed, but the on-tube exchanges gave the most conscientious viewer
little help in discerning the real cost of either proposal or their relative
merits or even how they would work.

Other differences have shown up: Mr. Kerrey and Mr. Clinton favor a middle-class
tax cut; Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Harkin are against it. Mr. Tsongas emphasizes
investment in basic industry; Mr. Harkin would put money into fast job-creators
like road building. Real issues all -- but in no case was the viewer given
enough information to figure out the pros and cons. Every road seemed to come to
a dead end.

That is not meant as a criticism of the moderators or the much-improved formats.
The problem is endemic to television and perhaps to debates generally, with
their tendency to invite the quotable statement and to discourage the less
grabby details. It does not take a professional media manipulator to recognize
that the goal in a debate, especially before an audience of millions accustomed
to a quick fix in both news and entertainment, is instant impact. Welcome, sound
bite.

Recognizing that getting bogged down in the tangles of health care or the
vagaries of what everybody now calls industrial policy is a sure way to send
viewers to a less demanding channel, the candidates have naturally slid into
image-projection. Here is what is coming across.


Edmund G. Brown Jr.

Mr. Brown, in his curious way, has been the most successful in setting himself
apart from his competitors, perhaps so far apart that he risks seeming like the
town kidder. Despite having been around the longest, he comes on as the new-age
outsider, determined to drive the money givers from the temple of politics. That
spares him and his audience the strain of analyzing specific programs, since all
programs are bound to be corrupted in a corrupted system.

Easy though it is to make jokes about Mr. Brown, whose plugs for contributions
bring to mind 800-number pitches for anti-establishment tunes from the 1960's,
his insurgent image is one that fans of movies and teleplays about politics
should have no difficulty recognizing.

Bob Kerrey

Mr. Kerrey has also positioned himself as something of an outsider, only instead
of pulling down the pillars of the temple, he would mow down the pillars of
Federal bureaucracy. It is a perennially popular role -- no candidate has ever
run on his admiration for bureaucrats -- and the Senator is playing into the
prevailing disaffection with politics: Mr. Kerrey Has Come to Washington. He is
also projecting youth, energy, boldness, qualities that complement the heroism
in Vietnam that keeps finding its way into his campaign. As Mr. Clinton has
reason to appreciate, television is rarely unkind to war heroes.

Tom Harkin

Mr. Harkin presents himself as a reformer of an older school, a hard-bitten,
softhearted populist who would open the temple's coffers to the needy. He
sometimes seems to be borrowing his more-compassionate-than-thou lines from a
Bill Moyers documentary. Tapping into the old American suspicion of foreigners
that has surfaced so dramatically in the past year or two, he has come out
against plutocrats abroad as well as fat cats at home.

Every protagonist in a television drama needs a villain or a gang of villains to
shoot down, and you can't distinguish yourself among Democrats by riddling Mr.
Bush. In case some viewers are put off by the odor of grass-roots radicalism,
Mr. Harkin perfumes his presentation with come-together pieties about God and
America, which have never lost anyone a vote. If Mr. Kerrey is trying out for
James Stewart, Mr. Harkin is playing Henry Fonda.

Bill Clinton

Mr. Clinton is not looking for an argument; stars rarely do, even flickering
ones. In the debates, he has been making much of his accomplishments as the
governor of a state that has known hard times, competing in the compassion
stakes with Mr. Harkin and in the youth-and-energy stakes with Mr. Kerrey, but
reinforced by a claim to superior experience at managing things. What can
senators know about managing anything, he seems to be asking in his cool way.

Unpleasant rumors aside, if a producer who knows his McLuhan had to choose one
of these men as the lead for an election-year mini-series, the handsome,
self-possessed, uninflammatory Mr. Clinton, abetted by a personable and
supportive wife (the only spouse to receive prime-time attention; thanks,
Gennifer Flowers), would probably get the job -- though, yes, a war record
wouldn't hurt. As for last month's embarrassing moments, they could of course be
a problem; on the other hand, they may add a certain frisson of romance that
further sets Mr. Clinton apart from a rather gray group.

Paul E. Tsongas

Romance is not the word that rushes to mind for Mr. Tsongas. Yet this knight of
the doleful countenance has managed to position himself in an unorthodox way for
a politician in heat. With his admonitory tone, he seems to be playing the
tightfisted bookkeeper (Gene Lockhart?) who usually takes a beating from
go-get-'em Frank Capra heroes. "I'm not Santa Claus," he announces, and asks an
audience accustomed to commercials for pain relievers to swallow the news that
his proposals do not promise instant relief. Nor do they lend themselves to
30-second exposition.

Does he really expect anyone to buy a copy of the book he has displayed twice a
debate as though acknowledging the hopelessness of making his case to
nonreaders? His hope must be that he will emerge as the sleeper of the season,
one of the unlikely counterheroes who occasionally win an audience's heart.

The Odds

You don't have to be a cynic to see the candidates as performers, and
particularly as television performers. They are already trapped in the roles
they have worked so hard to create. Mr. Tsongas, with the most substantive
program, has the hardest job; he must turn his implacably uncharismatic manner
into an asset. The truth-teller, he has to persuade viewers, is rarely a matinee
idol: remember Socrates.

The others are in more conventional modes: the proven executive; the down-home
populist; the up-to-date reformer; the indignant outsider. Like other
personalities of the tube, they will survive or expire by their images and their
ratings, which will reveal at least as much about the people watching the screen
as about those who temporarily occupy it.

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Democratic Presidential candidates (clockwise from top left)
Bill Clinton, Bob Kerrey, Tom Harkin, Edmund G. Brown Jr. and Paul E. Tsongas
during a debate on PBS last month. Robert MacNeil, left, and Jim Lehrer
moderated. (PBS)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Exponent of Government-as-Business Is Gaining Bigger Audience

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1193 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 16


In Florida, Gov.  Lawton Chiles followed the advice of a little-known political
consultant and freed some of his largest state agencies from their cumbersome
rules, quickly raising productivity.

In Massachusetts, Gov. William F. Weld listened to the same consultant and made
money-saving changes in the state's Medicaid program.

On the Presidential campaign trail, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas salts his
stump speeches with phrases from the consultant, like "paying for performance."

Democrats like Governor Chiles and Governor Clinton and Republicans like Mr.
Weld are among the many state and local officials around the nation who are
quietly experimenting with the ideas of David Osborne, a 40-year-old journalist
who has become a proselytizer for more efficient government.

Mr. Osborne, in a series of articles, books and speeches, has started a movement
to revolutionize government through what he calls "entrepreneurial government."

Different Realities

His latest book, which chronicles hundreds of successful examples of making
government more effective, was published last week, titled "Reinventing
Government: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the Public Sector
From Schoolhouse to Statehouse, City Hall to the Pentagon" (Addison-Wesley). The
co-author, Ted. A. Gaebler, is a former city manager of Visalia, Calif.

Behind Mr. Osborne's work is his belief as he stated in an interview last week
that "with the transition from an industrial domestic economy to a global,
postindustrial, knowledge-based economy the realities government has to deal
with are different."

Government as it evolved in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was based on
the same principles as Detroit's assembly line style manufacturing, and is just
as outmoded, he said in the interview here, near his home in the suburb of
Dedham.

This traditional form of government meant sluggish centralized bureaucracies
preoccupied with rules and hierarchy, Mr. Osborne said. They worked well at the
time, but today they cannot deal with the new problems like international
competitiveness, shrinking tax revenues, deteriorating public schools, soaring
health care costs and persistent welfare rolls.

"The fact that we are in a global market has meant a shrinking pie" as
once-strong American industries have lost jobs and governments have therefore
lost tax revenues, Mr. Osborne said. The central event in this turnabout for
government was the tax revolt that started with Proposition 13 in California in
1978, Mr. Osborne said.

Mr. Osborne insists that what he is advocating is neither liberal nor
conservative in the conventionial sense.

"Our fundamental problem is that we have the wrong kind of government," he wrote
in "Reinventing Government." "We do not need more government or less government,
we need better government."

What Mr. Osborne would do, at a time of widespread fiscal crisis, is to cut
costs without eliminating essential services through a more imaginative and
efficient approach to government. To some extent, he wants to make government
run more like business.

Good Business Management

He would introduce principles of good business management into government. Hence
Mr. Osborne calls for more competition in government -- including school choice
plans and schemes for privatization of services -- greater decentralization,
more emphasis on performance instead of regulations and attempts to enlist local
support by making people feel they own their government.

But Mr. Osborne, a Democrat by inclination, argues that it is misleading to
think government can or should ever work just like business, because their
purposes are funadamentally different.

One of his proposals, implemented by Governor Chiles in Florida and Governor Ann
W. Richards in Texas, is intended to get around the problem of government
agencies' spending their budgeted money before the end of the year so they are
not given less the next year. Mr. Osborne's answer is to have agencies that save
money turn back part of it to the state and keep the rest, using it for bonuses
or new equipment.

Ideas Termed Borrowed

Mr. Osborne is not without his critics. Harry P. Hatry, the director of state
and local government research at the Urban Institute in Washington, notes that
Mr. Osborne's has borrowed many of his ideas from other writers and even
President Ronald Reagan. "Osborne has just done a good job of packaging and
marketing them, so we've now got an express train going instead of a local," he
said.

Mr. Hatry also cautions that it is more difficult to measure performance in
government than in business. "I think most of his principles are good, but a lot
of people are a little glib in talking about making government run more like
business," he said.

Al Bilik, the president of the Public Employee Department of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
in Washington, is concerned that Mr. Osborne's stress on competition and
privatization is just a subterfuge for laying off government workers. "When he
talks about promoting competition between government and the private sector for
the same service, I think he is naive," Mr. Bilik said.  "What he is saying is
that the only way to keep people on their toes is to threaten their jobs."

Anti-War Journalist

Mr. Osborne, a native of San Jose, Calif., began his career as a journalist for
Pacific News Service, an avowedly left-wing organization that opposed the
Vietnam war. But after the passage of California's tax-cutting Proposition 13,
he became interested in how state goverments were responding to what he saw as
the end of the era of the New Deal and the Great Society.

His first book, "Laboratories of Democracy" (Harvard Business School Press,
1988), explored how several governors were developing ways to provide services
and spark economic growth in the Reagan era. The most successful governor in the
1980's, Mr. Osborne says, was Mr. Clinton.

In a state with the worst record of support for public schools, for example,
Governor Clinton dramatically increased spending for education. He also won a
battle to force testing of teachers for competency and greatly decentralized
decision making authority down to school principals.

Mr. Osborne acknowledged drawing some of the ideas for his new book from Gov.
Clinton's work. In turn, Mr. Clinton has picked up some of his campaign themes
from Mr. Osborne's writing, like the need to reform government.

Two other governors whom Mr. Osborne touted in "Laboratories of Democracy" have
not done so well. The are Michael S. Dukakis, the former Governor of
Massachusetts and the Democratic Presidential candidate who lost to George Bush
in 1988, and Dick Thornburgh, the former Republican Governor of Pennsylvania and
Attorney General who lost his bid for a Senate seat last fall in a stunning
upset to Harris Wofford. Mr. Wofford called strongly for national health
insurance.

Mr. Thornburgh's loss was a good illustration of the new reality of politics,
Mr. Osborne said. "People don't want passive government," Mr. Osborne said.
"What they want is a government that does more and spends less."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 25, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article on Feb. 17 about David Osborne, a political consultant, incorrectly
described the Pacific News Service, for which he once worked. The service
provides articles from countries around the world about social policy and
international issues; it is not an avowedly left-wing organization.


GRAPHIC: Photo: David Osborne, a former journalist, has started a movement to
revolutionize government through "entrepreneurial government," in a series of
articles, books and speeches. (Joe Wrinn for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Bitter Abortion Debate, Opponents Learn to Reach for Common Ground

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1659 words

DATELINE: ST. LOUIS


Two years ago the director of the largest abortion clinic here telephoned the
leading anti-abortion lawyer in the state with a revolutionary proposal.

B. J. Isaacson-Jones, the director of Reproductive Health Services, invited
Andrew Puzder, the lawyer, to come talk to her at the clinic in the hope of
finding common ground to help women and children.

Joined by a handful of others on both sides of the abortion issue, the meetings
have regularly continued, trying to move beyond the quagmire that for 20 years
has trapped the abortion debate in hostilities.

"It was shockingly easy to identify issues we agree on," Ms. Isaacson-Jones
said, "like the need for aid to pregnant women who are addicted to drugs, the
need for better prenatal care and the need to reduce unwanted pregnancy. Neither
side wants women to need abortions because they don't have the money to raise a
child."

The St. Louis common-ground movement is still nascent and has only recently
begun to yield tangible results. Both sides stress that while they would like to
see a kind of disarmament in the abortion wars they will continue to disagree
about abortion and will never compromise their positions on it.

But after 20 years of protests, mass arrests and firebombings, some on both
sides of the debate say, learning to talk together presents the only real hope
for a peaceful future.

Talk to Each Other

"No one is ever going to convince me that it's all right to kill unborn babies,"
said Loretto Wagner, the past president of Missouri Citizens for Life, "and I'm
going to go on working to make abortion illegal. But that doesn't mean we need
to demonize each other. If this is not to become the Vietnam of the 1990's, we
have to learn to sit down and talk to each other."

The idea that it is time to de-escalate the battle over abortion is attracting a
great deal of interest in several other cities, from church groups, policy
groups and abortion activists, a few of whom are interested in starting similar
movements.

"It is become very clear to me that the polarization I have engaged in for years
has not been served the women in my community, has not helped to resolve
anything and was a self-indulgence," said Charlotte Taft, director of the Routh
Street Women's Clinic in Dallas, which performs 4,000 abortions a year. "I'm
trying to figure out who on the other side I can talk to, but it's scary, since
I don't trust them any more than they trust me."

Among the participants in the St. Louis talks, there is now enough trust to make
joint action possible. For example, several months ago, when a pregnant
10-year-old came to the abortion clinic, but decided to carry her pregnancy to
term, Jean Cavender, the clinic's director of public affairs and a participant
in the common-ground talks, called Ms. Wagner for help.

She told Ms. Wagner that the girl needed to stay in bed because the pregnancy
was medically complicated but that because her mother worked there was no one to
care for her during the day. Ms. Wagner then raised enough money in
anti-abortion circles to pay for an attendant and found a woman willing to go
into the girl's dangerous, drug-infested neighborhood. The baby was later put up
for adoption.

"It may not sound like a big thing," Ms. Wagner said, "but I feel very good that
they trusted me enough to call and that I knew they weren't just trying to stick
it to me, saying put your money where your mouth is, but really seeking help."

Pregnant Drug Addicts

The common-ground group also worked together last spring on legislation in
Missouri to pay for the treatment of pregnant drug addicts.

"We all thought it was a good thing, so we agreed not to to attach any riders
that might interfere with passage, and it did become law," said Ms. Wagner, who
resigned as president of Missouri Citizens for Life last year in part to
continue the common-ground talks. "But we're a long way from any major joint
projects."

The abortion debate has been deeply divisive all over the country, but probably
nowhere more than in Missouri, where the Legislature, in a measure sponsored by
Mr. Puzder, declared that life begins at conception and prohibited the use of
public money or employees in assisting abortions.

Ms. Isaacson-Jones's clinic, one of the largest abortion clinics in the nation,
challenged that law, leading to the 1989 United States Supreme Court decision in
Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, the watershed decision in which the
Court opened the door to new state restrictions on abortion.

There is still a man with a gun guarding the door to Ms. Isaacson-Jones's
clinic, a tacit reminder of the years of death threats and protests directed to
the staff of Reproductive Health Services, which performs more than half the
abortions in Missouri and which sees women from 10 states who are seeking
second-trimester abortions.

A Choice: Abortion or Adoption

But Reproductive Health Services offers more than abortions. In an effort to
offer real choices to women, the clinic started an on-site adoption agency two
years ago, a service offered by only two other abortion clinics in the nation,
and one that Ms. Wagner applauds.

It is precisely such efforts to lessen the need for abortions that underlie the
common-ground talks.

"The problem in our world is not really abortion, it's unintended pregnancy,"
Ms. Isaacson-Jones said. "For a woman with a crisis pregnancy, the issue is not
political, it's personal. No one walks in here and says 'I'm here to exercise my
constitutional right to choose.' "

Mr. Puzder, who recently moved to California but remains in touch with Ms.
Isaacson-Jones, uses similar words: "If you have a poor woman who can't support
another baby, and she goes to an abortion clinic, you don't have a woman who's
exercising her constitutional right, you have a woman who has a problem."

But their efforts at re-framing the issue in a mutually acceptable way are still
controversial in the charged atmosphere of the abortion debate, where
"baby-killer" and "woman hater" are the usual forms of communication.

And that atmosphere restricts how far the common-ground approach can go. After a
local newspaper reported that the common-ground people were talking about
putting an anti-abortion counselor at Ms. Isaacson-Jones's clinic, there was
such fury on both sides that the idea was shelved.

Skepticism About Movement

Both the leading anti-abortion group in Missouri and the state's abortion-rights
league remain skeptical about the common-ground movement, each saying they
distrust their adversary's motives.

"Our goal is saving babies' lives.  Their goal is killing babies, and I don't
see a lot of common ground there," said Carol Scoville, the president of
Missouri Right to Life, the new name for the group once led by Ms. Wagner.

Ms. Wagner and Ms. Isaacson-Jones have stories about long-time colleagues who
are horrified by the common-ground talks, feeling that they give credibility to
the enemy. Ms. Wagner said that even her own husband is not sure she is doing
the right thing.

"This is a big culture shock on both sides," said Ms. Wagner, who is president
of Our Lady's Inn, a group that runs two homes for pregnant women.  "We have to
go very slowly, and very carefully, if we're going to succeed.

"I sometimes have doubts myself. I don't want to sound like a religious fanatic,
but I ask myself, 'If Christ were on earth, would He approve of this kind of
activity?' And I think He would."

So far, it seems that people who actually deal with women facing unwanted
pregnancies -- those who run abortion clinics, or, on the anti-abortion side,
homes for pregnant women -- are far more receptive to the idea of seeking common
ground than are those in the advocacy groups, who are more active in the
political and legal battles.

Common Ground in Wisconsin

While the national advocacy organizations have steered clear of the
common-ground movement, Ms. Wagner and Ms. Isaacson-Jones say, the concept has a
strong appeal to Americans who have been sitting out the abortion debate.

And the St. Louis group is not the only one of its kind. In Wisconsin, eight
leaders from both sides of the abortion debate beginning meeting last September.
The initiator was Maggi Cage, who for 14 years ran an abortion clinic, and a
mediator participates in the sessions.

Recently, several state legislators who have worked with the Wisconsin group
asked for and quickly received its recommendations on proposed legislation on
sex education in public schools.

"This comes as a great relief to the legislators, because they've been caught in
the middle for so long, getting beaten up whatever they do," Ms. Cage said.
"They're very excited when they see us working together."

But, she said, that is not the group's main purpose.

"We haven't any idea where this will go," Ms. Cage said, "but we want to see it
evolve. For 20 years, we've been butting heads, and it hasn't worked, so it was
time to try something else.

"I see this as the most important thing I've ever done. It's not just a good
model for abortion but for any conflict in the community. It's a way of getting
people to come together to participate in self-governance."

Similar groups may soon be forming. In recent months, Ms. Isaacson-Jones has
talked about the common-ground concept at the Kennedy School of Government at
Harvard University and at a meeting of 25 abortion-clinic operators. It was
well-received at both.

Last summer, after The St. Louis Post-Dispatch ran an article on the
common-ground effort, the group was invited to the Bonhomme Presbyterian Church,
where a common-ground group has been set up.

"We had become convinced that women were being chewed up by the pro-life,
pro-choice debate," said Jody Robbins, the associate pastor at the St. Louis
church, "and it was wonderful to find people who would come talk to us about
these same ideas."

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "No one is ever going to convince me that it's all right to
kill unborn babies, and I'm going to go on working to make abortion illegal."
said loretto Wagner, the past president of Missouri Citizens for Life. "The
Problem in our world is not really abortion, it's unintended pregnancy," said
B.J. Isaacson-Jones, the director of the Reproductive Health Sevices in St.
Louis. (Photographs by Bill Stover for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words



International A2-9

ISRAEL KILLS SHIITE MILITANT

Israeli forces killed the leader of the pro-Iranian Party of God, Sheik Abbas
Musawi, in a helicopter raid on his motorcade in southern Lebanon. Sheik
Musawi's wife, son and at least four bodyguards were also killed in the attack,
which seems likely to cast a pall over the Middle East peace talks.  A1

The Party of God eulogizes its leader as a martyr.  A9

PENTAGON DRAFTS WAR SCENARIOS

In its post-cold-war planning, the Pentagon envisions seven scenarios that could
draw American forces into combat over the next 10 years, military documents
show. Robust defense spending would be needed to maintain forces capable of
winning one or more of the conflicts.  A1

COLLECTIVE PAIN AND POETRY

Peace is only snow-deep in Koltsovo, a village near Moscow that is going through
the pains of withdrawal from centralized economics.  A1

UZBEK RIVALS COURT BAKER

Secretary of State Baker got a lesson in the complexities of Central Asian
politics on a visit to Uzbekistan. President Karimov assured Mr. Baker that he
had become a democrat; opposition leaders told him the President was a dictator.
A7

A MUSLIM ECONOMIC CLUB

Officials of Iran, Pakistan and Turkey met in Teheran with representatives of
the six former Soviet republics of Central Asia to revive a moribund economic
organization.  A9

TROOPS OPEN FIRE IN ZAIRE

Zairian troops fired on protesters led by priests in the capital, killing 13
people. The protesters were calling on President Mobutu to allow the resumption
of a national democracy conference.  A3

NEW PITCH FROM NEW WORLD

With an economic boom coming after a brain drain, several South American
countries are turning to the economic rubble of Eastern Europe to find skilled
workers.  A5

A Serbian enclave votes to oust its hard-line leader.  A7

Algeria outlined an economic program after weeks of violence.  A2

A memorial in Hungary to the sufferings of gypsies under fascism.  A4

National A10-14

QUIET SUCCESS FOR JOB CORPS

With nearly three decades of turning uneducated young people into skilled
workers, Jobs Corps is being lauded as a Federal project that actually works.
But plans to expand the program are being threatened by budget cuts.  A1

FINAL NEW HAMPSHIRE DEBATE

The main Democratic Presidential candidates met in a debate that focused on
their common opposition to President Bush, rather than the differences among
their own prescriptions for the economy.  A1

BUSH ON DEFENSIVE

Despite weeks of trying to sell his ideas for ending the recession and
addressing middle-class concerns, President Bush's re-election campaign still
faces questions about the economy. Not to mention Patrick J. Buchanan.  A1

BROWN AS POLITICAL SAVIOR

Despite what naysayers argue, the former California Governor is pushing his
anti-big politics message with the fervor of an evangelist.  A13.

Voters have a lower threshold for sugar-coated promises.  A12

DAHMER JURORS REACT

After weeks of graphic accounts of horrifying acts in the trial of Jeffrey L.
Dahmer, jurors met with psychiatrists to give them an outlet to talk, cry or
vent rage.  A11

CAN HE MAKE GOVERNMENT WORK?

A little-known political consultant is finding a wider audience for his ideas of
injecting principals of business management into government operations.  A10

MUST JURY REFLECT POPULACE?

News Analysis: The notion of a jury of peers has been around for hundreds of
years but has never been written into the law in the United States. Should it
be?  A11

HEALING A SCHISM

In Scranton, Pa., an emissary brought a healing message from Pope John Paul II
to a breakaway Polish Catholic denomination.  A10

COMMON GROUND ON ABORTION

Advocates on both sides of America's bitter abortion debate find they do share
some concerns and goals.  A10

Prince Georges County, Md., is furloughing school employees.  A11

Canadians defended their health-care criticism.  A14

TEEN-AGERS WITH GUNS

Throughout New York City, youths are carrying guns that have been flooding in on
the currents of violence in the nation's biggest drug market. Many teen-agers
have been caught up in a circle of packing weapons to protect themselves.  A1

Business Digest D1

Sports C1-11

Baseball: Cone and Mets go to arbitration.  C2

Basketball: Best of the beginners.  C4

Bulls want piece of history.  C8

Lakers retire Magic's number.  C8

Columns: George Vecsey on Richard Petty.  C3

Dave Anderson on Herschel Walker.  C7

Hockey: Devils beat Rangers.  C4

Olympics: The amazing, amusing American hockey team.  C1

No medal for Americans in bobsled.  C1

East Germany's past resurfaces.  C5

Norwegian wins super giant slalom.  C7

Tennis: Navratilova makes history.  C2

Track and Field: Scotsman wins Vietnam marathon.  C4

Obituaries D7

Marton Y. Koplin, television producer

Melvin L. Sokolow, literary agent

Robert F. Kelly, former state Assemblyman

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Museums stretching hours.  C13

Reading music closely (maybe a bit too closely).C13

Theater: "Grandchild of Kings." C13

Music: Kronos Quartet.  C13

Ellen Greene remembers.  C15

Tribute to Jan DeGaetani C16

Primal Scream at the Ritz.  C16

Word and Image:

"Outerbridge Reach," a novel.  C18

"Till Death Us Do Part," NBC.  C18

Assimilating the Indians, on "The American Experience." C18

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials A16

Reinventing the debate.

California medical model.

Presidents' words.

Poor judgment.

Letters A16

Leslie H. Gelb: Godzilla vs. King Kong.  A17

William Safire: The plumbers' return.  A17

Walter A. McDougall: What we do for our country.  A17

John May: World-class destruction.  A17

Simon Strong: Peru is losing more than the drug war.  A17

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ahead in New Hampshire polls on the eve of primary.  A12
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Democrats Join in Assailing Bush In Final New Hampshire Debate

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Feb. 16


The five main Democratic Presidential candidates met tonight in a bland and
largely anticlimactic debate that focused on their common opposition to
President Bush, rather than the differences among their own prescriptions for
the national economy.

Although it took place less than 48 hours before the New Hampshire primary, the
first in the nation, and had thus been considered a potentially pivotal event,
the encounter produced little fresh enlightenment for the voters of this state,
tens of thousands of whom say they remain uncommitted.

Only on nuclear energy were there any real fireworks. His rivals ganged up on
former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, the current leader in the New
Hampshire polls, attacking his insistence that some use of nuclear power was
unavoidable. Once they patronized him. Tonight, for just a moment, they shook
his habitual calm.

A Sensitive Issue

"Don't come at me," he warned them, insisting that he had been a committed
environmentalist since the 1970's and remained steadfast. Mr. Tsongas had lost
his temper about the same issue 10 days ago at Dartmouth College. The protracted
controversy over the Seabrook nuclear plant in New Hampshire, which started
operation in March 1990, has made it an issue of great sensitivity in the state.

All of the Democratic hopefuls laid into Mr. Bush, and Mr. Tsongas in particular
kept saying the choice was not among Democrats but between the President and
whomever the Democrats chose -- a classic leader's tactic, designed to preserve
as much unity as possible for the fall campaign. Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska
summed up the consensus with the comment, "No political figure in America is
more indifferent to jobs than George Bush."

For much of the rest of the 90-minute debate, staged at St. Anselm's College
just south of here and carried by the Cable News Network, the Democrats were
content to recycle their campaign speeches and punch lines.

Politicians here and in Washington had expected Mr. Tsongas to be taken to task
on substantive issues and Mr. Clinton to be attacked on questions of character.
It didn't happen. Unchallenged, the Arkansas Governor chose not to comment, or
was prevented by the format from commenting, on the accusations that turned his
once free-flowing campaign into a nightmare.

Mr. Kerrey may have sensed that the event was providing less-than-gripping
television viewing. When Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa mentioned Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo of New York, whose name is not on the ballot here, the Nebraskan commented
with a smile: "Did you have to mention Governor Cuomo's name? Now more people
will write him in." Two Chicagoans have started an unauthorized write-in
campaign on Mr. Cuomo's behalf.

In the debate, the fourth of the young campaign, it was clear that the Democrats
consider the President vulnerable on many issues.

Call for 'a Clean Break'

Mr. Kerrey, who seemed more focused than he had in earlier broadcasts, said
early that "our President has his head outside of the cold war, but his entire
body is still in it." Mr. Tsongas said Mr. Bush lacked "a core of principle."
Mr. Harkin called for "a clean break with Reagan and Bush trickle-down
economics."

And Mr. Clinton declared, "We've got a President who doesn't believe we need a
national economic plan."

Earlier in the day, the Democratic candidates had wrangled off-screen about
taxes, abortion and questions of honesty and character.

Mr. Tsongas took on the Democratic leadership in Congress. Senator Harkin took
shots at two of his rivals, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey, over their positions on
abortion as well as on other issues. Mr. Clinton hit back at his critics, and
Mr. Kerrey appeared to be trying to keep alive accusations of draft evasion
leveled at Mr. Clinton.

Polls tracing the changes in voter sentiment day by day showed Mr. Tsongas
holding a solid lead over Mr. Clinton, Mr. Kerrey in third place by a narrow
margin over Mr. Harkin, and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
running well behind.

There were signs of stress in the campaigns of both Mr. Kerrey and Mr. Harkin as
both sought to stave off possible elimination from the race.

After Mr. Kerrey's longtime poll- taker and strategist, Harrison Hickman,
acknowledged anonymously sending a memorandum critical of Mr. Clinton's draft
record to journalists, Mr. Kerrey disavowed him and said he was not, at least
for the time being, working for the campaign. Mr. Kerrey added, "He betrayed
me."

The Harkin campaign approved and paid for a hard-hitting flier, circulated by a
women's group, implying that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey were less than firm in
their support of abortion rights. Among other things, the handbill asserts that
Mr. Kerrey ran for Governor in Nebraska in 1982 as an opponent of abortion and
that Mr. Clinton signed a bill in 1989 that requires young women seeking
abortion to get parental consent first.

No 'Hollywood Women'

In allusions to the accusations in a supermarket tabloid that Mr. Clinton
conducted a 12-year extramarital affair, to Mr. Kerrey's relationship with Debra
Winger and to Mr. Brown's romance with Linda Ronstadt, Mr. Harkin said in a
speech to a labor group: "You won't be reading about me in the tabloids. I sure
as heck won't be dating any Hollywood women."

Challenged about his tactics on the ABC news program "This Week," Mr. Harkin
said, "I have a great deal of respect for Governor Clinton," but asserted that
Mr. Clinton's conduct "raises questions in everyone's mind."

So much dirt had been thrown at him, Mr. Clinton replied, that he was "virtually
a one-man landfill." He sought to turn the attacks made upon him into an
advantage.

"One of the tests of a President is whether or not that man or woman can live
with the pressure, take the heat and go on," he said. "I've learned some things
about myself, I think, in the last couple of weeks, and I think the American
people and certainly the people of New Hampshire know much more about me than
anyone else."

Clinton as Outsider

Mr. Clinton also sought to portray himself as the outsider, although he led the
race here for weeks and won the endorsement of Democratic officeholders across
the country. He suggested that Mr. Tsongas had always been the favorite here
because he came from a neighboring state.

Mr. Clinton also railed against Washington. "You know, a lot of people in
Washington may have given up hope on my campaign," he said, "but Washington has
given up on the deficit. Washington has given up on the economy.  Washington has
given up on everything that's mattered for 10 years."

Mr. Tsongas rejected the middle-income tax cut that has been proposed by
Democratic leaders in Congress, arguing that they would drop the idea if his
campaign succeeds. Appearing on the NBC news program "Meet the Press," he said
tax help for the middle class was needed but argued that his first job was
stimulating the economy to create jobs, because if a working person was
unemployed, "giving that person a tax cut is irrelevant."

"I'm not Santa Claus," Mr. Tsongas said, repeating a familiar campaign line. "If
you want Santa Claus, you've got a lot of choices, Democrats and Republicans."

Mr. Bush's campaign manager, Robert M. Teeter, who was also interviewed on the
ABC program, paid Mr. Tsongas a backhanded compliment with the remark that
people were for him because he sounded like a Republican.

Alone among the major contenders, Mr. Kerrey avoided the television studios,
campaigning instead at a suburban shopping mall and speaking at a rally in
Manchester.

With him for the second time in eight days was Max Cleland, the former head of
the Veterans' Administration, who lost both legs and an arm in Vietnam. Mr.
Kerrey insisted that he was not trying to call attention to accusations that Mr.
Clinton tried to avoid military service in Southeast Asia.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, left, Senator Bob Kerrey, center,
and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas debating last night in Goffstown, N.H. The
moderator, Bernard Shaw of CNN, is in the foreground. (Associated Press) (pg.
A1)

Graphs: "New Hampshire's Difficult Downturn" compares the unemployment rate
('86-'90); wages ('86-'90); cost of a home ('87-'91); crime rate ('86-'90);
bankruptcy ('87-'91); welfare rate ('86-'91); and schools pending ('86-'91)
between New Hampshire and the United States. (Sources: Unemployment, Bureau of
Labor Statistics; wages, Bureau of Economic Analysis; home cost, National
Association of Realtors, New Hampshire Realtors Association; crime rate, Bureau
of Justice Statistics; bankruptcy, Administrative Office of the United States
Courts; welfare, Office of Family Assistance, Health and Human Services
Department; school spending, New Hampshire Education Department, U.S. Education
Department. (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 19, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Ill Wind for the President;
A Wave of Discontent in New Hampshire May Be an Omen for Bush in Other States

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1379 words

DATELINE: BEDFORD, N.H., Feb. 18


The Republicans of New Hampshire made their views clear enough today. Nearly
half of them felt dissatisfied enough with George Bush's performance, especially
his handling of the economy, to vote for a television commentator, Patrick J.
Buchanan, in preference to the incumbent President.

The question is: Will Republicans elsewhere feel and do the same? And will Mr.
Bush's evident weakness, together with the rather indecisive outcome of the
Democratic primary, propel other Democrats into the contest?

It was a bad day for the status quo. Not only did Mr. Bush suffer from voters'
wrath; the winner among the Democrats, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas, was a man
who has been out of office for eight years and ran against politics-as-usual.

Mr. Buchanan had a lot of advantages in New Hampshire that will not be available
to him in subsequent contests, including those in Georgia on March 3 and Texas
on March 10, which he has described as his next targets.  This state has been
hit harder than almost any by the recession. Television advertising is cheap
here, an advantage to a challenger, and Mr. Buchanan had the exuberant backing
of the state's dominant newspaper, The Union Leader in Manchester.

But the political trade winds could carry the dissatisfaction registered here to
other states.

'Contagious' Anger

"The anger expressed by our electorate is contagious, and it will travel," said
Thomas Rath, a former state attorney general who was one of the President's main
advisers here. "New Hampshire provides the context for what comes next. The
White House has to figure out some way to change the mood of the country very
quickly, or the President will be in serious trouble."

Clearly, Mr. Buchanan was the recipient of many protest votes. According to a
survey of voters leaving polling places, about half of the challenger's
supporters said they had backed him mainly to "send a message." About half of
those who voted for Mr. Buchanan today said that if he were nominated, they
would vote for Mr. Bush in November.

Even after Mr. Buchanan's near-triumph today, politicians and political analysts
see him less as a threat to Mr. Bush's renomination, which most of them take for
granted, and more as a threat to Mr. Bush's eventual re-election. The longer he
stays in the race, they say, the more he distracts the President from the main
business at hand, fighting the Democrats.

But then Mr. Buchanan has been underestimated before, notably by the White House
political operatives. The candidate's sister, Angela, who heads his campaign,
says she is confident that $2 million can be raised in a matter of days to
finance the next phase of his effort.

Tonight, Mr. Buchanan appealed for tens of thousands of volunteers in Maryland,
Florida and South Carolina, indicating that he planned to run in the primaries
there next month as well as those in Georgia and Texas.

Mr. Bush's backers sought to dismiss the New Hampshire results as an aberration.
For example, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas, a conservative Republican, said, "The
President is going to win every primary, and his margin is going to get larger
as we go along." Mr. Buchanan, he asserted, would achieve nothing in Texas
because he lacked the time and the money to assemble a campaign there.

Not a 'Tidal Wave'

"What this was not is a tidal wave of support for Pat Buchanan as the next
President of the United States," said Mitchell E. Daniels Jr., who was a White
House political director during the Reagan Administration.

What it was was "a primal scream," said Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia,
a sometime ally of Mr. Buchanan who is backing the President this time. But the
breadth of support for Mr. Buchanan was remarkable, apparently coming close to
the 41.9 percent that Senator Eugene J. McCarthy polled against Lyndon B.
Johnson in 1968; it was that embarrassment that forced Mr. Johnson from the
race.

To be sure, the economic issue of 1992 is less corrosive than Vietnam was in
1968. But Kevin Phillips, a conservative analyst, described Mr. Buchanan's
challenge to Mr. Bush as the most serious to an elected Republican president
since 1912, when Theodore Roosevelt broke with the incumbent, William Howard
Taft, to challenge him under the Bull Moose party banner.

A fierce debate over tactics is likely before the Georgia primary, in which Mr.
Gingrich expects Mr. Buchanan to poll at least 30 percent of the total.
Speaking for many others, Mr. Rath argued, "You can't let Buchanan get away, as
he did here, without facing the scrutiny and criticism real candidates face."

Deciding what approach to take next will be a big test for Mr. Bush's campaign
organization, led by Robert M. Teeter and Richard N. Bond. Its performance here
looked like that of a team forced into a big game in the midst of spring
training -- reflexes slow, too many strikeouts in the clutch.  Their inept
performance is an embarrassment, but they still have plenty of time to recover
for the playoffs.

Almost universally, Republican leaders expect the White House to move rapidly
now to emphasize middle-class tax relief. Mr. Bush's ambiguous performance on
that issue gave Mr. Buchanan a huge opening here and put the President on the
defensive during his final campaign swing.

"The President has to get his message clear, and he has to get out and convince
people that he wants to be re- elected, not because of what he has done but what
he wants to do," said Edward Rollins, a prominent Republican strategist who also
served in the White House under President Reagan.

Mr. Bush's bloody nose may encourage new Democratic candidacies.  Even among
Republican voters here, only 48 percent approved of his performance as
President, with 49 percent disapproving. But the Democratic results, with Mr.
Tsongas winning and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas running a respectable second,
send no clear message.

While Mr. Clinton did less well than he had hoped before his campaign was
swamped for a time by accusations of marital infidelity and draft evasion, which
he denied, he did well enough to head toward the South, his natural base, with
his head high. He did equally well among men and women here, and only 5 percent
of the Democratic voters said that questions about Mr. Clinton's character
influenced the way they voted, according to the survey of voters.

The Arkansan now faces a stern test. He must demonstrate in the next month in
the culturally and politically conservative South that the accusations don't cut
there, either. If he can, restive national Democratic leaders, many of whom
continue to view Mr. Clinton as a damaged political property, may change their
minds.

Mr. Tsongas won about a third of the vote, according to the survey of voters. It
was a remarkable achievement for a man whose announcement of candidacy was
greeted with derision. But he comes from neighboring Massachusetts, so the
professionals discounted it, to some degree, as a regional phenomenon.

It will take a few weeks, probably until Maryland votes on March 3 and possibly
until Super Tuesday, March 10, when 11 states vote, to answer the question of
whether Mr. Tsongas's political magic can be exported.

During that time, in the primaries in South Dakota and elsewhere, the second
tier of Democratic candidates -- former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California,
who did much better than expected, and Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska -- will vie to see which of them survives.  Their blanket
finish here meant that New Hampshire's traditional winnowing function was
frustrated.

Senator Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri
or Senator Al Gore of Tennessee may decide in the next few days to make a late
entry. Frank Watkins, an aide to Jesse Jackson, the civil rights leader, called
reporters today to suggest that his man was "under pressure to run." It is even
possible that Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York might jump in, though the write-in
campaign in his behalf did not really catch fire.

With so many questions still open, however, a late entrant might well be seen as
a spoiler or worse, and it seems more likely that everyone will wait to see
whether any of the active contenders demonstrates staying power.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "The Primary Vote"

DEMOCRATS

Results at 1:50 A.M., with 99% of the vote counted:

Tsongas      54,933    35%
Clinton      40,873    26%
Kerrey       18,255    12%
Harkin       16,605    10%
Brown        13,524     9%
Cuomo*        5,458     3%
Nader*        2,558     2%
Others        6,004     4%


REPUBLICANS

Results at 1:50 A.M., with 99% of the vote counted:

Bush         91,012    58%
Buchanan     63,460    40%
Others        2,898     2%

 *Write-in candidates

TYPE: News Analysis; Statistics

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Wait For a Winner

BYLINE: By Bruce Babbitt;  Bruce Babbitt, Governor of Arizona from 1978 to 1987,
was a Democratic candidate for President in 1988.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX


Like the Oracle of Delphi, New Hampshire's voters have spoken to us in riddles.
President Bush has been savaged by a challenger who can't win. Paul Tsongas is a
winner with few places to go. Gov. Bill Clinton has bounced back because Senator
Bob Kerrey, an authentic war hero, can't seem to take advantage of the renewed
debate over Vietnam.

The conventional wisdom among Democratic leaders is that we should unite quickly
behind a nominee. The sages in Washington would like to scrub these hapless
newcomers and bring in a brand name like Gov. Mario Cuomo or Senator Lloyd
Bentsen. Unhappily for them, one of the few clear messages from New Hampshire,
in the form of a paltry 3 percent for the New York Governor, is that voters
aren't looking for candidates who sat on the sidelines when the President looked
invincible.

New Hampshire's voters, it seems, are telling us that this campaign hasn't gone
on long enough. We just don't know enough about candidates. With the exception
of Jerry Brown, who was Governor of California, they are all newcomers, mostly
from small states. And with the exception of Mr. Clinton, the news media haven't
really subjected them to the hazing that is part of a Presidential campaign.

If the 1988 campaign was a bit too long, this one has been way too short. It
started late because of Operation Desert Storm and the high approval ratings the
gulf war conferred on a weak incumbent. But that's no reason to rush to
judgment. This campaign should go clear to California, and even, to the
convention in New York in July.

Four year ago, we slogged through Iowa and New Hampshire for months, too often
sounding like Congressional candidates offering up seed catalogs full of new
Federal grants. This time the candidates have learned that the economy is the
issue in Presidential elections. They are finding that voters are eager for
truth-telling about the effort we must make to get this country back on track.

While none of the candidates has succeeded in putting the words to music, they
are shaking off the past and creating a new Democratic center that will be
competitive in Presidential politics. Why should we gamble on who has the
potential to put it together? They are still learning from each other.
Prolonging the process will eventually produce a better nominee.

Tradition dictates that candidates bow out gracefully once they lose several
primaries and the press puts them in the last paragraph of the story. It may be
that the next round of primaries in South Dakota and Colorado will eliminate
either Mr. Kerrey or Senator Tom Harkin. And if Mr. Clinton wins all over the
South, he will certainly be on the way to the nomination. Money becomes a
problem for second-tier candidates, but they don't charge to attend debates.
This time, however, they owe it to their party and their country to stay in.

Remember that in the 1988 convention we lowered the percentage threshold for
accruing delegates in state primaries. The rule was written for Jesse Jackson,
but now it should encourage all candidates to stay in and take delegates to the
convention.

This year there are more super delegates than ever. Governors, senators,
Congressmen and members of the Democratic National Committee can declare their
allegiance to a particular candidate at any time. It's a good concept, and they
ought to stay uncommitted, remaining available to steer the convention in a
different direction or to break a deadlock.

There is also another reason to keep all the Democrats in the race as long as
possible. Their presence will encourage Pat Buchanan in his effort to force the
President to come up with an economic plan. As long as the Democratic race
continues, Republicans will be more willing to fight among themselves instead of
closing ranks against an early Democratic nominee. That will be good for the
country. And for the Democrats as well.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
A Devalued Asset

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Being the Leader of the Free World is not worth what it used to be in American
politics. That was one stark message from the New Hampshire primary.

During the decades of the cold war -- and the primal American fear of Communism
-- an incumbent could expect to take at least one great asset into a campaign.
He was the protector of U.S. national security.

George Bush was the very model of the national security President. He had been
the Director of Central Intelligence. In the White House he dealt on intimate
terms with every important world figure. He won the Persian Gulf war.

But it availed him not in New Hampshire. Pat Buchanan, a commentator who had
never run for any political office, won 37 percent of the Republican primary
vote against Mr. Bush. The President's spin doctors hardly bothered to pretend
that the result was anything but a humiliation for him.

Incumbent Presidents have had their troubles in New Hampshire before. In 1968
Senator Eugene McCarthy won 41.9 percent against President Johnson, and L.B.J.
withdrew from the race. But Johnson had on his head a foreign-policy disaster:
Vietnam. Jimmy Carter bore the burden of the Iran hostage crisis when he beat
Edward Kennedy by only 47 to 37 percent in 1980. George Bush was coming off a
victorious and immensely popular war against Iraq.

The threat of war used to be a major political concern. CBS/New York Times
surveys over the years asked people to list "the most important problem facing
this country." In the mid-1980's, many listed "war, nuclear war" -- the figure
rising to 20 percent in 1985. Last month, 1 percent mentioned that as a concern.

Exit polls in New Hampshire showed a similar disregard for foreign-policy
issues. One done for the four television networks asked voters to pick from a
list of eight issues one or two that "mattered most in deciding how you voted."

Fewer than 10 percent of both Republicans and Democrats chose "foreign trade" or
"the Persian Gulf war." A listed problem that could be considered either
domestic or foreign, "U.S. ability to compete economically," was picked by 19
percent of Republican voters, 12 percent of Democrats.

Most important by far to voters in both parties was "the economy and jobs,"
which was picked by 48 percent of Republicans, 59 percent of Democrats. The only
other issue to be mentioned by more than 25 percent of either party was "health
care," checked by 36 percent of Democrats.

Those figures reinforce something we already knew. The end of the cold war has
coincided with another fundamental change: the rise of doubt among Americans
about their own society. It is not just personal distress about falling living
standards. It is fear about the state of the country's economic and social
institutions.

Pat Buchanan understood those feelings and campaigned extremely effectively on
them. He painted President Bush as someone who did not know or did not care
about economic pain. He even adjusted his anti-government rhetoric to come out
for increased government action on behalf, for example, of the unemployed.

There was no sign that New Hampshire Republicans who voted for Mr. Buchanan were
attracted by such of his extreme views as the suggestion that Jews were a major
factor in pushing for the Persian Gulf war. Neither that nor other statements
that have been called anti-Semitic became an issue in New Hampshire.

The larger question left by this New Hampshire primary is whether we are seeing
the beginning of an American retreat from the world: a retreat into
protectionism, for one thing. That possibility is a concern for our allies and
friends, well expressed recently by the British columnist Peter Jenkins in The
Independent.

"America is on the blink," he wrote. "It is seen this way by us because that is
how too many Americans see it. At the moment of victory in what was a historic
global contest, the stuffing has been knocked out of American self-confidence.
The national mood is recessional in a sense that transcends the pain of the
longest economic recession since the Great Depression."

The world still needs American leadership, Mr. Jenkins wrote. But before it can
be reasserted, America "first must change itself."

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1219 words


From the rave notices -- "visually arresting," "a triumph" and the like -- one
might think "L. B. J." was a major motion picture. In fact, PBS Home Video,
which will release the praised television documentary about Lyndon B. Johnson
next week, doesn't shy from trying to piggyback the program, which it calls a
"four-hour blockbuster," onto a current movie about a President who also goes by
a set of initials. "Now, for the first time on home video, the highly acclaimed
'L. B. J.' underscores the events of L. B. J.'s Presidency as closely as 'J. F.
K.' does the Kennedy years," reads the promotion.

In a slow time for feature films on tape, prominent television titles are
getting more play from distributors. For example, Time-Life Video and Television
of Alexandria, Va., which sells tapes by mail order, is having success with the
12-part "Trials of Life," a popular nature program produced by the BBC and the
Turner Broadcasting System and shown last year on TNT. (The series is not yet
available in video stores.)

Recently, Time-Life announced two other series: a year-by-year compilation
(1975-79) of highlights from "Saturday Night Live" and a collection of "Sesame
Street" videos that organizes the material into categories like "Learning About
Numbers" and "Getting Ready to Read."

Even the movie studios are paying closer attention to classic television. In a
recent deal with Jim Henson Productions, Disney gained distribution rights for
Henson library programs featuring, among others, Kermit, Miss Piggy and other
Muppets. Disney plans to begin issuing the Henson titles later this year.

In April, Disney's Buena Vista video division will release "The Very Best of the
Ed Sullivan Show, Volumes I and II," the first two installments of a new
collection drawn from the classic variety show that went off the air in 1971.
Performance clips -- notably by Elvis Presley and the Beatles -- have been used
in other videos, but the new Disney series is the first release of the Sullivan
show itself.

As with other old television shows, the Sullivan titles, which are priced at
$19.99 each, give Disney another product to sell. "The public's appetite to own
videos has expanded," said Tania Steele of Disney. "We want to feed that."

Often, though, old television isn't lying around ripe for the packaging.
Disney's Sullivan series comes from a library put together by Andrew Solt of
SOFA Entertainment in Los Angeles.

"It's a very complicated legal situation," Mr. Solt said. Rights to the show
were held by the Sullivan family, but permission is also needed from every
performer and various others. Mr. Solt estimates the number of such individuals
at 10,000 over the 1,000 hours of programming. "We have 10 people clearing
artists, directors, musicians, music publishers," he said. "Everybody gets paid
again."

NEW VIDEO RELEASES



The Pope Must Diet
1991. Media. $92.98. 1 hour, 30 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

Protesting when all genuflect before him, a chubby country priest (Robbie
Coltrane) is told, "Shut up, Albinizi, you've just been made Pope." Peter
Richardson's film twits papal conventions and Vatican financial adventures of
the kind managed by shadowy figures in grainy newspaper photographs. Originally,
the "Diet" in the title was "Die," but after protests, attention was redirected
to the pontiff's waistline. The focus, however, remains on fiscal chicanery
engineered by a wheeling-dealing Cardinal (Alex Rocco) and spiced by a Mafia
kingpin (Herbert Lom), who wouldn't mind being Pope himself. "Francis Ford
Coppola's 'Godfather Part III' recycled the same material for heavy melodrama.
Mr. Richardson and his associates merely send up everyone in a balloon filled
with the helium of laughter" (Vincent Canby).

An Angel at My Table
1991. New Line $89.95. 2:37. R.

Jane Campion's rigorous film draws from three autobiographical novels by the New
Zealand writer Janet Frame to explore the roots and evolution of literary
imagination. As it proceeds from Miss Frame's austere childhood through her
years in a mental hospital and eventual recognition as a writer, the story tries
to reach beyond worldly events to tap the writer's hidden instincts and
thoughts. But while the narrative objectively records Janet's world, the film
seems a "little puzzled, as if recognizing the impossibility of ever knowing the
mind itself, except through books" (Canby).

Body Parts
1991. Paramount. $91.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:30. CC. R.

It's about that arm. When the handsome criminal psychologist Bill Crushank (Jeff
Fahey) loses one of his in a car crash, a replacement is stitched on by the
beautiful and quite mad Dr. Alice Webb (Lindsay Duncan). But this arm belonged
to a deranged killer and comes with a will of its own. Soon the recipient is
having the most awful urges (Bill's cute suburban family take note). While it
has an eerie mood, Eric Red's film too often "makes the mistake of opting for
grisly horror effects when a less literal-minded approach would be more
compelling" (Janet Maslin).

A. Einstein: How I See the World
1991. PBS Home Video. $19.95. 60 minutes. No rating.

William Hurt narrates (with some unnecessary affectation) a documentary about
the physicist's life that concentrates on his decades in America and sensibly
stays away from the "simple and beautiful" hypotheses of time and space that
changed the course of science. What comes through is the sweetness of the man,
as well as the pacifistic convictions so antithetical to the "father of the
bomb," giving the "impression that Einstein's political views were as intuitive
as his scientific theories" (Walter Goodman).

THE OTHER DISNEY

Disney is so strongly associated with animated films ("101 Dalmations" will be
released in April) that its involvement with many other movies is sometimes
forgotten. Here are a few on tape, all from Disney's Touchstone division.

COUNTRY. When an Iowa farm couple faces foreclosure on their property, one (Sam
Shepard) turns to drink and the other (Jessica Lange) decides to fight. 1984.
$79.95. LD, $36.99. 1:48. PG.

TOUGH GUYS. Burt Lancaster and Kirk Douglas are a couple of old thieves geared
up for the last heist. 1986. $19.99. LD, $36.99. 1:42 PG.

GOOD MORNING, VIETNAM. The role of Adrian Cronauer, the irrepressible disk
jockey, is generally thought to have launched Robin Williams's film career.
1987. $19.99. LD, $39.99. 2:00. CC. R.

OUTRAGEOUS FORTUNE. After discovering they've been sharing the same missing
boyfriend, two aspiring actresses -- one prim (Shelley Long) and the other
raucous (Bette Midler) -- traipse after him from New York to New Mexico. 1987.
$19.99. LD, $36.99. 1:32. R.

THE COLOR OF MONEY. Paul Newman and Tom Cruise run the table as a couple of pool
hustlers of the old school and new wave, respectively, in Martin Scorsese's
film. 1987. $19.99. LD, $44.99. 1:57. R.

TIN MEN. Richard Dreyfuss and Danny DeVito are a scam a minute in Barry
Levinson's film about a pair of Baltimore aluminum-siding salesmen. 1987.
$19.99. LD, $36.99. 1:52. R.

SHOOT TO KILL. Roger Spottiswoode's film stars Sidney Poitier as an F.B.I. agent
tracing a killer who has made off with a camping party in the Pacific Northwest.
1988. $19.99. LD, $36.99. 1:46. R.

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ed Sullivan with the Beatles, from "The Very Best of the Ed
Sullivan Show, Volumes I and II," to be released in April by Disney. (CBS); Alex
Rocco in a scene from "The Pope Must Diet." (Miramax)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words



'Jelly's Last Jam' at Home

The future has certainly been knocking at Broadway's door recently, with
flexible ticket discounts making their debut at Bloomingdale's Ticketmaster and
the Theater Development Fund's TKTS booths grudgingly following suit. Now come
music videos and the dreaded pay-per-view performance, which Broadway sages say
will ruin the theater by "cannibalizing" its audience. The fear is that if
people see the show on television, they won't go to see it live. Producers still
remember how Joseph Papp's production of "Much Ado About Nothing" in the early
1970's died at the box office after being televised. But times do change.

The show in question now is "Jelly's Last Jam," the musical based on the life of
the legendary jazz pianist and composer Jelly Roll Morton, starring Gregory
Hines, with libretto and direction by George C. Wolfe. Scheduled to open at the
Virginia Theater on April 26, at a cost of $5 million, it is being produced by
Margo Lion and Pamela Koslow-Hines. Jujamcyn Theaters, which owns the Virginia,
is a co-producer and a major investor in the show, as is Polygram Diversified
Entertainment. Because a successful album is practically guaranteed, and because
the music is a natural for a video on VH-1 and Black Entertainment Television,
Polygram considers the show a good bet. And a pay-per-view performance could
provide a fast way to recoup an investment.

John Scher, the president of Polygram Diversified Entertainment, says he will
soon begin negotiating with the traditionally conservative Broadway unions. He
says the pay-per-view performance will not be geographically limited, and he
allows that half the transmissions will not be scrambled, permitting the show to
be taped. "We think the pay-per-view can be the biggest, longest commercial for
the play possible," Mr. Scher says. "If you enjoy it on TV, it only whets your
appetite to see it live."

"Jelly's Last Jam" would cost $24.95 a viewing on television, Mr. Scher says,
rather than the $60 a seat it would be on Broadway. He estimates the number of
potential participating households could reach 90,000. That would mean a gross
of $4,491,000, of which roughly $2 million would be profit.

Many Broadway producers and union officials refused to be quoted about
pay-per-view. But Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn Theaters, says that
although the cannibalizing theory may be right, "I want to find out." He adds:
"I have to hope that the unions will realize this is a way to preserve live
theater. If they don't play ball, there won't be a pay-per-view performance,
Polygram won't do the next show and we'll lose an important new player in the
theater. We either start cultivating new sources of investment capital, or we
won't be able to produce musicals anymore."

'Redwood Curtain' Postponed

In what may be one of the smartest marketing decisions of this crowded Broadway
season, the producers of "Redwood Curtain," the new play by the Pulitzer Prize
winner Lanford Wilson, have decided to postpone the opening from April 9 until
the fall.

The three-character drama, directed by Marshall Mason, about an Amerasian girl
whose search for her lost father takes her to the redwood forest in California
and a disturbing encounter with a mysterious Vietnam veteran, features David
Morse (best known for the television series "St. Elsewhere"), Debra Monk and
Kamiko Cazanov. About the same time "Redwood Curtain" was scheduled, plays will
be opening on Broadway that star, among others, Glenn Close, Richard Dreyfuss
and Gene Hackman ("Death and the Maiden"), Alec Baldwin and Jessica Lange ("A
Streetcar Named Desire"), Gregory Hines ("Jelly's Last Jam"), Judd Hirsch
("Conversations With My Father") and Alan Alda ("Jake's Women"). Even if
"Redwood Curtain" received rave reviews, it would be a terribly hard sell.

"Redwood Curtain" is now playing its world premiere engagement at the Seattle
Repertory Theater and has a run scheduled in Philadelphia. The Broadway
production is budgeted at $800,000, and the producers say they are still at
least $100,000 short. And because the play's biggest investor is the Nederlander
Organization, the play is obliged to go to a Nederlander-owned theater. The only
one available now is the Nederlander Theater on 41st Street, which is held in
low regard, being south of 42d Street and on a rundown block.

Ben Mordecai, the play's executive producer, says, "Lanford and Marshall deserve
to have everything in their court when they open." Tanya Berezin, the artistic
director of the Circle Repertory Company, which is producing the play, says an
interim production is being discussed.

Benefits to Fight AIDS

Want to see Carol Channing close up and personal, singing "Diamonds Are a Girl's
Best Friend"? Go to Steve McGraw's on March 8, when she will appear in
"Forbidden Broadway's 10th-Anniversary Gala Benefit for Equity Fights AIDS,"
which will also kick off the show's 10th-anniversary "Best of" edition,
beginning performances at Theater East on March 26. Andrea McArdle will perform
the show's spoof on "Annie," with the lyrics "I'm 30 years old tomorrow/And I
haven't worked since I played Annie/When I was 10."

Another benefit at Steve McGraw's for Equity Fights AIDS on March 5 will feature
Marni Nixon, perhaps best known for singing Eliza Doolittle's songs for Audrey
Hepburn in the film "My Fair Lady." She will perform "Dub Me," to the tune of
"Show Me." Gerard Alessandrini, the creator of "Forbidden Broadway," will also
try out two spoofs for the new edition, of Raul Julia in "Man of La Mancha" and
Cyd Charisse in "Grand Hotel."

Tickets are $25 and reservations are required. Information: (212) 595-7400.

Bunraku Is Back

For the first time in 20 years, Bunraku, the National Puppet Theater of Japan,
will appear in New York, at City Center from March 10 through March 14. The
company will present "The Love Suicides at Sonezaki," a play that has been
called a Japanese "Romeo and Juliet." Based on an actual incident of tragic love
in Osaka in 1703, the piece had its premiere within two months of the events
that inspired it and has remained a classic. The hand-sculptured Bunraku puppets
are one-half to two-thirds life size, and each requires three puppeteers to
handle it. The production will be performed in Japanese, although a full
libretto and a detailed synopsis of the play wil be available.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: On her hiatus from the TV series "L.A. Law," Cecil Hoffmann, who plays
Zoey Clemmons, will take on Lady Macbeth for the Willow Cabin Theater Company,
founded in 1987 by graduates of the Circle in the Square acting program, of
which she is one. Performances begin at the One Dream Theater in TriBeCa on May
15 and continue through June 7. Information: (212) 886-1889. ("L.A. Law")
Photo: "The Other Side of the Law"

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Australia's Angst On U.S. Behavior

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


AUSTRALIANS consider themselves among the staunchest friends and allies of the
United States, having fought beside Americans in World War I, World War II,
Korea, Vietnam and the Persian Gulf. But during a swing from Melbourne to Sydney
to Brisbane and Cairns, this reporter found Australians giving vent to their
worries and frustrations about America's political and economic behavior.

Australians' anxieties about the United States are intensified by Australia's
own recession -- the deepest in 60 years. Unemployment rose to a postwar rate of
more than 10 percent in recent months. Business investment has fallen sharply,
as the roaring boom of the 80's went bust.

And the farm sector has been battered by falling wool prices, a severe drought
and continuing woes over low wheat prices and a loss of foreign markets for
wheat, which the Australians attribute to the high export subsidies of Europe
and the United States.

During President Bush's recent visit to Australia, where he was expecting a warm
welcome before the tough bargaining in Japan, he was met by demonstrations of
farmers protesting America's Export Enhancement Program. Mr. Bush, meeting with
a delegation of farmers, sought to convince them that the United States was
fighting on their side to eliminate all export subsidies in the Uruguay Round of
trade negotiations but had to keep its own subsidies until the Europeans dropped
theirs. The Australians said they would be just as dead if they were hit by
"friendly fire" from the Americans.

Mr. Bush promised he would order his aides to study carefully this country's
export subsidies and consult with the Australians to forestall any actions that
might damage their interests. The Australians don't feel that the United States
is keeping that commitment.

They point, in particular, to an American offer in late January, after the
President's visit, of 200,000 tons of wheat to Yemen, on which they say they
were not informed or consulted. John Robson, Deputy Secretary of the United
States Treasury, said in an interview that there were "alleged" problems with
the Australians over the Export Enhancement Program.

But Australians' concerns go far beyond the specific issue of wheat subsidies.
They fear that the United States is moving away from trade liberalization toward
restrictions to protect specific industries.

"Is there a retreat from globalism, and where will the Presidential campaigns
fit into this?" asked Jim Gale, an economic consultant in Sydney.  The New
Hampshire campaign deepened anxieties on that score, not only because Patrick
Buchanan ran on the slogan "America First" but because President Bush and the
five Democratic candidates shied away from all foreign policy issues.

The Australians see a danger that the world is splitting into three major trade
blocs, in Europe, the Americas and Asia. The Australians fear that too much of
the relationship between the United States and Japan, on one side, and between
the United States and Western Europe, on the other, was built on Soviet
containment for it to survive the end of the cold war. They want to know what
effect a fracturing of the Japan-United States links would have on the
Asia-Pacific region, and they are made nervous by the American agreement to give
up its bases in the Philippines.

"What role does America see for itself in the Asia Pacific basin as a whole?"
asked one business executive.

To safeguard their own interests, the Australians are increasingly seeking to
orient their economy toward the Asian region. "We are Europeans in an Asian
setting," said one Australian diplomat, "and we must adapt our way of thinking."
In the Asian configuration, Australia has been called the odd man out, but
Foreign Minister Gareth Evans said, "We are odd man in."

Yet Australia does not want to give up its ties with the United States or
Europe. Just from the standpoint of its bargaining position and economic
interests, it would prefer to pursue a global strategy, with access to all
markets, rather than being locked up in a single region.

Australians see the preservation and growth of an open world economy as
basically dependent on the ability of the United States to strengthen its own
economy and provide a base for its global leadership. But the pressures of the
election campaign on the candidates could worsen American economic imbalances.

If global economic stability and security are still predicated to some extent on
American leadership and military power, Australians are asking, what effect will
a decline in United States domestic confidence have on the expression of that
leadership?

It is up to the Presidential candidates -- and the American voters -- to provide
the answer.


LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll;
Tsongas Gains Substantially, Pulling Near Clinton in Poll

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words


Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts made a substantial gain in
national recognition as a result of his victory in the New Hampshire primary and
has drawn close to Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas among Democrats who have chosen
a favorite for their party's nomination, according to the latest New York
Times/CBS News poll.

But all five main Democratic candidates remain virtually unknown to half or more
of the likely primary voters in their own party, the poll found.

Mr. Clinton has the support of 29 percent of his party's likely voters, despite
increased negative views about him that were detected in the poll, which was
conducted Wednesday and Thursday. Mr. Tsongas is second with 24 percent and has
made the greater gain of the two since the last Times/ CBS News poll, in
January. He moved up 14 percentage points while Mr. Clinton advanced by 7
points. Because of the new poll's margin of sampling error, Mr. Tsongas and Mr.
Clinton could now be in a virtual tie.

Bush Leads His Challenger

Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California was backed by 10 percent in the
new poll, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska by 4 percent and Senator Tom Harkin of
Iowa by 3 percent.

Among Republican primary voters nationally, President Bush leads his
conservative challenger, Patrick J. Buchanan, by a 4-to-1 ratio, the survey
showed. And while 80 percent of Republican primary voters agree that Mr.
Buchanan is "saying some things George Bush needs to hear," 73 percent of those
same voters say they want Mr. Bush to win his party's nomination.

But among all registered voters in the nation, regardless of party, 53 percent
say they lack any clear idea of what Mr. Bush "wants to accomplish in a second
term as President," even though he has been campaigning for re-election for at
least six weeks.

This finding coincides with the judgment of Republican strategists who have
criticized the President's "I care" message in the New Hampshire primary
campaign. With 13 primaries scheduled for the next three weeks and Mr. Buchanan
pressing his campaign, it also suggests that the White House needs to retool its
strategy quickly.

It had been theorized by many politicians that neither of the top finishers in
the Democratic voting in New Hampshire, Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton, would get
much benefit nationally from their accomplishment because so much attention was
focused on Mr. Buchanan's strong showing against the President. But the
Times/CBS News poll showed they have become much the best-known of active
Democratic candidates.

The current survey, which has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three
percentage points, suggests that the President retains ample room to change
voters' minds and retake the initiative, and, like all incumbents, he has many
tools with which to do so.

Trouble on Economic Front

Still, the poll indicates that Mr. Bush has national difficulties, not just a
local problem brought on by New Hampshire's severe recession. His approval
rating is hovering at 42 percent, about the same as it was just before the State
of the Union Message on Jan. 28, which had been widely heralded as the key to
turning around the economy and halting the President's slide.

Clearly, the speech did not accomplish its political purpose, and polls indicate
there was not even a brief lift for Mr. Bush.

The Times/CBS News poll showed only 18 percent approval of Mr. Bush's handling
of the economy, the worst level for a President since Jimmy Carter, who was at
15 percent in July 1979. In the current survey of 1,044 adults, 75 percent said
they disapproved of Mr. Bush's economic stewardship.

Hard economic times and a belief that the Bush Administration is responsible for
them are evidently hurting the President, despite his effort in his speeches and
his primary-state advertising to lay much of the blame on the
Democratic-controlled Congress.

Asked whether Mr. Bush "cares about the needs and problems" of people like
themselves, only 49 percent of registered voters said yes, a dangerous level for
an incumbent who has had three years to connect with the electorate and
especially dangerous for one who has been saying "I care" again and again. More
directly, 46 percent said they placed "a lot of the blame" for the recession on
the White House.

On another question in the same area, 52 percent of all those interviewed and 37
percent of Republicans, a significant minority, said Mr. Bush could have avoided
raising taxes in 1990. It was the President's violation of his "no new taxes"
pledge that Mr. Buchanan hammered home in New Hampshire television commercials.

Not suprisingly, given his blunt style of speaking and writing, Mr. Buchanan
evokes contrasting reactions among Republicans. Of primary voters, 24 percent
hold a favorable view and 26 percent an unfavorable view of the television
commentator, columnist and former White House speech writer.

Nevertheless, 44 percent said Mr. Buchanan, who has never held elective office,
"has the ability to be an effective President," while 34 percent disagreed with
that.

Republican primary voters preferred Mr. Bush as the party's nominee, with 73
percent backing him, 17 percent supporting Mr. Buchanan, and 2 percent choosing
David Duke of Louisiana, a former Ku Klux Klan leader.

Bush Leads Democratic Rivals

The Democratic electorate has reached no consensus about a preferred challenger
to Mr. Bush, at least partly because the party's candidates remain poorly
defined in the public mind. Exactly half the Democratic primary voters
questioned in the survey expressed no opinion about Mr. Clinton, despite
torrents of publicity about accusations of marital infidelity and of efforts of
avoid the draft during the Vietnam War. Even fewer had an opinion about the
other candidates.

As a result, perhaps, Mr. Bush lost a trial heat against an unnamed and possibly
idealized Democratic nominee, 40 percent to 45 percent, but he won theoretical
races among registered voters: against Mr. Clinton by 51 to 40, against Mr.
Tsongas by 47 to 40 and against Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri,
often mentioned as a possible late starter in the race, by 52 to 33.

Both Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton are rated favorably by 33 percent of Democratic
primary voters nationally, but Mr. Tsongas is rated unfavorably by only 9
percent, while Mr. Clinton is so characterized by 16 percent. That could be the
result of the accusations against Mr. Clinton this month.

Though relatively unknown, the Democratic hopefuls are apparently gradually
persuading voters that they constitute a reasonable pool of talent. Last
October, 64 percent of Democratic voters said they wished there were more
choices, but this week only 45 percent said additional candidates were needed,
while another 45 percent said they were satisfied with the field.

Among three potential late starters whose support was explicitly gauged in the
poll, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York, on whose behalf a write-in campaign was
waged in New Hampshire, is the most popular. He is followed by Senator Lloyd
Bentsen of Texas, the 1988 Vice Presidential nominee, and Mr. Gephardt.

Voters in New Hampshire repeatedly emphasized to reporters this year that "the
issues" were what mattered most to them, and the 820 registered voters among
those interviewed in the Times/CBS News poll said the same thing. Seventy-two
percent said issues would play the largest role in their decision on how to
vote; the next most frequently mentioned criterion, a candidate's moral
character, was ranked first by only 5 percent.

But other answers suggested deeper currents. Asked whether the accusation about
Mr. Clinton's marital life would affect their votes, 61 percent said no. But
when asked whether the accusation would affect how other voters would react,
only 28 percent said they thought the accusation would be seen as immaterial.



HOW THE POLL WAS CONDUCTED

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted on Wednesday and Thursday with 1,044 adults, including 820 registered
voters, around the United States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the continental United States. The exchanges were
chosen to insure that each region of the country was represented in proportion
to its population.  For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by
random digits, thus permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The
numbers were then screened so that calls would be placed to residences only.
Within each household one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the
respondent to the poll.

The results have been weighted to take account of a household's size and the
number of telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variations in the
sample relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
those who say they vote in Democratic primaries or caucuses, it is plus or minus
five percentage points. For Republican primary and caucus voters, it is six
percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Voters Assess Their Choices" shows results of Republican and
Democratic candidate polling. (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: South Dakota;
Rival Senators Face Showdown In the Heartland

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: SIOUX FALLS, S.D., Feb. 22


This is the state that rewards political victors by carving their faces in a
mountainside. But if you lose here, it could be your last stand.

No one knows that better than two Senators from neighboring states: Bob Kerrey
of Nebraska and Tom Harkin of Iowa. A loss in the Democratic primary on Tuesday
by either man could spell the end of his quest for the Presidency.

But "the battle for the heartland," as the South Dakota Democratic Party is
billing the primary, has escalated into more than a do-or-die showdown between
those two candidates from the Farm Belt.

Seeking to capitalize on his victory in the New Hampshire primary, former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts rushed here from New England to pose
with livestock. Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the New Hampshire runner-up, has
been flooding the state with television commercials. And all five major
candidates will take part in a nationally televised 90-minute debate here Sunday
evening.

First Test in Midwest

This sparsely populated state is taking on particular importance this year
because its primary closely followsNew Hampshire's and, in contrast to the 1988
primary, will take place on a day when there are no other Presidential contests
to overshadow it. It is also the first true test of the candidates' strength in
the Midwest because the other candidates conceded Iowa's caucuses to that
state's favorite son, Mr. Harkin. Fifteen delegates to the Democratic National
Convention are at stake.

President Bush has no challenger in the Republican primary here; Patrick J.
Buchanan lost a court fight to have his name added to the ballot.

Appealing to South Dakotans' farm-bred values and their distrust of big-city
politicians, and enticed by one of the cheapest media markets in the country,
all the major candidates except former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
are inundating the state with commercials. And the advertisements, with their
scenes of wheat fields and farm animals, are distinctly different from those
that the candidates broadcast in New Hampshire.

"If they ran ads on unemployment, they'd be wasting their time in our state,"
where the unemployment rate has hovered around 3 percent, said Senator Tom
Daschle, a Democrat. "Our concern is not the availability of jobs, but what jobs
pay. We have the lowest wage rate in the country."

Senators Kerrey and Harkin are trying to outdo each other in putting forth their
farm credentials. Mr. Harkin's campaign is running an advertisement that credits
him with "battling to save America's family farms." Mr. Kerrey's commercial
offers an almost identical message, that he is "fighting to save the family
farm." But the advertisement jabs his rival from Iowa by noting that Mr. Kerrey
is "one of us -- from the Great Plains."

The Kerrey commercial also directly attacks Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton as being
anti-farmer.

By his own admission, Mr. Tsongas knows little about agriculture. But his
campaign has been running a testimonial from his father-in-law, Russ Sauvage, a
local hero who was captain of the University of South Dakota's football team. In
those ads, Mr. Sauvage appeals to the no-nonsense sensibilities of residents
here by calling Mr. Tsongas "a straight shooter -- tells it like it is."

Though the race here has attracted all the candidates, the Harkin and Kerrey
camps have portrayed the primary as a battle between the two Senators. "It's
like the Hatfields and McCoys," said Lorraine Voles, press secretary for Mr.
Harkin. "This date is critical to us."

But a poll published today by The Argus Leader, the newspaper here, suggested
that the race was not so close. The telephone poll, of 288 Democrats who said
they were likely to vote on Tuesday, found that Mr. Kerrey was the choice of 26
percent, with three other candidates bunched far behind: Mr. Clinton, 16
percent; Mr. Harkin, 15 percent, and Mr. Tsongas, 12 percent. Mr. Brown got 3
percent. But 28 percent said they were undecided, so the outcome appeared hardly
certain.

The poll, conducted right after the New Hampshire primary, had a margin of
sampling error of plus or minus six percentage points.

Campaigning today at the Sioux Falls Fire Station, Mr. Kerrey, who many
Democrats in the state say has the best organization here, said he was "pleased
to be way ahead in South Dakota." The Senator insisted that he was the candidate
who best understood the state. "I don't think South Dakota will ever have a
better President than Bob Kerrey," he said.

Mr. Harkin also campaigned today across this state of frozen plains and
mountains, insisting that even if he does not finish first in South Dakota he
will press on at least through the following week for the Colorado and Maryland
primaries and Minnesota caucuses.

Senator Daschle said Mr. Kerrey's emphasis on national health care and his
service in vietnam have an appeal in a state with high concentrations of elderly
people and veterans.

But he also said he expected Mr. Harkin's populist themes and attacks on
President Bush to go over well among some Democrats in this state where
registered Democrats are barely outnumbered by Republicans. "South Dakotans are
extraordinarily independent," Mr. Daschle said. "They like to see little guys
take on big guys and win."

Yet winning here guarantees little more than a temporary lift. In 1988,
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri easily beat Michael S. Dukakis on
the Democratic side, while among Republicans, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas
defeated Mr. Bush. Neither winner won his party's nomination.

Chart: "South Dakota Profile"

Democratic primary: Feb. 25
Delegates at stake: 15

Figures are for 1990, except unemployment, which is for the end of 1991. South
Dakota's population in 1990 was696,004, or 0.3 percent of the U.S. total. It
ranks 45th among the states in population.

Growth since 1980
S.D.: 1.3%
U.S.: 10.2$

Median age
S.D.: 32.5
U.S.: 32.8

Married couple households
S.D.: 58.9%
U.S.: 59.7%

Per capita income
S.D.: $15,872
U.S.: $18,685

Unemployment rate
S.D.: 3.1%
U.S.: 7.1%

Race

White
S.D.: 91.6%
U.S.: 80.3%

Black
S.D.: 0.5
U.S.: 12.1

American Indian
S.D.: 7.3
U.S.: 0.8

Asian
S.D.: 0.4
U.S.: 2.9

Other
S.D.: 0.2
U.S.: 3.9

Hispanic
S.D.: 0.8
U.S.: 9.0

People of Hispanic origin can be of any race.

(Sources: Census Bureau; The Almanac of American Politics, 1992; The World of
American Politics, 1992; The World Almanac and Book of Facts, 1992)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Martyring A Shiite May Haunt Israelis

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 678 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


ISRAEL'S raids in southern Lebanon last week, while intended to punish and
restrain the armed militias and terrorist cells known as the Party of God, may
instead give the organization a new lease on life among its Arab and Iranian
backers, Arab analysts are saying.

Israel's attack came at a time when much of the Arab world had come to shun the
pro-Iranian group, which in Arabic is known as Hezbollah, and as many Arab
governments were nudging Syria, the arbiter of power in Lebanon, to contain and
eliminate it. The group's fame derived from its terrorism in the 1980's,
including the bombing of a United States Marine barracks in Beirut and the
holding of scores of hostages. But now Iran and Syria, the movement's mentors,
appear to be seeking improved relations with the West, and at least until last
week they seemed to be clipping the Party of God's wings.

Over the last year, for reasons of their own, the two countries had put clear
limits on the group's sphere of action, forcing it to give up most of its
Western hostages and telling it to restrict its combat against Israel to the
stretch of Lebanese border territories where many Shiites live and work under
the military control of Israel and an Israeli-sponsored Lebanese militia. Now
the assassination near that zone of one of the movement's leaders, Sheik Abbas
Musawi, by Israel's army, followed by an armored thrust that destroyed two
Shiite villages that are strongholds of the Party of God, has arrested any
progress toward containing Hezbollah, analysts of Lebanese affairs are saying.

Some Israeli and Arab decision-makers maintain that neither Syria nor Iran were
sincere in neutralizing the Party of God. Indeed, many assert that most Arab
governments would like to be rid of this group, whose actions were cruel and
violent, and which was closely tied to Iran.

The common wisdom, though, is that a complete defanging of the Party of God can
only be accomplished through an elaborate political accord under which Israel
would give up control of its buffer zone in Lebanon in return for a commitment
by Syria to disband and disarm Hezbollah's militias. Whether such an accord is
likely is another question; some Israelis say Sheik Musawi was killed now
precisely because they felt cheated and humiliated in the last round of dealings
involving the Party of God -- which had freed Western hostages but produced no
word on whether an Israeli captive is still alive.

Some Lebanese experts say Israel's army sweeps against the Lebanese Shiite
villages where the Party of God operates resemble the United States' tragic
effort to root out Vietcong fighters in Indochina in the 1960's. Furthermore,
attacking Hezbollah inside Lebanon casts the movement as a martyr -- an
especially potent image in Shiite Islam. This makes it harder for the Lebanese
and other Arabs to deny the movement their support, and for pro-Western
countries like Egypt and Saudi Arabia to keep pressure on Syria to disengage
from it.

Until just two weeks ago, it appeared that the Party of God was drifting toward
an eclipse.  Sheik Musawi was widely believed to be associated with Iran's
President, Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, whose hallmark was to try to tone down
militant clerics bent on exporting Iran's revolution. And while Syria saw some
benefits in keeping the Party of God active against Israel in southern Lebanon,
it had pretty much frozen its ability to operate elsewhere.

The initial Syrian, Lebanese and Palestinian reaction to the killing of Sheik
Musawi appeared mild, and even on Friday some Shiite figures in Beirut were
calling for restraint. But the longer-term trend toward reining in the Party of
God had clearly come under new pressure. On Friday an influential Iranian
ayatollah, Mohammed Emami Kashani, appealed for increased financial support for
the group. And a Lebanese businessman echoed an advisory from the United States
State Department when he said: "I would strongly advise any foreigner against
traveling anywhere near Lebanon. The hostage-taking may be on again."

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Party of God fighters near Siddikin, Lebanon, take up position
during heavy clashes with Israeli troops in southern Lebanon last week. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Los Angeles Leaders Rebuke the Doomsayers

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 583 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 25


In the last year, this sunny land of movies and aerospace giants has had an
unwelcome visit from the prophets of doom and gloom. A deep, prolonged and
painful recession, compounded by drastic cutbacks in military spending brought
about by the end of the cold war, has badly shaken the optimism and sense of
unlimited opportunity that has long been the mark of Southern California.

On Monday, nearly 100 local leaders gathered in a hotel ballroom on the glittery
Sunset Strip of West Hollywood to try to shake the jitters, peer through the
clouds of pessimism and find a "new vision" for Los Angeles.

It was an extraordinary gathering, most notably because there was no one from
the Los Angeles Area Chamber of Commerce, the major unions or other traditional
bastions of economic leadership. Participants included people like Frank Cruz,
chairman of Gulf Atlantic Life Insurance Company, which has prospered on the
region's large Hispanic population; Mike Medavoy, chairman of Tri-Star Pictures,
and Jose Lozano, publisher of La Opinion, the largest Spanish-language newspaper
in the United States. A third were Hispanic or non-white.

The conference, titled "The Next L.A. Economy," was sponsored by the New Vision
for Southern California Council, a loose coalition of business groups and other
organizations that sees itself as the center of a new economic base less
dependent on large Pentagon-related industries like Hughes Aircraft and the
Lockheed Corporation.

It was the brainchild of Joel Kotkin, co-author of "The Third Century --
America's Resurgence in the Asian Era" (Crown Publishers, 1988). A former New
Yorker, Mr. Kotkin has been a leading booster of California as the center of a
bright future in a world dominated by the Pacific economy.

"This is the beginning of the end of the thinking that this city is going down,"
Mr. Kotkin said during a break. "There are a lot of problems in Southern
California. But if you look at it from a distance, there are enormous
strengths." The region should take advantage, he said, of its proximity to
Pacific and Latin American countries, its reservoir of small entrepreneurial
companies and a vast pool of immigrant labor.

Looking Abroad

Other speakers agreed. "The future does not lie with giant firms like Lockheed
and General Motors, but smaller networks of specialized producers," said David
B. Friedman, director of the Center for U.S.-Japan Relations at the Rand
Corporation in Santa Monica. Such networks, he said, exist in Japan and prevent
an industrial policy dominated by larger companies that are "relics of the
past."

Stephen Levy, an economist with the Center for the Continuing Study of the
California Economy in Palo Alto, took issue with many other economists and
pronounced the future bright.

"We've been here before," said Mr. Levy, referring to the slump that followed
the Vietnam War, after which California boomed. While recovery will be more
difficult in the 90's, he said, Southern California is well equipped to base a
new economy on foreign trade and investment, on the application of new
technology to goods and services, and on tourism and entertainment.

Kathleen Brown, the state treasurer who was the keynote speaker, said, "The
sights and sounds of crisis should be viewed as opportunity." Ms. Brown, whose
father, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown, presided over heavy public investment a
generation ago, added, "When everything is fine, it's the worst time to get
people to embrace change."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Recycling the 1980's For Ecological Scorn

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 2; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1009 words



Strong Motion
By Jonathan Franzen
508 pages. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.95.

Boston hovers in the background of Jonathan Franzen's second novel, "Strong
Motion," just as St. Louis served as the scene of "The Twenty-Seventh City," his
acclaimed first novel. Mr. Franzen's new novel -- there's so much packed into
its 500-plus pages that it's really three interlocking stories in one --
confirms his literary abilities and expands his political horizons. Writing this
time from the cynical perspective of the 1990's, Mr. Franzen, who is in his
early 30's, exposes the unethical practices of a recognizable group of
entrepreneurs in the United States.

There's something as American as today's business pages about the catalyst
behind "Strong Motion": how a large company pollutes the earth, endangers
people's lives, suppresses whistle blowers and covers up its activities to keep
its greedy executives in corporate clover. Muckraking American authors exposed
such wealthy malefactors early in this century; Henrik Ibsen, George Bernard
Shaw and Arthur Miller created similar enemies of the people for the stage.

Apart from references to the Red Sox as hopeful winners and perennial losers,
Mr. Franzen's picture of Boston and its environs bears little resemblance to the
city that many of its inhabitants consider intellectually superior to the rest
of the country. But in the boondocks beyond Cambridge, the author introduces the
reader to intolerant anti-abortion demonstrators who condemn women's rights
under the banner of religion, and gullible men and women victimized by an
itinerant Southern radio evangelist with a soothing line, who promises that
redemption follows the collection plate.

Criticizing the 1980's, a radio station owner with a European accent -- one of
the few sympathetic personalities in the novel -- establishes the see-no-evil
mood of that decade: "TV noose and noosepapers are the enemy. For eight years we
had a U.S. President with subnormal intelligence. Every day he does horrible
harm to language, the future, the truth. Every single sinking person in the
country knows this, except not the networks and the noosepapers."

At the epicenter of "Strong Motion" is a series of earth tremors that shake up
metropolitan Boston and propel the two principal characters into action. They
meet casually, fall in love cautiously, are scraped by the barnacles of past
romances and distant families and then part tragically. Toward the end of their
mutually destructive affair (they are smart but not wise), the lovers are
reunited in a burst of self-discovery. This comes as close to a happy ending as
the author -- who is generally depressing about human relationships for young as
well as middle-aged people all through his novel -- will allow his characters to
enjoy.

The woman is a brilliant, idealistic 30-year-old seismologist at Harvard who
surmises that the tremors are triggered by a toxic-waste dump, thousands of feet
below the earth outside Boston, that was secretly dug by a chemical company
named Sweeting-Aldren. The company made hundreds of millions of dollars by
shipping defoliants and "spot sales of napalm" to Vietnam. In one of many
dramatic scenes in the novel, she invades the company's restricted space in a
small plane, photographs incriminating material and is discovered by security
guards.

The man is a gifted 23-year-old radio engineer, working for a small station that
is idealistic in its own way, playing good music and delivering public service
editorials. He comes from a pixilated Midwestern family: his father, a
professor, smokes pot, and his mother is alternately distant and controlling,
all the more so when she inherits $22 million worth of Sweeting-Aldren stock.
The family dispute over the money becomes one of the satirical laugh tracks in
the story.

Mr. Franzen is seasoned enough to permit his characters to overwhelm his own
polemical instincts. This can be a pitfall faced by any serious novelist with
something to declare. In "Strong Motion," the author begins one riff about the
simple life in New England two centuries ago. He makes the reader wonder if
things were really better then, but he knows when to shift gears from lecture
platform back to plot. After he has captured our interest with his fictional
characters, we find ourselves almost equally interested in the mind behind their
opinions, and that is a great accomplishment for any author.

Some of the many commercials in the book -- for cars, shoes, drinks, television
shows -- may be obscure to readers who haven't put in time as couch potatoes.
Although deadly serious about corruption and the environment, the novel is
replete with humorous touches and inside jokes. There's a pet gerbil called
Milton Friedman.  The effluvia of Boston are examined through the eyes of a
nocturnal raccoon. An alcoholic stepgrandmother who perishes during an
earthquake becomes something of a posthumous heroine to the public; they don't
know she died falling off a bar stool.

Mr. Franzen stops the action now and then to deliver a lecture, which is never
less than provocative. His technical knowledge about so many subjects reminded
me of Thomas Pynchon's brilliant novel "Gravity's Rainbow." On computer
information, he writes: "The system believes that the last 20 years have
eliminated any significant distinction between human and artificial intelligence
in America. The system believes that all vital functions of the average American
intelligence can now be simulated by a program running to 11,000 lines supported
by 6 Phrase libraries and 1 Opinions library together totaling less than 8
megabytes."

Here, obviously, is one author who doesn't believe in "the system."

By the sheer force of his imaginative writing and his unsheathed views of
American life, Mr. Franzen succeeds in joining together a love story, a family
story and a corporate-cum-environmental story. "Strong Motion" is a mature novel
with original characters and challenging ideas that leave a distinctly original
aftertaste.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Jonathan Franzen (Susan Rosenberg/Farrar, Straus & Giroux)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 27, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words



International A3-11

OFFER FROM ISRAEL

Israel has offered the Palestinians an outline for self-rule in the West Bank
and Gaza Strip that would give them control over many aspects of daily life. But
Israel would maintain control over security and prevent Palestinians from
creating a framework for an independent state.  A1

RULING IN IRISH ABORTION CASE

The Irish Supreme Court overturned a lower-court ruling and cleared the way for
a 14-year-old girl to go to Britain for an abortion. The girl, who says she was
raped, had been barred from leaving because of Ireland's own law restricting
abortions.  A1

AUTO MAKERS' TWO WORLDS

When Chrysler's chairman visited Japan with President Bush, he made no mention
of the Nagoya plant where Mitsubishi makes the Dodge Stealth. But "American"
cars keep pouring off Japanese assembly lines, underscoring the Big Three's
dependence on Japanese factories.  A1

BENDING RULE ON SOMALI AID

The threat of starvation around Somalia's embattled capital is so serious that
the United Nations is considering breaking its normal rules and giving food to
armed combatants as well as civilians.  A3

SPECTATORS IN SOUTH AFRICA

Conversations in South Africa's biggest black township confirm a painful
paradox: to get a fresh mandate to negotiate power-sharing with the black
majority, President de Klerk has turned to the white minority that elected him.
A3

GUATEMALA ENTRENCHED IN WAR

Despite hopes that peace in El Salvador might spur an end to the civil war in
Guatemala, recent negotiations have shown that its rightist Government and
leftist guerrillas are taking their own time.  A6

COLOMBIA ARMY QUITS DRUG WAR

In a shift in strategy, the United States and Colombia have agreed that
Colombia's army will no longer play a big role in pursuing cocaine traffickers,
officials said. U.S. aid will be redirected to the police.  A6

HOLES IN HAITIAN ACCORD

After signing an accord to end Haiti's political crisis, leaders disagree on
whether it calls for the punishment of the army commander who led a military
coup last year.  A8

U.S. MAY BACK ELEPHANT HUNTING

A week before a world meeting on endangered species, the Bush Administration
said it was sympathetic to a proposal by some African nations to open
international trading in elephant hides and meat.  A11

Armenians overrun Azerbaijanis in a disputed enclave.  A5

Moscow Journal: On a Big Mac, a genuine Russian pickle.  A4

Canada wants to pull combat forces out of Europe by the end of 1994.  A9

National A12-23

SEX DISCRIMINATION RULING

In a broad, unanimous decision, the Supreme Court said the Federal law barring
sex discrimination in schools and colleges permits students to sue for damages
for sexual harassment and other forms of sex discrimination.  A1

LOOKING LIKE A LONG CAMPAIGN

News analysis: Voters in four states have now had their say about whom the
Democrats should nominate to oppose President Bush, and the outcome at the
convention is no clearer than it was before the balloting.  A1

TOUGH TALK FROM KERREY

Seeking votes in conservative Georgia, Senator Kerrey and his supporters bluntly
criticized Governor Clinton for avoiding military service in Vietnam, and for
the first time, former Senator Tsongas obliquely raised the issue as well.  A22

Polling in South Dakota reveals problems for the candidates.  A22

Maryland appears to be ideal Tsongas country.  A23

Washington and Idaho are eager for the Democrats to come West.  A23

END FOR A NUCLEAR PLANT

The nation's oldest nuclear power plant will be closed immediately, ending the
industry's hopes that the plant would be allowed to prove that nuclear plants
could operate safely for up to 60 years.  A12

HOME ON THE RANGE

Ault Journal: Buffeted by hard times, ranchers are getting fewer and older, but
for those who remain it's still a life where miracles master misery.  A12

COMMON DRUGS AND SAFETY

Possibly dangerous side-effects of some over-the-counter drugs are going
unreported, a Government study said, because the Food and Drug Administration's
system of approving and monitoring those drugs is inadequate.  A12

A TREATMENT BACKFIRES

In a finding with major implications for people with multiple sclerosis, doctors
reported that the standard treatment for a painful eye disease closely related
to m.s. may actually worsen the disease.  A14

U.S. SHIFT ON WARMING

The Bush Administration is to announce plans to help developing countries pay
for limiting the emission of gases that cause global warming.  A14

TAKING AIM AT COMMISSIONER

Saying the Commissioner of Food and Drugs is biased on the issue, a leader of
plastic surgeons began a campaign to bar him from making the decision on whether
silicone gel breast implants are safe.  A20

Fewer unmarried white women are putting their babies up for adotpion.  A15

A teen-ager whose arms were reattached goes home.  A20

Texas has been unable to verify an AIDS cluster in a small town.  A20

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

GAMBINO PLEA DEAL MADE

Two sons of the late crime boss Carlo Gambino and others allied with them agreed
yesterday to quit the trucking business and pay a $12 million fine in exchange
for being spared prison sentences. Prosecutors said that the plea bargain would
break organized crime's half-century stranglehold on New York City's dwindling
garment industry.  A1

TWO DEAD IN SCHOOL SHOOTINGS

Two teen-agers were shot dead in a Brooklyn high school just before Mayor
Dinkins was to visit the troubled school to tell students they had the power to
break free of the world of violence and drugs.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

The Home Section C1-12
Future worth: grab it now, before it's hot.  C1
Waifs return, for the last laugh.  C1
Design's own dialect.  C1
Parent & Child C12

Arts/Entertainment C13-26
Newark's arts center plan.  C14
Why Frohnmayer is out.  C15
Art dealer directs a movie.  C15
Los Angeles Opera grows up.  C15

Sports B9-16
Baseball: Yankees hail Perez's arrival to spring training.  B9
Basketball: Knicks lose.  B9
Seton Hall edges Georgetown in overtime.  B9

Obituaries B6-7
Jean R. Yawkey, Boston Red Sox owner and a philanthropist.  B6
Oscar T. Broneer, archeologist.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25
Editorials A24
Youngest, cruelest Justice.
Don't rush to deploy ABM's.
G.O.P. vs. democracy in N.Y.
Topics: Franking follies.

Letters A24
William Safire: Comeback coming.  A25
Anthony Lewis: The hunt for Red October.  A25
Seymour Melman: Shaping a civilian economy.  A25
Ellen Haas: Tighten the rules on seafood safety.  A25

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: McDonald's copes with changing times in Russia.
(Novosti/Gamma-Liaison) A4

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 29, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Shift in Drug Summitry: U.S. No Longer Dictates

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, Feb. 28


At the close of a summit meeting here on drug problems in the Americas, a
Bolivian journalist asked President Bush why he was so insistent on the use of
armed force in the drug war and so resistant to economic strategies.

The question was an echo of what Mr. Bush had been hearing for two days from the
leaders of the six Latin American countries attending the conference.

Actually, Mr. Bush replied, he wasn't all that stubborn. "One thing that I
learned out of this," he said as he shared a dais with the other leaders at a
news conference, "is the need to work more cooperatively in alternative
cropping" -- his shorthand for getting Andean farmers to shift from growing
coca, the raw material of cocaine, to fruits and vegetables.

"I think there's more we can do to be of assistance on alternative cropping,"
the President added.

U.S. Turns More Flexible

By speaking in a tone of of collegiality but steadily pursuing their own
strategies, Mr. Bush's Latin American allies in the drug war seem to be
gradually forcing him to shift to their tactics.

Mr. Bush said he was not thinking of big increases in economic aid but perhaps
more trade benefits and some incentives to American corporations to create jobs
in the drug-producing countries by starting businesses, farms and mining
operations. The Administration has also begun showing a new flexibility as Latin
leaders resist the deployment of their armies in the drug war.

Whether the Latin American approach will bring the success that has so far
eluded Mr. Bush is not clear. But it is apparent that he cannot compel the
governments to follow his dictates.

In the last year Colombia and Bolivia have refused to extradite drug kingpins to
the United States, preferring to strike deals in which many powerful traffickers
have accepted lenient prison terms without being required to surrender their
fortunes, personnel rosters or ledgers. In Colombia, the result has been a
remarkable drop in violence, but no measurable decline in cocaine exports.

Irate Warning From Peru

On the first day of the meeting, President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru startled
the Bush Administration with what one American diplomat described as an "in your
face" outburst. Mr. Fujimori told reporters that Mr. Bush's strategy of
repression had failed and that he was having no more of it.

"No government may fight against an entire population," Mr. Fujimori said,
referring to Peru's 250,000 coca growers. "This will lead to a fight that may
produce even a civil war or a war of the Vietnam type."

Administration officials suggested that Mr. Fujimori's undiplomatic remarks had
been mainly intended for the ears of constituents back home. In any case, his
fury squelched an American-backed proposal from Colombia to set what the
Peruvian leader viewed as an unattainable, and thus potentially embarrassing,
goal of cutting coca production by 50 percent over the next eight years.

By the time the leaders held the final press conference of the summit meeting on
Thursday, the atmosphere seemed cordial once again. Mr. Bush praised the
Peruvian leader for his hard work and Mr. Fujimori praised the United States'
generosity. His lingering complaint was not with the Administration, but with
Congress for withholding most of the $100 million allocated to Peru this year.
The lawmakers are reacting to continued reports of human rights abuses by the
Peruvian security forces.

Clearly the Peruvian President was not seeking a return to the icy relationship
that his predecessor, Alan Garcia, maintained with the United States. "He got
what he wanted and he backed off," one Administration official said of Mr.
Fujimori.

The Latin Americans had been talking economics from the time Mr. Bush first met
with them on the drug issue two years ago in Cartagena, Colombia.

At Cartagena, they reluctantly accepted Mr. Bush's argument that the Andean
nations needed a one-two punch: a strong anti-drug offensive by their armies and
police forces followed by increased economic assistance once a trail had been
blazed.

Colombia, Bolivia and finally Peru accepted more than $30 million a year for
their armies, up from virtually nothing in previous years. But the civilian
leaders felt doubtful about their ability to maintain control over more heavily
armed battalions. The armies themselves spoke contemptuously of chasing drug
traffickers as a job better suited for the police.

With many commanders struggling even to provide boots for their troops, the
armies rationalized that they could take the anti-drug money and continue to
operate as traditional military forces, backing up the police on the front lines
but not actually touching drugs or traffickers.

More Interested in Rebels

But even in Colombia, where the army has been most active, the generals were
more interested in pursuing guerrillas; after all, the insurgencies in Colombia
and Peru are the No. 1 threat to their national security. In the end, neither
the Colombian Government nor the Bush Administration was satisfied that the
anti-drug money was being well spent. So both sides agreed as the summit meeting
was opening to rechannel some $75 million to the Colombian police force.

Bolivia said that it was also planning to pull its army out of the drug war,
including two battalions that had just received more than $10 million in special
drug enforcement training. Weeks earlier, the Latin American countries had
rejected overtures by the Bush Administration for an expansion of United States
military control over anti-drug operations.

Administration officials, who had been increasing the flow of money to the
armies and urging that they take a more commanding role for three years, sensed
the hardening of attitudes and headed for middle ground.

The Bolivians, who are negotiating with the Administration on the details of how
the army money might now be spent, spoke soothingly of the change.

"This is something that has been evolving," said Gustavo Fernandez, the chief of
staff of the Cabinet of President Jaime Paz Zamora. "We all have more knowledge
of the problem now and we're in a better position to look at the issue."

LOAD-DATE: February 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush says he is considering economic strategies in the
war on drugs. He and other leaders attended a briefing on Thursday in San
Antonio at the close of the summit meeting on drug problems in the Americas.
With him were, from left, Presidents Carlos Salinas de Gortari of Mexico,
Rodrigo Borja Cevallos of Ecuador, Jaime Paz Zamora of Bolivia and Cesar Gaviria
Trujillo of Colombia. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 1, 1992

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   3   RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) The mysterious
                death of a young woman leads to an investigation in which
                technology and the American-Japanese rivalry play major roles.

 2          1   THE ROAD TO OMAHA, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $23.95.) A
                retired general and a lawyer scheme to take possession of the
                state of Nebraska on behalf of an obscure Indian tribe.

 3      1   6   HIDEAWAY, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) A man
                miraculously resuscitated after he has technically died is
                haunted by visions of evil.

 4      3  21   SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to
                "Gone With the Wind."

 5      5   3   BYGONES, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $21.95.) A dinner party
                reveals family strains and love.

 6      8   2   VOX, by Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) A man and a woman
                learn about each other and themselves through a telephone
                conversation on an "adult party line."

 7      4  10   DISNEY'S BEAUTY AND THE BEAST. (Gallery Books/Penguin USA,
                $6.98.) A retelling of the classic fairy tale in words and
                pictures.

 8      7   4   FUGITIVE NIGHTS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $22.)
                Three people on the trail of a dangerous fugitive in Palm
                Springs, Calif.

 9     12  20   NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer
                opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as
                nightmares.

10 *   11  15   NO GREATER LOVE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.) The
                sinking of the Titanic greatly alters the life of Edwina
                Winfield.

11 *    9   6   PRIVATE EYES, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $21.50.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware to the rescue of an
                actress.

12 *    6   6   LINE OF FIRE, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $21.95.) The fifth
                volume of "The Corps" tells of an attempt to rescue marines
                during World War II.

13 *   14   3   GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Delacorte, $20.) A private
                eye probes a case involving pet dogs and Chicago scandals.

14     13  28   THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle
                Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.

15          3   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $16.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                cards and letters.

16 *   10   5   McNALLY'S SECRET, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $21.95.) The
                sleuth Archy McNally pursues a stolen block of priceless
                stamps.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5   REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown,
                $22.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on her own and
                other people's struggles to achieve self-esteem.

 2      2  20   DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis
                Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.

 3      3  13   MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Macmillan, $19.95.)
                The autobiography of a country-music broadcaster.

 4      6   7   PLAUSIBLE DENIAL, by Mark Lane. (Thunder's Mouth/Publishers
                Group West, $22.95.) A lawyer's presentation of the case for
                believing that the C.I.A. was involved in the death of John F.
                Kennedy.

 5      4  15   BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Crown, $24.) A journalist contends
                that the media and political groups are staging a war against
                women's rights.

 6      5  24   ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The
                actress's memoirs. (LP)

 7      7  13   THE JORDAN RULES, by Sam Smith. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                reporter's account of an N.B.A. championship season spent with
                Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls.

 8      8   9   BROTHER EAGLE, SISTER SKY: A Message From Chief Seattle,
                illustrated by Susan Jeffers. (Dial, $14.95.) An environmental
                warning from the 19th-century American Indian.

 9     10  16   MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? by Molly Ivins. (Random
                House, $23.) Essays about the current political and cultural
                scene.

10      9  11   THE WORLD IS MY HOME, by James A. Michener. (Random House,
                $25.) The autobiography of the popular novelist. (LP)

11     12   3   SEIZE THE MOMENT, by Richard Nixon. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                The former President defines the challenges America faces in
                the newly changed world and what our country should do about
                them.

12     15  10   MAUS II, by Art Spiegelman. (Pantheon, $18.) The story of an
                Auschwitz survivor in the Catskills, told in comic-book form.

13     13  27   UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Thoughts on life's
                commonplaces. (LP)

14 *   11  37   PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic
                Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal
                Government.

15 *        1   UNTO THE SONS, by Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) A journalist traces
                his heritage through three generations, from southern Italy to
                Ocean City, N.J.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   2   A RETURN TO LOVE, by Marianne Williamson. (HarperCollins, $20.)
                Inspirational advice about ways to replace feelings of fear
                with feelings of love in daily life.

 2      4  13   HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli
                O'Phile/Dutton, $14.95.) Sexual advice for married couples.

 3      2  13   MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &
                Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial
                advice by a Florida entrepreneur.

 4      3   8   AWAKEN THE GIANT WITHIN, by Anthony Robbins. (Summit, $20.)
                Ways to take control of your emotional, physical and financial
                destiny.

 5          4   FRENCH FOR CATS, by Henry Beard and John Boswell.
                (Boswell/Villard, $9.95.) A cat's life, told in French, English
                and pictures.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

OUTERBRIDGE REACH, by Robert Stone. (Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) A shapely and
powerful novel with a seafaring adventure in it, built around a triangle of
husband, wife and her film-maker lover, suggesting that post-Vietnam
disillusionment and skepticism may not after all be the whole end of life.

TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception, by William J.
Broad. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) This accessible but heavily documented account
of the Strategic Defense Initiative, by a reporter for The Times, argues that
Mr. Teller sold President Ronald Reagan an unworkable turkey.

POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS: America's Literary Community Viewed From the
Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969, edited by Richard Gillman and Michael
Paul Novak. (University Press of Kansas, $35.) The view as seen by a smart,
honest poet who knew everybody and did not go in for malice.

MIGRATIONS TO SOLITUDE, by Sue Halpern. (Pantheon, $20.) A provocative book of
essays, chiefly about privacy and independence and their rarity in our part of
the 20th century.

CAMBRIDGE, by Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr. Phillips's splendid and tragic
novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful
Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and
powerful slave.

THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng, by Harrison E. Salisbury.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of China's rulers
for 40 years.

BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES, by William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly
true yet wholly imagined, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer
and editor, now in his 80's.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Jay F. Sharbutt, 51, Longtime A.P. Writer

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 175 words


Jay F. Sharbutt, a correspondent, theater critic and most recently senior
television writer for The Associated Press, died on Wednesday at his apartment
in Brooklyn. He was 51 years old.

He died of a heart attack, his former wife, Jeanne Drewsen, said.

Mr. Sharbutt began his career as a reporter at The Ledger in Lakeland, Fla., and
later at The Orlando Sentinel. After joining The A.P. in 1966, he reported from
Washington and Vietnam.

He was the wire service's television writer from 1972 to 1978, before taking
over as theater critic. After working as a television reporter for The Los
Angeles Times, he returned to The A.P. in 1989 as senior television writer -- an
assignment interrupted by a stint covering the Persian Gulf war.

He is survived by his father, Del Sharbutt, the longtime radio announcer for NBC
programs like "Amos 'n' Andy" and "Your Hit Parade," who lives in Palm Desert,
Calif.; his brother, William, of Manhattan; his sister, Meri Dell Ridge, of
Norfolk, Va., and a daughter, Julie Christine, of Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Democrats;
Candidates Go on Attack, Mostly Gently, in 3 Debates

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words

DATELINE: COLLEGE PARK, Md., March 1


For the second straight day, Bill Clinton and Paul E. Tsongas, front-runners in
the contest for the Democratic Presidential nomination, came under attack today
in a pair of televised debates in primary states, one in Georgia and the other
in Maryland.

In Atlanta this morning, Mr. Clinton, the Governor of Arkansas, and former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California criticized Mr. Tsongas's tax proposals, which
include cuts in capital gains taxes. Mr. Tsongas, the former Massachusetts
Senator, did not counterattack. But Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska again raised
the touchy issue of the military draft with Mr. Clinton and accused him of
giving "a baloney answer" on health care.

Tonight, at the University of Maryland here, Mr. Tsongas was again assailed for
his economic views, which his rivals compared to those of President Bush. Mr.
Clinton's record on the environment in Arkansas was also roundly criticized, and
he responded in kind, mocking his accusers.

But today's debates were relatively mild. Nothing was nearly as personal as the
melee on Saturday night in Denver, when Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Clinton tore into
each other with a fury that dismayed many senior party officials.  The trigger
was Mr. Clinton's assault on Mr. Tsongas's limited support of nuclear power.

"No one can argue with you, Paul; you're always perfect," Mr. Clinton said
sarcastically, looking to the audience for confirmation.

Mr. Tsongas replied: "I'm not perfect. But I'm honest."

Coming after four days of verbal pitched battles among the candidates, the
hostile tone of the Colorado debate produced calls from Democratic leaders for
an armistice, and Mr. Tsongas appealed to his rivals to join in an agreement not
to use any more attack commercials. That produced no results, but the candidates
treated each other more politely today.

Seven states hold primaries or caucuses on Tuesday, with 380 national convention
delegates at stake. At the same time, American Samoa will hold caucuses to
choose six delegates with half a vote each.

Mr. Clinton is ahead in Georgia, according to polls of Democrats, with Mr.
Tsongas a rather distant second, but there are doubts about how many of the
Clinton backers will actually vote. Voters can cross party lines for primary
voting, and some rural conservatives, it is said, may choose to vote instead for
Patrick J. Buchanan in the Republican primary, and many blacks may stay home.

Brown Strong in Colorado

In Maryland and Colorado, Mr. Tsongas has taken a narrow lead over Mr. Clinton.
Maryland, where The Baltimore Sun endorsed Mr. Tsongas today, is considered a
two-man race. But in Colorado Mr. Brown is nipping at the heels of the two
leaders, with 19 percent in a Denver Post poll that was published this morning,
as against 26 percent for Mr. Tsongas and 24 percent for Mr. Clinton.

Washington, which will hold caucuses rather than a primary, is considered a
toss-up, but there, too, Mr. Brown is doing much better than anticipated with
his grass-roots campaign, fueled by attacks on the influence of big money on
elections.

Another caucus state, Minnesota, has been heavily organized by Senator Tom
Harkin of Iowa, with the help of freshman Senator Paul Wellstone. Mr. Harkin,
short of money, skipped the Georgia debate but took part here.

Idaho and Utah are the other two caucus states on Tuesday's schedule.

The candidate with the most to lose on Tuesday may be Mr. Kerrey. As he said
today the ABC News program "This Week," he has made "a strategic decision to
spend the next three or four days in the West." He took part in the Atlanta
debate by television link and skipped the College Park event when its organizers
declined to allow him to do the same thing here.

The Nebraskan's problem is that for all his concentration in the West, he seems
to making little impact there. In Colorado, for example, the Post's poll shows
him at 7 percent, trailing "undecided and uncommitted." He campaigned in Salt
Lake City today, hoping perhaps to spring an upset there.

Questions on Public Service

In the Georgia debate, Mr. Kerrey asked Mr. Clinton how he could justify his
backing of a program that would allow the repayment of college loans through
public service when he had not served his country in Vietnam or spent time in
the Peace Corps. Mr. Clinton has apparently suffered in the patriotic South
because he did not serve, and Mr. Kerrey said this week that that would make him
"an unelectable nominee" in the general election.

"I opposed that war," said Mr. Clinton of the conflict in which Mr. Kerrey lost
part of a leg and won the Congressional Medal of Honor. "I thought it was a
terrible mistake."

When Mr. Kerrey also attacked Mr. Clinton's ideas on health care, the Arkansas
Governor responded with criticism of Mr. Kerrey's own health care program, which
he said included "nine separate tax increases."

But it was Mr. Tsongas, who seems within reach of establishing himself as a
national rather than a regional contender, who attracted most of the critical
comment in the Atlanta debate. The chief topic was Mr. Tsongas's opposition to a
middle-class tax cut, which Mr. Clinton strongly favors.

Mr. Tsongas would use the proceeds of higher taxes on the rich not to cut taxes
for the middle class but to pay for reductions in capital gains taxes, which he
says are needed to rebuild the economy. Mr. Clinton said the defining question
was "whether you give it to the middle class or to people who buy stocks,"
attempting to link Mr. Tsongas to the upper classes.

Then Mr. Brown, who favors a flat tax, joined in with the comment, "Lollipops
for business are no better than lollipops for the middle class."

During a stop at his Atlanta headquarters, Mr. Tsongas told his supporters that
he was different from his party's 1988 nominee, without mentioning Michael S.
Dukakis, another Massachusetts Democrat, by name. His negative ads and his sharp
riposte on Saturday night, Mr. Tsongas said, showed that "in a situation when
the campaign has gotten very rough, this is one Greek who fights back."

One person in the crowd held a sign that said, "I'm Not Perfect, I'm Honest."
Another supporter, Jennifer Kasper, a 32-year-old architect, said of the former
Senator, "He's like a bad-tasting pill that you have to take to get rid of a
sickness."

At the Salem Baptist Church, Mr. Tsongas got a muted reception from the black
congregation. The pastor, the Rev. Jesper Williams, hugged him, but did not
issue the endorsement that the Tsongas entourage had predicted.

Also in pursuit of black votes, Mr. Clinton visited two black churches before
heading for the Carter Center for the Georgia debate. At one of them, the
Ebeneezer Baptist Church, where the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was pastor
for many years, Kerrey supporters greeted him with critical placards.

A few hours later, at College Park, just outside the District of Columbia, the
liberal Mr. Harkin took the offensive. He accused Mr. Tsongas and others of
advocating "trickle-down economics" on the Reagan-Bush model and said that the
Democrats had to stop trying to behave like Republicans.

Environmental Record 'a Joke'

There was a fair amount of wrangling over economic issues, but no real personal
venom until Mr. Tsongas said, "I've answered every question and I've never
mentioned anyone's name." Mr. Harkin quickly told him he had started the
name-calling months ago and said he should stop being "sanctimonious."

Then the Iowan described the record of Arkansas on the environment as "a joke"
and told Mr. Clinton that "flowery speeches" were inadequate. Mr. Brown joined
in attacking Mr. Clinton, accusing him of supporting businesses that polluted.
Mr. Clinton shot back the suggestion that people look at the record and not pay
attention to "people behind in the polls."

Mr. Clinton drew applause from the audience when he accused Mr. Buchanan of
racist behavior and said Mr. Bush "has not called him on it." No Democratic
candidate, the Arkansan said, would play the racial card.

Mr. Tsongas said today's debates, with charge and rebuttal among the candidates,
had worked well and had not damaged the Democratic Party.

Both of today's debates were carried on the C-Span cable television network, and
the Maryland event was broadcast on local public television.

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination gathered
at the Carter Center in Atlanta yesterday before taping a debate that was to be
televised later in the evening. They were, from the left, former Gov. Edmund G.
Brown Jr., Gov. Bill Clinton and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas. (Jim Estrin/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters
In Two Regions With Primaries Tomorrow, the Primary Emotion is Anger;
People in Denver Express Disdain for Candidates

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: DENVER, March 1


A weed never stands a chance along Fenton Street, where manicured lawns and
sculptured bushes surround tidy brick-and-shutter homes. The sidewalks are clean
and clear, except for a chalked outline for hopscotch. And bumper stickers
pledge allegiance to the flag and the Broncos football team.

Like most Americans, the people on Fenton Street, in the southwest Denver
neighborhood of Bear Valley, consider themselves to be the bulwark of the great
middle class, the taxpaying, law-abiding, family-centered voters being wooed by
the Presidential contenders. But with the Colorado primary set for Tuesday, the
candidates of both parties seem about as popular in this neighborhood as
crabgrass.

"It's a heck of a poor choice we've got," Gil Hassinger, a 55-year-old engineer,
said with a grimace and a shake of the head. "The average person on the street
could do better than any of this crew."

When voters here look at the smiling faces of the Presidential contenders in
television advertisements, they see mostly warts.

Anger on Both Sides

Republicans on Fenton Street are angry at President Bush for breaking his no-tax
pledge and taking so long to notice the recession. But at the same time, many
see Patrick J. Buchanan's message of "America First" as a bit naive, even
frightening.

Democrats speak with exasperation about fumbled opportunities. Finally, after 12
years, they say they appear to have an invitation to the big dance -- the
Inaugural Ball. But no one seems groomed and fit to escort them.

"They've got a chance, and they're blowing it," said Dennis Schroeder, a
35-year-old photographer. "I think the Democrats just don't know how to win
anymore."

Democratic voters here look at Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, who was once
viewed as the party's front-runner, and they see too much baggage to fit aboard
Air Force One. They look at Paul E. Tsongas, the former Massachusetts Senator,
and they see reminders of Michael S. Dukakis, the 1988 nominee whose candidacy
they would like to forget.

Sorting Through the Issues

The Democrats here also say Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska has often seemed
bored with the campaign, and they are not terribly excited about him, either.
They listen to Senator Tom Harkin, the populist from Iowa, and wonder if he is
running for the presidency of a union local. And then there is Edmund G. Brown
Jr., the former California Governor, who is best known in the campaign for
waving his toll-free campaign number.

But like them or not, one of these seven candidates is almost certainly going to
win the Presidency this fall. So the voters on Fenton Street -- teachers,
truckers, police officers and aerospace engineers -- are sorting through the
issues.

A generation ago Democrats outnumbered Republicans in this neighborhood. But
Ronald Reagan swept the area in 1980 and again in 1984, and a majority of voters
here supported Mr. Bush in 1988.

The quest of the Democratic Party to regain the White House rests in large part
on bringing voters like those on Fenton Street back to their fold. And some
voters here say they are ready to return.

"The middle-income person just can't get ahead anymore," said Donna Gordanier,
41, an investigator for the Denver prosecutor's office. She and her husband live
in an attractive ranch-style home. But the living room is mostly empty. "We
can't afford to buy furniture," she said.

Ms. Gordanier, who voted for Mr. Bush last time, said she did not believe he
cared enough about middle-income people. She said that she left the Democratic
Party long ago because it seemed too liberal but that she is now considering a
vote for Mr. Tsongas, who is leading the Democratic field in surveys here. "He's
not against business," she said. "I like that."

Many Democrats on Fenton Street said they initially supported Mr. Clinton, in
part because he was cast as the candidate with the best chance to unseat Mr.
Bush. But some now say they are troubled by the allegations of marital
infidelity, along with reports that he sought to avoid service in the Vietnam
War.

"I just can't stand Clinton's moral values," said Clara Voss, 69, who sat in an
easy chair beneath a portrait of Jesus. "If you can't be true to your wife, how
can you be true to your country?"

Concern Over Health Insurance

Mrs. Voss, who has voted for Republicans for many years, said she would vote for
Mr. Tsongas on Tuesday. Mrs. Voss's son Bill, a union worker and lifelong
Democrat, said he, too, would vote for the former Massachusetts Senator, but
added that any of the Democrats would be better than Mr. Bush.

Above all other issues, most voters in this neighborhood cited health insurance
as a primary concern. "Our benefits get lower, and we have to dish out more,"
said Sharon Trujullo, a 40-year-old telephone company clerk who attends night
school. As a single parent, she said, she worries about health coverage for her
12-year-old daughter.

"If a candidate can fix the health insurance situation, they've got my support,"
said Ms. Trujullo, a Democrat who has not decided which candidate to support.

Tom Bailey, 62, who makes harpsichords and describes himself as a liberal, said
he would vote for Mr. Harkin even though he does not believe that the Iowa
Senator has a chance at winning. "I think the Democrats were too hasty to cast
him aside," Mr. Bailey said. "In these economic hard times, I think his message
would have strong appeal."

Bush Faulted on Taxes

Among the Republicans, virtually all criticized Mr. Bush for raising taxes. But
few spoke highly of Mr. Buchanan. "He's not a conservative," said H. K. Merrill,
a 56-year-old aerospace engineer. "He's a reactionary."

Mr. Merrill said he had never missed an election but might stay home from the
polls this year. "We don't have a good choice," he said.

But other Republicans said life would be worse under a Democratic President.
"The Democrats just want to give everything away," said Laurie Fong, 32, as she
balanced a crying baby in one arm and reached for a toddler with the other.

"We were married 12 years before we could buy a house," she continued. "We
sacrificed. A lot of people aren't willing to do that. And the Democrats cater
to them."

Other Republicans said they had not forgotten Mr. Bush's strong leadership in
the Persian Gulf war. "He showed he had guts," said Mike Busby, a 29-year-old
trucker who served in the Navy.

But Mr. Hassinger, the civil engineer, said Mr. Bush's "bumbling" of economic
issues outweighed all else. "There is absolutely no way I would vote for Bush
again," he said. "He's just too insulated. He doesn't know that people are
struggling."

Sounding a bit pained, he added, "I guess I'll have to vote for a Democrat."

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "They've got a chance, and they're blowing it," said Dennis
Schroeder, a 35-year-old photographer who lives in southwest Denver. "I think
the Democrats just don't know how to win anymore." He played with his children
recently outside his Fenton Street home. (Eric Lars Bakke for The New York
Times)

Maps: "Close-Ups: Colorado and Maryland" -- In Bear Valley, the people's choice
seems to be "none of the above." In Towson, voters said they were leaning toward
Paul E. Tsongas. Maps of Colorado and Maryland show locations of Bear Valley, CO
and Towson, MD.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Another Final Frontier: 'Star Trek' at Space Museum

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 2


The National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution here has often
been the last hope of parents desperate to interest their children in something
besides television. Now, television wins.

" 'Star Trek': The Exhibition" opened on Friday at the museum with more than 80
original props, costumes and models from the 1960's television series.

The exhibition includes Captain Kirk's uniform, Mr. Spock's pointed ears, two
models of the Starship Enterprise, a Klingon battle cruiser, communicators,
phasers and even a few Tribbles, the furry little creatures that overran the
Enterprise during "The Trouble With Tribbles," the all-time favorite episode
cited by fans in a nationwide poll conducted by Paramount Pictures in July.

On the second day of the exhibition, thousands trekked through the galleries,
crowding into the transporter room and spilling out of the tiny shop. There were
more adults here than in the rest of the museum, but there were also a lot of
10- and 11-year-old boys.

Star-Studded Preview

But what is a tribute to a pop-culture phenomenon, the museum's first, doing in
a place that honors real-life conquests of air and space? Martin Harwit, the
director of the museum, noted that "Star Trek" inspired many people in the field
of space exploration, "people who believed in a dream."

And the exhibition's curator, Mary Henderson, added: "There is no other fantasy
more pervasive in the conceptualization of space flight than 'Star Trek.' "

Eight of the show's stars turned out on Wednesday for a preview of the
exhibition, including William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy, who have been
identified for over a quarter century with their Enterprise alter egos, the
passionate and just Capt. James T. Kirk and the ever-logical half-Vulcan Mr.
Spock.

Majel Barrett, who played Nurse Chapel on the original series and who is the
widow of Gene Roddenberry, the creator of "Star Trek," said she saw the leap
from science to fantasy as being rather small. Both the museum and the show are
"testaments to the fact that dreams can come true," she said, adding that "the
only difference is that the Enterprise is here before it's been built."

Many of the artifacts are jarring reminders of the fact that despite its cult
status, "Star Trek" made its debut in the mid-1960's. The phasers and stun guns
are crudely fashioned of painted wood or plastic; the control buttons on the
ship's bridge are simply colored pieces of plastic. And the actors would be hard
pressed to squeeze back into those spiffy, polyester uniforms.

After posing in the captain's chair, Bob Krause, a "Star Trek" fan from
Columbus, Ohio, said: "Kirk's chair is plywood. I'm a little disheartened."

His wife, Kim, agreed: "It all looks a lot cheaper in person."

Philosophies, Power and Sexuality

Although visitors may first run to the captain's chair, the exhibition addresses
"Star Trek" not as just entertainment but also as a morality play. The dozens of
photographs and props are arranged under quotations from such philosophers as
Nietzsche in categories including civil rights and urban rebellion, the specter
of Vietnam, the resident alien, the balance of power within and even sexuality
and wives, in which viewers discover that Kirk, Spock and Leonard (Bones) McCoy,
played by DeForest Kelley, were all married during the series (usually under
duress) before they realized that they were truly married to their ship.

After an original pilot was rejected in 1965 as being "too cerebral," "Star
Trek" had its premiere on Thursday, Sept. 8, 1966, on NBC. Just 3 seasons and 79
episodes long, it ended on June 3, 1969, a month before Neil A. Armstrong and
Col. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin set foot on the moon. The series has since been
extremely successful in reruns, has spawned six feature films and a second
television series, "Star Trek: The Next Generation," now in its fifth season in
first-run syndication.

Turnout and security at the exhibition are unprecedented, said Ken Isbell, a
museum staff member, pointing to the alarm display cases and two full-time
guards on hand to protect the memorabilia from overzealous fans. Mr. Isbell, who
lectures at "Star Trek" conventions, said he felt obligated to volunteer at the
exhibition, but after a second day of capacity crowds, with 2,500 people going
through, he began to question that decision.

"Beam me out of here!" he cried.

" 'Star Trek': The Exhibition" will run until Sept. 7 at the National Air and
Space Museum. Free passes, which are available at the museum, are required for
viewings on Friday, Saturday and Sunday until June 15 and every day after June
15.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Jay F. Sharbutt A.P. Writer, 51

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


Jay F. Sharbutt, a correspondent, theater critic and most recently senior
television writer for The Associated Press, died on Wednesday at his apartment
in Brooklyn. He was 51 years old.

He died of a heart attack, his former wife, Jeanne Drewsen, said.

Mr. Sharbutt began his career as a reporter at The Ledger in Lakeland, Fla., and
later at The Orlando Sentinel. After joining The A.P. in 1966, he reported from
Washington and Vietnam.

He was the wire service's television writer from 1972 to 1978, before taking
over as theater critic. After working as a television reporter for The Los
Angeles Times, he returned to The A.P. in 1989 as senior television writer.

He is survived by his father, Del Sharbutt, the longtime radio announcer for NBC
programs like "Amos 'n' Andy," who lives in Palm Desert, Calif.; his brother,
William, of Manhattan; his sister, Meri Dell Ridge, of Norfolk, Va., and a
daughter, Julie Christine, of Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Poll;
In Poll, Voters Are Unhappy With All the Choices

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, March 2


Americans enter the busiest stretch of the primary season in a frustrated mood,
dissatisfied with President Bush but overwhelmingly convinced that none of the
candidates for President really understand their lives, according to the latest
New York Times/CBS News Poll.

Mr. Bush's approval rating stands at 40 percent, a new low for him in the
Times/CBS News poll, although it was unchanged from his reading last month when
the poll's margin of sampling error is taken into account.

There are many signs of public anxiety over the economy and the President's
response to it. Still, the Democratic alternatives to Mr. Bush remain murky and
ill-defined for most Americans, according to the telephone survey of 1,673
adults, conducted Wednesday through Sunday.

Democrats Are Unhappy

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, with the support of 28 percent of the likely
Democratic voters, and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, with the
backing of 19 percent, are at the front of the pack in the struggle for the
nomination. Mr. Tsongas's surge in polls after his victory in the New Hampshire
primary has stabilized, but could take another jump if he does well in the round
of primaries on Tuesday.

Still, 52 percent of the Democrats say they are not satisfied with the
candidates running and wish someone else would enter the race. And that level of
dissatisfaction is up from the 45 percent who felt that way a few weeks ago.

The poll also found that Americans overwhelmingly support the kind of tax cut
for the middle class that Democrats in Congress propose, but they do not give
the Democrats credit for the idea, and most believe Democrats proposed the cut
more to win votes than to help the economy. [Business Day, page D1.]

In short, the poll, which has a marging of sampling error of plus or minus three
percentage points, includes worrisome news for both parties that transcends the
voting over the next few weeks.

The level of concern about the economy remains remarkably high: 82 percent say
it is either "fairly bad" or "very bad." But most Americans seem to feel their
anxieties and the Presidential campaign are disconnected. Sixty-four percent
said they did not think any candidates "really understand what everyday life is
like for people like yourself." When asked what they wished the candidates
understood, most cited their economic problems.

While Mr. Bush's allies are focused on wearing down his primary opponent,
Patrick J. Buchanan, the new poll outlines a grim landscape for Mr. Bush in the
general election. His approval rating for his economic performance hovers at 19
percent, the lowest since Jimmy Carter's.

Fifty-seven percent of registered voters say they think Mr. Bush has a vision of
where he wants to take the country, down from 81 percent who felt that way when
he took office.

And those who said they were registered to vote are evenly divided when offered
a choice between re-electing President Bush or an unnamed Democrat: 40 percent
backed Mr. Bush, 44 percent the Democrat.

Edge for Ideal Democrat

Americans give an unnamed, idealized Democratic President the edge over Mr. Bush
in a number of areas. When asked whether Mr. Bush or a Democratic President
would be "more likely to care about the needs and problems of people like you,"
52 percent said the Democrat would, while 29 percent said Mr. Bush would. When
asked who would be most likely to end the recession, 43 percent said a
Democratic President, while 30 percent cited Mr. Bush.

But between the idea of a Democratic President and the reality of the candidates
falls a considerable shadow. A majority of Americans say they still do not have
an opinion about most Democratic candidates. When people were given a
head-to-head choice, Mr. Bush beat Mr. Clinton by 50 percent to 40 percent, Mr.
Tsongas by 49 percent to 39 percent, and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska by 52
percent to 35 percent.

Mr. Clinton's public image seems to reflect a month of attacks from his rivals,
in addition to accusations that he manipulated his draft status during the
Vietnam War and had a 12-year extramarital affair with a singer, both of which
he denied. Among likely Democratic voters, 28 percent said they viewed him
favorably, while 21 percent viewed him unfavorably. Just after New Hampshire, 33
percent viewed him positively and 16 percent negatively.

Mr. Clinton is viewed far more positively in the South than elsewhere in the
country; he was viewed favorably by 35 percent of the Southern Democrats and
unfavorably by 17 percent.

Negative Views of Tsongas Rise

Negative opinions of Mr. Tsongas are also rising. His favorable/unfavorable
rating among Democrats was 29 to 16 in the latest poll, compared to 33 to 9 just
after the New Hampshire primary. Mr. Kerrey, despite his moment in the limelight
after winning the primary in South Dakota, is still struggling to introduce
himself: 13 percent of the Democrats view him favorably, 12 percent unfavorably
and 74 percent said they were undecided or did not know enough to have an
opinion.

The rest of the pack fell well behind Mr. Clinton and Mr. Tsongas when Democrats
were asked their preferences for the nomination. Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.
of California was third with 12 percent, followed by Senator Kerrey with 6
percent and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa with 4 percent.

This survey included an unusually large sample of Southerners, because the
primary campaign is focused in this region for the next two weeks. The
additional Southern respondents were used to increase the reliability of the
results for that region but were weighted to avoid skewing the national results.


Differences of Degree

On a variety of attitudes, the survey found more differences of degree than
stark contrasts between the South and the rest of the nation. The region still
tends to have more people who identify themsleves as Democrats, with 40 percent
as against 29 percent in the rest of the country, and more people who identify
themselves as conservatives, with 35 percent doing so while 29 percent do so in
the rest of the country.

The region defied its stereotypes in other areas. For example, David Duke, the
former Ku Klux Klan leader and Louisiana State Representative who is seeking the
Republican nomination for President, is viewed nearly as negatively by Southern
Republicans as by non-Southern Republicans.

The survey did find regional differences in the views on other candidates.  Mr.
Clinton, not suprisingly given his regional roots and heavy campaigning here,
has much more support in the South than Mr. Tsongas, with 39 percent of the
Southern Democratic voters saying they would like to see him win the nomination,
while 14 percent say that about Mr. Tsongas. But these results reflect
regionwide views, and cannot be projected to individual states, like Georgia,
which votes on Tuesday.

Protest Vote Shows Strength

Mr. Bush is also stronger in the South than elsewhere in the country; 75 percent
of those who identify themselves as likely Republican voters in the South say
they have a favorable view of Mr. Bush, while 68 percent elsewhere in the
country say that. Nationally, Mr. Bush remains the favorite of 75 percent of
Republicans for their party's nomination, compared to 16 percent who back Mr.
Buchanan.

Still, the potential for a protest vote remained clear: 70 percent of Republcian
primary voters in the South as well as the rest of the country said they thought
Mr. Buchanan was "saying some things that George Bush needs to hear." Moreover,
40 of the likely Republican voters said they thought Mr. Buchanan could be an
effective President, while 37 percent said he could not.

The survey also sought to test some potential liabilities among the various
candidates. A third of those who said they were registered voters said they
would have doubts about a candidate who had opposed the use of force in the
Persian Gulf, a position that the Bush campaign is trying to use against Mr.
Buchanan.

But only a 10th said they would have some doubts if they learned a candidate had
been treated for cancer years ago -- as Mr. Tsongas was.

Nearly 60 percent of the registered voters said their votes would be unaffected
by allegations that Mr. Clinton had had an extramarital affair. But they said
they thought it would have a big effect on the votes of other people -- with
only 25 percent saying it would be unlikely to affect the votes of other people.

The draft issue seemed to cut deeper. About one in five registered voters said
the allegations that Mr. Clinton had manipulated his draft status would make
them choose someone else, while 41 percent said it would have no effect and 35
percent said it would be one factor among many. There were no significant
differences between Southeners and non-Southeners on this.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: The Nation and the South"

Total                                                                   Rest of
U.S.                                                            South      U.S.

30%       Republican                                              26%       32%
32        Independent                                              29        35
33        Democrat                                                 40        29
20        Liberal                                                  17        22
43        Moderate                                                 39        45
31        Conservative                                             35        29
          Say they approve of the way George
40        Bush is handling his job as President                    42        38
49        Say they disapprove                                      46        50
          Say the economy in their state is:
35        Very good or fairly good                                 38        33
64        Very bad or fairly bad                                   60        67
          Asked of registered voters:
          Say the candidates for President
          really understand what everyday
30        life is like for people like themselves                  26        32
          Say the candidates for President don't
64        understand                                               67        62

 (Based on telephone interviews conducted Feb. 26 - March 1 with 1,673 adults
including 801 in the South. Those with no opinion are not shown.) (pg.A18)

Table: "The New York Times/CBS News Poll: Judging the Candidates"

Likely primary voters were asked whether their opinion of each candidate was
favorable, not favorable or undecided or whether they hadn't heard enough about
the candidate to have an opinion.

                                                  Not          No
Democratic Voters on:           Favorable   Favorable     Opinion

Edmund G. Brown Jr.
   Total Voters                       11%         22%         67%
   Southern Voters                      5          20          75
   Non-Southern Voters                 16          23          61
Bill Clinton
   Total Voters                        28          21          52
   Southern Voters                     35          17          48
   Non-Southern Voters                 22          24          54
Tom Harkin
   Total Voters                         9          17          75
   Southern Voters                      7          11          80
   Non-Southern Voters                 11          19          70
Bob Kerrey
   Total Voters                        13          12          74
   Southern Voters                      9          11          80
   Non-Southern Voters                 17          13          70
Paul Tsongas
   Total Voters                        29          16          56
   Southern Voters                     22          14          64
   Non-Southern Voters                 34          17          49

Republican Voters on:

Pat Buchanan
   Total Voters                        21          37          42
   Southern Voters                     23          36          42
   Non-Southern Voters                 19          38          43
George Bush
   Total Voters                        71          13          16
   Southern Voters                     75           9          16
   Non-Southern Voters                 68          15          16
David Duke
   Total Voters                         4          74          23
   Southern Voters                      7          68          25
   Non-Southern Voters                  2          77          21

(Based on telephone interviews conducted Feb. 26-March 1 with 583 Democratic
primary voters nationwide including 307 in Southern and border states. The 482
Republican primary voters interviewed included 223 in Southern and border
states.) (A18)

How the Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted last Wednesday through Sunday with 1,673 adults around the United
States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country.  The exchanges were chosen to assure
that each region of the country was represented in proportion to its population.
For each exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus
permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. The numbers were then
screened so that calls would be placed to residences only. Within each household
one adult was designated at random to be the respondent for the poll.

To allow a more detailed examination of attitudes in the Southern region,
telephone numbers in Southern states were selected at higher rates than those in
other states. But the results from all regions were then weighted to reflect the
actual adult population of the nation. The results have also been weighted to
take account of household size and number of telephone lines and to adjust for
variations in race, sex, age, and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20 the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than 3 percentage points either way from what would have been
obtained from all American adults.

The potential sampling error for smaller subgroups is larger. For example, for
registered respondents in the South who say they planned to or usually vote in
Democratic primaries or caucuses, it is plus or minus 6 percentage points, and
for registered Republican primary voters in the South it is plus or minus 7
percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
(pg. A18)

Graph shows Bush's approval ratings in March 1991, October 1991 and present,
based on nationwide polls by The New York Times and CBS News. (pg. A1)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Getting Out of Vietnam Did U.S. Credit;
Same Old Dirty Tricks?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


To the Editor:

As I watched Gov. Bill Clinton respond to personal attacks over the last few
weeks, I have been reminded of an earlier Democratic front runner, whose 1972
campaign for the Presidency dissolved in the New Hampshire snow. Ed Muskie's
campaign was destroyed, not by his Democratic rivals, but by Republican
operatives working for the Richard Nixon re-election team who wanted him to run
against George McGovern.

As we discovered in the Watergate hearings, the Republicans used a variety of
techniques, including forgery, to untrack the Muskie campaign that left the man
reduced to tears. So far, Bill Clinton seems to be made of tougher stuff.

It may be hoped that Democratic voters will not again allow themselves to be
manipulated as they were in 1972.

ROGER A. WEBB
Little Rock, Ark., Feb. 25, 1992

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Forms of Solitude, Including Total Isolation

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 816 words



Migrations to Solitude
Sue Halpern
Illustrated. 213 pages. Pantheon Books. $20.

Journeys in Dream and Imagination
Artur Lundkvist
Translated by Ann B. Weissmann and Annika Planck. 129 pages. Four Walls Eight
Windows. $17.95.

The word privacy does not appear in the Constitution, but it has developed into
a right that is sought and practiced, sometimes at personal risk, by men and
women everywhere. In his famous dissenting opinion in the 1928 wiretapping case
of Olmstead v. United States, Associate Justice Louis D. Brandeis said that "the
right to be let alone" was the most comprehensive of rights and "the right most
cherished by civilized men."

In "Migrations to Solitude," Sue Halpern takes the reader on an unusual journey
across the country to look at what could be considered the other side of the
coin of privacy, solitude. While many people enjoy their privacy, a smaller
number want to discover some personal Walden Pond and live in Thoreauvian
solitude. Why is this so? Most people are social creatures, wool-gathering in
the cities by choice. To an outsider, solitude can sometimes appear to be a
privileged metaphysical junket.

But Ms. Halpern, an essayist and critic who lives in the Adirondack Mountains of
New York, has something bigger and kinder on her mind in "Migrations to
Solitude." She searches out residents of hospitals, prisons and homeless
shelters and even penetrates the silence of life in a monastery. If only by
contrast, the individuals encountered in the book may well cause readers to
wonder about their own fortunes and life styles.

In her series of reports, which are connected more by the author's sympathies
than by strong conclusions, we follow an outspoken homeless woman in the Bronx
who is acquainted with "the algebra of comfort, dignity and privacy." In a
Louisiana penitentiary, a man serving a life sentence for murder tries to
explain the meaning of solitary confinement, not too successfully. In a Trappist
monastery in Kentucky, Communion is "even more private than sex."

A mother tries to feed her dying son in an AIDS hospice in Los Angeles while he
inhabits the private world of the near-dead. Secrecy kills a 17-year-old girl in
Indiana, victim of a botched abortion; that state's law requires parental
consent before a woman under 18 can have an abortion.

In one of several personal touches in the book, the author camps alone in the
woods, trying to experience the meaning of solitude, only to find that the
natural world around her is no longer silent and she is no Thoreau.

"A thoroughly private society would be a cold, disheartening place," Ms. Halpern
states in her modest and wise book. "Yet privacy, some measure of it, is
essential to our souls."

A different kind of voyage of discovery is described by Artur Lund kvist in
"Journeys in Dream and Imagination." This remarkable story by the well-known
Swedish poet, who died in December, takes the reader inside his mind after a
nearly fatal heart attack in 1981. After two months in a coma in intensive care,
Mr. Lundkvist woke up and broke his silence. The doctors had never expected him
to regain his faculties and ability to speak.

While recovering, he began to have strange dreams and hallucinations. In these
dreams he traveled to distant places: by air over Vietnam, to a foreign planet
where Swedish immigrants had taken their cows, which now gave blue milk, to a
railroad station in Chicago, where doctors operated on white people and made
them black. He had a nightmarish vision of opening a book and finding all the
pages blank. He met and spoke with people long dead.

Fortunately, Mr. Lundkvist decided to write down how he felt during these
experiences. His hallucinatory recollections alternate between prose and poetry
and form the bulk of "Journeys in Dream and Imagination."

Speaking of his coma, Mr. Lund kvist writes: "The silence is like a fine spider
web against my face, I cannot rub it off, it is simply there without being
tangibly real, it does not flutter like a leaf in the breeze, nor is it entirely
immobile, it feels like the impression of a wind that is already becalmed, it is
hardly the beginning of the weave and it does not betray a pattern, it is the
most insignificant matter, yet it makes itself known."

Mr. Lundkvist says that there was a stranger within himself and at his side;
that his body and its shadow merged, and that old age begins when "you open the
trapdoors of memory."

In an overwrought introduction, the novelist Carlos Fuentes writes that he
regards "Journeys in Dream and Imagination" as a milestone of Europe's renewal
and that the poet's return from the edge of darkness is an epiphany of European
consciousness. This flowery and extravagant interpretation should not detract
from Mr. Lundkvist's own rare description of the time when he lived in a
twilight zone between death and life.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

What Debt Does Hollywood Owe to Truth?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1650 words


When Hollywood and history collide, which side wins? With "J. F. K." still
agitating a national audience, the question was put before Oliver Stone, the
film's director, and fellow panelists Norman Mailer, Nora Ephron and Edward Jay
Epstein on Tuesday night at Town Hall in Manhattan in a debate sponsored by the
Nation Institute and the Center for American Culture Studies at Columbia
University in association with the Writers Guild of America, East. Before a
packed house, the four discussed the duty of art to history, fiction to fact and
whether George Bush could be placed at Dealey Plaza in November 1963.

Feelings ran high. "Never have I been so besieged and be-faxed by people who
felt that their point of view was not represented," said the moderator, Victor
Navasky, the editor of The Nation magazine, in his opening remarks. Looking out
over the audience, he asked, "Will all of you out there who feel you don't
belong on this panel please stand?"

'I've Come to Have Severe Doubts'

It was a pro-Stone crowd, primed to sneer at what Mr. Mailer called "the
mind-stultifying myth of the lone assassin," with a large percentage of
groundlings eager for tales of conspiracy and cover-up, and inclined to become
restless if more than five minutes passed without a fiery denunciation of the
Central Intelligence Agency, the Warren Report, American cold-war policy or the
Bush Administration. They got all this and more from Mr. Stone, who, as he
lumbered toward the lectern, looked like a man who had bulked up by carrying the
weight of history on his shoulders for too long.

In a crowd-pleasing recitation, he went over the experience of working on "J. F.
K.," one that has shaken him so deeply, he said, that he has wondered aloud
about the version of American history given in the books he read as a youth.

Disillusionment evidently has been a bitter pill. "I've come to have severe
doubts about Columbus," he said, "about Washington, about the Civil War being
fought over slavery, about World War I, about World War II and the supposed
fight against Nazism and Japanese control of resources."

Careering toward a climax, Mr. Stone apparently decided to drive his car right
off the cliff. To thrilled applause, he concluded, "I don't even know if I was
born or who my parents were."

Mr. Stone's dead-serious, dead-ahead approach momentarily eclipsed a fine
performance by Mr. Mailer, the evening's first speaker, who contended that the
surplus of theories about the Kennedy assassination makes a factual movie on the
subject impossible.

" 'J. F. K.,' " Mr. Mailer said, "should be seen not as history but as myth,"
the story of "a huge and hideous event, in which the gods warred, and a god
fell."

'Worst of the Great Films'

He then delivered a series of backhanded compliments that had the effect of a
skillful station-house beating, the kind that inflicts maximum damage without
leaving any visible marks.

" 'J. F. K.,' " Mr. Mailer said, was "perhaps the worst of the great films, but
one with the power to make new history." It is powerful but crude, he said,
"like all of Oliver Stone's movies," which is only natural, since its maker "can
be characterized as a brute." But, Mr. Mailer added, "he has the integrity of a
brute."

By snuffling and rooting around "our national obsession," Mr. Stone accomplished
something, Mr. Mailer said. Sometimes, he concluded, using a familiar vulgar
expression, nonsense can only be driven out by superior nonsense.

In taking the high road of myth, Mr. Mailer sidestepped entirely the niggling,
footnote-plagued problems of Kennedy assassinology, leaving the fact versus
fiction discussion to Mr. Epstein, the author of several books on the Kennedy
assassination, and Ms. Ephron, who co-wrote the screenplay for "Silkwood," the
1983 film based on the life of the antinuclear advocate Karen Silkwood.

Mr. Epstein made a plea for maintaining the distinction between fiction and
nonfiction. "In nonfiction the writer is bound by the universe of discoverable
fact," he said. "When he reaches the limits of discoverable fact, he stops."

The problem comes, he continued, when an artist tries to mix fact and fiction.
"What you get is not a hybrid," he said, "but pure fiction, because the
introduction of a fictional scene or fact changes everything after it."

Ms. Ephron delivered a cool, disdainful and very witty set piece on the failure
of the press, specifically The New York Times, to understand the legitimate
claims of art in such matters. Burned and still smoldering after her experience
as a screenwriter for the film "Silkwood," which provoked criticism in the press
for its treatment of biographical fact, she tried to explain the furor over "J.
F. K." as the innate hostility of the press to any incursion into its territory.

The aim in films like "Silkwood" and " 'J. F. K.,' " she said, is to create "not
the truth, but what it was like -- sort of, maybe -- in a way that journalism
could never come close to."

" 'J. F. K.,' " she said, was "more ambiguous and brilliant" than its defenders.
"It's not a wild and wacky look at the assassination, but a look at 30 years of
assassination madness," she said.

Mr. Stone, who looked lethargic and put-upon for most of the evening, raised an
eyebrow halfway at this one.

All three of Mr. Stone's fellow panelists criticized his treatment of Jim
Garrison, the District Attorney from New Orleans played by Kevin Costner, as an
unsatisfying figure, with none of the dark corners and complications of the
actual man.

Mr. Stone defended himself on grounds of narrative efficiency and dramatic
coherence. Complicating Jim Garrison, he said, would have turned the movie into
a biography, when the point was to use him as a kind of spotlight to illuminate
broad historical questions.

Falling in with Mr. Mailer's myth approach, Mr. Stone called the District
Attorney "a Mr. Smith who goes to Washington but whose trip must end in
tragedy," done in by the same dark forces that kept the American people in
thrall "to a single-party superstate with its own cold-war religion, police and
culture."

His remarks met with stormy applause.

In a brief question period, four counter-panelists onstage fired away at Mr.
Stone, who relied heavily on a young research assistant at his side who slipped
him notes on yellow paper with arcane bits of Kennedy-assassination data.

When a questioner from the floor asked if President Bush was a C.I.A. agent, Mr.
Stone said, judiciously, "He may well have been, but I don't put him at Dealey
Plaza," a delicious possibility raised by an earlier questioner. Mr. Stone
suggested that a thoroughgoing investigation of the matter might be in order,
however.

Max Holland, a contributing editor at The Nation, took aim at the Kennedy halo,
calling the movie "a case of wish fulfillment," and remarking sourly on such
events as the Bay of Pigs and the assassination of President Ngo Dinh Diem of
South Vietnam.

Mr. Holland also criticized Mr. Stone on more narrow factual grounds. He cited a
scene in "J. F. K." in which a man is seen doctoring the famous snapshot of Lee
Harvey Oswald holding the rifle used in the assassination.

In fact, said Mr. Holland, technical examination of the photograph in 1979
showed it to be genuine. "A film maker crosses the line," he said, " when he
bends the facts to suit his thesis."

"I talked to Marina Oswald about the photograph," Mr. Stone said of Oswald's
widow. "'She told me that she did take the photograph, but that she took it from
the stairs." Here Mr. Stone paused dramatically. "But if you look at the
photograph, you'll see the stairs in the background."

Rejecting Panel Arguments

The remark hung in the air, like many others that night, delivering the kind of
brief but delicious frisson that has made "Unsolved Mysteries" mandatory
television viewing.

Christopher Hitchens, a columnist for The Nation, decided he had had about
enough of the Kennedy worship for one night. He noted the panelists' fondness
for the notion of "American innocence, loss of same," and rejected it as "an
objectionable, narcissistic formulation."

Turning the cold shower on full blast, Mr. Hitchens directed the attention of
the "media haters, and I know you're out there," to the myth of Camelot as the
first and grandest of the press conspiracies, a soft-focus treatment of the
Kennedy era that has disguised its roots in McCarthyism and segregation.

"Let us get rid of that Arthurian metaphor with which we've been stuck ever
since Jackie Kennedy went to a musical," he concluded.

Mr. Mailer softly rebuked Mr. Hitchens, explaining that although Kennedy was not
perfect, "he was flexible and extremely intelligent for a U.S. President."

Conspiracy Upon Conspiracy

It was too late for Mr. Mailer, however. He had thrown away any audience good
will at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, several minutes earlier by arguing that
the C.I.A. should not be dismantled and by defending the Persian Gulf war as a
necessary evil. Not even a vintage Mailer rant about the nation teetering on the
edge of fascism could bring the crowd back.

Yet it was Mr. Mailer who embraced, perhaps embodied, the historical
complexities and ambiguities heaped up throughout the evening and showed the
best chances of negotiating the wheels within wheels of conspiracy, duplicity
and bad faith. It was a high point of sorts when, in a daring
see-you-and-raise-you move, he tossed before Mr. Stone the juicy theory that
Watergate might have been a plot to get rid of President Richard M. Nixon before
he could dismantle the cold-war state. A look crossed Mr. Stone's face
momentarily, the look of a man who had just been pitched a rather interesting
movie idea.

"This country is so complicated," Mr. Mailer said at one point, "that when I
start to think about it I begin talking in a Southern accent."

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Debating art's duty to history were, from left, Oliver Stone,
Nora Ephron, Edward Jay Epstein, Norman Mailer and Victor Navasky, moderator.
(Angel Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Clinton Finds a Theme: He Is Not Paul Tsongas

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: CAMDEN, S.C., March 4


Gov. Bill Clinton thinks he has hit his stride.

He has the message he wants: an us-versus-them economic pitch. He has the
electoral credibility he wants, thanks to an unexpectedly solid win in the
Georgia primary and two respectable second-place finishes in Colorado and
Maryland.

And he has the opponent he wants -- Paul E. Tsongas, whose hard-edged pitch
about belt-tightening provides him with the contrast Mr. Clinton feels he needs
to sharpen the campaign's focus.

In many ways, the events that have narrowed the Democratic contest into a
two-way race may have provided the Arkansas Governor with the best scenario he
has had since Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York decided not to run for President.

Pointing Out 'Distinctions'

A Cuomo-Clinton contest, his advisers had hoped, would have provided instant
contrast in a muddled Democratic field. Now Mr. Tsongas can fill that role.

Mr. Clinton's chief weapon: the economy. By stepping up his discussion on
restoring jobs and investment, he is trying to take Mr. Tsongas's best issue
away from him.

The strategy took final shape this week as Mr. Clinton unveiled a new campaign
speech that relies heavily on outlining what he calls the "distinctions" between
his proposals and Mr. Tsongas's.

In an advertisement that is now on television in Florida after first appearing
in Georgia and Maryland, Mr. Clinton contrasts Mr. Tsongas's statements with his
own in a combination intended to leave the viewer with the impression that Mr.
Tsongas is not a friend of the average worker.

And in his standard speech, Mr. Clinton hammers away at Mr. Tsongas. "I believe
you can have growth and fairness in this country," Mr. Clinton said. "Now we're
having a fight in the Democratic Party with someone who says growth now,
fairness later."

Some of the message seems to be penetrating with voters, especially in Florida,
where a diverse and unhappy electorate votes next week.

"Tsongas, he's for the upper class," said Bernie Skall, a retired accountant who
heard Mr. Clinton yesterday at the Century Village retirement community in
Deerfield Beach, Fla. "I think Mr. Clinton's down to earth. He's for the little
guy."

The strategy also borrows from other campaigns. Although Mr. Clinton has long
tried to cast himself as a Washington outsider, he was embraced early by most of
the Washington Democratic establishment.

Now the outsider rhetoric has returned. And this time it owes more than a little
of its edge to former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, who has found some
success with his populist outsider's message.

"I'm not the favorite candidate of the Beltway," Mr. Clinton said as he
explained away his loss in the Maryland primary on Tuesday, "because I support
real change."

Cue From Buchanan

And with an eye toward Patrick J. Buchanan, Mr. Clinton has also renewed his
criticism of President Bush. Surveys of voters leaving polling stations show
that both Mr. Buchanan and Mr. Clinton appeal to less-educated, blue-collar
voters.

But by condemning what he describes as Mr. Buchanan's race baiting, Mr. Clinton
hopes to attract some of the disenchanted Republicans who want to send a message
and may be willing to cross party lines to do so.

For weeks Clinton aides have been looking for a way to portray the distinctions
between the two leading Democratic candidates. When the Tsongas campaign first
caught on in New Hampshire, Mr. Clinton was spending much of his time defending
himself against charges that he had ducked the Vietnam war draft and had been
unfaithful to his wife.

By the time last weekend's round of debates arrived, the Clinton campaign had
assembled its research on Mr. Tsongas and was searching for a way to distill it
into speeches and new television advertising.

The new approach got its first tryout this week.

"It's crystallized in Governor Clinton's mind during the last five days," said
George Stephanopoulos, the deputy campaign manager. "He felt it during the
debates."

"With Tsongas emerging maybe as the front-runner, the debate moves more toward
who's old and who's new on economic issues," said Paul Begala, another Clinton
strategist.

Mr. Clinton christened himself the "accountability candidate" on Tuesday, a
signal that the bitterness between the two Democrats is about to become even
more harsh.

Targets will include Mr. Tsongas's proposal for a nickel-a-gallon increase in
the gasoline tax and his call for a measured reduction in the capital gains tax
rate.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Coping With Peace -- A Special Report.;
Cambodia, Bleak and Fearful, Yearns for U.N. Peacekeepers

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2425 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Throughout this shattered and still heavily land-mined nation, many Cambodians
agree that only the swiftest arrival of United Nations peacekeepers can reverse
a slide into anarchy, and some even wonder whether the force of 22,000 will
prove large enough for the task.

In authorizing the deployment, the United Nations has approved one of the
largest and most expensive peacekeeping operations in its history, with the
assembly, transport and maintenance of soldiers and civilian monitors expected
to cost more than $2 billion.

But four months after Cambodia's warring factions signed a peace treaty and
paved the way for United Nations involvement, the problems are so vast and so
varied that they are certain to severely challenge the blue-capped international
force.

'I Am Forced to Worry'

Racked by feuds and corruption, the Government in Phnom Penh has stopped
providing the countryside with even basic services like medical care, education
and sanitation.

Moreover, tens of thousands of Government workers have not been paid since last
fall, and some soldiers have turned to banditry to support themselves and their
families.

"This is supposed to be a time of peace and rebuilding, but I am forced instead
to worry about how I will support my family and keep them safe," said a
28-year-old Government clerk in the western city of Sisophon, who last received
his salary, equivalent to $12 a month, in November.

Apprehensive About Refugees

Such problems, widespread as they are, are likely to be compounded as the
370,000 Cambodian refugees begin returning from border camps in Thailand where
many have lived for a dozen years or more.

For some, the trek home will run perilously close to undiscovered mines planted
on paths and rice paddies.

Diplomats and international relief workers say that this sense of disorder,
which intensifies exponentially the farther one travels from the capital, could
provide opportunities for the Khmer Rouge, the fanatical Chinese-backed
guerrillas who were responsible for the deaths of more than one million
Cambodians in the 1970's.

Despite its ugly past, the Khmer Rouge signed the peace treaty and are part of
the transitional coalition, the Supreme National Council, which is supposed to
work with the incumbent Phnom Penh Government to run Cambodia until elections
are held.

But the Khmer Rouge, its adversaries say, are waiting patiently for a second
chance for power -- perhaps through the ballot box, perhaps on the battlefield.

The Capital
Peace Has Brought A Modest Boom

In Phnom Penh, neighborhoods that were little more than rubble a year ago are
being reborn as Cambodians and foreign investors gamble that peace will take
root and with it will come the kind of profits that have been accumulated
elsewhere in Southeast Asia.

The boom has trickled down to people like Pung Sikhoeur, a father of three who
drives a bicycle rickshaw and sometimes works as a cook.

He has rented his three-room home to a group of Thai investors while moving his
family into a shack on the outskirts of the city. The rent he gets for his home,
the equivalent of about $300 a month, is a fortune in a nation where per capita
income is less than $200 a year.

"I am lucky," said Mr. Pung Si khoeur. "It is craziness for foreigners to pay so
much money. But I am happy to take their money. If the United Nations comes and
takes over, maybe the peace will last, and I can become truly rich."

Wounds of War, and More War

Cambodia has not known real peace since the 1960's.

In 1969, at the height of the Vietnam War, the United States began secret
bombing of suspected North Vietnamese Army bases in eastern Cambodia. The
bombing lasted four years.

In 1975, the Khmer Rouge overran the American-supported Phnom Penh Government
and began its reign of genocidal terror.

Four years later the Vietnamese army ousted the Khmer Rouge regime, forcing its
leaders back into the jungle, where they regrouped as rebels.

The civil war that followed lasted nearly 13 years.

Phnom Penh, which the Khmer Rouge turned into a ghost town by forcing its
residents out at gunpoint in 1975, is now suffused with a dreamlike atmosphere
where the hopes and prospects for instant wealth intermingle with looming
portents of more tragedy and disaster.

The city today has at least 800,000 residents, up from about 50,000 when the
Khmer Rouge were overthrown in 1979, but still less than half its 1975
population of 2 million.

Uneasiness Over Inequalities

In the capital, Mercedes-Benz sedans regularly cruise along the potholed
streets. It is seldom clear who is behind the heavily tinted windows but many of
the pedestrians and bicycle riders assume they are newly affluent Government
officials.

In December riots erupted when it became known that corrupt officials had sold
off Government buildings and businesses and pocketed the proceeds. As many as a
dozen people were killed before the rioting was put down by the security forces.

The city's only luxury hotel is filled with Asian business executives, many of
whom admit that they are driven more by the impulse of gambling than by the
calculation of investment.

Though more luxury hotels are being built and a newly opened meeting spot for
the elite, the Cafe No Problem, provides snacks of French cheeses and pates, the
unease and resentment that flared into riots is not hard to find.

Begging as a Career

"All I can do is beg," said 22-year-old Tep Samoun, who stops pedestrians along
Achar Mean Boulevard, the busy central thoroughfare, to plead for the equivalent
of a few pennies. "There is nothing else I can offer."

Mr. Tep Samoun came to the capital from Kompong Cham Province, north of the
city, after losing his left leg in 1988 in a land mine explosion.

In the belief that his handicap would prevent him from ever being useful on his
family's small farm, Mr. Tep Samoun sought work in Phnom Penh but, like many of
the dozens of other beggars along Achar Mean, he found none. He and his wife
sleep on a sidewalk near the railroad station, under a bamboo sheet to guard
against the heat and rain.

"It is not a good life but I can survive," Mr. Tep Samoun said, noting that his
income from begging, the equivalent of about $1.50 a day, has risen since last
October, when the Cambodian peace treaty was signed. "People in Phnom Penh have
more money now to share with us. There are rich people here."

The Countryside
Far Away, Poor And Frustrated

Kampot, a palm-shaded provincial capital about 90 miles southwest of Phnom Penh,
is undergoing a minor facelift: a handful of the ochre-colored colonial villas,
gutted during the civil war, are being restored as businesses or homes.

But that is where any similarity with Phnom Penh ends: Peace is bringing
prosperity to a far smaller proportion of Kampot's residents. For many, perhaps
most, an already bleak situation is growing worse, as the central Government
first cut back and then cut off basic services. .

The impact is most poignant in the decrepit Kampot hospital, the major health
facility for the region.

No Medicine, No Pay, No Food

The Health Ministry has ended regular deliveries of oxygen. Antibiotics are
scarce, and the only ones available come from international relief agencies.
Doctors and nurses stopped receiving pay in November.

Patients must provide their own food and drinking water, and if they do not
sweep out their grimy, fly-infested hospital wards, nobody will.

Tan Lay, a 30-year-old soldier, moaned gently as he lay on dirty linens pulled
across a simple wooden bed in the intensive care unit. His right leg was blown
off above the knee when he stepped on one of the Soviet-built mines planted by
Government forces.

Regaining consciousness in the hospital after the amputation, Mr. Tan Lay was
told he would have to pay 70,000 riels, about $82, for the two liters of blood
that were needed to keep him alive on the operating table. The Government, he
was told, would not pay for his medicine, or even for his food.

"We cannot hope to pay back all this money to the hospital," said his wife, Prak
Phalla, as she fanned her feverish husband. "What can we do?" she asked, noting
that he had not received his $7-a-month salary since December.

Arranging to Survive

Chin Sathealin is a 31-year-old teacher who, like all other employees in
Kampot's schools, has not been paid for four months. "We go to the provincial
bank and ask for our salaries, and they say there is no money from Phnom Penh,"
she said.

Many teachers, she said, survive only with the help of second jobs. Some can be
found after classes at Kampot's central market, selling produce raised on their
small family farms.

There are reports circulating throughout Kampot Province that many soldiers are
turning to banditry. The reports are widely believed.

In mid-February, a truck carrying sea salt from Kampot to Phnom Penh was
ambushed at dawn, its tires shot out and the driver and other passengers robbed.
Trigger-happy soldiers were blamed for the attack.

In Kampot, as in other provinces, many people say they are frightened to be
outside their homes after dusk.

"In a sense, I preferred the war, because at least then the soldiers were paid
and they had an enemy to fight," said one angry official, who insisted that his
name not be used. "Now, in peacetime, they are not paid, and they will attack
citizens to survive."

The Khmer Rouge
The Specter Cast By Ex-Murderers

The growing lawlessness outside Phnom Penh is most likely to benefit the Khmer
Rouge, who gained some legitimacy by signing the peace treaty brokered by the
United Nations.

Despite their murderous past, Khmer Rouge have been made part of the Supreme
National Council, a coalition led by the nation's former monarch, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, that is to help govern the nation until elections next year.

The ambitions of the Khmer Rouge remain a constant worry to those Cambodians
whose families suffered under its genocidal reign. The small advance contingent
of United Nations military observers in Cambodia has accused the leaders of
ignoring terms of the cease-fire by refusing to allow monitors into areas under
Khmer Rouge control.

Fulfillment of Fears

A senior Asian diplomat in Phnom Penh said of the Khmer Rouge: "They will do the
bare minimum in meeting terms of the cease-fire, keeping soldiers and weapons in
reserve, in secret if necessary. They want to be ready to pounce if the war
resumes."

In late February, a clearly marked United Nations helicopter passing near Khmer
Rouge troops was shot at, and an Australian soldier was wounded.

Last month, Khmer Rouge were reported to have begun moving heavy guns and more
than 1,000 troops to Kompong Thom Province, where there have been repeated
cease-fire violations by both the Khmer Rouge and Government troops.

In Takeo Province, villagers complain that Khmer Rouge often sweep down to rob
them along the highway that leads to the Gulf of Thailand, then leave behind
minefields, apparently to terrorize local settlers.

'I Think They Are Evil'

"They plant mines here to make it impossible for us to walk safely in our
villages," said an elderly woman who sells fruit and cigarettes at a roadside
stand in Takeo. "All they want to do is make people die and make us think that
peace is impossible.

"Some people like the Khmer Rouge, but I think they are evil," she said.

Khieu Samphan, the nominal Khmer Rouge leader, was nearly lynched when he
returned to Phnom Penh last November after a dozen years in exile. Government
troops rescued him from a villa being used as the Khmer Rouge headquarters in
the capital, but the villa was ransacked.

While Khmer Rouge insist that they they have abandoned Marxism and embraced
free-market economics, they continue to portray themselves as champions of the
Cambodian masses, and the faction retains at least a small base of support among
the rural poor.

The Refugees
Harsh Logistics Of Return

Already burdened with so many troubles, Cambodia is about to be inundated with
hundreds of thousands of mostly landless refugees.

Nearly 370,000 Cambodians are making final preparations to flood home from
Thailand in what relief workers say will be one of the largest and most complex
resettlements since the partition of India in 1947.

Across the countryside and on the outskirts of Phnom Penh, there is the sound of
hammers and saws as hundreds of wood-and-tin buildings rise to serve as
temporary reception centers. The refugees are expected to begin returning with
United Nations escorts in April. The goal is to have all the refugees back by
year's end.

The United Nations, which is organizing and paying for the repatriation, warns
that the return of so many Cambodians at such an unsettled time is fraught with
hazards, including a shortage of safe, fertile land for the refugees to farm.

Planting Rice Among the Mines

Under the original plan, each refugee was to be provided with two hectares, or
about five acres, as well as farm tools and building supplies.

But after a generation of fighting, Cambodia is littered with mines laid by the
four warring factions during the civil war; as of mid-February, United Nations
specialists had been able to find safe land for only 18,000 of the 75,000
families now in Thailand.

Mine experts say that even if there is a thorough mine-sweeping, thousands of
plastic mines will never be detected and will likely maim and kill Cambodians
for a generation to come.

"There is just not enough safe land available now," said Daniel E. Conway, who
represents the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Thailand. "Not
everybody is going to end up with two hectares of land," at least not soon, he
said.

'This Is a Poor Country'

Even those who do get land may be unable to farm productively.

"The land we have located is not of the best quality," conceded a United Nations
official in Phnom Penh. "This is a poor country, and if the land were of prime
quality, it would already be under cultivation."

In the expectation that many refugees will be unable to feed themselves, the
United Nations has already agreed to provide up to 18 months' food for returning
refugees.

"Our nightmare is that the refugees will cross the border, determine that their
prospects here are very limited because of the chaos in the Cambodian peace
process, and head right back to Thailand," said the official in Phnom Penh.
"They could just turn on their heels."

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peace in Cambodia has brought a modest boom to Phnom Penh, where
scaffolding surrounded a French colonial villa under renovation (Agence
France-Presse) (pg. A1); About 370,000 Cambodian refugees are expected to begin
returning soon from border camps in Thailand, where some have lived for a dozen
years or more. Workers at a United Nations-sponsored reception center in Phnom
Penh constructed temporary housing for the refugees. (Philip Shenon/The New York
Times) (pg. A10)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Phnom Penh. (pg. A10)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 722 words



International 3-21

ONE SUPERPOWER, PLEASE


The Defense Department is drafting a policy statement that makes the case for a
world dominated by one superpower -- the United States -- whose position can be
perpetuated by constructive behavior.  1

VENDETTA IN THE CAUCASUS

The former Soviet republic of Azerbaijan seems to be losing a communal war as
violence boils over in an Armenian-majority enclave within its borders.
Survivors tell of tank barrages, looting, rape and hostage taking in
Nagorno-Karabakh.  1

ISRAELI AIDE SLAIN IN TURKEY

A powerful car bomb killed a senior Israeli Embassy security officer in the
Turkish capital. Two militant Islamic groups took responsibility for the
slaying.  12

Mideast peace talks have become a stage for Israeli electioneering.  12

AIDS ENTERS MEXICO FROM U.S.

The spread of AIDS by migrant workers returning to Mexico is becoming a growing
concern in towns like Zinapecuaro. But doctors and epidemiologists say the
phenomenon remains submerged in denial and social taboos.  3

BOAT EXODUS TO HONG KONG FADES

The number of Vietnamese boat people arriving in Hong Kong dropped to zero last
month. Welcoming the news, officials said the exodus that scattered nearly
675,000 Vietnamese through the region over a dozen years may finally be ending.
7

'MR. EUROPE' WAVERS

Having enjoyed more power and popularity than any of his predecessors as
president of the European Community's commission, Jacques Delors wrestles with a
choice born of success: whether to keep the post or seek the French presidency.
9

National 22-35

A WOUNDED GUN INDUSTRY

Improbable as it may seem at a time of drug wars and senseless schoolyard
shootouts, American gun manufacturers are staggering after a decade of sluggish
sales.  1
Many New York teen-agers have embraced a gun culture.  30

A LAW FIRM CRIES FOUL

Facing imminent collapse, a leading New York law firm said Government lawyers'
effort to freeze its assets had forced it to try to hurriedly settle a $275
million lawsuit alleging concealment of a client's corruption.  22

U.S. SEEKS WIRETAP HELP

The Government proposed legislation that would require the nation's telephone
companies to give law-enforcement agencies technical help with eavesdropping.
22

THE CLINTONS AND AN S.& L. OWNER

After he became Governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton and his wife were business
partners with the owner of a failing savings and loan association that was
subject to state regulation.  1

THE CAMPAIGN TURNS BITTER

On the final weekend before Super Tuesday, Governor Clinton and former Senator
Tsongas engaged in heated exchanges over who was distorting whose record.  1

Clinton wins convincingly in South Carolina.  26

Clinton is taking the brunt of a step-up in attack campaigning.  24

Neo-Nazi groups have embraced the Buchanan campaign.  26

Gay groups have reacted to Buchanan without rancor.  26

Buchanan said he would not quit the race even if he could not win.  25

BRANDED A SPY, UNJUSTLY

Three years ago the C.I.A. gave S. Peter Karlow a small bronze medal, a citation
in a blue leatherette binder and a check for close to $500,000. It was the
agency's way of saying there had been a terrible mistake.  1

Regional 36-44

CONCERN OVER GROWTH PROGRAM

New York City has paid little attention to economic development in recent years,
spending far less than other cities and focusing its efforts poorly, both
government and business leaders say. Many say the city has ignored growth
industries in its efforts to prop up sagging businesses.  36

PHOTO STUDIO OWNER KILLED

A Long Island man who ran the Crown Heights photo studio his father started
decades earlier was shot to death by a pair of teen-agers who may have known the
victim.  37

VIOLENCE ON BROOKLYN SUBWAY

As a new Transit Police Chief took office, his celebration was interrupted by an
urgent message: A 15-year-old youth had just been shot by another teen-ager on a
subway car in Brooklyn.  37

Former schoolhouse becomes model for the city's housing efforts.  40

News analysis: Albany confronts election revisions and redistricting.38

Obituaries 46

Joseph A. Buttinger, anti-Nazi and Vietnam scholar.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Despair and defeat for Azerbaijanis against Armenians. 1
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
Hot and Cool Images of Malcolm X

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 12; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: NEWARK


HE came into the world as Malcolm Little and left it as Malcolm X. The story is
short -- 1925 to 1965 -- and grim, and it is being told through word and picture
in "Malcolm X: The Man, the Meaning," a show that comes to Aljira here from the
Jamaica Arts Center in Queens.

Malcolm was about 4 when his father, a Baptist preacher who worked for Marcus
Garvey's Universal Improvement Association, was killed by a white hate group.
The family had been burned out of their house in Lansing, Mich., and before that
had been run out of Omaha, Neb., by the Ku Klux Klan.

Malcolm's mother, another Garveyite, cracked under the strain of raising eight
children with next to no money. This landed the boy in a foster home. His own
delinquency brought him to a house of detention, which in turn led to a life of
crime in Harlem, followed by jail at the age of 21.

There, however, Malcolm received the education that had eluded him in the real
world. He also acquired the message being disseminated by Elijah Muhammad's
Nation of Islam and, hence, a reason for living. The conversion took longer than
that undergone by Saul on the road to Damascus, but in its own way was quite as
dramatic.

Malcolm had gone to prison as, in his own words, "one of the most depraved
parasitical hustlers in New York"; he emerged from it, in 1952, a man possessed
of self-respect, knowledge, a mission and, equally important, the means of
proclaiming it.

As James Cone explains in the introduction to the show, from which the foregoing
was taken, Malcolm joined the Nation of Islam and quickly rose to the top. So
persuasive was he as a speaker, "Martin Luther King Jr. and other mainstream
civil rights leaders refused to appear on the same platform with him," and those
"who did debate him often regretted it."

After a glance at the show's videotape, it is not hard to see why.

This man with a professorial air and a light but penetrating voice gets right to
the point in a style that is as lean as his person and is both acerbic and
humorous. "An integrated cup of coffee is insufficient pay for 400 years of
labor"; "While King was having a dream, the rest of us Negroes are having a
nightmare."

The most famous quote is the one that got him into trouble with Muhammad -- the
"chickens coming home to roost" crack about President Kennedy's assassination.

After his break with Muhammad, Malcolm sought a rapprochement with the regular
civil rights movement but, while it lasted, his gall must have been
exhilarating.

Unfortunately, there is nothing in this rather bleak show to indicate that he
inspired exhilarating art, although James Andrew Brown's contribution comes
close, in a gruesome way. An installation 10 feet long, it consists of a wall
embellished with Life magazine covers featuring Lyndon Johnson, Edward Kennedy
in a brace and scenes related to the Vietnam War.

Below these is one shelf occupied by plastic bottles imprinted with Malcolm's
portrait in black, and another shelf with a tube that siphons red liquid from
one container and pours it down a sheet of plastic into another. When the power
is turned on, the "blood" flows -- nauseatingly. Completing the installation are
red umbrellas, red and white checkerboard linoleum and quotes from Malcolm,
including the one that seems to have prophesied his own end: "A bloodbath is on
the way in America."

A specialist in depicting horror, from gang rape to slaughterhouses, Sue Coe
weighs in with shiny black paintings of the actual assassination and a grisaille
drawing of Klansmen converging by firelight on Malcolm's mother and two of her
children.

With a larger-than-life portrait, Isaac Paris Jr. goes no farther than the
photograph that he worked from. This is also true for Daniel Tisdale's head of
the subject repeated nine times in bright red (which is illustrated here).

The only good portrait is Archie Rand's expressionistic, crimson-toned head and
shoulders painted in 1967, when Malcolm's memory would still have been fresh.
Mr. Rand's other contribution is a 1960's abstraction that communicates little
more than a tendency to the Color Field style.

Larry List shows a paperback copy of "The Assassination of Malcolm X," by George
Breitman, Herman Porter and Baxter Smith, which is riddled with shots.

Grace Williams presents three denim jackets ornamented with photomechanical
reproductions of Malcolm, together with an assortment of fringe, beads and other
trinkets. Elizabeth Catlett is present with a lithograph of women's heads turned
toward the head of the leader.

Finally, it seems as if abstraction is the most appropriate way of celebrating
this cerebral personality who, to begin with, found salvation in Islam. In any
event, the images that remain in mind are the cool paintings of Stuart Little.

Each painting consists four separate canvases in solid colors, making a Maltese
cross. For some reason, they alone encourage meditation about what might have
been had Malcolm X lived.

The exhibition runs through March 28. Aljira, a Center for Contemporary Art, is
at 2 Washington Place. The gallery is open Wednesday through Sunday from noon to
6 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Malcolm X, 20th Century Black Man," by Daniel Tisdale.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 10, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment;
Eyeing November, Democrats Shiver

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, March 9


Despite all the partisan hullabaloo leading up to Super Tuesday, all the
proclamations of inevitable victory in November, a gnawing anxiety grips
Southern Democrats. They have a wounded bird in their sights, but they fear they
lack the ammo to bring him down.

President Bush is in terrible trouble. It shows in the national polls, where his
approval rating is down to 40 percent. It shows in his floundering campaign, his
search for themes, his aides' short fuses. And it shows here in the South, where
like Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan, Mr. Bush built his majority in the
electoral college and where he hopes to do so again this year, to make up for
the possible loss of California with its 54 electoral votes.

In the South Carolina primary on Saturday, as in so many other early contests, a
third of Republican voters said no to the President, voting either for Patrick
J. Buchanan or David Duke. Some of the naysayers will "come home" in November,
but not all.

In addition, in the primaries that are open to independent voters, the President
has been running weakly among this group, an important element in the coalition
that has kept the Republicans in the White House.

Trouble Even in Texas

"Without the independents and the Reagan Democrats," said one of Mr. Bush's old
friends here, "we lose. At the moment, we don't have them."

The trouble shows even in Texas.  This is the President's adopted home state,
and he is expected to sweep the primary on Tuesday, perhaps even to hold his
rivals to 20 percent of the vote.  But in a recent poll, three quarters of the
respondents said they were worse off economically under Mr. Bush, which surely
suggests potential vulnerability in November.

In another survey, published Sunday by The Houston Chronicle, four of seven
people interviewed said they wished that other names were on the ballot for both
parties.

"The boom for the Republicans of the 1980's has stalled out," said Richard
Murray, a political science professor and poll taker at the University of
Houston. "But people aren't switching to the Democrats. They are turned off by
both parties."

Texas matters a lot. In November, it will cast the third-largest number of
electoral votes, 32, just behind New York, with 33, and fast-growing Florida
will cast the fourth-largest number, 25.  The two Sun Belt states have overtaken
four Great Lakes states -- Illinois, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania -- to take
a commanding position in national politics. And without carrying Texas, people
here remind visitors, no Democrat has won the Presidency since Texas entered the
Union in 1845.

Democratic strategists are keenly aware of that, and they remember, too, that in
the last 40 years, they have captured the White House only when they nominated
Southerners for President (Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964 and Jimmy Carter in 1976)
or for Vice President (Mr. Johnson in 1960). That has been a powerful argument
for Gov. Bill Clinton among party leaders this year.

Backing and Doubt

But important figures throughout the South wonder whether the Arkansas Governor,
whom many of them back, can get the job done if he is nominated.

Almost no major Democrat in the region sees any alternative to Mr. Clinton. That
is why senators and governors who dislike or distrust him have said so little in
public.

They dismiss former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California as a no-hoper, and it
is impossible to overstate the apprehension that most feel about former Senator
Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts. They see him as another Michael S. Dukakis,
and that makes them gag.

"If Tsongas is nominated," said a Democratic Senator from the region who knows
him and likes him personally, "you can write off the South. Again.  And that
means you can write off the White House for us. Again."

Fear of Tsongas

Local officeholders have rushed to endorse Mr. Clinton at least partly out of
concern about how a Tsongas candidacy might damage their own re-election
chances. An example is State Senator Ted Lyon, a Texan who said the other day,
"I have had all the liberal candidates from Massachusetts I want running at the
top of the ticket."

Why the animosity? Partly it is the legacy of the lackluster Dukakis campaign,
which came as a crushing disappointment in Texas particularly, since Senator
Lloyd Bentsen was on the ticket as the Vice-Presidential nominee. Partly it is
the foreign surname in a region with no experience of ethnic politics. Partly it
is Mr. Tsongas's platform; he is liberal on social issues and conservative on
economic questions, to paint with a broad brush, and many Democrats in Texas and
elsewhere in the South are the reverse.

Unvarnished liberals win in the South these days only in special circumstances.
A recent case is Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas, elected in 1990 after one of the
most inept Republican campaigns in recent memory.

Mr. Clinton is therefore careful to throw out symbols of moderation, calling for
welfare reform and advocating the use of the death penalty in a fairly large
number of cases, to mitigate his liberalism on race and economics. The problem
for him is the accusations that he avoided the draft in the Vietnam War and had
an extramarital affair.  Many Southern Democrats think this makes him
unelectable. It's as simple as that, although few will say so openly.

Reports last weekend of questionable financial dealings involving Governor
Clinton, his wife, Hillary, and a developer subject to state regulation will do
nothing to make voters forget the earlier accusations.

Issue of Character Remains

The Clinton campaign believes it has left its difficulties in the dust of
victory.  George Stephanopolous, the deputy campaign manager, said the other day
that "the campaign is again focused on the real issues."

Polls of voters leaving the booths in Georgia's primary last Tuesday did suggest
that few Clinton voters took the character issues, as they are called, into
account. But Mr. Clinton won only a bit more than half the vote in the
Democratic primary, which itself amounted to only about half the overall vote.
Among those who backed other Democrats, the character issues loomed larger, and
it seems certain that they also mattered to many of the Republicans and
independents.

The Democratic primary electorates in the South are no longer very
representative of statewide sentiment. In Texas, for instance, blacks and
Hispanics, white-collar urban professionals and trade-union members now
predominate, and many rural Democrats have switched to the Republican primary or
avoided primaries altogether.  It may be among those people -- religious,
patriotic, conservative -- that the greatest damage has been done to Mr.
Clinton, and they will be vital to victory in November.

"You can be sure of one thing," said a Democratic state chairman who described
himself as "spooked" by the prospect. "If we nominate Bill, the Republicans will
find a way to drive those issues home in the fall."

Earl Black, a prominent political scientist at the University of South Carolina,
attributed Mr. Clinton's powerful showing in his state's primary to what he
termed the weakness of the Democratic field. With a stronger challenger, he
said, the Arkansan would have felt "the impact of all the baggage he's
accumulated over the last month."

The baggage probably won't weigh too much on Tuesday. But much of the Democratic
establishment in this part of the country fears that it will feel like lead come
November, especially if the economy starts to snap back and the voters remember
that once upon a time they liked George Bush a lot.

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton was joined yesterday by Senator Bob Graham of
Florida, left, and Harold Wishna, exec-utive director of United Synagogues, in
singing the national anthem at Temple Beth Israel in Sunrise, Fla. (Jose R.
Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Hard Times, Just Plain Bars Are Timeless

BYLINE: By BRYAN MILLER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2017 words


IN the New York metropolitan region, there are Bars and there are bars. In the
former, beers go for $4, the bartender wears a vest and a substantial pub-style
menu is displayed on a chalkboard. In the latter, beers go for as little as
$1.50, the bartender wears a faded New York Giants T-shirt and asks if you want
a glass with your brew, and no matter what's on the menu, it's wise to stick to
hamburgers.

The earthier bars are never referred to as taverns, pubs, lounges or, heaven
forbid, night spots. In fact, they are rarely referred to at all except perhaps
in the context of a news story. ("The car ran onto the sidewalk in front of the
Suds Cafe.") Yet these unvarnished watering holes play a crucial role in the
tragicomedy of big-city life. They serve as inexpensive sources of recreation,
as anodynes to frazzled urban nerves and, in some cases, as democratic forums
where people from different walks of life converge.

And in a time of economic distress for the hospitality industry in general,
these fringe establishments are thriving, some in the most unlikely places,
based on visits to a dozen such haunts and interviews with proprietors of many
others. One would expect to find gritty, working-class bars in, say, Queens and
Staten Island and marginal areas of Manhattan. What's surprising, though, is
that many thrive in the gentrified neighborhoods of TriBeCa, Greenwich Village
and midtown Manhattan, as well as in well-heeled towns like Greenwich, Conn.

"I would say that right now they are the places that are surviving this economy
the best," says Raymond Foley, the publisher of Bartender Magazine. "People want
value when they go out. They are also looking for a home base. The local bar
offers both."

One vintage bar in Chelsea that seems to have a secure future is the Peter
McManus Cafe on Seventh Avenue. It's an inviting place in a rough-and-tumble
sort of way, with a well-worn tile floor, lead-paned windows and a splendid
carved mahogany bar. A back room has eerie green and blue banquettes and
cocktail tables.

The owner, Jim McManus, is a slow-moving, cocky Irishman with a 60-megabyte
memory of anecdotes. "I started with my father and my brother 56 years ago,"
says the thick-set, silver-haired owner with obvious pride. "This place was a
drugstore before that." In the middle of a chat, Mr. McManus launches into a
discourse on how to make a perfect rob roy. "Swirl the shaker with the scotch
and vermouth very gently," he admonishes. "You don't want to bruise the
vermouth; it's delicate. Like wine."

At 7 P.M. on this day, the bar is filled with a casually clad, risible crowd
ranging from business suits to blue jeans and flannels. Mr. McManus's son, Jamo,
who is 38 years old, works here. He represents the third generation in the
business and heads the kitchen, where generally satisfying pub fare like
sandwiches, steaks and casseroles is prepared.

Jim McManus can spin tales taller than the head on a fresh draft beer. "One day
Errol Flynn walked in here and was looking pretty gone," he recalls. "He said,
'I'll have a double vodka on the rocks.' I said, 'You're not gonna get it from
me,' and I showed him the door."

Then there was the time that Burt Lancaster came in with Leonard Bernstein. "It
was during the Vietnam War, and Lancaster made some remark about the American
flag," Mr. McManus remembers.

He, too, was shown the renowned door.

A Social Symphony

Most patrons of Carnegie Hall have probably walked past P. J. Carney's bar many
times without ever noticing it. Little did they know that a social symphony of
great color and texture holds forth there nightly. The small oval room with a
U-shaped bar and scattering of tables and booths attracts a remarkable cross
section of New Yorkers: businessmen, artists, students, musicians, itinerants,
even some turnaways from the nearby Planet Hollywood restaurant. Carney's may
not have the hood of the Batmobile on the wall, but it certainly has a better
shepherd's pie (made with beef, not lamb) as well as a good hamburger and fish
and chips.

Opened by P. J. Carney in 1927, then passed along to his son, the bar was
purchased 10 years ago by a tall, thin, soft-spoken Irishman named Desmond
Crawford. For many years this convivial little spot has been a favorite hangout
for teachers and students of the Art Students League around the corner. It's a
diverting place to spend a late weekend afternoon when the jocular regulars
drift in.

Robert Cenedella, a teacher and full-time artist, has been going to the bar for
more than 30 years. He treasures the place for its timelessness.  "Nothing ever,
ever changes here," Mr. Cenedella says, sipping an English ale at the
horseshoe-shaped bar.  He recalls going to P. J. Carney's with his mentor, the
artist George Gross. "I had my first beer in that booth over by the window," he
says. "It had to be, oh, 1959. I remember that seat because it had a broken
spring that would stick you when you sat down. Well, two weeks ago, I sat over
there with some students and the same spring caught me in the rear end!"

When Mr. Crawford is asked if he would ever change anything in the bar, he
doesn't even pause to think it over. "Not a chance," he replies. "People feel as
if this is their home and don't want people changing things around in their
living room."

Among others who stop by P. J. Carney's for the ambiance and Irish ales are the
neighborhood resident Buster Poindexter, the pop singer, and the musicians Cy
Coleman and Joe Jackson.

Afterwork Clubhouse

Milady's, at the corner of Prince and Thompson Streets in SoHo, is rather
nondescript from the outside. Inside, though, about 6 P.M. on Fridays, it
becomes a raucous after-work clubhouse. The spacious room has rec-room paneling,
sound tile, red-and-white-checked tablecloths, Connie Francis on the jukebox and
a big color television mounted overhead.

Two advertising executives shoot pool in one corner. Nearby a group of men and
women in the printing business take their usual table. "I come here every day,"
says Martin Moore, 33, a printing company executive. "I even bring customers
here to eat at lunch. We play pool, have something to eat. They feel they've
done something rather than just sit in a restaurant."

Frank Genovese, the 35-year-old owner, grew up a few blocks from the bar, and
later worked there before buying it 10 years ago. "I thought of making this
place much fancier than it is," Mr. Genovese says. "But then in my experience
the chi-chi places make a lot of money for a very short time -- but then?" He
says his bar is having its best year in memory.

Milady's is primarily a neighborhood bar, although periodically celebrities like
Madonna ("She comes with two huge people and has a club soda at the bar") and
Sylvester Stallone drop in for fresh homemade ravioli or the house favorite, a
charred chicken salad with five types of greens and a mustardy vinaigrette. Main
courses top off at $9.

Accent on Food

In fact, many of the old neighborhood joints emphasize food. For example, the
46-year-old Star Tavern in Orange, N.J., is locally renowned for superior,
light-crusted pizzas with all kinds of toppings. It's a big barn of a place with
an elongated bar, two overhead televisions blaring hockey games, and a
100-inch-television screen that descends for special sports events. The owner,
Gary Vayianos, 38, agrees to talk only after he finishes playing electronic
bowling with a customer.

The same thing that endears local bars to big-city customers applies here. "You
don't change the place if it works," says Mr. Vayianos, a former practicing
lawyer. "We have everyone from welfare mothers to millionaires from Montclair in
here. It's a real mix. And they like the way it is." When he recently tried to
remove a small section of the bar to create a passageway, he said, "customers
got all upset about it, asking me who gave permission for that."

Ambiance: Macho

The Bruce Park Grill, in dignified Cos Cob, Conn., is similarly close to being
an icon among its bibulous, sports-oriented crowd. It has a decidedly macho
ambiance: a dim, smoky mood, a long shuffleboard set running nearly the length
of the room and plangent rock music that could create waves in a gin and tonic.
Every other male customer looks like a former linebacker, and the $2.50 beers go
down like Gatorade.

The octogenarian owner of the town's most colorful hangout, the Mianus River
Tavern, better known as Augie's, refused to speak on the record for fear that
publicity would change the gritty character of his blue-collar bar. He is so
protective that the bar is not even listed in the Greenwich phone directory.
Augie's is right out of an Edward Hopper painting, a wonderfully preserved -- or
neglected, depending on your perspective -- tableau of Greenwich when most
residents worked with their hands, not with their stockbrokers.

A magnificent carved oak bar dominates the faded, threadworn room. A few
Formica-topped tables are lined up along the cherry red leather banquettes.
Local electricians, builders and town road crew workers pack the spartan back
room daily to fill up on "the cheapest lunch in Greenwich," as they refer to
Augie's. Hamburgers, for example, are $1.25.

With a Past

Down on far west Spring Street in SoHo is the Ear Inn, a saloon with pedigree.
Several years ago, 326 Spring Street was named to the National Register of
Historic Places.  The first bar on this site opened in 1812 when the riverbank
was 15 feet away and this neighborhood housed a substantial number of men who
worked the piers.

You couldn't tell its lofty status from the interior, with its splotched old
bar, slatted wood ceiling and dark, cramped feeling. Dangling over the bar on
this visit is a giant hand-scrawled message from a former patron: "I won't miss
work but I will miss you people next year when I'm in Jerusalem."

Some fear the Ear Inn may be losing its character as a local joint judging from
the number of dark suits showing up there after work. "Ten years ago there was a
frightening group of characters at the bar," says Thomas White, an investment
counselor in Manhattan. "You looked in the door and had serious reservations
about going inside. Now it's so much better."

The Ear Inn is popular among neighborhood residents for dinner. The
straightforward and generally satisfying fare includes soups, chicken breast
with mozzarella and ham, broiled salmon with a ginger-scallion sauce and
spaghetti with meatballs. The most expensive item, the salmon, is $8.75.

The phone rings behind the bar.  The bartender, holding the mouthpiece to his
stomach, shouts, "PHILLLLLLLLL! Are you here?"

Phil shouts back over his beer, "If it's female, I'm at the health club."

"I'm sorry, ma'm," the bartender responds. "I believe he's gone to work out at
the club."

Now, try that at the Oak Room.

                             --------------------
<HBWhere to Go

Here is a list of the bars, in the order mentioned, and their weekend hours:

 PETER McMANUS CAFE, 152 Seventh Avenue, at 19th Street, Manhattan. Hours:
Fridays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 3:30 A.M. Information: (212) 929-9691.

 P. J. CARNEY'S, 906 Seventh Avenue, at 57th Street, Manhattan. Hours: Fridays
through Sundays, noon to 4 A.M. Information: (212) 664-0056.

 MILADY'S RESTAURANT, 160 Prince Street, SoHo. Hours: Fridays through Sundays,
11 A.M. to 4 A.M. Information: (212) 226-9340.

 STAR TAVERN, 400 High Street, at Washington Street, Orange, N.J. Hours: Fridays
and Saturdays, 11:30 A.M. to 12:15 A.M.; Sundays, 11:30 A.M. to 11:45 P.M.
Information: (201) 675-3336.

 THE BRUCE PARK GRILL, 231 Bruce Park Avenue, Greenwich, Conn. Hours: Fridays
and Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 2 A.M.; Sundays, 11 A.M. to 11 P.M. Information: (203)
869-8006.

 MIANUS RIVER TAVERN (AUGIE'S), 136 River Road Extension, Cos Cob, Conn. Hours:
Fridays and Saturdays, 11:30 A.M. to midnight. Information: (203) 622-9578.

 EAR INN, 326 Spring Street, SoHo. Hours: Fridays through Sundays, 11:30 A.M. to
4 A.M. Information: (212) 226-9060.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Schmoozing is the pastime of the hour at Peter McManus's in
Chelsea. Mellissa Sabatch chatted with friends one recent night after work.
(Edward Keating/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Active Leadership? You Better Believe It.

BYLINE: By Dick Cheney;  Dick Cheney is Secretary of Defense.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The history of American defense teaches that the decisions we make when
conflicts end are as important as any in the heat of battle.

After World Wars I and II, and most recently after Vietnam, we dismantled our
military, believing that the threat had gone away. When we needed our military
again to deal with threats that could have been prevented had we stayed engaged,
like the expansion of Hitler's empire or the invasion of Korea, it was not
ready. In the end, we paid with American lives and resources to turn the threats
around.

Now, in the aftermath of the cold war, we can do what we have never done before:
reduce our military safely while retaining our ability to influence the events
that will most affect our security and freedom in the years ahead. That means
recognizing the critical importance of America's world role and preserving the
ability to fulfill it effectively.

Now I hear the absurd charge, most recently in a New York Times editorial, that
we advocate a "go it alone" defense strategy. No Administration has worked more
closely or successfully with its allies and friends in international security
efforts, from the worldwide coalition we assembled to fight aggression in
Operation Desert Storm to the collapse of Communism in Eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union.

Far from being against greater efforts by our allies, we regard such efforts as
essential. We have pressed our allies in Europe and Asia to take on a larger
share of responsibility.

The U.S. has helped revitalize U.N. leadership in peacekeeping and security
affairs. We've helped design and lead cooperative humanitarian efforts such as
Operation Provide Comfort, to aid refugees in northern Iraq, and Provide Hope,
to support democratic reform in Russia and other republics of the former Soviet
Union. We've participated in a sweeping revision of NATO's strategic concept,
emphasizing multinational forces.

These and other achievements recognize the continuing importance of active U.S.
leadership. That leadership role is the best hope for protecting freedom in a
period of significant uncertainty and global political change.

But the same critics who have always opposed defense are at it again, raising
the tired old cry that America's world presence is somehow immoral and dangerous
-- that whenever the U.S. takes an active role in the world, it arouses the
worst fears of other nations.

But other nations do not see it that way. I well remember Lech Walesa of Poland
and Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia warning me of the consequences of drawing
down U.S. forces in Europe too fast. They believe our presence in Europe
enhances stability and democracy.

We certainly need to take advantage of the new opportunities to reduce and
restructure our military, and we are. Army divisions, Navy ships and Air Force
wings are being rapidly retired. We are cutting our troop strength in Europe by
half. Today, there are fewer active-duty military personnel in the U.S. armed
forces than at any time since 1950, before the Korean War. By 1997, we will be
spending a smaller percentage of the gross national product on defense than at
any time since before Pearl Harbor.

But reducing the size and cost of the military is not the only opportunity we
face today. We also have the chance to influence the course and development of
world events in the post-cold war period.

We've already seen what U.S. leadership can achieve. In the Persian Gulf, we
kept a critical region and its essential resources out of the hands of a
ruthless aggressor. In nuclear affairs, the world has been transformed by the
President's historic initiatives to make radical reductions in U.S. nuclear
arsenals safely, while encouraging the former Soviet republics to do the same.
The world will be safer as a result.

Today, no other nation has won such widespread confidence and trust. The world's
strongest countries are our friends and allies. Throughout the post-Communist
world, new leaders seek to work with us to create a safer security environment.

It would be a grave mistake to forsake this leadership position and abandon our
friends and allies at a time of global change. Moreover, it is positively
foolhardy to assume we will never again face the need to prevent or respond to
the efforts of an aggressive, non-democratic power to dominate critical regions
of the world.

We cannot predict every significant shift that may affect our security, and we
cannot be certain that the positive developments of recent months will continue
indefinitely and without interruption. The only thing we can be sure of is that
a time will come again when Americans must go in harm's way to defend this
country's interests.

We can either sustain the forces we require and remain in a position to help
shape things for the better, or we can throw our advantage away. That would only
hasten the day when we face greater threats, at higher costs and further risk to
American lives.

It's no secret which course this Administration chooses. We seek to insure that
the U.S. remains able to pursue its democratic interests.

That's the goal behind the sweeping revision of defense policy we began three
years ago. We developed a new defense strategy, focusing on the regional crises
that would most likely affect our security in the years ahead. We moved
aggressively to reshape American defenses to meet the new requirements at
greatly reduced levels. Those who would slash our defense spending still further
and rely instead on "collective internationalism" forget that we need capable
forces to back up collective action.

The collapse of Soviet Communism in the past few years owes much to the courage
of the people of the former Communist world and the enduring ideas of liberty
and individual rights. But the fact remains that the U.S. and its allies averted
global conflict and laid the foundation for freedom to grow because we were
willing to deploy the military capability needed to protect and sustain our
liberty for more than 40 years.

Our leadership role benefited us. It benefited our allies. And it benefited the
world as a whole. We can remain a leader for much less than it cost us in the
past.

Those who advocate abandoning our leadership responsibilities are uncomfortable
with our strength. But millions around the world have found it cause for
celebration and pride.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary/March 8-13

BYLINE: By Joel Kurtzman

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1536 words



COMPANIES

The F.C.C. Moves to Free the Airwaves -- but for Whom?


Ever since former President Reagan installed deejay "Mad Man" Mark Fowler as
head of the Federal Communication Commission, the Government has been trying to
deregulate the airwaves. Last week, under F.C.C. chairman Alfred C. Sikes, the
Bush Administration moved it further along that path. The F.C.C. voted 4 to 0,
with one abstention, to increase the number of stations a single company may own
to 30 AM and 30 FM stations from a total of 12. It also voted to expand the
number of stations a single owner may own in a single city. The new rules, which
go into effect Aug. 1, could lead to renewed bidding by broadcasters for
existing properties. "We're delighted," said Stephen A. Hildebrandt, chief
counsel of Group W Radio, which owns 17 AM and FM stations. But Andrew C.
Barrett, the commissioner who abstained, said he may change his vote to nay in
protest. The ruling will radically alter ownership, he said. It only pays "lip
service" to minority broadcasters.

Beating Back Cable

Cable has been snatching viewers from broadcast TV for more than a decade. But
last month, the "Broadcast Four" -- CBS, NBC, ABC and the Fox Broadcasting
Company -- grabbed back some of those couch potatoes. Ratings for the broadcast
networks climbed to 46.1 from 42 the month before. Cable's ratings fell to 10.2
from 12. Each rating point is equal to 921,000 households. CBS, which aired the
Winter Olympics, was the ratings champ while CNN, without a war to cover, saw
its ratings plunge to near obscurity: they fell to 0.6 from 2.4 last year.
"Three years ago, the consistent growth of cable would have offset even the
Olympics," said David F. Poltrac, senior vice president of research at CBS.
Analysts say the broadcasters' gains come from new programming.  Now if they
could only make money.

Keycorp's Geography

Keycorp, the Albany-based bank, has adopted the Star Trek strategy. It goes
where few other banks have dared to venture. It is big in Utah, Wyoming, upstate
New York and Alaska. Last week, when it acquired Puget Sound Bancorp, it became
even bigger in Washington. Puget Sound Bancorp, with $4.9 billion in assets,
will make Keycorp the nation's 25th-largest bank. It is already one of the most
profitable. It is also conservative. Though it is large enough to make loans as
large as $250 million, it has made only 20 loans of more than $12.5 million. "We
don't try to compete on the basis of price," said Lee Irvin, senior vice
president. "People who shop around will find we are not the cheapest," he said.
But they are there.

Taking on Joe Camel

Last week, the United States Surgeon General, Dr. Antonia Novello, said, "It's
time for Joe Camel to take a hike." Joe Camel is the cartoon character invented
in Europe and featured in ads created by Mezzina/Brown Inc. for the R. J.
Reynolds Tobacco Company. The problem is the character appeals to kids.
According to the American Medical Association, more young children recognize Joe
Camel than Mickey Mouse. "Calling for the voluntary withdrawal of a successful
advertising campaign is not a traditional role of organized medicine," Dr.
Novello said. R. J. Reynolds rebuffed the Surgeon General. "No linkage has been
made between advertising and the consumption of cigarette products," the company
said.

J. P. Morgan's Mortgage Crunch

After banks make mortgages, they often sell them to other banks that turn them
into securities. Billions of dollars worth of these securities change hands each
day in what is a very volatile market. Last week, J. P. Morgan & Company got
caught in those ups and downs. It said it lost $50 million. The losses forced
the resignation of Mohamad Sotoudeh, a market strategist who failed to forecast
lower interest rates, which caused the market plunge.

Chrysler, Post-Iacocca

Finding someone to fill Lee A. Iacocca's shoes when he retires next year as
chairman of the Chrysler Corporation has not been easy. Two would-be's went to
Wall Street and one wannabe, Robert A. Lutz, Chrysler's president, hasn't been
asked. Last week the headhunters turned up a hot prospect: Robert J. Eaton, head
of General Motors Europe. "If he came with a good offer I'd have to look at it
naturally," he said.



ECONOMY



Detroit Resists Higher Prices

Detroit often bucks the trend by raising prices even in a recession. Higher
prices make up for lost sales. But last month, Detroit was a conformist.
According to the Labor Department, the price of passenger cars fell in February.
That helped keep the rise in the Producer Price Index to a modest 0.2 percent.

Back to Buying

Consumers may not be bursting with confidence right now, but at least they're
spending. Last month, according to the Commerce Department, retail sales climbed
1.3 percent after surging 2.1 percent in January. Those were the first
back-to-back increases of more than 1 percent since 1985.

A Faster, Cheaper Way to Mars?

When Daniel S. Goldin, an executive at TRW Inc., was nominated to head the
National Aeronautical and Space Administration last week, it came as a surprise
to some. Mr. Goldin, who led TRW's Star Wars satellite research, has no
policy-making experience. But what Mr. Goldin brings, the Administration said,
is private-sector smarts. He is a "faster, cheaper better kind of guy," said a
White House official who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Since the
Administration wants to expand the space program (it wants to go to Mars) but do
it on the cheap, those are qualities it hopes Mr. Goldin will bring to the job.



INTERNATIONAL



Pointing Fingers Over Russia's Future

Former President Richard M. Nixon has gained quite a reputation for his
foreign-policy savvy, Vietnam War aside. Last week, Mr. Nixon released a memo to
a slew of influential friends complaining that the Bush Administration had done
"pathetically little" to help Russia. Mr. Nixon warned that unless the Republics
get more help people will be asking, "Who lost Russia?" the way they asked "Who
lost China?" He also warned that without more aid Boris N. Yeltsin, Russia's
President, might not be able to prevent a "new despotism" in the ex-Soviet
Union. But President Bush said the money is not there to bail out Russia. "I
don't have a blank check for all that," he said.

Recession With a Japanese Spin

They used to call it the English-speaking recession. It brought growth in
America to a halt and drove up Britain's unemployment rate to 9.2 percent. But
now the recession may start speaking Japanese. A survey by the Bank of Japan
showed business confidence there had fallen to its lowest level in four years.
The Government is also projecting that industrial production will decline 4
percent in the first quarter of 1992, the sharpest drop since the recession of
1974. Capital investment by manufacturers is also expected to fall. Sound
familiar? Not quite. Recession in Japan, where companies are loath to lay off
workers, won't raise unemployment much. "This could be severe for corporations
but not for individuals" said Yoshihisa Kitai, chief economist at the Long-Term
Credit Bank. Many in the United States wish the English-speaking recession could
learn Japanese.

Mashiro Dozen of Daiwa Securities apologized for a stock scandal that will cost
Daiwa $323 million in fiscal 1991. Though he resigned as president, he will
remain on the board.

Britain's Neglect of B.C.C.I.

The Bank of England took its licks last week. A Parliamentary committee in
London chastised Britain's central bank for its handling of the Bank of Credit
and Commerce International scandal. B.C.C.I.'s British operations were closed
last July after an investigation by Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm,
uncovered widespread fraud and large losses. Though B.C.C.I. was chartered in
Luxembourg, regulators there were not up to the task. But the Bank of England
let B.C.C.I. alone. . "We simply do not understand why B.C.C.I. should have been
the only bank in the world to be given such preferential treatment," the
committee said.

Keeping the Dollar in Its Place

Since November, the dollar has been rising against the Japanese yen and German
mark. But for a few hours last week the rally seemed in danger when Japan sold
dollars."Germany and Japan have a strong bias toward keeping their currencies
strong," said Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, a
consulting firm in New York. Since raw materials are priced in dollars, "a
weaker dollar lets them bring down inflation at home at our expense," he said.

I.B.M. Sells Its Own Clones

Last year, John Akers, chairman of the International Business Machines
Corporation, sent a memo to his troops telling them to fight harder for market
share. Last week, I.B.M. Europe showed how it interpreted those words. Rather
than pump up its numbers by marketing its own machines, it would buy clones and
resell them. The knock-offs will be made by Hong Leong, a Singapore company in
which Big Blue has an interest. If it works in Europe, I.B.M. may do the same at
home.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Alfred C. Sikes, F.C.C. Chairman (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times); Joe Camel (Keith Meyers); Shuttle (United Press International); Richard
Nixon.

Graphs: Track prime-time ratings for networks combined and basici during Feb of
each year, 1988-1992 (Source: A.C. Nielsen Co.); monthly percent change in
producer prices, Feb. 1991-Feb. 1992 (Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics); value
of the dollar in German marks at end of each month, Mar. 1991-Mar. 13, 1992
(Source: Datastream)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRAFTS;
New Reflections Abound in Glass Art

BYLINE: By BETTY FREUDENHEIM

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 15; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: SUMMIT


SPOTLIGHTS penetrate the translucent interiors and set off sparklike reflections
on the surfaces of the art glass on display at the New Jersey Center for Visual
Arts. "Contemporary Glass Sculpture: Innovative Form and Expression" is one of
the most stunning craft exhibitions in this state in recent years.

Pat Kettenring, a curator of the show, said she had tried to include a broad
range of glass techniques. The work shown demonstrates not only the intrinsic
appeal of glass but also its value as a medium for expressing ideas. Ms.
Kettenring and Kiku Fukui, the other curator, selected 42 pieces by nine
American, three Japanese, one Swedish and two Czech artists.

Among them is Harvey Littleton. This year marks the 30th anniversary of his
creation of a glass-blowing workshop on the grounds of the Toledo Museum of Art
in Ohio. The success of this workshop proved his theory that glass blowing does
not require the superheated furnaces of mass production factories, that glass
can be a medium for artists to explore in their own studios.

It was the start of the American glass movement. Alumni of the Toledo workshop
and Mr. Littleton's follow-up courses at the University of Wisconsin initiated
similar glassmaking programs on campuses across the country.

Mr. Littleton creates his distinctive ribbons of striated glass by rotating a
rod with a ball of molten glass in the glowing furnace. When the rod is removed,
it is swung like a pendulum until the sphere gradually lengthens into an oblong.

"Blue-Ruby Spray" looks as though Mr. Littleton stretched, pulled and twisted
his molten glass into looping curves on a carnival taffy-making machine. The
segments were sliced and arranged into this flowing ensemble of sinuous lines
and hues.

Dale Chihuly, a student in Mr. Littleton's postgraduate program at Wisconsin,
continued his glass training in Venice. He was the first American to apprentice
at the Venini glass factory on the island of Murano. He is also the founder of
Pilchuck, a glass art colony on a hillside overlooking Puget Sound in Washington
State.

Snakelike coils with black blossoms encircle a vivid vase in "Cadmium Orange
Venetian #493." Mr. Chihuly has carried the excesses of Murano blown glass to
new extremes of complexity, color and voluptuous curves.

What a contrast with the quiescent mood of Stephen Dale Edwards's "Silence."
Four matte-black heads are partly buried in white sand, the artist's comment on
the Persian Gulf war. Features of the fourth face are almost obliterated.

This artist works with glass cast in molds. His "Hunter's Dream" is a masklike
image cast in optical glass. As light is diffused through the translucent
interior, the solemn features take on an awesome authority.

William Morris's "Artifact Still Life" resembles a find from an archeological
dig. This pile of pale blue bones, shells and vases of translucent glass may
relate to the contents of the tomb of an ancient Phoenecian glassmaker. Flecks
of gold settle like dust on the mottled surfaces.

Bertil Vallien's cast-glass forms also suggest the ruins of vanished
civilizations. This Swedish artist sculptures elongated molds in wet sand and
lays miniature treasures inside before filling them with molten glass. The
oblongs are suspended as tall, motionless pendulums. Each one has the majestic
power of a Nordic myth; clues to the stories are hidden within.

Mary Ann (Toots) Zynsky is an American glass artist who works in the
Netherlands. The vivid splashes of color of her "Tierra del Fuego" seem to have
been painted with a stiff brush with each bristle leaving its mark. The bowl was
formed with thin threads of fused glass that resemble dried vermicelli. The
outer edges have been manipulated to give the form a slighlty irregular contour.
This piece has verve and panache.

There was no glass tradition in Japan when Kyohei Fujita started his career in a
factory in the 50's, so he created one. Rather than emulating European glass
blowers, he turned to historic lacquerware for inspiration.  His elegant small
boxes are blown glass layered with gold and platinum foil and flecks of color.

Niyoko Ikata cuts shapes from plate glass and laminates them together into neat
stacks. These piles of glass take on the graduated contours of a sea-green shape
with a transparent interior. While some artists use this technique to create
pseudo vases, she extends her forms into undulating wings. Their spontaneity
gives no indication of the slow, meticulous process required to form them.

One wall has 16 variations on a theme: glass bones and wood sticks wrapped with
wire and bandages. Michael Aschenbrenner, a Vietnam veteran, said his work was
"about healing, not destruction."

Nancy Mee complements the transparency and fragility of glass with rigid metals.
Using a printmaking process, she transfers images of Greek goddesses onto plate
glass and then bolts them to rusted steel plates. In "Veiled Goddess," a
photograph of a skull X-ray is superimposed on the sculptured head,
transfiguring its beauty. Her work becomes a metaphor for the relationship
between the surface and inner beauty of women in a hard world.

The show runs through April 18. The New Jersey Center for Visual Arts is at 68
Elm Street. Hours are noon to 4 P.M. Monday through Friday and 2 to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday. Admission is free. A video shows the varied glassmaking
techniques used by these artists.

Today at 3 P.M., William Warmus, a glass scholar, and Mr. Aschenbrenner, one of
the exhibitors, will speak on "New Boundaries for Glass Art."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Hunter's Dream," by Stephen Dale Edwards. (Rob Vinnedge)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 15, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Hollywood Law: Whose Idea Is It, Anyway?

BYLINE: By JOY HOROWITZ;  Joy Horowitz writes about the arts for Premiere
magazine and other publications.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2805 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


In the latest skirmish of the Hollywood plagiarism wars, a lawsuit filed in
state court here alleges that the television producer Aaron Spelling stole an
idea that H. W. Broido Jr., a merchandise marketer, pitched to him. Mr. Broido
charges that Mr. Spelling used his idea as the basis for the hit Fox series
"Beverly Hills, 90210."

Damages are not specified. Not yet, anyway. But stay tuned: "A large amount is
required," the lawsuit says, "to teach the Spellings a lesson that they cannot
continue their exploitive, mercenary, nefarious and corrupt practice of
conspiring to take advantage of individuals and their ideas and projects."

Welcome to the world of idea theft in Hollywood, a subterranean zone where the
mudslinging is rampant, the desperation factor is acute, and the charges and
countercharges of ethical misconduct are about as common as the lineup of BMW's
and Mercedes in a studio parking lot.

Sometimes friends steal from friends (or accuse friends of stealing). Sometimes
writers borrow from books, other movies or television. Sometimes a producer
hears an idea and decides it is his own. The theft can be obviously deliberate
or accidental. The charge can be serious, or a gold digger's scheme. From
writers who are afraid to discuss their work at dinner parties to lawyers who
quietly hammer out settlements so long as their terms stay secret, the topic is
a messy one that arouses techy responses from many and flat-out denials from
others. "If you write a hit movie, the odds are good you'll get sued," says
Craig Jacobson, a partner with Hansen, Jacobson & Teller, a major Hollywood
entertainment firm. A studio executive offered another view: "Plagiarism is not
a forefront issue for us. We don't live in fear of it. Everyone's honorable."

Although no one keeps track of how many plagiarism claims are filed each year,
attorneys who have represented both plaintiffs and defendants in these suits say
that the overwhelming majority are filed by opportunists trying to cash in on
someone else's success. But those cases that seem to have foundation have put
all the players in the movie and television industry on the defensive.

"Idea theft," says the entertainment lawyer Pierce O'Donnell, "is a cancer in
Hollywood. In an industry where imagination and creativity is the key to
success, idea theft is grand larceny. And it is prevalent."
 Mr. O'Donnell, no doubt, is hardly objective when it comes to such matters. For
it is he who won a stunning 1990 court victory against Paramount Pictures for
the columnist Art Buchwald and the producer Alain Bernheim, who claimed that
Paramount and Eddie Murphy stole the idea of "Coming to America" from Mr.
Buchwald's film treatment, "King for a Day." Paramount, which will appeal the
ruling, continues to insist that the 1988 blockbuster, which grossed $145
million, is an original work.

The damages phase of the trial is continuing; still pending is Judge Harvey A.
Schneider's ruling on how much Mr. Buchwald and Mr. Bernheim are owed for their
work. Mr. Buchwald is asking for between $1 million and $3 million and Mr.
Bernheim seeks between $4.5 million and $15 million for being denied the
opportunity to produce the film.

Repercussions from the Buchwald suit appear to be far-reaching. Interviews with
dozens of lawyers, agents, writers and studio executives suggest that because of
recessionary times and the impact of the Buchwald litigation, charges of idea
theft -- easy to make, difficult to prove, expensive to litigate -- are booming.
From unconscious borrowing to blatant pilfering, the practice of passing off
someone else's work as one's own is especially endemic to Hollywood, where novel
ideas are rare, stories are pitched orally, and the line between a remake (where
credit is given and paid for) and a rip-off is often blurry.

Ever since Orson Welles and his collaborator, Herman J. Mankiewicz, were sued
for plagiarizing "Citizen Kane" from a book about William Randolph Hearst
(R.K.O. settled for $15,000 after a hung jury), motion pictures have inspired
more plagiarism claims than all printed literature in the past, according to
defense lawyers.

On the Dockets
What Buchwald Wrought

Nuisance-value suits, as the studios label them, abound, particularly from what
one entertainment lawyer refers to as "oddballs, kooks and weirdos." But the
problem goes beyond fortune-seekers. A prominent agent, who spoke on condition
of anonymity, says: "I used to tell my clients everything's done on a handshake.
Now, I don't trust anyone, and I tell my clients not to, either."

Counters Kenneth E. Kulzick, a defense lawyer who represents major studios as
well as insurance companies that cover plagiarism claims: "To say there is a lot
of theft -- that is just baloney. A lot of these suits are in response to
economic conditions. People are more easily agitated and feel they've been taken
advantage of: when they can't do, they sue. The current wave of claims is also
due in part to Buchwald, which has given the illusion of easy pickings to get
money from production companies. But so far, he hasn't gotten a dime."

Plagiarism charges in Hollywood have become so institutionalized that they are
no longer a question of ethical ambiguity so much as business as usual. Beyond
Paramount's mounting legal bills on the Buchwald case, now in its fourth year in
court, several other charges of idea theft have recently surfaced:

"Beverly Hills, 90210": According to court records, Mr. Broido's pitch, for a
show called "Holli Woods," was offered mostly for its spinoff marketing
potential, and as an acting vehicle for Mr. Spelling's daughter, Tori.  Holli
was described in Mr. Broido's claim as a teen-ager "who finds herself uprooted
from the most normal Midwestern existence to the magic and dynamism of
California." She "moves through a wide variety of delightful, contemporary
adventures with her new schoolmates, her brother and a friend who is a boy" and
discovers "a world of sunshine, swimming pools, temptations to grow up too
quickly. . . ." All these elements are in "Beverly Hills, 90210."

According to court records, soon after introducing Mr. Spelling to his idea in
December 1985, Mr. Broido received a letter from Mr. Spelling describing the
concept as "absolutely charming." Mr. Spelling, who had previously worked with
Mr. Broido on licensing products from "Dynasty," another Spelling show, later
sent to Mr. Broido photographs of his daughter, who would star as Holli and be
the model for the Holli Woods doll.  ("Beverly Hills, 90210" dolls, including a
Tori Spelling doll, have since hit the market. Ms. Spelling plays a supporting
role in the Fox series.)

"More than a story line was taken," says Mr. Broido, whose suit also names 20th
Century Fox and Mr. Spelling's wife, Candy, and daughter, Tori. "It was a whole
business enterprise that was ripped off. And there's a huge paper trail to prove
it." Mr. Spelling, through his attorney, Maren Christensen of Rosenfeld, Meyer &
Susman, would not comment on Mr. Broido's charges.

"For the Boys": Did Bette Midler swipe Martha Raye's story? That is the question
at the heart of a threatened lawsuit by the 75-year-old comedienne's seventh
husband, the hairdresser Mark Harris, over the movie "For the Boys." He has said
in the press that Ms. Midler appropriated a 20-page film treatment that Ms. Raye
had submitted to Ms. Midler based on her experiences in World War II, Korea and
Vietnam. Ms. Midler's partner, Bonnie Bruckheimer, who co-produced "For the
Boys," says Mr. Harris's charges are "ridiculous," though she acknowledges that
Ms. Midler met with Martha Raye and others for research.

"Die Hard": In a 352-page suit -- replete with its own table of contents and
title, "Anatomy of a Rip Off" -- the Canadian film maker Alexis Kanner claims
that "Die Hard" is the "the wholesale cinematic "Xeroxing" and "cinematic rape"
of his 1977 movie "Kings and Desperate Men," about a hostage taken by
terrorists. The suit alleges that while Mr. Kanner was negotiating with CBS and
Fox to distribute his film in the United States, "Die Hard" was being developed
by Fox executives, who purloined Mr. Kanner's film. In seeking to dismiss the
suit, Fox attorneys describe Mr. Kanner's claim as "legally innocuous chaff."

"Home Alone": "Pere Noel," a 1989 French thriller about a young boy left home
alone on Christmas Eve, when he must fend off an intruder as his mother rushes
home to save him, bears some similarity to the highest-grossing comedy in movie
history, John Hughes's 1990 "Home Alone." "They remade my movie," says the
French film maker Rene Manzor. He approached the studio, Fox, in an attempt to
reach a settlement agreement, but Fox has denied any similarity between the
films. "I have no choice but to sue them," he says. Mr. Hughes has said he came
up with the idea for "Home Alone" in August 1989 while en route to Paris for a
family vacation and denied ever seeing Mr. Manzor's film.


The Hush Factor
It's All In the Family

Few idea-theft cases ever get to trial. Most are dismissed because they fail to
meet basic legal standards. The law says ideas are as free as air until they are
realized in some tangible form, for example a written story or outline. In
copyright-infringement cases, a plaintiff must show that the works in question
are "substantially similar" in dialogue, setting, plot, genre and characters.
More important, the plaintiff must show that the defendant had access to the
original work.

Many seemingly good cases never get filed because writers fear reprisal -- that
they'll be blacklisted or perceived as troublemakers -- if they take legal
action. If cases aren't dismissed, deals often get quietly struck to avoid
unseemly publicity for the studios and to shield studio executives from
depositions, court proceedings and the expense of litigation. Settlement
agreements with confidentiality clauses barring either side from disclosing
terms have become de rigueur. Many even include future script deals and an
office on the lot.

Says Mr. O'Donnell: "It's very sanitized, this informal jurisprudence of
settling these things quietly. It's typical of Hollywood to sweep its dirty
laundry under the mantle of confidentiality agreements." Says one attorney from
O'Melveny & Meyers, the firm handling Paramount's defense, who spoke on
condition of anonymity: "Frankly, it's because everyone works with everyone
else. It's almost like mediating a family dispute."

Last year, Tri-Star Pictures settled out of court for a seven-figure sum,
sources say, with Rita Stern and Jeanne Meyers, who claimed that Amy
Heckerling's 1989 hit "Look Who's Talking" was stolen from "Special Delivery," a
treatment for a comedy Ms. Stern and Ms. Meyers submitted to Ms. Heckerling
three years before her film's release. The agreement was struck after United
States District Court Judge Matthew Byrne issued a particularly trenchant
finding -- that nearly identical dialogue in both works pointed to nothing short
of "copying."

Even Disney's 1991 bomb, "The Marrying Man," was the subject of a
confidentiality agreement, signed by the playwright and screenwriter Neil Simon,
after being sued by the comedian Alan King, an old friend of his. Mr. King
claimed that after he told Mr. Simon his idea for a movie -- about a man who
marries the same woman four times, based on the true story of a shoe
manufacturer named Harry Karl -- Mr. Simon sold it to Disney as his own. While
Mr. Simon has denied any wrongdoing, claiming Mr. Karl's story was in the public
domain, he and Disney reportedly paid Mr. King a six-figure settlement.

Unlike other litigants, however, Mr. Buchwald has stated that he will never sign
a confidentiality agreement.  The practice of settling these cases can be
especially bothersome to writers who feel they've been unjustly accused and
never get to clear their names. David Ward, for example, who won an Oscar for
best original screenplay for "The Sting" in 1973, was sued by David W. Maurer
for plagiarizing "The Big Con," his 1941 nonfiction book about swindlers. The
Los Angeles Times reported that Universal and Mr. Ward, who admitted using Mr.
Maurer's book as research, settled the case for $600,000.

"This whole thing has been a real source of pain to me," Mr. Ward says. "If
accused, people assume you were guilty. There's no trial. No evidence presented
against you. Universal made the decision to settle for purely business reasons."


Pitch Pitfalls
The 'Play It Again' Syndrome

Some safeguards are available to protect against plagiarism beyond copyrights.
Every year, the Writers Guild receives about 25,000 submissions -- from pitches
to treatments to scripts -- to be registered as a means of preventing idea
theft. But even written registration may not be enough legal protection.

Currently, "the most frustration" expressed by writers, says Charles Slocum, who
oversees registration at the Writers Guild, occurs when an inexperienced writer
pitches an idea to a studio executive, who then takes the idea to an A-list
writer.

Harlan Ellison, a science-fiction writer, says plagiarism is systemic. In 1980,
a jury awarded Mr. Ellison $337,000 in a copyright-infringement case against
Paramount and ABC for the shortlived ABC television series "Future Cop." After
the trial, Mr. Ellison rented a billboard opposite the studio with the message:
"Writers -- Don't Let Them Steal From You! Keep Their Hands Out of Your
Pockets!"

But Mr. Ellison's victory had little effect. Several years later he sued the
writer-director James Cameron over Arnold Schwarzenegger's breakthrough 1984
film, "The Terminator," alleging that it was lifted from an episode he wrote for
the 1960's TV show "Outer Limits." The case was settled for an undisclosed sum.

Says a studio lawyer: "If I had to listen to as many pitches as these story
editors, I'd go nuts. After a while, they all start to blend into each other.
It's a tricky thing." But Mr. Ellison says studio gatekeepers simply can't tell
whether material is original or not. His point is underscored by a 1980 article
in Film Comment magazine for which the screenplay for "Casablanca" was submitted
to hundreds of Hollywood agents under the title "Everybody Comes to Rick's." Of
85 agencies that said they read it, only 33 recognized it as "Casablanca," while
three wanted to represent it, and one wanted to turn it into a novel.

Rita Stern, the plaintiff in the "Look Who's Talking" litigation, is not
embittered. "I don't think people are basically rotten," she says. "In the
course of time, you hear something and file it away and it comes out in another
form. Some people really think it's their idea by the time it comes out."

But sometimes, she continues, "it's, 'We can get away with it, so let's do it'
-- a real brazen attitude." If there is a lesson learned from all this, she
says, it's: "Hold onto documentation. Never throw away a letter. Record every
phone call.



THE STUDIOS' DEFENSE

To prevent accusations of plagiarism, studios and production companies will not
accept unsolicited material. In fact, there is danger even in acknowledging such
material: just before he died last year, Michael Landon was fighting an
idea-theft case because, his attorney says, he sent out a "nice letter," saying
he had no use for material sent to him. "This was Mr. Good Guy making the
mistake of reading it and sending it back," says Kenneth E. Kulzick, a defense
lawyer who won Mr. Landon's case. "Michael signed his own rejection letters,
which we don't recommend as a rule."

Writers who submit material through formal channels, for example, through an
agent, are asked to sign release forms. These forms -- which some lawyers
suggest are legally questionable -- say that if a writer whose script is
rejected by the studio later claims that the studio developed ideas based on the
script, damages will be limited to $1,000. Well-known writers object to such
forms.

Studios also insure themselves against claims of plagiarism.  Typically, when a
motion picture is greenlighted, the studio purchases a package of entertainment
insurance, which covers everything from a cast member breaking a leg during
production to copyright infringement. That part of the policy, called Errors and
Omission, covers the mistakes and oversights a studio might make in verifying
the originality of material. Such a premium can cover up to $25 million.

James Tierny, a plaintiff's attorney whose firm handled litigation over "Look
Who's Talking," blames the Errors and Omission policy for desensitizing studios
to plagiarism claims. "No matter how serious, no matter how important the
claim," he says, studio heads can treat it as an insurance matter. "They simply
say, 'Turn it over to the carrier.' "

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Among the works whose originality has been questioned in court
cases are the Fox television series "Beverly Hills, 90210," with Tori Spelling
and Brian Green (Fox), and the 1988 Paramount movie "Coming to America," with
Eddie Murphy, left, and Arsenio Hall. (Paramount Pictures)(pg. 22); Bette Midler
in "For the Boys" -- Martha Raye's husband says the film is his wife's story.
(Francois Duhamel/20th Century Fox); Macaulay Culkin in "Home Alone" -- An
original idea? (Don Smetzer/20th Century Fox)(pg. 23)

Drawing (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 16, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Sleeper Issue in '92

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


Inexorably, virtually unnoticed and contrary to Washington wisdom, Democrat and
Republican standard-bearers are inching toward a direction-setting confrontation
on foreign policy.

After the smoke of the primaries clears, an unusually united Democratic Party
will stress domestic over foreign priorities and offer a "new agenda" of human
rights and economic issues. And an unusually fractured Republican Party will
cling to the present domestic/foreign balance and press familiar considerations
of power politics.

The conflicting themes are not really new. They echo much of the head-butting
between President Ford and Jimmy Carter in 1976.

But the post-cold-war context is radically new. And the demise of the Soviet
monster ends three decades of Republican political advantage over Democrats on
foreign affairs.

Without the Soviet menace, Republicans lose their powerful club against
Democratic doves. President Bush will still try to beat up Democrats over their
hesitancy to fight Iraq. But that will not be nearly as devastating as charging
them with being soft on Communism. And without the unifying Soviet threat, the
Robert Taft isolationist and Nelson Rockefeller internationalist wings of the
party have renewed old battles.

Patrick Buchanan and Republican conservatives are already tearing the party and
Mr. Bush apart with their theme of "America First." Mr. Buchanan deliberately
chose that deeply isolationist tune with all its nasty historical overtones. It
is racist, protectionist to the point of bashing, and says to hell with the rest
of the world. It is also a direct affront to the President's internationalism.

Mr. Bush's moderate views will prevail within the party. But he is now boxed in
by the unhappiness of his own conservatives and the new-found unity of
Democrats. He advances responsible causes like foreign aid and NATO, then fails
to fight for them for fear of voter backlash, and ends up looking timid to boot.

By contrast, the passing of the Soviet threat allows Democrats to end decades of
liberal-conservative fratricide.

Foreign affairs has been a blood sport among Democrats since President Truman
fired a dovish Henry Wallace from the Cabinet in 1946. The issues have always
been how tough to to be with Moscow and whether to stop the spread of Communism
with force.

A hard-headed President Kennedy succeeded in uniting the party in 1961, though
clashes occurred with Adlai Stevenson. All hell broke loose in the late 1960's
over Vietnam. And the party divided bitterly between the camps of dovish George
McGovern and hawkish Henry (Scoop) Jackson.

From all this, Americans had good reason to conclude that the Democrats were too
deeply divided and wimpy to conduct a coherent foreign policy.

But as Moscow collapsed, the feuding fell away almost too suddenly to be fully
appreciated. The emerging unity was further camouflaged last year by the party's
split vote on whether to use force against Iraq. Similar votes over the years
had always been followed by intra-party bloodletting. This time, however,
Democratic hawks and doves forgave one another. Their mutual forbearance
permitted quick party healing.

It also allowed Democratic Presidential hopefuls to rally around an agenda of
"new ideas." These included: restoring American economic strength at home to
maintain strength abroad; cutting defense spending by about one-third over five
years; understanding that the lines had largely broken down between domestic and
foreign affairs, particularly on matters like the environment, energy and
economics; and focusing on human rights.

Besides, Democrats now sense Mr. Bush might be vulnerable on the help he gave to
Saddam Hussein before the war started, and his failure to help the Kurds
afterward.

For all these reasons, voters in November will have a clear and momentous choice
of foreign policy futures. They may still feel more comfortable with a leader
who stands for cautious change. But the Democrats, if they do not come across as
fearful of force, have the more forward-looking foreign pitch. And it dovetails
powerfully with the growing public mood to try something new. So don't be
surprised when Democrats soon challenge Mr. Bush in his foreign policy citadel.

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For a Hibernian, Relief and Dismay

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


Brian F. Sullivan is the quiet man of Greenpoint, one of the few remaining
Irish-Americans in that mostly Polish, working-class Brooklyn neighborhood.
Homosexuals are "weirdos" in Mr. Sullivan's book, "an affront" to the Roman
Catholic Church and the organization he belongs to, the Ancient Order of
Hibernians. No one was more relieved that gay Irish-Americans were barred from
marching in the parade or more certain that they didn't belong in it.

Mr. Sullivan didn't wear a Kelly-green tam or a "Kiss Me, I'm Irish" T-shirt or
even a shamrock corsage yesterday. For Mr. Sullivan, who is president of Sixth
Division of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, St. Patrick's Day is a serious,
sometimes solemn occasion. He wore a gray wool suit, a green and orange
ceremonial sash and a benevolent expression that grew sour when he contemplated
local politicians, whom he labeled "hypocritical jerks, mostly."

'Culmination' of His Year

For Mr. Sullivan, who grew up poor and is proud of it, the annual St. Patrick's
Day parade is what he calls "the culmination" of his year, a day for
demonstrating ethnic pride. There aren't many other such high points in his
life. As he rather glumly put it: "I don't think we Irish have political clout
in this city. Years ago, we did. Then everybody ran to the suburbs."

The vanishing Irish presence in his neighborhood was all too clear in his corner
of the parade: his division of Hibernians is small, with only 48 members. Only 6
fairly elderly men and 30 women from the women's unit showed up to march with
him. "The weather is a factor, and the controversy is a factor," he said. "It's
like fair-weather fishermen."

Mr. Sullivan works as a security officer at the Queens Midtown Tunnel for the
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, but his pride and spare time are wrapped
around his Irish roots. He joined the Ancient Order of Hibernians eight years
ago because, he said, "I was tired of the old potatoes-and-a-six-pack-of-beer
image people have of the Irish."

His two small children attend the same old parochial school, St. Anthony-St.
Alphonsus, that Mr. Sullivan and his five brothers and two sisters attended, but
lay teachers have replaced the nuns. The neighborhood pub doesn't serve Guinness
stout because there isn't enough demand.

Greenpoint has no visible gay community. "Thank God," Mr. Sullivan said, then
added: "I shouldn't say that. I had a gay couple as tenants a while back. They
were great. They always paid their rent on time. They were very quiet, good
neighbors."

Mr. Sullivan, 45 years old, served in the Navy from 1963 to 1966. He described
himself as a "right-wing war hawk" during the Vietnam War and just as
conservative today. He is a registered Democrat who voted for Ronald Reagan and
George Bush. He revered John F. Kennedy, never liked his more liberal brother
Robert and said he thought Senator Edward M. Kennedy "should be in jail."

But he also said he suported national health insurance and a welfare system for
people who cannot work. He said he disagreed with the Catholic Church's fervent
opposition to contraception and believed abortions for teen-agers, particularly
rape victims, might be preferable to "making them pay for the rest of their
lives -- none of us walk on water."

'A Major Crisis'

But homosexuality, he said, was not open to debate. "Certain things I hold in my
heart," he said. "God made men and women with different characteristics." If one
of his children ever said he or she was gay, Mr. Sullivan said, he is afraid he
would react "irrationally -- I'd kill the bastard." Then he added: "I don't know
what I would do. It would be a major crisis."

For all his reservations, he did not speak with hostility about gay people. He
reserved his harshest words for Mayor David N. Dinkins and other politicians,
whom, he asserted, had supported the gay and lesbian marchers out of political
expedience. And he reserved a special spot in hell for his fellow Hibernian,
Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, who had argued for including
gay marchers in the parade.

"He's a plastic Roman Catholic," Mr. Sullivan fumed, "and a hypocrite. If he
ever runs for another public office, I will fight tooth and nail to help destroy
his political career."

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brian F. Sullivan, one of the about 150,000 marchers in the
parade. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 19, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voters;
Primaries Drawing Fewer Blacks as Overall Turnout Declines

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 18


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas picked up about three-quarters of the black vote
in Tuesday's Democratic primary in Illinois, but the black turnout in this state
was much lower than it was four years ago.

That has been the case in much of the country this year, and Democrats will be
hurt in November if blacks continue to stay away from the polls.

In part, the falloff in black voting in this year's primaries reflects an
overall trend of decreased voter participation, which has occurred in nearly
two-thirds of the party primaries in 13 states. But the decline among blacks
also clearly happened because no black candidate was in contention the way the
Rev. Jesse Jackson was in 1988, said Sonia R. Jarvis, executive director of the
National Coalition on Black Voter Participation in Washington.

She added that it was perhaps more important that none of the Democrats
generated enthusiasm in black neighborhoods or conducted aggressive drives to
get out the vote. While Mr. Clinton's success in winning endorsements from black
politicians kept his percentage of the black vote high, it did not mean that
large numbers of blacks were turning out for him, she said.

November May Be Different

A survey of people as they left the polling places on Tuesday found that 19
percent who voted in the Illinois Democratic primary were black, while four
years ago 28 percent were. In Georgia two weeks ago, a similar survey showed a
29 percent of the voters in the Democratic primary were black, down from 35
percent in 1988. In Tennessee last week, 13 percent were black, down from 27
percent four years ago.

The polls were conducted by Voter Research and Surveys, which was created 1990
by ABC News, CBS News, CNN and NBC News, and those for Illinois and Michigan had
a margin of error of plus or minus three to four percentage points.

While most states are seeing fewer black voters and fewer voters over all in the
primaries than they did in 1988, Curtis Gans, director of the Committee for the
Study of the American Electorate, said that if history was a guide, the low
turnout in the primaries this year said little about the size and nature of the
turnout in November. For example, the high black turnout in the 1988 primaries
was not replicated in the general election, and that worked to the serious
disadvantage of the Democratic candidate, Michael S. Dukakis.

This year the number of primary voters for both parties has been lower than it
was in 1988 in 17 of 26 party primaries, and in many cases the difference has
been significant. In Florida, for example, turnout last week was down by 60,000
from 1988, even though the number of people of voting age has increased by about
one million. In Texas, the turnout was down nearly one-fifth to 2.3 million from
2.8 million, and in Louisiana, it fell by a third, to 515,000 from 770,000.

Looked at another way, 19 percent of Floridians of voting age voted in this
year's primaries, while 23 percent did so in 1988; in Texas, the participation
was down to 18 percent from 23 percent.

The main exception to the rule was New Hampshire, where the turnout was more
than one-fifth higher than it was in 1988. In Illinois, despite the drop in the
number of blacks voting, the overall turnout was about the same as it was four
years ago.

Boost From the Undercard

Turnout varies enormously from state to state, and the reasons are often
difficult to come by. This week, for instance, 15 percent of the people in
Michigan of voting age went to the polls, while 27 percent did so in Illinois.
In 1988, Michigan did not hold a Presidential primary.

The record high voter participation in the New Hampshire primary apparently was
mainly a result of the flagging economy there and the desire of voters to
register their protest about it. Furthermore, because the Iowa caucuses were not
seriously contested this year, the candidates spent more time campaigning in New
Hampshire than was the case in 1988.

In Illinois, the relatively solid turnout was probably the result of several
tight Congressional races, including the three-way fight for the Democratic
Senate nomination. Senator Alan J. Dixon, running for his third term, was
defeated by Carol Moseley Braun, the Cook County Recorder of Deeds.

Primary turnouts have fallen consistently since 1972, said Mr. Gans of the
Committee for the Study of the American Electorate who has conducted extensive
research on voting participation. The main reason, Mr. Gans said, is that no
cutting issue has distinguished the candidates in the primaries from one
another.

"Take this year," said Mr. Gans. "The differences between the Democrats is
minuscule compared with, say, the differences over the war in Vietnam in 1972."

As a general principle, he said, "you get high turnouts when people have
something to decide."

For example, Louisiana had a record turnout for a Senate race in 1990 when
Senator J. Bennett Johnston, a Democrat, was challenged by the former Ku Klux
Klan leader David Duke. And North Carolina also set a record that year when
Senator Jesse Helms, the extremely conservative Republican, ran against Harvey
Gantt, the former Democratic Mayor of Charlotte, who is black.

In the same vein, Mr. Gans said, a high rate of voter participation can be
expected in the Presidential race in November if the economy stays sour. But if
the economy improves noticeably, he said, more people are likely to stay home
out of a lack of interest.

In recent years nationwide, about 20 percent of eligible voters have turned out
for Presidential primaries, as against about 50 percent in general elections.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Tables: "Democrats: How Some Groups Voted," lists breakdown of groups
by religion, race, union, military abortion rights, unemployed households and
who voted for Bush in 1988, for Illinois and Michigan and who voted and for
which candidate (Based on poll conducted by Voter Research and Surveys of 1,580
Democratic primary voters in Illinois and 1,594 in Michigan); "Republicans: What
Mattered Mosts," lists breakdown of Republican voters in Michigan and Illinois
and how they voted based on issues that were of most concern to them (Source:
Based on poll conducted by Voter Research and Surveys of 980 Repbulican primary
voters in Illinois and 1,531 in Michigan)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China to Reward Army With 13% Increase in Military Budget

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 21


The Government announced today that it would give the army a 13.8 percent budget
increase this year, apparently a reward for helping to keep the Government in
power.

The rise in the military budget is bigger than any other increase in a major
spending category and comes on top of a substantial boost in army spending in
each of the last few years. The new military budget is more than 50 percent
bigger than the one for 1989.

The decision to increase military spending, particularly at a time when the
threats along the nation's borders are diminishing, is sure to raise eyebrows
and anxieties among some of China's neighbors. Not only has the principal threat
to China, an attack from the Soviet Union, virtually disappeared for the time
being, but tensions have also been considerably eased between China and two
other neighbors with which it has fought border wars: India and Vietnam.

The announcement today by Finance Minister Wang Bingqian in a speech to the
National People's Congress, the rubber-stamp Parliament now holding its annual
session, did not give any clues on how the allocation to the 3.1 million-member
army would be spent. But the military has been focusing lately on acquiring
high-tech weapons and on gaining equipment to project an image of power at sea.

A stronger navy would threaten Taiwan, which China insists is an errant province
that it has the right to invade. It would also worry several Southeast Asian
nations that have competing claims with China over islands in the South China
Sea.

Ever since the army was called upon in June 1989 to suppress the democracy
movement in Tiananmen Square, the military has played an important role in
internal security. Domestically, the army is particularly concerned about the
possibility of unrest in ethnic minority regions like Tibet and Xinjiang.

The official military budget, which in 1992 is projected to be $6.85 billion,
includes only some of the money actually made available to the military, but no
more comprehensive figure is available. Mr. Wang put the 1992 increase at 12
percent, but that was because military spending in 1991 was over budget. The
increase in the budgeted amount is actually 13.8 percent.

In contrast, agriculture spending will rise 7.2 percent this year, education
funds are increasing 11.3 percent, and science expenditures are rising 7.4
percent.

One revelation in Mr. Wang's speech today was that the leadership plans
essentially to abolish the grain subsidy this year. That would be a major stride
to restructure prices along market lines, and it also suggests that the
authorities feel comfortable that they can handle any protests over such an
unpopular move.

Raising Both Prices

"The State Council has decided to raise the purchase and selling prices of grain
at an appropriate time in 1992, basically unifying the two prices," Mr. Wang
declared.

The purchase price refers to the price that the Government pays farmers for
rice, wheat and other grains. The selling price means the price that the
Government charges consumers in the cities for rice, bread and flour.

The retail prices are well below the real cost of the grain, but until now the
Government has picked up the difference for fear that higher prices might
provoke unrest.

The Government raised grain prices a year ago, causing grumbling but no serious
protests, and the authorities announced this month that prices would rise again
on April 1. But so far the price increases have only reduced the subsidy, and
today's announcement is the first indication that it will be almost entirely
abolished this year.

While the abolition of the grain subsidy would be welcomed by economists as an
important reform measure, the basis for the move apparently is not so much
enthusiasm for economic liberalization as it is alarm over rising Government
spending. Mr. Wang has acknowledged that it will be difficult to avoid exceeding
budget deficit targets this year.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Chinese Government said yesterday at the National People's
Congress that it would increase military spending. A delegate rested during the
morning session at the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
In Peru's Shining Path, U.S. Sees Road to Ruin

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In Congress, the State Department, the Organization of American States and
private research and human rights organizations, the sense is growing that the
astonishing momentum being shown by the Shining Path rebellion in Peru is the
toughest post-cold war policy test on the horizon for the Western Hemisphere.
"Put out of your mind the F.M.L.N., the Sandinistas, the M-19 of Colombia and
other South American insurgencies," Bernard W. Aronson, Assistant Secretary of
State for Inter-American Affairs, told a recent Congressional hearing. "Sendero
Luminoso is in a category by itself."

"Make no mistake," he warned. "The result could be genocide" if Sendero Luminoso
-- the Shining Path -- were to take power in Peru. Quoting Shining Path's
leader, Abimael Guzman, the Assistant Secretary said the movement believes in
the violent replacement of one class by another -- to remake Peruvian society
just as the Khmer Rouge set out to reduce Cambodia to the Year Zero. "The
revolution will triumph, according to Guzman, after the Peruvian people 'cross
over the river of blood,' " Mr. Aronson said.

According to Gabriela Tarazona-Sevillano, a Peruvian visiting professor of
international studies at Davidson College in North Carolina, the insurgency
already controls one-third of Peru, and the Government has placed territory with
more than half the population under a state of emergency. Testifying before the
House subcommittee on Western Hemisphere affairs, Professor Tarazona-Sevillano
said Shining Path's beliefs are a political synthesis based on the thinking of
Marx, Lenin, Mao and the Peruvian philosopher Jose Carlos Mariategui. Many of
its adherents are descendants of indigenous Indian people who have for centuries
nurtured a resentment of the mestizo descendants of Spanish conquerors.

Shining Path's brutality is deplored by human rights organizations and
governments alike, and they hold no hope of bringing it into the political
mainstream. Its tactics include the burning of ballot boxes and the public
"executions" of moderate local leaders and others, including nuns and priests,
who are seen as rivals for the allegiance of the poor. In wildly exaggerated
demonstrations of Maoist precepts, children have been killed for political
"crimes." Amnesty International says the guerrillas routinely torture, mutilate
and murder captives. More than 23,000 people are thought to have died in a
decade.

Provoking Repression

"Acts of sabotage and extreme violence are deliberately used to provoke violent
responses on the part of the state, further exacerbating the rift between civil
society and the nation's security forces," Alexander Wilde, executive director
of the liberal Washington Office on Latin America, told members of Congress.

In reacting to Shining Path's brutality, Peru's military has spread its own
"climate of terror," Amnesty International said in a report in November.
Ambushes have been met with army massacres. Most victims are poor Indian
peasants in rural areas, where whole villages have been punished by troops led
by urbanized upper-class officers.

Experts agree that Shining Path is self-sustaining, earning the money it needs
through the narcotics trade. It appears to have no direct backing from abroad,
giving Washington no leverage through third countries.

If fears are growing in Washington, so is a sense of helplessness. What can stop
a self-generating movement like this? Victory for Shining Path would bring "a
major test of the new world order," said Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a
New Jersey Democrat who heads the House Western Hemisphere subcommittee. "What
is the responsibility of the international community when a terrorist movement
takes over a country?"

At the Inter-American Dialogue, a Washington-based forum for leaders from the
Americas, a formal study will ask whether concepts of sovereignty have changed
enough in recent years that collective outside responses to internal crises
might be workable. Those who believe the climate has been altered point to the
United Nations' current peace efforts in Cambodia and Yugoslavia, or the efforts
of the O.A.S. to bring compromise to Haiti. Skeptics, however, counter with
fears that Latin America's nationalistic armies may be dangerously unready, and
no one seems prepared to propose an international mission to Peru.

In Congress, parallels are frequently drawn between Peru now and Cambodia in the
early 1970's -- often from different political viewpoints. In 1973, unwilling to
sustain an American war in Cambodia against Vietnamese Communist sanctuaries and
supply routes, or the Cambodian Government's war against the Khmer Rouge,
Congress cut off all money for Cambodia's defense. Many critics of the Vietnam
War cheered, thinking the Khmer Rouge would be better than the Lon Nol regime.

Last fall, citing human rights abuses by the Peruvian military and fearing that
the United States would be drawn into another foreign war, this time against
Shining Path in the cocaine production center known as the Upper Huallaga
Valley, Congress curtailed military assistance to Peru over the objections of
the Bush Administration. Some American involvement in narcotics eradication
continues, however.

"To confront drug trafficking in Peru is to confront Sendero," Mr. Aronson says.
That is what worries members of Congress. Mr. Torricelli describes United States
narcotics agents as "sitting ducks" in somebody else's war. "Perhaps we should
be involved in the effort to defeat Shining Path," Mr. Torricelli told Mr.
Aronson. "Perhaps we should not. But the one thing that we must avoid is getting
involved through the back door. We have been down that road before."

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peasants who survived an attack by Shining Path guerrillas on
their village in the Andes of southeast Peru are armed with lances, their
only weapons. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEXT LEVEL;
Clinton Turns His Energies To Bush Battle

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words


After all the candidate forums, all the Holiday Inns, all the box lunches, all
the tarmac news conferences, all the panic and the exhaustion and the adrenaline
buzz of watching large groups of people whipsawed by gossip and rumor and
personal attacks, the Democrats finally seem close to choosing a nominee.

Sometimes it felt like Lonesome Dove, a cross-country cattle drive with
amphetamine timing. Now, of course, it will begin anew.

Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas was making all the appropriate comments last
week, saying that he took nothing for granted and would continue to campaign
hard for the nomination in the remaining 21 primaries and caucuses. But former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas's rueful withdrawal after his losses in Illinois and
Michigan left the Governor from Arkansas as the presumed nominee, with seven
times the delegates of his remaining rival, the maverick former California
Governor Edmund G. Brown Jr.

Already, Democratic leaders, who created this jam-packed primary schedule in
hopes of producing an early nominee -- and, miraculously, seem to have achieved
just that -- were turning their attention to George Bush.

Over at the Democratic National Committee, where memories of how the Democrats
were out-campaigned and out-researched in 1988 run deep, they have been clipping
and studying and looking for booby traps in the Bush record.  Down at
Bush-Quayle headquarters, similar "opposition research" is under way on the
Democrats. Out on the campaign trail, the shape of the coming debate is already
emerging.

If Mr. Clinton has his way, this will be an election about change -- yes or no.
The 1980's, he argues, are over, their economic policies repudiated, and the
country desperately needs a fresh new direction. He campaigned against Mr.
Tsongas by calling him a man who wanted to continue "trickle down" economics,
notably a cut in the tax on capital gains, rather than redress the inequities of
the decade with measures like a middle-class tax cut and greater investment in
education and training.

Mr. Clinton's aides believe his message needs fairly little retrofitting for the
general election. From their perspective, he has simply left behind the body
double for the real thing. "George Bush is the ultimate believer in the 1980's
and the ultimate believer in trickle down," said James Carville, a top
strategist for the Clinton campaign. "George Bush wouldn't know change if it ran
over him."

Robert Teeter, the chairman of the Bush campaign, counters calmly that it will
be easy to avoid getting trapped in the role of Mr. Status Quo Incumbent, a role
that every incumbent who can read polls desperately fears this year. "The
obstacle to change is Congress," Mr. Teeter said in an interview on Friday.
"Every poll shows that the number of people who recognize that is increasing.
And it's not a Republican Congress."

The Republicans, in other words, are not foolish enough to cede this ground to
the opposition. It may be harder for a party in power for 12 years to present
itself as an agent of change, but Ronald Reagan did it deftly in 1988: "We are
the change," he told the Republican convention in New Orleans.

Ready for Something New


 As Mr. Bush vetoed the Congressional tax measure late last week, asserting that
it would not ease the nation's economic plight, there were a lot of references
to change.

"If the Democratic leadership that runs the status quo Congress will not help us
change America, we have to change it without them," he said. "Change is nothing
to fear." The idea behind all this, of course, is simple enough: Eight out of
ten Americans in recent polls say the economy is in bad shape, and huge
majorities have told poll takers that they think the country is headed in the
wrong direction. Change is the last thing they fear.

Oratory can only help an incumbent President so much; what Mr. Bush probably
needs most is continued improvement in the economy. He has other, related needs:
His approval ratings have been hovering at 40 percent. The old Reagan coalition
seems to be fraying badly; in the 1980's, a growing economy helped keep socially
liberal baby boomers and conservative Christians under the same tent. And
Patrick J. Buchanan's angry primary attacks casting Mr. Bush as a man who breaks
his word and jettisons his principles have opened some wounds.

Still, Mr. Clinton's path is anything but clear, beginning with the approaching
primaries in Connecticut and New York. To begin with, there is Mr. Brown, who
shows very little inclination to fade away. The endgame with him may not be as
difficult as the endgame was with the Rev. Jesse Jackson in 1984 and 1988,
because it will not involve the sensitive issue of racial respect; the political
always seemed fused with the personal when a nominee negotiated with Mr.
Jackson.

Why Democrats Worry

Still, Mr. Brown is viewed by many Democrats as a dangerous opponent because he
seems to revel in throwing bombs. The Clinton forces will be trying to undercut
his "we the people" appeal by focusing on his support for a flat tax, which they
will present as a giveaway to the rich -- which, of course, fits neatly with
their general election themes.

The deeper issue for Mr. Clinton is the fear within the party that some new
character issue will emerge. Even those who dislike Mr. Clinton are somewhat
amazed at his ability to plow through charges of marital infidelity, of
manipulating his draft status to avoid Vietnam, and, most recently, of conflict
of interest stemming from the partnership of his wife, Hillary, in a law firm
that does business with the state of Arkansas.

But Democrats still worry. Many in the party believe that anything that
distracts the public's attention from the economy this fall will hurt the
Democrats' chances.

The Clintons seem to be trying to appeal to generational solidarity: if the
standard is perfection, Mr. Clinton asks, who could pass? And, by extension,
should the messy lives of the baby boomers forever foreclose them from power?

For all of that, Mr. Clinton has been given a great gift. This was a short
campaign, waged largely by Presidential novices who were always scrambling for
money and the limelight; they fell quickly and they fell hard. They also left
with considerable grace, as Mr. Tsongas did last week.

Always left standing was Mr. Clinton, maneuvering through the complicated
politics of South Florida or Chicago's City Hall, picking up endorsements
wherever he went, eyes glittering and very, very hungry.

For all the talk of demographics and the broad forces of economics and culture,
Mr. Clinton's campaign teaches once again that simple fire in the belly can do a
lot. After the emotional detachment of Michael S. Dukakis, after the ambivalence
and calculation of the Democrats who pondered a race last year but decided
against it, Mr. Clinton and his crew provide a dose of political id for the
Democrats.

They want the White House and they want it bad.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton and his wife, Hillary, waiting to appear at a
primary victory celebration in Chicago last week. (Win McNamee/Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 23, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hidden Lives: New York's Poorest Immigrants -- A special report;
Crammed in Tiny, Illegal Rooms, Tenants of the Margins of Survival

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2367 words


Up three flights of broken stairs in a garment factory building on the western
edge of Chinatown was the windowless 8-by-10-foot cell that Abdulaye Kamara, an
immigrant from Senegal, was happy to call home.

His neighbors were mostly people like himself, resourceful immigrants from
China, Vietnam, Mexico and a few other countries, living quietly in a warren of
16 cubicles constructed illegally, with no apparent regard for building codes.

They had one working toilet, out in the narrow hallway, and no bath or kitchen.
The air they breathed was thick with particles of dust and lint, wafting from
three other floors where hundreds of Chinese women work at sewing machines from
morning till night. They paid $200 to $350 a month and considered it a bargain.

Reduced to Rubble

"I thought, 'This is lucky for me,' " Mr. Kamara said, recalling the day he
moved in four years ago. "Manhattan is very high."

This most rudimentary of dwellings is nothing but rubble now, courtesy of four
men with sledgehammers who showed up one morning in the wake of a
landlord-tenant dispute. Since then, eight tenants have managed to get rooms at
a single-room-occupancy hotel on East 28th Street -- a brief respite in the
ceaseless search for that rarest of New York commodities: a decent and
affordable place for a poor person to live.

But while the fourth floor is no more, the story of 372 Broadway in its
hardscrabble heyday -- and of the lives that brought its tenants together there
-- is the story of tens of thousands of marginal people who live packed together
in similarly subdivided illegal encampments all over New York City.

These are the people who find jobs where there aren't supposed to be any, who
manage to survive in New York -- and feed and shelter their families back home.
They are the people who sell flowers at highway exits and watches on Fifth
Avenue, who drive gypsy cabs in neighborhoods where yellow cabs won't go, who
bus tables in Chinatown and deliver takeout at 2 A.M.

They are from China, the Dominican Republic, Colombia, Haiti, Senegal, Mexico
and a lot of other places where freedom or work or both are in short supply.

At night here in America, they crowd 10 or more to a basement in East Flatbush,
the East Bronx and Washington Heights, or five to a subdivided room in Harlem,
Brighton Beach and Elmhurst. In Chinatown, some people sleep in shifts on bunks
in barracks-style rooms.

More Than 60,000

They are all citizens of an illegal underground network that has been expanding
since the 1970's, as the city's single-room-occupancy hotels have been swallowed
by real-estate development. It is impossible to know just how many of these
dwellings there are, but urban planners, tenant lawyers, social workers and
community organizers, based on their work with the tenants and on reports of
evictions from the Fire Department, estimate there are more than 60,000.

The encampment at 372 Broadway was certainly not the worst -- there were
sprinklers and fire alarms, and the walls were Sheetrock, not plywood and
chicken wire.

"This was actually palatial compared to the standards by which a lot of people
are living," said City Councilwoman Kathryn Freed, who is trying to help the
tenants.

And Mr. Kamara's cell was palatial compared to where he spent his first six
months at 372 Broadway. He is 5-foot-9 and thin, but in the circuit-breaker
closet, there was barely space for him to curl up on a narrow mattress on the
floor. Mr. Kamara, who is 31 years old, came to America 10 years ago to provide
for his mother and nine brothers and sisters back in Dakar. For the last four
years, he has done it on a meager $4.25 an hour as a stockboy. The
circuit-breaker closet cost $35 a week, cash.

Like Mr. Kamara, the other residents of 372 Broadway, devoted to work and saving
money for families back home, led lives as circumscribed as their tiny rooms.

In their two years in America, Fan Yong Guang, 35, and his brother, Fan Yong
Yuan, 30, returned every night from the garment factory where they sew zippers
to eat rice and vegetables cooked on a hot plate in their room. They have never
been to a restaurant, or a movie. Central Park? Fifth Avenue? They had never
heard of them.

"I don't know what is in America," the older brother said.

On one of his last nights at 372 Broadway, Mr. Kamara wore a secondhand winter
coat as he huddled in his cold cubicle, with only a candle for light. He had
just started a new job, as a $5.50-an-hour security guard, and his uniform hung
from a hook on the wall. Displayed on a dented metal desk was a Christmas card
from his family 4,000 miles away.

On his small tape player, his famous countryman, Youssou N'Dour, sang Mr.
Kamara's favorite song, "Immigres," about Senagalese like him who have gone
abroad in search of work.

"Every night before I go to sleep I'm thinking about the future," Mr. Kamara
said, in the smooth English he says he has taught himself here. His smile was
luminous.

"I want to build my mom a house in my country. Not a big house, just four rooms,
including the bathroom and kitchen. Mango trees out front. Sometimes I dream I'm
sitting under the mango trees with my mom and my brothers and sisters. Then I
wake up, and look around, and I'm here."

"This was Frankie's room. Frankie was Spanish. Frankie was a nice guy." Mr.
Kamara, the historian of the fourth floor, was giving a tour of a disaster area.
Frankie's room was one of those demolished by the sledgehammers, and Frankie had
vanished.

So had several Korean peddlers. And Sebastian. "Sebastian was Mexican," Mr.
Kamara said. "He sold stuff on the street, sweaters, scarves, everything."

Anyone who was desperate enough to find the way to the fourth floor, and who had
cash for rent, could get in. Mr. Kamara arrived after he lost the apartment he
shared with five people in the Bronx. Near the electronics store on Canal Street
where he was a stockboy, he had spotted the sign: "Room for Rent -- 372
Broadway."

Mee Ying Chan was a mystery tenant. She owns an apartment building in Queens.
Still, she insists that she is poor. Last year, she declared herself an
Independent candidate for the City Council but then dropped out. Ms. Chan's
neighbors enjoyed watching Chinese movies on her VCR, before it was stolen.

In two rooms down the hall lived Gina Doss and Harry Fromer, both from New York.
"Gina's in the hospital," Mr. Kamara said.

Mr. Fromer had returned to 372 Broadway after a month's absence -- he had also
been in the hospital, he said -- and, before he could reach his door, Mr. Kamara
gently broke the news. His room was no more.

"At least we're not on the street," said Mr. Fromer, whose last job was passing
out fliers for the Plum Blossom restaurant in Chinatown.

Mystery Landlord
Space Leased 'For Storage'

No one knows who put up the cubicles, though the tenants paid their rent to
Javier Arana, who runs a small retail fabric store on the building's ground
floor.

City records list the owner of 372 Broadway as the Broadway-White Realty
Corporation. Besides that building, the company, which has had many addresses
through the years but is not listed in the phone book, owns six apartment
buildings in the Bronx. A man involved in the operation of the building, Zalman
Deitsch, said he did not know that people were living in the building, which is
zoned for commercial use only.

Until recently, Mr. Deitsch said, Mr. Arana leased the fourth floor. He said Mr.
Arana told him he was using it for storage. Reached at the fabric store, Mr.
Arana said he had nothing to do with the fourth floor and refused to comment
further.

For the tenants of the fourth floor, the end may have begun when Ms. Doss,
apparently unaware that her room was illegal, took Mr. Arana to housing court
last October, demanding repairs. On Feb. 10, a judge fined Mr. Arana $3,500. On
Feb. 11, the men with sledgehammers went to work.

No Strangers to Trouble

"Look what they did to the Old Man's home." Mr. Kamara pointed to Room 408,
where the front wall had been knocked in. The Old Man, as Mr. Kamara refers
respectfully to 78-year-old Tsang Kok Wah, stood there in a soiled raincoat and
knit cap.

The tenants were stoic. This disaster was not their first. In the village where
he grew up, Mr. Kamara saw other children swallow stones because there wasn't
enough food. "For a long time it didn't rain," Mr. Kamara said. "For lunch, we
ate a little rice and drank a lot of water. For dinner we had bread and water
with sugar. Then everyone moved to the city."

To build his mother's house, Mr. Kamara says he needs $12,000 -- an enormous sum
of money in Dakar. After several years of nonstop labor -- peddling umbrellas,
icing cookies in a baking factory in the Bronx, making plastic hangers in a
factory in Brooklyn -- he had saved $6,000 in a bank in Senegal, he said.

"A few years ago my mom called," he said. "She told me the bank had gone out of
business. My money was just gone. I was discouraged. My mom said, 'It happened,
it's life. You have to encourage yourself.' So I started over." But he gave up
peddling -- it was too risky, he said -- and it is hard just to keep sending
money home, let alone to save.

Mr. Tsang wept as he talked through a translator about his losses. His family in
China was denounced for owning land when the Communists seized power in 1949.

"The Communists killed my parents," he said. "They executed my brother, and they
banged my wife's head on the wall until she died."

Mr. Tsang escaped to Hong Kong. Ten years ago, he came to New York. Here, he
said, he is safe from Communists. Though he owns property in Florida, Mr. Tsang
said, he can't live anywhere very far from Chinatown. He speaks no English.

On the fourth floor, the only running water was from a small sink in the
hallway. How, then, did Mr. Kamara manage to stay so clean?

Mr. Kamara pulled from his pocket the membership card that, for $25 a year,
admits him to the Carmine Street city pool, two subway stops and a short walk
from his old building. "I love to swim," he said. "I swim half a mile. And I
take a shower."

Work, Hope, Work
A Better Future For Someone Else?

On the morning of their last Sunday at 372 Broadway, no tenants were home. Mr.
Kamara, dignified in his uniform, was at his security guard post -- at the
luxury high-rise next door.

Mr. Tsang was at his job, in Atlantic City, where he trades in cut-rate casino
coupons for a modest profit, $4 a ticket. Seven days a week, he commutes by van
from Chinatown.

On Canal Street, Fan Yong Guang and his brother were peddling men's dress socks
from a cardboard box. "Four for 5 dollar," the older brother said to a couple
who stopped only to look. His sales pitch is the only English he knows.

The brothers peddle socks on their days off from the factory in Brooklyn.  Some
days they sew 200 zippers each; their hands get sore, they said. Other days
there is no work.

They each earn about $900 a month, they said. They send $100 a month to their
wives in China and put away a few hundred dollars for the day when their
families will join them. Food for both of them costs less than $10 a day. They
have one luxury -- 10 unfiltered cigarettes apiece a day.

"I'm going to make money for my son," the older brother said. "He's going to go
to school, and he's going to learn English. Then, when I'm old, he'll take care
of me."

Mr. Kamara is eager to experience the city. "A few years ago, I rented shoes at
Rockefeller Center for $10," he said. "I was falling. My friend took my picture.
I sent it to my family."

The Only Worker

Ice skating was one evening out of 10 years. Mr. Kamara can't afford small
pleasures. "I'm the only one working in my family," he said. "It is very hard to
find a job in my country." The only one he could find was pouring nail polish
into bottles at a factory for $3.50 a day -- when he could get it.

His mother, Ramatoulaye Diop, speaking in French from the home of a friend in
Dakar with a telephone, said the rent on her four-room house is $345 a month.
Abdulaye is the one who pays it, she said. She is proud of her second eldest
son.

Mr. Kamara gladly put in 11-hour days, seven days a week, as a stockboy at the
electronics store. For $45 a day. "I asked the boss for a raise," Mr. Kamara
said. "He told me, 'I can get two Mexicans for $45 a day.' "

Mr. Kamara, who has been searching the classifieds for a second job, recently
invested $3 in a red tie. He was wearing it with his white shirt the other
evening as he walked along bustling Canal Street. "You never know when you could
get a job interview," he said. "They won't hire you if you don't look nice."

In 'Heaven'
Companionship At an S.R.O.

At the Latham Hotel, 4 East 28th Street, the eight former tenants of 372
Broadway meet often in one another's rooms after work. "Now we have a lot of
problems," Mr. Kamara said. "We talk a lot."

It takes some improvising. Mr. Tsang speaks Cantonese, the brothers Mandarin.
Everyone's favorite tenant, Mr. Kamara, makes a point of greeting his Chinese
neighbors in their own language: "Ni hao ma?"

Holding tightly to Mr. Kamara's hand, the Chinese brothers repeated their
one-word assessment -- in English -- of their sparsely furnished hotel room:
"Heaven, heaven!"

After an telephone call from Councilwoman Freed's staff 18 days ago, the Fire
Department vacated the tenants, making them the responsibility of the city. If
they qualify, they will eventually move to housing projects or city-owned
apartments.

After All, Hope Flutters

Mr. Kamara is thinking of the house he wants to build his mother. His dream, he
said, seems distant.

"If I had a dream that this was going to be my life in New York," he said, "I
would just have stayed in my country and been poor."

But New York is where he is. And, he said, "I have to be hopeful." A few days
ago, hope was rising. "I got more hours on my job!" he said. "Double shifts!"

Mr. Kamara heard recently from his 27-year-old brother, Doudou. He can't find a
job. "He wants me to send him a plane ticket," Mr. Kamara said. "He wants to
come to New York."

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fan Yong Guang, left, and his brother, Fan Yong Yuan,
immigrants from China, sitting last month in an illegally built cubicle in
Chinatown before it was demolished in the wake of a landlord-tenant dispute
(Edward Keating/The New York Times); "I thought, 'This is lucky for me,' " said,
Abdulaye Kamara, an immigrant from Senegal, who lived in one of the cubicles at
372 Broadway. "Manhattan is very high." He stood outside his room. (C. M. Hardt
for The New York Times) (pg. B2)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week;
Brown Flails as Clinton Rolls With the Punches

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 23


Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California is flailing about, spewing out
charges like sparks from a Fourth of July pinwheel, in a last-ditch effort to
establish himself in this week's Connecticut primary as a credible alternative
to Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.

The rest of them -- the Wilders and Kerreys, Harkins and Tsongases -- are gone
now. Just Bill Clinton and Jerry Brown are left, locked in a wildly unequal
struggle for the Democratic Presidential nomination. Mr. Clinton has the
delegates, the endorsements, the money and the television commercials. He even
has the support of the desperate workers at Groton, Conn., who build the Seawolf
submarine, soon to be suspended under President Bush's military cutbacks.

What is left for Mr. Brown is somehow to undercut the reputation that Mr.
Clinton has built up as a candidate who can survive almost anything. In that
effort, the Californian is willing to utter some pretty harsh words.

In little more than 48 hours, Mr. Brown accused Mr. Clinton of economic
incompetence; called him "Slick Willy," which is what his adversaries have been
calling him in private for weeks but refraining from calling him in public; said
that if nominated he would "ruin the whole Democratic party;" charged him with
promising a lot to blacks but delivering nothing, and labeled him "the greatest
bluffer to enter American politics in my lifetime."

Even if Mr. Clinton wins big, Mr. Brown is unlikely to desist. So after the
votes have been counted in Hartford tomorrow night and the candidates head for
the New York balloting on April 7, the Arkansas Governor can expect more of the
same. More bombardment from a challenger who has absolutely nothing to lose and
absolutely no expectation of future favors to temper his tongue.

In addition, Mr. Clinton faces two weeks of close scrutiny on the urban issues
that plague New York City, from the homeless to AIDs to decaying housing to
inadequate schools to crime to drug epidemics to disintegrating roads. To a
degree, those topics were issues in Illinois and Michigan as well, but only to a
degree; the New York primary will focus more attention on them than any other
contest until the fall.

Perhaps he will roll with those punches, as he has rolled with so many others.
What is interesting, and highly disturbing for those Democrats who have already
conceded the nomination to Mr. Clinton, is that the punches keep coming, from so
many directions. They keep coming partly because he has made so much progress,
and each level of success brings scrutiny, but also because he keeps doing
things that raise continuing questions about his judgment.

Why, for instance, having taken so many zingers over the past two months, would
a candidate, whose chances for nomination and for ultimate victory depend upon
black voters, play golf at an all-white country club? Why would a man who as
long ago as the Vietnam War, by his own testimony, was worried about his
viability as a political candidate, fly on an airplane owned by a man whose
company has a reputation for polluting rivers and streams in Arkansas?

Today, The Los Angeles Times reported that Mr. Clinton lobbied legislators to
approve a state bond contract benefiting a political supporter who later pleaded
guilty to cocaine possession and distribution charges.

Mr. Clinton rebuts each charge as it arises and presses on. His campaign aides
are now talking about using the remaining big primaries, especially those in New
York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Ohio and California, to begin the process of
persuading the "Reagan Democrats" to come home.

The President lost New York in 1988, but he won the other four by relatively
narrow margins -- 100,000 in Pennsylvania, 300,000 in California, 500,000 in
Ohio and New Jersey. Most Democratic strategists think all are winnable this
fall, except perhaps New Jersey, but Mr. Clinton still has to make himself and
his ideas known in them.

So he will campaign hard in all with one eye on their electoral votes in the
fall, the other on Mr. Brown. Mr. Bush will be stumping hard for their support,
too. But so far this year he has done poorly among the Democrats and
independents who backed him four years ago and made possible his successes in
the big states, according to exit polls in the early primaries.

The President's attempt to take the initiative against Congress last week lacked
drama, content and timing. Nothing original or unexpected about
Congress-bashing, and in big-time politics, a radio speech at 4 o'clock on a
Saturday afternoon is the ideal vehicle for something you want to conceal from
public notice, not for something you hope will set a campaign afire.

Mr. Bush has got rid of Patrick J. Buchanan, his tormenter in the early
primaries, although the conservative commentator's name remains on the ballot in
Connecticut and elsewhere and might still draw some protest votes.

The President's biggest problem is that he makes the recession sound like
something that happened on someone else's watch, not something that happened on
his. "Just hang on and everything will be all right" is a formula for a one-term
Presidency, many Republicans think, but they have pressed Mr. Bush in vain so
far to lay out a grand vision of a second Bush Administration.

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
'Jake's Women,' a New Chapter in the Sex Wars

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1157 words


It is reassuring to know that Neil Simon, battle-scarred veteran of the sexual
wars, is as confused as the rest of us: what he still does not know about men
and women could probably fill half a dozen plays.

"Jake's Women" is one of them. In this new Simon comedy at the Neil Simon
Theater, a successful novelist, played by Alan Alda, wrestles with intimacy,
guilt, trust, control and several other buzzwords that have been known to saw
through modern American marriages, upper-middle-class, upper-middle-age
division. While the effort is painfully sincere and the jargon only slightly
out-of-date (the characters seem untouched as yet by "Iron John" and
"Backlash"), the insights prove as canned as those in any daytime talk show
about men who hate women who love men who hate women. But since Mr. Simon does
know more about playwriting and comedy than most mortals, and since a uniformly
charming cast is on hand to carry out his theatrical schemes, "Jake's Women" is
not without its ancillary amusements.

The play is essentially a rueful footnote to "Chapter Two," Mr. Simon's breezy
piece of 15 years ago in which a young widower bounces back from mourning with
remarkable agility once he meets a new dream girl. The 53-year-old hero of
"Jake's Women" also lost his first wife at an early age, but we meet him a
decade later as he learns that his second wife, Maggie (Helen Shaver), is
halfway out the door after eight years of marriage. What's gone wrong? Both Jake
and Maggie stand accused of brief extramarital flings, of workaholism (he writes
compulsively, she climbs "the corporate ladder"), of spending too much time
apart (three to four months a year). Jake has the added handicap, endemic to
writers on stage and screen, of preferring "creative pleasure" at his word
processor to real pleasure. "Reality is a bummer," he says.

To cure these ailments, Mr. Simon sends Maggie away on a dramatically convenient
six-month separation so that Jake can roam through memories of women he has
known, with the hope that he might make an emotional breakthrough and learn to
live life instead of merely observe it. As written, however, the hero's
confessional monologue often seems to be a series of observations rather than a
spontaneous experience, a manufactured stream of consciousness rather than an
honest one. Jake is like the analysand who goes into a session with every
revelation, even the most embarrassing anecdotes about Mom, carefully rehearsed
and edited, lest any unexpected question or feeling actually emerge. For all his
talk about pain and learning to "stand naked," he seems remote.

At least Mr. Simon does not misplace his sense of humor; some of the vignettes
are quite funny. The boisterous Brenda Vaccaro, who barrels through as Jake's
meddling and unattached sister, and Joyce Van Patten, as a therapist with dating
woes of her own, are founts of wisecracks, all expertly delivered; one only
wishes they had more to do. Mr. Alda also gets some delightful stand-up comedy
riffs as Jake stage-manages the play's Pirandellian mixture of real,
present-tense scenes, subjective flashbacks and wish-fulfilling fantasies.

The sadder incidents can also be effective self-contained playlets, reminiscent
of the melancholy sketches Mr. Simon once shuffled into the comic decks of
"Plaza Suite" and "California Suite." Ms. Shaver, a lovely actress with big, sad
eyes and a forthright manner, has an affecting bit late in Act I in which she
walks out a door a bubbly bride-to-be and re-enters moments later as a
disillusioned wife eight years older. An imagined meeting between Jake's smart,
college-age daughter and her long-dead mother is both sweet and feisty. Tracy
Pollan's sharp intelligence keeps the daughter from lapsing into sentimentality,
and Kate Burton, in what may be her long-awaited breakthrough performance, makes
Jake's first wife, frozen in time at the age of 21, a magical incarnation of
lost youth, the earthiest of ghosts.

Other episodes, whether comic or searching, do not come off so well, including a
strained re-enactment of a name-dropping East Hampton cocktail party that opens
the play very nervously, and a shrill altercation between Jake and a new fling
(well acted by Talia Balsam) that is the major attempt to inject sustained
laughter into a rudderless second act. The evening's supposedly cathartic
denouement, which features the broadcast of recorded inner voices ("from some
deep place I've never been before," says Jake) and the recitation of
psychobabble to the accompaniment of easy-listening music, can only be described
as bizarre. It's a new-age version of a Senor Wences comedy routine.

Those interludes most notably excepted, Gene Saks has directed "Jake's Women" in
a refreshingly human key rather than with the hard-sell theatrics that begged
for applause at the end of nearly every speech and scene of "Lost in Yonkers."
The director has been less successful at commissioning an inviting set from
Santo Loquasto. A brilliant designer of period Americana ("Lost in Yonkers"
included), Mr. Loquasto gives Jake a SoHo apartment that resembles a duplex
suite in a modern chain hotel and surrounds it with brick catacombs and
staircases suggesting that the abstract recesses of Jake's psyche resemble an
abandoned factory.

It is up to Mr. Alda to set the evening's tone and hold its focus, and he does
both jobs most effectively. While there will be few surprises in his performance
for devotees of "M*A*S*H," his stage skills have in no way atrophied since his
Broadway heyday in the 1960's. Addressing the audience almost continuously, Jake
could easily wear out a star's stamina and welcome, but Mr. Alda carries his
duties lightly, practicing deft comic timing and displaying an old-shoe warmth
and sensitivity that never become sanctimonious.

Mr. Simon is not sanctimonious, either, but he does come across as naive. By the
end of "Jake's Women," he has posited that battling married couples can cure
what ails them by giving each other some space, cutting back on their workloads,
getting in touch with their feelings and banishing their childhood demons by
fiat. Is it all that easy, or is Mr. Simon merely desperate for a happy ending?
Jake's simple, abrupt resolution of this play's deadlocked marital war recalls
Senator George Aiken's memorable prescription for getting the United States out
of Vietnam: declare victory and send everyone home.

Jake's Women
By Neil Simon; directed by Gene Saks; scenery and costumes by Santo Loquasto;
lighting by Tharon Musser; sound by Tom Morse; production supervisor, Peter
Lawrence. Presented by Emanuel Azenberg. At the Neil Simon Theater, 250 West 52d
Street, Manhattan.

Jake . . . Alan Alda
Maggie . . . Helen Shaver
Karen . . . Brenda Vaccaro
Molly (at 12) . . . Genia Michaela
Molly (at 21) . . . Tracy Pollan
Edith . . . Joyce Van Patten
Julie . . . Kate Burton
Sheila . . . Talia Balsam

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kate Burton, left, Alan Alda and Tracy Pollan in the new Neil
Simon play, "Jake's Women," directed by Gene Saks at the Neil Simon Theater.
(Martha Swope/"Jake's Women")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 25, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Reporter's Notebook;
Students Give Clinton A Skeptical Reception

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas likes to visit high schools, often handing the
microphone around like a talk show host and offering his pet proposals on
college financing and educational choice.

But yesterday, he got more than he could have expected from an aggressive
audience of government and political science students at Benjamin N. Cardozo
High School in Bayside, Queens.

For nearly an hour, the teen-agers grilled Mr. Clinton on everything from the
war in the Persian Gulf to distributing condoms in public schools. And, unlike
those in other schools he has visited, these students seemed unwilling to accept
Mr. Clinton's flexible answers.

The tone was set when Kamal Latham, the student body president, greeted Mr.
Clinton at the door and told him that although he was running for President, Mr.
Latham already was a president.

After a short introduction in a room crowded with more photographers and
reporters than students, the questions flew like darts:

Who pays for your community service proposal? How do you plan to equalize the
burdens of taxation? What difference would a waiting period make in controlling
the sale of handguns when people can get them illegally anyway?

One student suggested rewriting the Constitution to control the amount of
violence young people are exposed to in movies and on television.

The exchange disclosed a deep skepticism among the students toward anyone, let
alone a political candidate, who promises them that society's abiding problems
can be solved too easily or too glibly.

They laughed at his proposal to take drivers' licenses away from high school
dropouts. "How many kids now are driving without their license?" one student
wanted to know.

"I didn't say it would work here," Mr. Clinton offered.

The students moaned. For a while, they even ignored the candidate altogether,
falling into earnest debate among themselves about what it takes to make a good
teacher. Watching and listening was Sandra Feldman, the president of the United
Federation of Teachers and a Clinton supporter.

When Mr. Clinton began answering a question about gun control, Marjan Shirzad, a
16-year-old sophomore from Bayside, could scarcely contain her exasperation.
"People who want guns are going to get them anyway," she told Mr. Clinton. "I
mean, we went to war over oil, and we're telling our kids not to shoot each
other?"

"Thank you," Mr. Clinton murmured. "I don't agree with you, but thank you." Mr.
Clinton now says he supported President Bush's decision to go to war, even
though he said before the hostilities that sanctions against Iraq should be
given more time.

"I don't think he answered my question at all," Ms. Shirzad fumed.

"The students have been exploited here," her friend Jesse Slansky, 17, added.
"This is just a photo opportunity."

Trying to Slim Down

At 6 A.M. yesterday, Mr. Clinton had members of his Secret Service detail wake
up one of his aides, and they all went for a run in Central Park. The exercise
could not have come a moment too soon.

For weeks, people on the Clinton campaign bus have watched as Mr. Clinton's
waistline has expanded along with his political fortunes. No member of the
campaign staff who values his job will confirm the extent of the Governor's
weight gain, but the generally accepted estimate falls between 20 and 25 pounds.

The excess pounds have puffed his face and strained the seams on some of his
suits. He eats a lot and has been known to grouse when his wife, Hillary, or
flight attendants suggest a diet drink as he downs the fatty snacks on his
chartered jet.

In New Hampshire, when accusations about marital infidelity and his behavior
during the Vietnam-era draft drove his campaign into 24-hour damage control, a
friend from Arkansas who had come to campaign on Mr. Clinton's behalf suggested
that the candidate buy some more easily fitting suits. He did.

Mr. Clinton's eating habits during times of personal stress are grounded in
history. In the now-famous 1969 letter he wrote to an R.O.T.C. colonel thanking
him for "saving me from the draft," Mr. Clinton, then 23, described the stress
of making his decision to drop his deferment. He ate constantly, he said.

The pounds began to pile on when Mr. Clinton caught a severe and stubborn cold
that, complicated by allergies, forced him to stop running and working out in
hotel gyms. Last week, he apologized to a woman who had offered him a cookie,
saying he had been warned away from such things.

But temptation is everywhere. On Monday in Hartford, a freshly baked and wrapped
fruit pie appeared on the Clinton bus with a note: "For Governor Clinton." It is
not clear what became of the pie.

Some people close to the candidate say he has now recognized the error of his
ways. Mr. Clinton told an aide yesterday morning that he had lost five pounds.
The aide, who customarily says things are worse than they are to dampen
expectations, was asked what this estimate was based on. "Different scales in
different cities," he replied.

Cameras to Spare

Timing is everything in politics. And in the New York primary campaign, it
becomes crucial. So Clinton campaign aides have decided that in a city where
there are always more questions than answers, they will use their candidate's
public time a little differently.

Reporters who are familiar with Mr. Clinton's affection for television cameras
when they are aimed his way were shocked yesterday to watch him emerge from
Cardozo High School, stride right past a bristling thicket of cameras and climb
into his car without stopping to talk.

Mr. Clinton has been known to bore casual bystanders with a flood of details
about health-care policy or taxation in response to offhand questions. When he
was most heavily under fire, his strategy became to face every camera, answer
every question. The idea was to give the impression of a man with nothing to
hide.

So Mr. Clinton's change of heart immediately set off speculation that he had
seen disappointing early poll results from Connecticut.

But the deputy campaign manager, George Stephanopoulos, said the change was
actually part of a new strategy for New York, where campaign officials think
there is plenty of news exposure for the Democratic front-runner without
muddying the story of the day by talking too much.

"He's not going to stop and talk every time there are three cameras there," said
Mr. Stephanopoulos.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton faced some tough questions yesterday as he
talked with a group of government and political science students at Benjamin N.
Cardozo High School in Bayside, Queens. Sitting at right was Sandra Feldman, the
president of the United Federation of Teachers. (Keith Meyers/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 26, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Said to Harass Refugees

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 25


Five days before the first of nearly 370,000 Cambodians are scheduled to return
home from camps in Thailand, refugee workers warned today that Khmer Rouge
guerrillas are attempting to undermine the refugee program sponsored by the
United Nations.

The Communist Khmer Rouge, they said, seem to be trying to force refugees into
areas of Cambodia under their control.

The warning came after two serious incidents in recent days in Khmer Rouge camps
near the Thai border.

Fear as a Tactic

On Monday night, two people were killed at a camp known as Site 8 during what
the Khmer Rouge described as an attack by bandits. Foreign relief officials say
the attack was highly suspicious: the so-called bandits asked for their victims
by name. They suspect Khmer Rouge were behind the incident.

The relief workers say the Khmer Rouge may have meant the attack as a warning to
refugees who are hoping to go back to areas of Cambodia that are protected by
the United Nations and thus outside Khmer Rouge control. "This could be the
Khmer Rouge way of telling them to think again," one relief worker said.

In the other incident, on Friday, two civilian leaders of another camp under
Khmer Rouge control, Site K, were detained in Cambodia after they were accused
of working too closely with the United Nations and of being too supportive of
the repatriation program.

Daniel E. Conway, the representative in Thailand of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, said the detention of the two officials had created
"a climate of concern or fear -- fear is probably a fair word" among the nearly
11,000 refugees at Site K.

The Khmer's Different Tune

"This is a matter of great concern to us," he said, reflecting what seems to be
a growing belief among refugee workers that the Khmer Rouge have decided simply
to ignore terms of the United Nations-brokered peace treaty, which calls for the
orderly repatriation of the refugees in Thailand. "The world should be
concerned."

The treaty, signed by the Phnom Penh Government, the Khmer Rouge and two other
long-warring factions, was intended to end decades of civil strife in Cambodia.

From 1975 to 1979, the Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia under an agrarian Marxist
ideology and with a brutality that led to the death of at least one million
people in a population of seven million. Some were put to death; others were
moved from cities to the countryside and forced to do punishingly hard labor;
still others starved to death or died of disease.

Despite that history, the Khmer Rouge were included in the peace process.
Diplomats said they could not be excluded because they were by far the most
powerful group among those seeking to overthrow the Cambodian Government
installed by Vietnam.

Refugees to Move Monday

On Monday, the United Nations is expected to begin transporting the first
Cambodian refugees from Thailand, where many have lived for more than a decade.

This advance group is expected to include 670 people and will come from several
United Nations-aided border camps, including the three run by the Khmer Rouge.
It is hoped that over the next year, they will be followed by hundreds of
thousands of Cambodians who fled to Thailand from the civil war and from the
Khmer Rouge.

Under the treaty, refugees on the border are to have the freedom to settle where
they choose.

But there has long been concern that the Khmer Rouge would break the rules and
force the 75,000 refugees in the border camps it administers into the areas of
Cambodia that it controls. There, it is thought, the returning refugees could be
intimidated into voting for Khmer Rouge candidates in the election scheduled in
1993.

That fear explains why the United Nations and refugee organizations reacted so
sharply to word that the Khmer Rouge had detained two civilian leaders at Site
K.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To the Dustbin of History

BYLINE: By Walter Laqueur;  Walter Laqueur, the chairman of the International
Research Council of the Center for Strategic and International Studies, is the
author of "The Long Road to Freedom: Russia and Glasnost."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1300 words



THE COMMUNISTS
The Story of Power and Lost Illusions: 1948-1991.
By Adam B. Ulam.
528 pp. New York:
A Robert Stewart Book/Charles Scribner's Sons. $27.50.

THE Age of Communism has ended for the time being with a whimper; the bang,
alas, may still come. While the new era has produced few truly sensational
revelations so far, it is certain to result in a new literature -- of which "The
Communists" by Adam B. Ulam is a notable and very welcome precursor. The
subtitle of the book, "The Story of Power and Lost Illusions: 1948-1991," and
its first sentence say it all: "Never had the threat or promise of Communism
loomed larger than it did three years after the conclusion of World War II."
Stalin was at the height of his power, the Soviet Union had expanded in many
directions, the Red Army had exported Communism to Eastern Europe, Mao Zedong
had seized control in China, major Communist parties in France, Italy and other
European countries seemed poised for a takeover. The global victory of Communism
appeared only a question of time.

True, even in 1948 there were some clouds on the Communist horizon; a heretic
named Tito stood up to Stalin and got away with it. Furthermore, some experts
maintained that the victory of Communism in China was by no means an unmixed
blessing for the Soviets; sooner or later, they argued, the interests of the two
Communist giants were bound to collide. But these views were by no means widely
shared at the time, and it did indeed take more than a decade for the conflict
to come out in the open. The relative unimportance of a common ideology, as Mr.
Ulam notes, was not realized in the West for a considerable time.

Mr. Ulam, who is the director of the Russian Research Center and the Gurney
Professor of History and Political Science at Harvard University, reviews
succinctly and with his customary elegance the subsequent developments inside
the major Communist countries and the complicated relations among them, as
revealed in the recurrent crises in Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. It
quickly became clear, he says, that the aim of the Communist movement to
establish a supranational order, a worldwide commonwealth of Communist states,
was not likely to materialize. The spiritual fathers of Marxism-Leninism, like
most of their contemporaries, had greatly underrated the enduring strength of
nationalism. Nevertheless, something like a Soviet bloc continued to exist,
militarily powerful, politically influential and economically viable, though not
exactly an outstanding success.

What, then, caused the eventual breakdown? Mr. Ulam believes that it came as the
result of the widening discrepancy between the Communist ideology and what the
system had in fact become. This, it seems to me, is correct, but it leaves open
a number of essential questions. Despite the setbacks and difficulties, the mood
in the Communist world in the early 1960's was still one of relative optimism.
True, the general economic situation and the standard of living were quite bad,
but modest improvements were being made almost every year, the West was in
disarray (going through one of its recurrent economic downturns and periods of
political self-doubt) and, above all, citizens of the Communist countries had no
way of comparing their own lot with that of the rest of the world. There was
also hope in Moscow that the third world would gradually become part of the
Soviet sphere, turning into "countries of socialist orientation."

Whether all these things had to do with the power of the Communist doctrine, as
Mr. Ulam seems to imply, is questionable. Even before Stalin's death in 1953,
Communism had gradually turned into something akin to National Socialism, with a
strong bureaucracy, immense military power and an omnipresent secret police as
the pillars of the regime. Can a political system of this kind exist without a
creed for any length of time? Not indefinitely, surely, but for many years,
especially if there is a broad stratum of people who have a vested interest in
the perpetuation of the status quo.

The situation was less stable in Eastern Europe than in the Soviet Union, but
through a mixture of concessions (up to a point) and the threat of military
intervention, discipline of sorts could be maintained. Indeed, these countries
would probably still be under Communist rule but for the breakdown in Moscow.

When exactly did the change in mood from optimism to pessimism occur in Moscow?
Mr. Ulam and most other students of Soviet affairs seem to agree that, to a
large extent, it occurred when a growing number of Russians, not only the elite,
realized that their country, far from overtaking the West, was falling behind
virtually every other industrial nation. That is, it had to do with the
constantly deteriorating quality of life, the general stagnation, the absence of
any new ideas and initiatives among the aged leadership. And so the mood of the
country underwent radical change, and this in turn led to the earthquake that
occurred under Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

But it is also true that the same malaise affected China, North Korea, Vietnam
and Cuba without the same political consequences: Communist rule in these
countries has not disintegrated yet, and Communist power in the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe could have been maintained for another decade, perhaps even
longer. In other words, personal factors played a role of some importance, and
Mr. Ulam observes that personalities have been of considerable, sometimes
decisive, importance in a system that, on a theoretical level at least, denied
the significance of individuals.

A further question remains to be explored. How are we to explain the
considerable number of experts on the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe (Mr. Ulam
was a notable exception) who overrated the achievements of the Communist systems
long after their failure should have been obvious? It is now difficult to find
any serious person in the former Soviet bloc who will refer to the Communist
experience as other than an unqualified disaster. Yet Western observers who
yesterday were saying only half as much were derided by many Soviet specialists
as reactionaries and incurable cold warriors, hopelessly lacking in objectivity.
(Many China scholars have been similarly reluctant to face facts.) It is not
clear why this should have been so, and Mr. Ulam provides no explanation.

When Mr. Ulam finished writing his book last summer, the full extent of the
Soviet catastrophe was not yet manifest -- the Soviet Union still existed and
some central political authority still held sway, however weak and uncertain.
Since then a total collapse has occurred, and with this the dangers to the world
have grown immensely. For more than 30 years Mr. Ulam provided an invaluable
service by offering a running commentary on developments in the Soviet Union;
the most recent events, the period of transition, will undoubtedly be the
subject of his next book. He is not to be envied, because historians will now
have to deal with more than a dozen different countries, and what applies to one
may not necessarily be true of another.

Many of the problems generated by 70 years of Communist rule are proving
intractable. At least in the short run, the economic situation continues to
deteriorate, the prospects for the emergence and survival of free institutions
are not good, and nationalist separatism is running wild. Little remains today
of the Western euphoria of 1989-90, when so many people expected a global
victory for democracy and a safer world, one in which, like Candide, we would
all be free to cultivate our gardens without giving constant attention to
others. Instead, it is now apparent that our fate is intertwined with the
perilous plights of our neighbors.

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
For the Sweet Science on Screen, a Split Decision

BYLINE: By ALLEN BARRA;  Allen Barra, a contributing editor at The Village Voice

and Entertainment Weekly, has written about film for Premiere and American Film.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2053 words


Watching the bloody boxing bouts in the new movies "Gladiator" and "The Power of
One," I was reminded of a screening of "Rocky IV" I attended some years ago with
the trainer Eddie Futch. Mr. Futch, who has worked with such champions as Joe
Frazier, Larry Holmes and Ken Norton, watched the fight sequences through
squinted eyes, frequently holding up a hand in front of his face as if he were
witnessing an auto accident. When he got up to leave, a sportswriter asked him
if he would now support a move to ban boxing. Mr. Futch grinned and replied,
"No, but I certainly would support a movement to ban boxing movies."

The suggestion has merit: it's a safe bet that almost any film featuring boxing
has more blood and torn flesh than one is likely to see in a year of viewing
real boxing matches. As Willem Dafoe's character in the 1989 film "Triumph of
the Spirit" observes after an especially gruesome match at Auschwitz, "Dis hiss
not box-hing." No, indeed; it's the movies.

Movie studios are quick to distinguish between a "boxing film" like "Gladiator"
and a movie like "The Power of One," in which boxing is part of a larger theme.
This is a legitimate distinction. Except for the fact that the two lead
characters are black and white, "Gladiator" is a standard boxing picture that
could have been made in the 30's or 40's. By contrast, "The Power of One" uses
boxing as a dramatic device in a film about South African politics and a young
white fighter who becomes a national hero.

Nevertheless, the two films have several major points in common: both use boxing
as a metaphor for the larger battle of life outside the ring, and both see the
violence inherent in the sport as a kind of cleansing agent, as well as a
passage to some higher good.

These themes have always caught the public's imagination. Boxing movies have
been a Hollywood staple since the 20's; in fact, there have been times when the
movies were more popular than the sport itself. "Rocky," directed by John
Avildsen, who also directed "The Power of One," was released in 1976, a year
when Muhammad Ali was in a rapid downslide and Olympic heroes like Sugar Ray
Leonard had yet to establish professional careers.

In truth, there has never really been a period when boxing movies were out of
style, and that style has scarcely changed -- from the Wallace Beery-Jackie
Coogan tear-jerker "The Champ" (1931) to the John Garfield vehicle "Body and
Soul" (1947) to the later "Rocky" movies of the 80's.

The genre was neatly parodied in "Dynamite Hands," an episode in the 1978 spoof
"Movie Movie," in which George C. Scott is a wizened fight trainer and Barry
Bostwick his young charge. "Dynamite Hands" stakes out the territory: boxing
films thrive on veteran trainers who are inheritors of ancient wisdom (think
Burgess Meredith in "Rocky"), desperate young fighters looking for a break on
the way up ("Champion" in 1949, "Golden Boy" in 1939, "Gentleman Jim" in 1942),
pugs on the way down holding on for one more shot ("The Champ," "Fat City" in
1972, "Hard Times" in 1975), treacherous managers, promoters and mobsters and
women who are either saints or hookers.

There is one other element a screenwriter absolutely can't afford to leave
 out: the climactic big fight that pits an underdog against a favorite.

What's amazing is that such a restricted formula has produced so many films that
have unfailingly pleased audiences and critics. Films with boxing themes have
been routinely bigger at the box office than movies about any other sport. One
boxing film, Martin Scorsese's "Raging Bull" (1980), is generally considered by
critics to be one of the best films of the 80's.

What's behind the popularity of boxing movies? Some people are quick to cite the
violence. "The basic quality of these scripts seems to be a pure imaginative
delight in the mangling of a human body," wrote Manny Farber, an author and
former film critic for Commentary and other publications. "In-fighters,
counterpunchers, 'cuties' are never characterized," Mr. Farber continued. "Only
one type is presented, a creaking version of the mauling club fighter," by whom
he means the toe-to-toe slugger.

It is true that the greatest professional fighters -- Benny Leonard, Gene
Tunney, Sugar Ray Robinson, Archie Moore, Muhammad Ali, Sugar Ray Leonard --have
always been so-called cuties, all of them consummate masters of ring craft. They
were experts at slipping punches, tying up their opponents on the inside and
overcoming power with speed and guile. And yet, with the exception of Errol
Flynn's Jim Corbett in "Gentleman Jim" (1942), it's hard to think of a single
fancy boxer in movies who ever overcame a slugger.

Indeed, it can almost be taken as a rule that the more realistic the critics
find a boxing film, the more brutal the action is. Take "Raging Bull," a film
admired more by film critics than by those in the fight game. Every left jab is
an eye-splitter, every hook a rib-cracker. In one scene, shot in slow-motion,
Robert De Niro's Jake LaMotta seems to lapse into ecstacy at the sight of a
water bucket turning dark with his own blood.

From the explosions that rock the soundtrack every time Jake or his opponents
land a blow, one would never guess that most of his real fights actually went to
decisions. (In the book "In the Corner: Great Trainers Talk About Their Art" by
Dave Anderson of The Times, Mr. LaMotta's trainer, Al Silvani, takes Mr.
Scorsese to task for the film's dialogue. "I grabbed Scorsese," Mr. Silvani is
quoted as saying. "I says, 'Marty, don't you think we talked like human beings?
What is all this profanity?' " Mr. Scorsese explained to Mr. Silvani that he was
seeking a truth beyond realism.)

Leonard Gardner, who adapted his novel "Fat City" for John Huston's film, says
there is a lot more to violence than its elemental appeal. "In most fight films
the violence has a kind of purifying element, as if the fighter has to drag
himself through purgatory before redemption. The implication is that he somehow
comes out a better man for the suffering he's been through. All that may be pure
baloney, but the idea is an ancient one, and it's still appealing to audiences."

Says the novelist Harry Crews, author of "The Knockout Artist": "Boxing is a
hell of a metaphor for almost anything you want to write about. You've got two
guys locked in this elemental struggle, the outcome of which could change their
lives. And it all takes place on a canvas. The novelist and film director can
fill in any background they like."

In the public's mind, movie fighters are idealized versions of real-life
fighters who have fought their way out of poverty and squalor. They embody
dreams. Even the exceptions prove the rule: Marlon Brando's ex-pug Terry Malloy
in Elia Kazan's "On the Waterfront" (1954) spoke for the failed dreams of
working-class America when he told Rod Steiger, "I coulda been a contender." One
reason for the enormous appeal of "Rocky" was that it took the Terry Malloy
character and gave him a second chance at glory.

Behind any popular boxing film is its triumph over an obstacle, whether it be
poverty, racism or simply the fighter's self-destructiveness. Boxing has always
reflected ethnic pride, and when the boxer touches the dreams of the right group
at the right time he takes on the aspect of myth.

As examples there are John L. Sullivan, who represented the ascendancy of brash,
young America (particularly Irish America) over Britain; Joe Louis and his
grudge rematch against the German heavyweight champion Max Schmeling, or
Muhammad Ali, whose resistance to the draft during the Vietnam War and brash
manner made him a symbol of 60's protest. All are vivid examples of ethnic
vindication (though perhaps not too vivid since none has been the subject of a
successful film).

From James Cagney's fiery Irish welterweight in "City for Conquest" (1940),
fighting to put his kid brother (Arthur Kennedy) through music school, to
Ricardo Montalban's surly Mexican-American middleweight champ in "Right Cross"
(1950) to "The Power of One," boxing films have always tapped the resentments of
the underclass and played on its dreams of salvation.

In "The Power of One" a young British orphan called P. K. learns to box under
the tutelage of a white mentor and a black political prisoner played by Morgan
Freeman. In this film Mr. Avildsen has loftier goals than he did in "Rocky," but
the movie still culminates in, yes, a big street fight with P. K.'s childhood
classmate, now his bitter enemy. Does P. K. win? Keep in mind the one great
advantage of boxing movies over boxing: in the movies, what's supposed to happen
does.

THEY MIGHTA BEEN MOVIE STARS

At least five fighters have climbed out of the ring and onto the screen. Here
are some of their films, with information about videocassettes.

Max Baer: A natural ham, the popular Baer helped make the comedy "The
Prizefighter and the Lady" (1933), with Myrna Loy, one of the most interesting
of the early boxing films (not on videocassette). Later he played a
fictionalized version of himself in "The Harder They Fall" (1956), adapted from
Budd Schulberg's novel ($59.95 for videocassette; 1 hour, 49 minutes; no
rating).

Victor McLaglin: McLaglin once fought a real-life six-rounder with the
heavyweight Jack Johnson (no decision). In 1935 he won an Academy Award as best
actor (becoming the only former pug ever to win an Oscar) for John Ford's
"Informer" ($19.95; 1:31; no rating). In "The Quiet Man" (1952), also directed
by Ford, he battles John Wayne ($19.95; 2:09; no rating).

Archie Moore: The ageless (virtually) Moore was at least 40 in 1960 when he won
rave reviews as the runaway slave Jim in Michael Curtiz's "Adventures of
Huckleberry Finn" ($19.95; 1:47; no rating). His ring career ended two years
later when he fought a rising young heavyweight named Cassius Clay.

Mark Breland: When his fighting days are done, the 1984 Olympic gold medal
winner and professional welterweight champion should be ready to pick up the
screen career he began in "The Lords of Discipline" (1983), Franc Roddam's film
about the trials of the first black student at a military academy in the South
($39.95; 1:42; R).

Randall (Tex) Cobb: He began his acting career as the slugger who beats up Jon
Voight in the 1979 remake of "The Champ" ($59.95; 2:01; PG), but he's most noted
for his performance as the biker-bounty hunter in Joel and Ethan Coen's 1987
film "Raising Arizona" ($19.95; 1:32; PG-13).


THEY COULDA BEEN CONTENDERS

Some actors cast as fighters look as if they could actually lace on the wines
and go a few rounds at Caesar's Palace. Here are five ring-worthy performances,
with information about videocassettes.

Robert Ryan: As the weary journeyman in "The Set Up" (1949), Ryan refuses to
throw the big fight and achieves a gritty nobility matched by no movie fighter
before or since ($19.95 for videocassette; 1 hour 12 minutes; no rating).

Ricardo Montalban: As the angry hero of John Sturges's "Right Cross" (1950), the
lean and hungry Montalban embodied the pent-up rage of Latin athletes decades
before the current emphasis on ethnic problems (not on videocassette).

Paul Newman: Not everyone liked the former middleweight champ Rocky Graziano or
the film biography of his life, "Somebody Up There Likes Me" (1956), but Mr.
Newman's boxing was superb. To see him plodding along with his left hand low and
his right cocked by the side of his jaw is to see Graziano ($19.95; 1:53; no
rating).

James Earl Jones: It is impossible to imagine anyone other than Mr. Jones as
Jack Johnson in Martin Ritt's film "The Great White Hope" (1970), based on
Howard Sackler's play. Watching the actor move the heavy bag with a snapping
left jab and ward off punches with his long, smoothly muscled arms, one gets the
impression that he could have stayed in there with Johnson himself ($39.95;
1:42; PG).

Ryan O'Neal: "The Main Event" (1979) is widely considered one of the worst
boxing films ever made, but Mr. O'Neal, who once boxed an exhibition match with
Joe Frazier in a ring set up in a Philadelphia street, looks as if he could take
on most of the fighters hired as extras. And as his manager, Barbra Streisand
acts tough enough to T.K.O. the promoter Don King ($19.95; 1:49; PG).


LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 29, 1992, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article in the Arts and Leisure section on March
29 about boxing films misidentified the source of an anecdote about the trainer
Al Silvani. In a letter dated April 23, Ronald K. Fried, author of "Corner Men:
Great Boxing Trainers," has pointed out that the anecdote is from his book. (A
further editing lapse delayed this correction after the letter was received.)

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Ryan (Photofest); Ricardo Montalban (Photofest); Paul
Newman (Photofest); James Earl Jones (Bob Greene); Ryan O'Neal (Warner
Brothers)(pg. 17); Max Baer; Victor McLaglin; Archie Moore; Mark Breland;
Randall (Tex) Cobb (Photographs by Movie Star New); Stephen Dorff plays the
teen-age P. K. in "The Power of One" -- Boxing is used as a dramatic device in a
film about South Africa. (Warner Brothers)(pg. 20); Cuba Gooding Jr., left, and
James Marshall in "Gladiator" -- A boxing picture like those of the 30's.
(Columbia Pictures)(pg. 21)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 29, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Oh, for a Chance to Chatter at the White House!

BYLINE: By JAMES ATLAS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words


As Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown fight it out for the Democratic nomination,
pollsters and public opinion experts are assessing their strength among the
constituencies they need to win. How are they doing with the middle class,
labor, blacks, Jews? What no one has troubled to look into is how they are doing
among that statistically insignificant but intangibly crucial sector --
intangibly crucial in their own eyes, at least -- the intellectuals.

As a class, American intellectuals have never been more than minor players in
electoral politics. Or, indeed, in much of anything else. Isolated in
universities, "marginalized" -- to borrow a term from contemporary academic
discourse -- by the specialization of literary studies, they're perpetually on
the verge of obsolescence. In his influential book, "The Last Intellectuals:
American Culture in the Age of Academe," Russell Jacoby lamented the possible
disappearance of an "endangered species" from American life: "While the aging
industrial plant of America elicits much talk, the aging intellectual plant
passes unnoticed."

The last two Republican administrations have only exacerbated the intellectuals'
sense of isolation. A handful of neo-conservatives -- influential columnists,
editors of well-known journals and denizens of think tanks -- may imagine
themselves in proximity to power, but Republicans have always been defiant
philistines. The golf course is their chosen turf. (How could Mr. Clinton have
ignored such obvious symbolism on his ill-advised jaunt to the Country Club of
Little Rock?) Ronald Reagan never pretended to have any use for intellectuals,
and neither does George Bush.

The Glow of Camelot

The Democrats, on the other hand, have always cultivated intellectuals, and
intellectuals have returned the favor. "He thought that if Adlai could beat Ike
in the November election, Culture would come into its own in Washington," Saul
Bellow wrote of the crazy poet Von Humboldt Fleisher in his novel "Humboldt's
Gift." Humboldt, like his real-life model, Delmore Schwartz, was convinced that
"if Stevenson is in, literature is in." But Mr. Stevenson was out. "The Republic
summons Ike,/ the mausoleum in her heart," as Robert Lowell summed it up in his
poem "Inauguration Day: January 1953."

And so it was until the election of John F. Kennedy, who celebrated his
inauguration by inviting Robert Frost to read a poem. The nostalgic glow of
Camelot is greatly dimmed now, but for intellectuals the Thousand Days was their
last great moment. President Kennedy's brain trust "emptied the Harvard
faculty," as Hannah Arendt put it. The White House was a virtual salon. The
dinner parties were legendary. "We all drank a great deal, and had to sort of be
told not to take our champagne into the concert, to put our cigarettes out --
like children -- though nicely," Mr. Lowell remembered.

In a BBC program aired in 1964, the year after the Kennedy assassination, the
English writer A. Alvarez went around Manhattan with his tape recorder and
gathered eulogies from the New York intellectuals. "Kennedy's style was superb,"
testified Norman Podhoretz, the editor of Commentary. "He was a man who was
post-Freud, post-Marx, post-Einstein." He "thickened things up and gave people a
certain sense of our actuality in the social structure," said the critic Lionel
Trilling. Norman Mailer called him an "existential hero." Intellectuals revere
power as much as any other group, if not more; Kennedy rewarded them with the
illusion of it, if not the reality.

It was rough sledding after that. Lyndon Johnson was enraged by the opposition
of prominent intellectuals to the war in Vietnam; when Mr. Lowell refused to
attend a White House Festival of the Arts in 1965 in protest against Johnson's
foreign policy -- and drafted a public statement signed by 20 prominent
intellectuals to explain his refusal -- the President was apoplectic. So much
for the salon.

There was no one for intellectuals to like until Eugene McCarthy, who wrote
poetry (Mr. Lowell tagged around with him on the campaign trail), and Robert
Kennedy, who read Camus and was once observed with a copy of Edith Hamilton's
"The Greek Way" in his pocket. But they didn't become President. The next
Democrat who did was Jimmy Carter, a middle-brow; his favorite poet was Dylan
Thomas.

Is Bill Clinton the intellectuals' savior? As long ago as 1988, reporting on
their diminished role in American life, U.S. News & World Report compiled a
Who's Who of "that endangered modern species" -- and there, between photographs
of Robert B. Silvers, the distinguished editor of The New York Review of Books,
and Hanna Holborn Gray, president of the University of Chicago, was . . . Gov.
Bill Clinton. Why Mr. Clinton? The article didn't explain. Never mind. He was
perceived to be on the side of intellectuals. He was there. And success, as
Woody Allen said, is largely a matter of showing up.

But what about Jerry Brown? He's also got high-minded friends. In New York,
preparing for the primary on April 7, he often stays at the East Side home of
Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne, old friends from California. He's spent time
with the radical educator Ivan Illich in Cuernavaca, and among his intellectual
cronies is the Mexican novelist Carlos Fuentes. For policy advice he's said to
depend on the economist Lester Thurow and on Richard Goodwin, who was a member
of Kennedy's inner circle. (Mr. Brown and Mr. Clinton both read Mr. Goodwin's
forthcoming book, which is tentatively entitled "Promises to Keep: A Call for a
New American Revolution," in manuscript.) Is he a big reader? "He doesn't read
as much as he vacuums," Mr. Dunne says. "If he sees a book, he will pick it up,
take it back to the bedroom and be ready to discuss it in the morning."

The trouble with Mr. Brown, as far as some intellectuals are concerned, is that
he's too New Age. While Mr. Clinton golfs, he hangs out at the Buddhist retreat
Tassajara in Big Sur. Also, his chances of winning are slim, and intellectuals
like a winner as much as anyone else. As the Democratic front-runner, Mr.
Clinton has been eagerly adopted by the Endangered Species -- if you include in
that category some of the more literate journalists. In the corridors of mental
power, Mr. Clinton is clearly the man, the one to revive intellectuals'
perennial hope of sharing in a power they've never had, and probably never will
have. "Clinton is about the renaissance of policy," declared the political
commentator Sidney Blumenthal in a New Republic cover story last month that
featured a caricature of Mr. Clinton as Superman. The cover line read "The
Anointed."

Not that Mr. Clinton, despite being a Rhodes scholar, is necessarily an
intellectual himself. He's not like Gov. Mario Cuomo, quoting Teilhard de
Chardin to every Albany beat reporter who wanders into his office. On the
campaign trail in Illinois, Mr. Clinton pulled out a copy of Sara Paretsky's
"Guardian Angel" -- she's a mystery writer, but a literary, highbrow mystery
writer. His favorite writers, he has said, are Robert Ludlum and P. D. James --
neither likely to top the "10-best" list of subscribers to Partisan Review.
(Well, maybe P. D. James.) But Mr. Clinton seems brainy: he graduated from Yale
Law School, he's a Rhodes Scholar, he knows -- and is known to know --
intellectuals.

The Right Aura?



 He's not, however, a member of the Eastern Establishment. "Kennedy was an
insider in that world," notes Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., who still is. "Clinton
is an outsider."

What matters is his intellectual aura: Garry Wills publishes an admiring piece
about Hillary Clinton in The New York Review of Books, noting her contributions
to the Yale Law Journal and the Harvard Educational Review, and describing her
as "one of the more important scholar-activists of the last two decades." Arthur
Schlesinger detects "an end-of-an-era feeling" that prefigures change -- a kind
of Hegelian tide that confirms on the mental plane his theory of a 30-year cycle
in American history.

Perhaps even more significantly, Mr. Clinton strikes the right intellectual note
-- one of worldliness and self-deprecation, of rueful irony. In the latest issue
of The American Oxonian, the journal of the Association of American Rhodes
Scholars, his entry in the 1968 Class Letter reports that daughter Chelsea, "age
11, 5 feet 2 inches, size 9 shoes," loves ballet more than politics.

"Accordingly, says Bill" -- in the artful paraphrase of class secretary Robert
B. Reich, the policy analyst from Harvard's Kennedy School of Government who is
one of Mr. Clinton's chief advisers -- "he and Hillary must have done something
right." If Governor Clinton wins, Mr. Reich observes, "Bill will be the very
first U.S. President from our Oxford class."

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Scene from Camelot: Robert Frost and Pearl Buck flanked the
Kennedys during a dramatic reading by Frederic March in the East Room of the
White House in 1962. Also in the front row is Lady Bird Johnson. (United Press
International)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 31, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words



International     A3-13

IRAQI KURDS FLEEING NEW ATTACKS

Iraqi forces, apparently violating the gulf war truce accord, are shelling and
shooting at thousands of Kurdish civilians in a dozen villages along the Great
Zab River. The attacks have forced 40,000 to flee, U.N. refugee officials said.
A1

FIRST CAMBODIANS RETURN

An advance group of 527 Cambodians -- some joyous, some frightened -- returned
to their homeland from refugee areas in Thailand. As they made their way, the
Government reportedly began a major attack against the Khmer Rouge.  A12

President Bush is pressed to modify U.S. embargo against Vietnam.  A3

WARSHIP AND METAPHOR

The dispute between Russia and Ukraine over the Black Sea fleet is not just
about the gray warships in the Sevastopol's harbor. It is about the future of
the Crimean peninsula, which faces a referendum on independence from Ukraine,
and about Sevastopol itself.  A6

BUSH MOVES TO AID RUSSIANS

Bush was reported planning to lump Russian assistance proposals with those for
other former Soviet republics in hopes of overcoming election-year resistance in
Congress.  A7

The I.L.O. predicted Russian employment of 11 million in 1992.  A6

SOUTH AFRICAN GOAL UNCERTAIN

Negotiators agreed to make every effort to bring about a South African interim
government by June 30. But It was not clear whether disagreements remaining
between the Governt and the A.N.C. would be resolved in time.  A3

THE OLD ORDER GETS YOUNGER
Whether the British election is won by the Conservative Party or by Labor, it
will mark a generational turning point. Former Prime Minister Thatcher, now 67,
and many of her officials are leaving the stage to younger men and women.  A10


THE I.R.A. CIVILIANS
Sinn Fein, the civilian face of the Irish Republican Army, is struggling in the
British election campaign to maintain credibility as a political force in
Northern Ireland.  A11

Resolute Journal: Where polar treks are planned over coffee.  A4
Secretary Baker asked Savimbi to explain rebel killings.  A5
Algeria further tightened hold on Islamic fundamentalists.  A8
French Cabinet shake-up appeared certain after further losses.  A9
Spain sees Basque arrests reducing threat to Olympics.  A9
Taiwan's effort to write constitution underscores divisions.  A12
Israelis fear Levy's resignation may spur ethnic tension.  A13

National     A14-18

12 YEARS UNDER CLINTON

A review of Bill Clinton's record as Governor of Arkansas showed he could take
justifiable pride in moving the state forward in several areas. But it also
showed that he sometimes took shortcuts in exercising his considerable
influence.  A1

FRONT-RUNNER DECIDES TO DEBATE

After refusing requests from former Governor Brown to debate, Governor Clinton
challenged Mr. Brown to at least six debates before the New York primary.  A16

Democrats at a fork: toward order or the wilds of uncertainty.  A17

Mayors will force Brown and Clinton to address big-city problems.  A17

Jackson indirectly boosted the fortunes of Brown.  A18

KEATING CASE SETTLEMENT

Ernst & Young and Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue will pay millions to settle claims
that they helped Charles Keating defraud Lincoln Savings investors. A1

GOVERNING WITHOUT PERKS

Upset by the President's attacks on lawmakers' perquisites, Democratic
Congressional leaders have begun reviewing those enjoyed by Federal bureaucrats
everywhere.  A14

THE REVIVAL OF STEEL

The American steel industry, long a symbol of the nation's industrial decay, in
the past decade has undergone a transformation that has drastically sharpened
its competitive position. Now the Bush Administration has decided not to extend
protective quotas on imported steel.  A1

SHIELDING STATES FROM U.S.

The Supreme Court gave a sympathetic hearing to an attack on a Federal law that
requires states to take responsibility for disposing of the low-level
radioactive waste within their borders.  A15

INTERPRETING ABORTION RULE

Contrary to the Bush Administration's assertion that doctors may discuss
abortion in federally financed clinics, the rule that bans abortion counseling
continues to apply to them, experts told lawmakers.  A18

A BRIEF, CONTROVERSIAL LIFE

A baby girl born without a fully formed brain died, ending an emotional quest by
her parents to donate her organs for transplant in hope of helping other babies.
A14

A PSYCHIATRIST'S INFLUENCE

The Massachusetts state medical board is investigating charges of medical
malpractice against a Harvard Medical School psychiatrist accused of seducing a
medical school student and leading him to commit suicide.  A14

Tracing the deviant sexual behavior of a Philadelphia man.  A15
The Noriega case moved near closing arguments.  A15

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

NEW THREAT TO BUDGET

An election-year battle over how to distribute $8.4 billion in school aid
erupted in Albany, threatening the budget deal made over the weekend. Lawmakers
are frantically pushing to pass a budget before the start of the new fiscal year
tomorrow.  A1

SINGLE MOTHERS' STRUGGLE

A growing number of single working mothers face an agonizing choice between the
certainty of poverty on welfare and the struggle to get ahead in a low-paying
job. Many cannot afford housing, insurance or quality day care, researchers say.
A1

Business     Digest, D1

Science Times   C1-11
The new conservation: taking the widest view of habitats.  C1
A look at the earth's core.  C1
Doctors ponder whether addictions are truly diseases.  C3

Sports   B11-17
Baseball: Mets urged to break silence.  B14
Basketball: Nets beat Spurs.  B11
Happy days at Cincinnati.  B11
Hockey: Strike deadline postponed.  B11

Obituaries   B10
Manolis Andronicos, archeologist

Fashion Page   B9
Lagerfeld in the spotlight.

Arts/Entertainment C13-20
"Silence of the Lambs" sweeps Oscars.  C13
Dance: Bournonville festival.  C13
Music: Elly Ameling.  C13

Editorials/Op-Ed  A20-21
Editorials A20
Get the candidates.
Albany races its deadline.
Waldheim's German fans.
Theresa Pearson, baby girl.

Letters A20
Russell Baker: The prisoner of VCR.  A21
A. M. Rosenthal: Closing our eyes.  A21
Nancy Bekavac: War in another world.  A21
Martin Jacques: Britain in political fog. Continent cut off.  A21
Jurgen Mollemann: Down to the wire on trade talks.  A21

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The repatriation of Cambodian refugees begins. (Associated
Press) A12

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wilder's Flier

BYLINE: BY B. DRUMMOND AYRES JR.;  B. Drummond Ayres Jr. is a national
correspondent covering the mid-Atlantic region for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 31; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3977 words


Lawrence Douglas Wilder, Governor of Virginia and candidate for President, is in
Philadelphia to sell his political wares. His first stop is a news conference at
the Four Seasons Hotel.

"Where do you stand on the political spectrum?" a television reporter wants to
know.

"I don't consider myself liberal, conservative or moderate," Wilder replies.

Under further questioning, the 60-year-old Democrat, his voice Southern soft as
cheese grits, yields a bit and describes himself as "a fiscal conservative with
a social conscience and a deep concern for the country's middle class." But
essentially, he reiterates, he does not attach any particular label to himself.

Which raises another question: Can a black Democratic Presidential candidate who
often sounds like a white, Republican plutocrat be taken seriously by his own
party's leaders and voters?

"I expect to be elected President of the United States," he answers
dismissively.

Then Wilder, a surprisingly slight man, barely 5 feet 9 inches, with a shining
silver coif and an elegant bespoke suit, plunges into the lobby of the hotel, to
work the front-desk crew, the bellhops and, finally, the doorman.

"Wasn't that the Governor from Virginia?" one desk clerk asks another as Wilder
exits.

"Yeah," the other clerk replies, turning quickly to the next check-in.

DOUG WILDER -- A GRANDSON OF slaves who grew up in the midst of segregation and
what he calls the "gentle poverty" of the predominantly black Church Hill
section of Richmond, and then scratched and battled his way to the top, first
becoming a millionaire defense lawyer and later the first black ever elected
Governor of an American state -- is having trouble making an impression on the
1992 Presidential campaign. Among the six major announced Democratic candidates,
he is clearly one of the also-rans in raising money, organizing a campaign
staff, and, perhaps most significantly, honing a sharp message.

Wilder has been called a political chameleon, a man with no fixed ideological
address. In his home state, he has a reputation both for opportunistically
switching sides on issues and for coldly turning on his friends. Those who know
him say he is so consumed with politics -- politics as process rather than
politics as ideas -- that he seldom talks about anything else.

He can fly from Richmond, his state capital, to Concord, N.H., a one-hour trip
on his Commonwealth of Virginia jet, and never look out the window, not even
when the dome of the Capitol of the United States looms on the horizon, nor when
the towers of Manhattan suddenly jut up directly below. He is too busy talking
politics, holding forth from his special seat embroidered with the state's
golden seal. But there is no talk here of programs or reforms, nothing about how
to house the homeless or how to deal with Boris Yeltsin -- only about how the
political game is played.

"Now you take my friend Bill Fears," he says, referring to a veteran Virginia
State Senator who failed to win re-election last fall. "He's always loved to run
that mouth. It finally caught up with him when he made that quip about how some
new drunk-driver law would take all the fun out of driving. Killed him. Just
killed him. He didn't really mean it. But when you're a public figure. . . ."

The words are still tumbling out when the plane taxis up to a waiting limousine
in Concord.

Politics is more than Doug Wilder's one true love. Politics is his best friend.

OVER MORE THAN TWO DECADES in politics, Doug Wilder has never lost an election.
In Virginia, voters have succumbed time after time to the man's considerable
charms, his quick wit and his easy courtliness, a trait that moves him, even as
Governor, to hold open doors for others and to bow from the waist when greeting
women. True, Virginians are disenchanted with Wilder now, angry that he is
running for President after only two years in the Governor's mansion and at a
time when the state faces its worst economic crisis in half a century. But over
the years, they have habitually forgiven Wilder his flaws, and have rewritten
political and racial history by making him the first black since Reconstruction
to serve in the State Senate (from 1970 to 1986) and then by electing him
Lieutenant Governor in 1985 and Governor in 1989.

Now the question is whether the kind of politics that has worked for Wilder for
nearly 25 years in Virginia will play beyond the state's borders. With the Feb.
18 primary in New Hampshire only five weeks away, the smart money says Wilder's
candidacy is in trouble, that he has a lot of catching up to do if he is to
execute his game plan: to stay alive through New Hampshire and then to try to
make a strong showing in early March in the Southern primaries, where he hopes
to be able to attract large blocs of black voters.

The Governor, the conventional political wisdom says, is out of his depth,
politically adrift with no real campaign organization (what strategizing there
is comes almost exclusively from Wilder himself and his longtime political
adviser, Paul Goldman) and no real money (as of late December, he'd raised only
$198,315, which put him dead last in the Democratic field). But Wilder's
supporters point out that the Governor has always been a slow starter; his
Virginia campaigns were all plagued in the early going by loose organization and
vague message. By the end, however, he has consistently managed to find a symbol
or issue that not only draws donors and energizes his campaign organization but
also powerfully connects with voters. In his 1985 campaign for Lieutenant
Governor, for instance, he grabbed the attention of Virginia's electorate with a
marathon 1,500-mile trek back and forth across the state in a modest station
wagon.

If Wilder can find a way to capture a significant portion of black voters in the
early primaries -- to fill the void created by the Rev. Jesse Jackson's absence
-- he could go to the Democratic convention in New York City next summer with
some leverage. His campaign has begun to focus more and more on racial issues,
but Wilder, whose speeches tend to drone on and on rather than soar soulfully,
is no Jesse Jackson when it comes to galvanizing the black electorate.

While conceding that his candidacy is "the longest of long shots," Wilder
insists nonetheless that he is electable. Over and over he repeats what has
become a kind of personal mantra: "I expect to be elected President of the
United States."

Still, there is little evidence so far that predominantly liberal Democratic
voters are ready to nominate a card-carrying fiscal conservative, and even less
evidence that a black man can be elected President should he somehow be
nominated. So why is Doug Wilder -- barely halfway through his four-year term as
Governor of a state with more than its share of knotty financial problems --
embarking on this seemingly hopeless political quest?

The quick answer is that he has nothing to lose. Under the Virginia
Constitution, no governor can succeed himself, a rare prohibition in state
politics. Beyond that, Wilder no doubt hopes to emerge from the nominating
season if not with the nomination itself, then at least with some national clout
in his own party, specifically as the pre-eminent power broker of black votes.
Should Wilder succeed in becoming even a partial heir to Jesse Jackson's
constituency, he could be in position for another Presidential bid in 1996 or,
alternatively, for a run in 1994 or 1996 at one of Virginia's Senate seats.

Then there is the possibility, often bruited about in political circles, that
Wilder is really after a spot on the 1992 ticket as the Vice Presidential
nominee. Though few give this much chance of happening, Wilder's supporters are
forever toying aloud with this idea, arguing that their candidate could bring
much-needed ideological and racial balance to the Democratic ticket.

"People who sell a possibility like this short do it at their own risk," warns
Paul Goldman, the tart ex-New Yorker who is chairman of Virginia's Democratic
Party and has been the Governor's chief political schemer and dreamer since
1984. "Wilder is the most underestimated politician in America today."

Though Wilder insists his sole goal is the Presidency, more likely he is simply
seeing how far he can take his candidacy. His philosophy of public life, he has
often said, is to "get a little bit today and come back for the rest tomorrow."

WILDER HAS BEEN DAMAGED by the growing perception that he is prone to sudden
about-faces on issues and to displays of temper with friends and foes alike.

"Well, these are things I have to deal with," he admits. "They are perceptions
that don't help."

The sharp edges of Wilder's personality were clearly on display one day last
fall, when Jesse Jackson came to the Governor's mansion to discuss the 1992
campaign. At the top of Jackson's agenda was a complaint; a number of Virginia
school districts had taken the Wilder administration to court in an effort to
get more funds. Wilder was obviously irked by having to listen to a lecture from
the man who remains perhaps the chief obstacle to his national political
ambitions.

After conferring in private for about an hour, the two men emerged from the
mansion and walked over to a clutch of waiting reporters and television cameras.
Wilder, his arm around Jackson's shoulder, spoke glowingly of his rival.

"And, oh, yes, Jesse," Wilder concluded abruptly, his tone changing. "Don't come
down here again talking about schools unless you bring money."

Jackson took a half-step back, struggling to crack a smile. Wilder then turned
his back on Jackson and began to chat with bystanders, leaving his rival to make
an unceremonious exit.

This is the way Wilder plays the political game. Courteous as he customarily is,
he comes at those who cross him, or those he believes have crossed him, with a
quick vengeance, political fist balled.

Last spring, his longtime feud with Senator Charles S. Robb, his major
Democratic rival in Virginia, bubbled up again in the open, becoming so
rancorous it made news from coast to coast. Party leaders in and out of the
state warned that both men risked their political futures if they continued to
squabble like petulant children over the Governor's charge that the Senator had
tapped his phone and the Senator's countercharge that the Governor had ordered a
police investigation of his private life. But the animosity between Wilder and
Robb is virtually certain to flare up again. There is little political or
personal chemistry between the two, and in the background lurks the possibility
that Wilder will challenge Robb for his Senate seat two years from now.

Wilder also came off less than well in the surprise departure of his press
secretary of the last two years, Laura Dillard. Asked to explain what happened,
the Governor initially refused to comment. Meanwhile, several Wilder aides began
calling reporters around the state, suggesting that Dillard had been forced to
leave over a series of anti-Semitic and anti-black remarks. But later,
investigations by several Virginia newspapers revealed that Dillard's sin had
been to dare question whether Wilder ought to be running for President before
completing his term as Governor.

"You can be with Doug 99 times in a row, but if you're against him the 100th
time, he'll say, 'He was never with me,' " the Governor's chief of staff, J. T.
Shropshire, once said. In spite of this oft-repeated observation, Shropshire has
not lost his position.

Wilder's contentiousness comes through even in everyday conversation. He sees
all politics -- and most of life -- as a bruising contact sport. "Let me tell
you why Jesse Jackson has been such a success," he says. "Jesse makes people
cower politically. I don't blame him."

From the start, Wilder's basic campaign theme has been that the Democrats will
never recapture the Presidency until they stop nominating liberal tax-and-spend
candidates. Instead, he argues, the party must put a new kind of politician on
the national stage, a realist who blends social compassion with balanced budgets
-- not by raising taxes, but by eliminating "niceties" in favor of
"necessities." That's the way, Wilder boasts, he has always run and won in
Virginia.

But lately the Governor has begun to shift more than a little on the tax issue.
"I wouldn't automatically veto a tax increase in Virginia," he now says. "But it
would have to be bipartisan."

Wilder, however, has pinned his Presidential hopes on the claim that he
successfully balanced Virginia's budget without raising taxes. Does this mean he
is now backing off?

"Not at all, not at all," he insists. "It would be irresponsible to flatly rule
out any increase, especially one with bipartisan support."

Then he chuckles. "Clever, though," he says, slapping his knee for effect. "Damn
clever way to handle those Republicans."

WILDER GREW UP IN A LARGE, deeply religious Baptist family. His father, Robert,
was an insurance salesman and his mother, Beulah, worked as a maid. The
second-youngest of eight children, he put himself through the predominantly
black Virginia Union University in Richmond, won a Bronze Star as an infantryman
in the Korean War, and under the G.I. bill went through Howard University Law
School in Washington. While in law school, he married a Howard undergraduate,
Eunice Montgomery. Before divorcing in 1978, the couple had three children: two
daughters, Lynn, 32, and Loren, 28, and a son, Lawrence Jr., 29.

It might come as a surprise to Wilder-watchers today that in his political
youth, he positioned himself as a liberal, and a confrontational one at that.
After entering the State Senate, he began to sport a bushy Afro and to press
demands for fair-housing legislation, more minority hiring in business and
making the death penalty unconstitutional. In his maiden speech, he charged that
the state of Virginia, including its Legislature, was racist to the core, and
called heretically for dropping the official state song, "Carry Me Back to Old
Virginia," which contained the words "massah" and "darkie."

Wilder made little progress on his demands, and his career seemed headed in the
same direction. But then he abruptly changed course. He became one of the
Legislature's great compromisers, a man who would drop a demand here to gain a
concession there, who would do a favor to get a favor. Thereafter, he ascended
steadily through the ranks of the Senate, eventually becoming chairman of the
powerful committee that oversees state appointments. In 1984, when he could not
persuade his fellow senators to designate a holiday in memory of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., he engineered the ultimate compromise: he persuaded them
to set aside a day on which Dr. King would be remembered -- the same day that
honored Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson.

Wilder's strong suit has always been his ability to take the political pulse of
the electorate, rather than the everyday details of governing. His speeches are
packed not with facts and specific proposals but with symbolically charged
rhetoric, telling vignettes and sharp digs -- the mention of David Duke and
George Bush in the same sentence, the heart-tugging tale of a sick child who
died because her poor family could not afford health care, the flat promise that
in the first few weeks of his Presidency he will eliminate $50 billion in
Government programs, military spending and bureaucratic waste.

"He's positioning and repositioning himself all the time," says Larry Sabato, a
University of Virginia political scientist who has followed the Governor's
career closely. "My guess is that by the end of this campaign, he'll try to be
the broker of the black vote, which would give him the kind of clout Jesse had.
He'll demand that the party not ignore him, because he's the only black
candidate in a party that has to have the black vote to win. That's his kind of
positioning. He may not pull it off. But you'll hear the noise."

In the 1989 gubernatorial race in Virginia, Wilder won by putting together an
unusual coalition of black and middle-class white voters. Running against J.
Marshall Coleman, a Republican former state attorney general, Wilder managed, in
a single ideological mouthful, to support, among other things, both abortion
rights and the death penalty (he'd flip-flopped on that issue since his early
State Senate days). His abortion-rights stand proved critical, drawing big
support from women and those in the state's heavily liberal Washington suburbs,
and enabled him to squeeze out a 0.3 percent margin of victory.

The Governor says he intends to replicate that election feat nationally, that he
can assemble the same coalition from coast to coast. "If it can happen in
Virginia," he argues, "it can happen anywhere."

Increasingly in his Presidential campaign, however, Wilder appears to be
concentrating less on putting together a black-white coalition than on an
all-out pursuit of black voters. He has hired some of Jackson's former aides --
among them Joe Johnson, a top Jackson operative who has become Wilder's campaign
manager -- and his speeches contain ever more criticisms of President Bush's
handling of civil rights issues. "The Bush Administration's resistance to strong
civil rights measures helps produce the David Dukes," he says.

Meanwhile, black politiciansaround the country have adopted a wait-and-see
attitude. Mayor W. Wilson Goode of Philadelphia is typical. "If Doug delivers
the message," he says, "he'll get the vote."

While Jesse Jackson's aides are urging black officials to withhold their
commitments until the race is further along, Jackson himself will say only that
if "the Honorable Governor of Virginia" expects to inherit the votes of his
Rainbow Coalition, he will have to "earn them the old-fashioned way, by working
for them."

IN 1984, WHEN DOUG WILDER announced his candidacy for Lieutenant Governor, he
stood in the State Capitol beneath a large oil portrait of Harry F. Byrd Sr.,
the former United States Senator whose name is virtually synonymous with
old-style Southern segregation. That gesture would have been impossible for many
blacks in politics, but for Wilder it was just part of the process. Coming from
a senate district that was predominantly black, Wilder knew that to win a
statewide office in Virginia he would need to reach out for white votes, and
there was no more revered political figure in the Old Dominion than Byrd, who
led the "massive resistance," Virginia's abortive struggle against desegregation
in the 50's.

But Wilder did not stop there. Later in the campaign, he permitted himself to be
photographed in front of Confederate flags and ran a television ad in which a
burly white rural sheriff endorsed him. But when backers of his Republican
opponent, State Senator John H. Chichester, tried to tag him as a liberal,
Wilder played the other side of the race card. "That's a code word for racism,"
he declared.

Wilder was never a major figure in the civil rights movement. In the 60's, when
many of his peers were in the streets demonstrating for racial equality, he was
focusing his energies on building a career in law, primarily as a defense
attorney and the founder of his own firm, and later a career in politics.
"During the days of the movement, I figured I could be more effective behind the
scenes than up on the barricades," Wilder explains. "I worked on making myself
the best lawyer and politician possible on the theory that I could best serve
not by being a demonstrator in handcuffs but by seeking to get the handcuffs off
the demonstrator and the repressive laws changed. I have no second thoughts
about that."

And there is no denying the historic achievement of his successful campaigns in
Virginia, where no black had held high elective office for more than a century.

For all of his triumphs in Virginia politics, however, Wilder has amassed an
unusually wide array of enemies and detractors within the state. His feuds and
switchbacks, his decision to run for President in Virginia's hour of economic
need and, yes, the fact that as a divorced man for almost 15 years, he sometimes
dates white women, among them Patricia Kluge, the former wife of the billionaire
John Kluge -- all have pushed down his statewide approval rating to an
embarrassing 23 percent in mid-December, the lowest figure for a Virginia
governor in history.

"Those of us who've dealt with him can tell people around the country that Doug
Wilder is not always a nice man," says Steve Haner, the director of the
Republican caucus in the Virginia Legislature. "In last fall's state elections,
our candidates ran as much against him as their real opponents, and we made the
biggest gains in a century. How's he going to explain that?"

Wilder's answer: "Incumbents were the targets of voter discontent, and that
discontent can be blamed on the Bush Administration."

ON A RAW DECEMBER DAY, Wilder has come to the State Capitol at Concord, N.H.,
braving 10-degree temperatures to hand the New Hampshire Secretary of State a
check for $1,000, the entry fee for the Feb. 18 primary. The dozen reporters on
hand to chronicle the moment want to know -- given the Governor's low standing
in the polls and equally low standing on the fund-raising front -- whether
Wilder is serious about his candidacy. Does he really have a shot, or is he
angling for the Vice Presidential spot?

But all the reporters get is another recitation of the mantra. "I tell you I
expect to be elected President of the United States," Wilder says.

Outside the filing office, the Governor bumps into an old acquaintance, Eugene
J. McCarthy, the former Senator from Minnesota. Back in 1968, McCarthy ran a
legendary race in the New Hampshire primary against the Vietnam War and all but
destroyed Lyndon Johnson's hopes for re-election. Now McCarthy makes the
Presidential run nearly every four years, evidently just for the nostalgia of
it.

"Doug," McCarthy says, grasping the Governor's hand. "All you have to do is beat
the spread."

Wilder gives out a hearty laugh. He likes the spread in New Hampshire, where the
morning line has him as the biggest long shot in the race -- sixth in a field of
six. To beat it, he figures, all he has to do is run better than only one of his
opponents.

"I'm dead serious about staying in this race," Wilder declares, as he exits the
Capitol building. "But if I don't do well in the Southern primaries, it's all
over for me."

But after watching the Governor on the campaign trail for several months, most
Democratic officials remain skeptical. "He's relying too much on generalities
about what he's done in the past and not offering enough vision for the future,"
says George Bruno, a Democratic National Committeeman from New Hampshire who has
aligned himself with Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. "It's hard to figure out
what he really stands for. He was one of the first to announce his candidacy,
but he's been slow getting his team on the ground, slow winning commitments.
He'd better keep in mind that he's running for President, not Governor."

Wilder himself may be starting to realize how different politics is in the
national arena. Near the end of his news conference at the Four Seasons Hotel,
he appeared to hedge his promise to fight to the end, and he gave himself a
possible out. Almost as an aside, he allowed that if the economic situation in
Virginia continued to get worse, requiring more of his attention, he might be
forced to reassess whether to continue his candidacy.

But a few hours later, during a campaign appearance at a black church center,
the old Wilder bluster was back. Looking directly into a television news camera,
he proclaimed, his voice keening with confidence: "I am a lion. The
slaughterhouse of failure is not my destiny."

NAME: Lawrence Douglas Wilder

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: L. Douglas Wilder, left, in his office in the State Capitol
(Gregory Heisler for The New York Times)(pg. 30), top left, as a soldier in
1953, and, above, campaigning in New Hampshire. (Peter Blakely/Saba)(pg. 31);
Wilder as a State Senator in 1974. In his maiden speech, he called heretically
for dropping the official state song, "Carry Me Back to Old Virginia," which
contained the words "massah" and "darkie." Later, however, he became one of the
Senate's great compromisers. Wilder in the early 40's with sisters Agnes, at
rear, and Jean. Wilder as a brand-new State Senator, being greeted by two senior
colleagues, Rr. J. D. Hagood and M. M. Long. (Richmond Newspapers Inc.)(pg. 32);
Wilder with Senator Charles S. Robb. Both men were warned that their longtime
feud could threaten their political futures. (Martin Simon/Saba); On the steps
of the Virginia Capitol, Wilder kicks off his Presidential campaign with his
children, Lynn, Loren and Lawrence Jr. (James Colburn/Photoreporters)(pg. 33)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Unlikely Pairing, Ickes Strengthens Clinton Bid

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 40; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1417 words


That Harold M. Ickes joined Gov. Bill Clinton's Presidential quest surprised
many of Mr. Ickes's political colleagues. Not just because the Arkansan is
viewed as a moderate and the iconoclastic Mr. Ickes is a liberal from the West
Side of Manhattan who profoundly disagrees with Mr. Clinton's support of the
death penalty.

Most people were surprised for another reason. Mr. Clinton is -- or was --
considered the front-runner for the Democratic nomination. And Mr. Ickes, who is
as unconventional as he is committed, has been a perennial supporter of losers.
Four years ago, he supported the Rev. Jesse Jackson, not to make a President,
but to make a point about the Democratic Party's drift from its liberal roots.

Mr. Ickes's value to a campaign is as an unrelenting tactician. He can also
deliver a devoted following. When City Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge, a
Democrat who represents the Upper West Side, was recently asked why she was
supporting the Governor, an uncharacteristically moderate candidate by her
standards, she responded with two words: "Harold Ickes."

Mr. Ickes, 52 years old, a lawyer whose father, Harold L. Ickes, who was
Secretary of the Interior and who carried out tough tasks for Presidents
Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, has been immersed in politics for 25
years. But about the closest he has come to a cabinet were those that he
fashioned as a part-time carpenter. He has managed campaigns for candidates
whose headquarters he sometimes built himself, whose philosophy he shared and
whom he valiantly fought the good fight for and usually lost.

Iconoclastic Tactician

Mr. Clinton's campaign, which Mr. Ickes directs in New York State, is the first
in which he has enlisted with a candidate who is apparently the front-runner.
Mr. Clinton represents a candidate with whom Mr. Ickes differs on several
issues, but who he believes has the best chance of defeating President Bush.

Disputed allegations about sexual affairs, derogatory comments about Gov. Mario
M. Cuomo that Mr. Clinton acknowledges having made and, more recently, questions
about his draft status may undermine what is perhaps the greatest source of his
support, the view that he is the most electable Democrat in the field.

"I think there's no question a lot of people are undoubtedly raising that as a
serious question, and my sense is their judgment is being withheld until New
Hampshire results are in," Mr. Ickes said.

He added that "any front-runner is bound to take some lumps," but he
acknowledged that whether Mr. Clinton was the front-runner was debatable. "I
don't know what tense to use any more," he said.

"I knew about the rumors, but I never knew they had any substance and still
don't," said Mr. Ickes, whose father's affair during his first marriage was an
open secret that went unreported.

Mr. Ickes has devoted much of his energies lately to damage control. He
telephoned political and labor leaders who had signed up to be Clinton delegates
or who had pledged their support, trying to gauge the degree to which they might
be wavering and to reassure those who were that their candidate may have been
wounded, but not fatally, if for no other reason, he reasoned, than there is no
obvious alternative.

"I'm pleased that nobody has defected," Mr. Ickes said. He acknowledged, though,
that "this is a big bump," as he tried to sound philosophical about a setback
that might more deeply embitter politicians who were less accustomed to losing.

"First impressions affect people, and for people first learning about Bill
Clinton, they may be concerned," he said. "I wouldn't want anyone to go into my
background. None of us is perfect. None of what has come out has shaken me. None
of it throws into question his character."

If Mr. Ickes needed more diversion from the campaign or the demands of his law
practice, as counsel to Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign committee he also
helped investigations of the committee chairman, Arnold I. Biegen, who was
indicted last week on Federal and state charges that he stole $158,000 in
campaign money.

From Lowenstein's First Race

Whatever Mr. Clinton's appeal, the breadth of his support in New York is widely
credited to Mr. Ickes's persistence and to the loyalty of the following he has
developed since he worked in Allard K. Lowenstein's first, and unsuccessful,
Congressional campaign, which Ms. Eldridge managed. Mr. Ickes has never run for
office and probably never could, because of the prickly personality that he
inherited from his father, a self-proclaimed curmudgeon. But the younger Mr.
Ickes has toiled tirelessly for others.

Even Mr. Clinton's rivals concede that he has received the bulk of organization
support in the state, including the Democratic leaders of the Bronx, Brooklyn,
Queens and Staten Island, the heads of the teachers' and New York City municipal
employees' unions and the people whom Mr. Ickes described as "West Side liberals
like myself." Many of those liberals and many more labor leaders might have been
expected to support Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, Mr. Ickes said.

"But that assumes Bill is conservative or at best a moderate," Mr. Ickes said.
"I consider him progressive in the best sense."

'A Phenomenal Campaigner'



Mr. Ickes said he also disagreed with Mr. Clinton's support for armed
intervention against Iraq last year, but added: "I agree with him on many more
things than I disagree with him on. He is a phenomenal campaigner. I just don't
think the others measure up. I don't think they're electable."

Mr. Clinton, who met Mr. Ickes 20 years ago in the antiwar movement, telephoned
him at his law office in Mineola, L.I., last summer to sound him out about
running his campaign for the primary on April 7. Mr. Ickes hesitated, only in
case Mr. Jackson decided to run again, but not out of concern that Mr. Cuomo
might, because, Mr. Ickes said, Mr. Cuomo was not an announced candidate and had
not reached out to him.

Removal of Adding Machines

Everyone who has worked with him has a favorite Harold Ickes story. At one party
meeting in a hotel upstate, he joined his political mentor and the man who was
going to become his law partner, John F. English, then the Nassau County
Democratic chairman, and Carol Opton, another politician, in a precautionary
strike to thwart a rival candidate for Democratic national committeeman. They
spirited away all the adding machines that would have been needed to compute the
weighted vote the next day. The caper proved to be unnecessary, though. Working
through the night, they mustered enough support for their own candidate, Basil
A. Paterson.

At the 1976 national convention, Sarah Kovner, another liberal from the West
Side, recalled, Mr. Ickes was instrumental in bringing the issue of amnesty for
Vietnam draft resisters to the delegates' attention. He arranged to have a
conscientious objector nominated for vice president and seconded by Ron Kovic,
the wounded veteran depicted in the film "Born on the Fourth of July."

When convention officials insisted that they could not accommodate Mr. Kovic's
wheelchair at the podium, Mr. Ickes exclaimed: "You did it for George Wallace.
You can do it for him." They did.

Young Farmer and Cowboy

Mr. Ickes is known for his political and legal acumen, the zeal and, often, the
good humor with which he pursues every goal. Although his bark is usually bigger
than his bite, at one argument he sunk his teeth into an adversary's leg. He
once nearly hit a county leader. In 1965, a beating by three white men in
Louisiana, where he was a civil rights advocate, cost him his left kidney.

Mr. Ickes, who lives in Manhattan with his wife, Laura Handman, also a lawyer,
and their 5-year-old daughter, grew up on a farm in Maryland. He worked as a
cowboy after graduating from high school; received a pilot's license in New
Mexico; majored in economics at Stanford University, where he met Mr.
Lowenstein, and graduated from the Columbia University Law School.

He worked in the Presidential efforts of Jimmy Carter, Eugene J. McCarthy, Mr.
Jackson and Edward M. Kennedy and for other candidates, including Paul O'Dwyer,
William Fitts Ryan and Robert F. Wagner Jr. What distinguished his latest foray
was Mr. Clinton's early anointment by opinion polls and politicians as the
candidate to beat.

"I've never chosen a Presidential candidate because they were necessarily going
to win," Mr. Ickes said. "But it doesn't hurt."

NAME: Harold M. Ickes

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harold M. Ickes, director of Gov. Bill Clinton's Presidential
effort in New York State, may disagree with the candidate on several issues, but
says Mr. Clinton has the best chance of defeating President Bush. (Ruby
Washington/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 5, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Bowing Out;
Kerrey Decides to Withdraw After Poor Showing in West

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 4


Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska told several Senate colleagues today that he had
decided to withdraw from the Democratic Presidential primaries.

Earlier, on a flight from Arizona to Washington, Mr. Kerrey said he had changed
his mind about traveling to Florida this morning after he saw his poor finish in
caucuses in Idaho and Washington State on Tuesday. "The full picture was
painted," he said drily. "All the dots were connected."

While he had expected to do poorly in Colorado, a state he once said he needed
to win to stay in the race, he had put some hope on a credible finish in other
Western states. Yet he won only 11 percent of the vote in the Utah primary and 8
percent in the Idaho caucuses, both finishes worse than his 12 percent in
Colorado.

Mr. Kerrey said those results helped to make up his mind. "Yeah," he said, "I
think I know what I should do."

Farewells on a Napkin

Upon boarding the campaign plane in Tucson today, Mr. Kerrey put a jazzy blues
song by Bonnie Raitt on the compact disk player, filling the air with the jaunty
spirits of a jazzman's New Orleans funeral. Later he cheerfully scribbled short
farewell messages on blue paper napkins to staff members.

When Mr. Kerrey entered the Presidential campaign last year, many political
experts predicted that the handsome, decorated war hero who seemed impatient
with old-fashioned political verities would be the ideal candidate for 1992. And
even today, his closest aides were discussing, in puzzled, frustrated tones, his
"potential" to succeed.

The great expectations surrounding his campaign were dashed early, in New
Hampshire, with an often-lackluster performance, a vague platform and a
disorganized campaign.

Mr. Kerrey today did not directly declare his decision to withdraw. He met with
several Senators in the Capitol this afternoon and told them he felt he had to
withdraw. One Senate staff member said Mr. Kerrey told the Senators that if he
persisted in the campaign at the risk of looking foolish Nebraskans would never
forgive him.

Mr. Kerrey said he would announce his decision at 10:00 A.M. Thursday here in
Washington. His staff was making plans for an afternoon rally in Omaha.

Fading Options

Mr. Kerrey's options had been narrowing rapidly as the primary season sped on
and appeared extremely limited after his showings on Tuesday. He told one Senate
colleague that he owed close to $1 million, and with no victories expected next
week on Super Tuesday and only the hope of winning caucuses in Wyoming and
Nevada this Saturday, he had scant hope of raising enough money to compete in
the Illinois and Michigan primaries on March 17.

Even after winning the South Dakota primary on Feb. 25, Mr. Kerrey had trouble
raising money. At a New York fund-raising event two days after his victory, his
campaign was obliged to give away tickets to fill a small reception room in the
Regency Hotel.

Changing Focus of Campaign

Mr. Kerrey initially focused his campaign narrowly on national health insurance,
an issue that he thought would be critical to voters and would distinguish him
from his rivals. But when all the candidates endorsed expansion of insurance
coverage, his plan tended to just blend in.

He then broadened his themes, reaching for a loftier subtext as he spoke of
managing the post-cold-war era and the need for "fundamental change," a phrase
he adopted as a motto. He learned to establish rapport with crowds and often
charmed audiences in rallies and small groups. But neither Mr. Kerrey's
personality nor his message seemed to inspire large numbers of voters.

Self-Deprecating Humor

Mr. Kerrey's aides today wore the glazed smiles that ships' pursers keep up
around passengers upon learning that a squall lies ahead. But the Senator spoke
of his dimming prospects with self-deprecating humor. "Arizona isn't life or
death," he said of the caucuses there on Saturday. "It just feels that way."

Asked in Tucson if he was trying to stay in the race in the hope that one of the
front-runners would stumble, Mr. Kerrey replied, "Life is always borne of dark
secrets -- hoping that someone else will stumble."

In the past several days Mr. Kerrey had begun threading his standard speech with
hints of his mood. The candidate who once zigzagged across Colorado, promising
supporters a victory that would launch him on his way to the White House, told a
rally in Seattle on Monday, "Tomorrow is going to a tough moment for me." At a
luncheon in Phoenix on Tuesday he said, "I am anxious about my campaign."

He also began revealing new parts of his life, telling college students in
Colorado, for example, about a visit to former Vietcong amputees whose
artificial legs had been made by the same doctor who made his after he lost part
of a leg in Vietnam.

Only once did Mr. Kerry's reserve melt. Prodded by a reporter on Tuesday night
to explain why he said he was not disappointed in the results of his campaign,
Mr. Kerrey replied sharply: "I've been blown away before in my life and come
back -- and far worse things than this."

This morning Mr. Kerrey had recovered his good spirits. Shortly before landing
here, he telephoned an aide to make sure that two dozen T-shirts ordered weeks
ago would now be sent to Washington because of the sudden change in his plans.

Describing the legend he had thought up and had inscribed on the shirts, Mr.
Kerrey broke into laughter. It was a joke at the expense of a rival, Paul E.
Tsongas, he said, a red slash cutting across the figure of Santa Claus.


NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Bob Kerrey heading for his campaign office in Washington
yesterday. He told several Senate colleagues that he had decided to withdraw
from the Democratic Presidential primaries. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Clinton's Uncertain Journey

BYLINE: By Peter Applebome;  Peter Applebome is Atlanta bureau chief of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 26; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4352 words


It's early December, and although very few voters have any idea who he is, Bill
Clinton knows by the early buzz from the press and the party professionals that
he's on the verge of becoming the hottest man in America. The rain is beating
down on the roof of his limousine speeding along the New Jersey Turnpike, he's
losing his voice and the plastic container of food in his lap is filled with
cold rubber chicken and cardboard vegetables. But, talking politics in the back
seat, Bill Clinton looks like he's exactly where he wants to be.

"Best campaign I ever ran," Clinton says in a hoarse drawl between cellular
phone calls to campaign contributors. "Just a lost cause that almost won." He's
talking about his first political campaign 18 years ago, when, as a
shaggy-haired 28-year-old who had never run for office, he came within a whisker
of unseating a popular Republican Congressman in a heavily Republican district.

"I just got in my little car and drove and had a hell of a time," Clinton
remembers. "I was still in my 1970 Gremlin, and later I had a little Chevelle
truck with Astroturf in the back. It's what I like about politics. You learn
something. You hear another life story. It's like being able to peel another
layer off an unlimited onion every day."

Since that December night, the layers -- real, imagined or projected on him by
others -- have been peeled off Bill Clinton in a harrowing kind of
hyper-politics, like a political lifetime compressed into four months. Since the
Democratic campaign began to take form in the late fall, Clinton has gone from a
little-known Southern Governor to a political phenom virtually anointed the
Democratic nominee by the national news media to a left-for-dead victim of
feeding frenzies about his sex life and draft history. Now he's like some kind
of Robo-candidate, full of bullet holes but still plowing ahead, as he
approaches this Tuesday's crucial primaries and caucuses in Texas, Florida and
nine other states. Super Tuesday will determine 783 of the 4,287 Democratic
convention votes.

To those who have followed his career, it's not entirely surprising that Clinton
has found himself in the middle of this whirlwind or that, in the face of it, he
is somehow still standing. A blend of contradictions, Clinton's politics are at
once deeply personal and shrewdly calculated. The product of a tumultuous
upbringing full of love and loss, seemingly running for office since high
school, he was elected the nation's youngest Governor at the age of 32 and then
came back after a humiliating defeat to win his job back.

At various times, he's been hailed as a cross between L.B.J. and Elvis. But just
as often, he's been dismissed as too young to be Governor, too liberal to stay
in office, too moderate to please the national Democratic faithful and now
perhaps too scarred to become President. "He has run a balancing act all his
political career," says Karl Rove, a Republican consultant who has observed
Clinton from across the border in Texas. "The problem with a balancing act is
that while you may look masterful on the high wire, you're not anchored to
anything."

Many people have wondered -- given the longstanding rumors of past womanizing he
knew would hit his campaign -- what made him run? But no one who knows him well
wondered for a second. He ran because at every key moment in his life Clinton
has charted a course, no matter how risky, and followed it. He ran because he
had worked his way through enough mine fields to think he could overcome
whatever lay in store. He ran because his whole life has pointed toward this
campaign, and he thinks he'd be a better President than anyone else in the race.

But the making and unmaking and possible remaking of Bill Clinton is more than
the story of a man on the high wire. Because of Clinton's combination of guts
and guile, mission and ambition, there's a perverse logic to the way the news
media both built him up and tore him down. But there's also a nightmarish
glimpse of what politics has become in the bizarre coronation and demolition
derby Clinton has starred in. It's his story in a particularly affecting way
because, more than most people in public life, Clinton's politics cut to his
soul. But to the degree we're all eager consumers of the news media's baroque
choreography of scandal, avidly taking in whatever train wreck becomes the
sensation du jour, it's the story of our political process as well.
 NOTHING SEEMS SUNNY AT 9 sunshine Court.

It is eight days before the New Hampshire primary, and Clinton and his wife,
Hillary, are sitting in a house in Manchester in what's billed by his campaign
as a meeting with a family facing foreclosure. The trouble is, the Ackerman
family isn't really about to lose their home, and Clinton, fighting a cold and
looking tired and distracted, knows the reporters jamming the house aren't here
to listen to his views on banking reform. They're waiting, instead, for the
candidate, whose campaign is floundering, to supply them with the sound bite of
the day. Finally, Clinton, looking perfectly cool and composed for the cameras,
addresses the press, presenting himself as the victim of a "Republican attack
machine," promises to "fight like hell" and answers some shouted questions about
his draft history. He then heads to another dismal event at a yogurt factory,
where he looks even more preoccupied than he was before.

Flying to a fund-raising event in New York that night, he dozes while Hillary
reads a book called "God and Other Famous Liberals." But once in front of a
packed banquet hall at the New York Sheraton, Clinton suddenly lights up.
"People know if they can make the election about my past or any other
politician's past, if they can dump on people and kill their enthusiasm, their
feelings and their hope, then the same old crowd gets to stay in power," he
says. "No one that covers it will have to give up their cynicism, and nothing
can change. If any one of us permits this election to be about anything other
than the real big human issues, we ought to be ashamed of ourselves."

It's a strong speech, and he knows it. Back on the campaign plane, some of the
old exuberance returns. "Who wants to play cards?" he asks, his voice still
hoarse, pulling out six vials of antihistamines and cold pills. After Hillary
brings him some vitamin C and amid bottles of Evian water, Ka-Me Onion Crunch
rice crackers and Eagle Cheese Crunch, he launches into a spirited game of
three-hand pinochle, shuffling the cards with the deft wrist flip of a Las Vegas
sharpie.

On the ground in New Hampshire after midnight, it's off to a Dunkin' Donuts shop
in Keene, where he and Hillary schmooze with the help before sitting down to a
chili and bagel dinner. His mood darkens briefly upon spying a New York Post
headline: "Gennifer & Bill Romped in Our Apt.: Ex-Roomie." But then after
talking health care with some customers, the upbeat Clinton is back as he and
Hillary head for the motel where they're to spend the night.

The day is a microcosm of the roller-coaster ride Clinton has been on since his
campaign got going in earnest. One moment, he's giving a foreign policy speech
at Georgetown University in Washington and people are coming up to his aides and
shouting "I'm on," like the bandwagon scene in a bad political movie; the next,
Hillary Clinton is making a face like a schoolgirl given a frog to dissect as
she's offered a faxed copy of the supermarket tabloid story that kicked the
campaign into the Geraldo Zone.

But somehow Clinton seems to be still hanging on -- partly, in his view, because
he's been through so much already in his 18 years of running for office. "I
think if I had one characteristic in my public life, it has been I have
endured," he says. "I have really been committed to the long run. I'm not going
to fold my tent and go away."

One of the most striking aspects of Clinton's now famous 1969 letter to an Army
colonel in the University of Arkansas's R.O.T.C. program is his frank
acknowledgement of his desire to maintain "political viability" -- an unusual
concern for a 23-year-old anytime, but particularly at the height of the Vietnam
War. In fact, Clinton's fixation with politics began much earlier. "Bill was the
kind of person who would come up to everyone new in high school and say: 'Hi.
How are you? My name's Bill Clinton, and I'm running for something,' whatever it
was," recalls Glenda Cooper, a high-school classmate and still a close friend.
"We always thought, well, someday Bill will be President."

Since early on, Clinton has been the product of two entirely different political
talents: On the one hand, he is a chronic politician unable to leave a room
without shaking every hand. On the other, he is an eye-glazing policy wonk, who
gets genuinely excited at the end of a 16-hour day of campaigning when he's
asked questions about subjects like stock depreciation compensation and
passive-loss provisions in the tax code.

In Bill Clinton, the Arkansas Traveler meets the Progressive Policy Institute.
Half of him comes out of the oldest tradition in Southern politics -- one-on-one
campaigning, at pig pickings and V.F.W. halls, where elements of macho excess
are almost expected. The other half, which comes out of Oxford and Yale
Univerity Law School, led him to become an active member of an entire generation
of young Democrats looking for a post-New Deal, post-Great Society vision for
the party.

Addicted to card games of hearts, golf and crossword puzzles, a whiz on the
tenor sax, Clinton has the look and loosey-goosey enthusiasm of a high school
jock perched somewhere between eternal youth and paunchy middle age. But he also
has the natural ease of a born politician -- touching, hugging, making eye
contact so deep that recipients sometimes seem mesmerized. Tabloid rumors aside,
Clinton embodies the parallels between the seductions of politics and the
seductions of sex. As one Clinton watcher said recently: "It's not that Clinton
seduces women. It's that he seduces everyone."

At 6 foot 2 and 230 pounds, with a full head of newly styled graying hair,
intense blue eyes and a square jaw, Clinton can evoke the image of a bionic
politician. But up close, there's not much bionic about him. Forever popping
Sudafeds and Tums, he often seems in danger of losing his voice and appears to
be in a constant battle with a red-nosed, baggy-eyed, puffy-faced condition that
seems more at home on a cold-remedy ad than a political one.

Clinton's early success in this campaign reflected three things: a gift for
strategy and pressing the flesh, a weak field of Democratic rivals and a message
geared to middle-class voters, many of whom had deserted the party in the last
12 years. Combining traditional Democratic rhetoric about compassion and
activist government with Republican ideas like school choice and "workfare,"
Clinton's campaign appeared to be the distillation of two decades of Democratic
Party ferment.

"In 1988, you had a lot of candidates who had a piece of the new picture, but
they were like the blind men looking at the elephant," says David Osborne, an
occasional adviser to Clinton whose book "Reinventing Government" has made him a
hot property in political circles. "Gore, Gephardt, Babbitt, Dukakis all touched
part of the elephant, but they couldn't see it whole. This year there's one
candidate who's seen the elephant whole, and that's Bill Clinton."

Others say Clinton's ability to craft the ultimate centrist message is the case
to be made against him, not for him. "I think he's the best politician I've ever
seen," says John Brummett, a longtime newspaper columnist in Arkansas, who,
unlike most other critics there, comes at Clinton from the left. "I just don't
know if there's much there in terms of abiding principle. Reinventing the
Democrats is about one thing -- getting elected. That's what he's about."

It's Clinton as "Slick Willie," the smart politician who's too smart by half.
Still, for someone often accused of being too slick, it's remarkable how much
Clinton's campaign has touched the cultural and generational fault lines of
American life. The most conspicuous example was undoubtedly the letter Clinton
wrote about his draft status. In the numbing compression of soundbite
journalism, the question became grossly oversimplified: draft dodger or no draft
dodger? But it's hard to read Clinton's words -- his description of peers "still
loving their country but loathing the military, to which you and other good men
have devoted years, lifetimes of the best service you could give" -- and not
feel both the passions and the pain of that era.

To some observers, the moving struggle of the 23-year-old student trying to come
to grips with his ambivalence sets a standard the 45-year-old candidate cannot
match. "The letter shows a candor and anguish that has shrunk," says Paul
Greenberg, a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The Pine Bluff Commercial and
a harsh Clinton critic. "He is now a completely political man who has swallowed
everything else. I don't see the anguish now. I wish I had known that
23-year-old."

To others, the trouble is not with Clinton himself, but with the way he's been
overpackaged in the kingdom of spin that is Presidential politics. "There have
been so many times in the campaign I've wanted to scream, 'Bill, let your gut
instincts take over.' " says Betsey Wright, Clinton's longtime top aide and now
a fellow at the Kennedy School of Government's Institute of Politics. "Nobody
has better gut instincts than Bill Clinton. I think Bill is really on to
something unprecedented in American politics -- that it may be O.K. to make
mistakes if you learn from them."

But at other times, Clinton's campaign has seemed to come out of his gut. On
Feb. 12, the night the letter was released, Clinton flew to Dover, N.H., to
speak at the Elks Lodge there. He knew his campaign was on the verge of
collapse. Speaking in a small packed room with the audience on all sides of him,
giving his appearance the feel of an actor in a theater in the round, he spoke
like a man at the edge of a cliff looking down. "This is the work of my life,"
he said in a pained voice, comparing his commitment to change with that of
George Bush, whose campaign had been saved by the voters of New Hampshire four
years earlier. "I'll tell you what I think the character issue in this election
is. How can you have the power of the Presidency and never use it to help people
improve their lives until your life needs saving in an election? I won't be like
George Bush. I'll never forget who gave me a second chance, and I'll be there
for you until the last dog dies."

It was both artful spin and politics so close to the bone it hurt to watch. In
an interview the day before, Clinton had wondered how much the public can demand
from people running for office.

"People have a right to expect that there's more than my mind engaged in this,"
he says. "But to say you have to keep revealing yourself in order to be in
public life, I don't think that is a standard anybody can keep. I don't think a
minister in a church can do that. I'm almost positive a politician can't. At
some point, all of us hold something back, except in our most intimate
relations."
 THE TWO EVENTS ARE like bookends of a relationship that is still raw for Bill
Clinton long after his stepfather's death.

The first came when Clinton was in his early teens -- a moment that would change
his life forever. His stepfather, Roger Clinton, was a quiet, amiable man by
day; at night, the bourbon turned him so violent and abusive that he once fired
a gun in the house. After one particularly ugly incident, Bill Clinton took his
mother and younger half brother by the hand and issued a warning to his
stepfather: "You will never hit either of them again. If you want them, you'll
have to go through me." It was the stepfather who blinked, and though his
drinking continued, the violence at home ended.

The second came when Bill Clinton was a 20-year-old undergraduate at Georgetown
University. His stepfather was dying of cancer at Duke University Hospital, and
Clinton would drive the 266 miles between Washington and Durham, N.C., on
weekends to see him. Bill remembers one Easter weekend in particular, when he
and his stepfather attended services together at the Duke Chapel, a soaring
Gothic symphony of stained glass. It was then that each man finally came to
terms with the other.

"It was, God, beautiful," Clinton recalls now, his voice softening. "I think he
knew that I was coming down there just because I loved him. There was nothing
else to fight over, nothing else to run from. It was a wonderful time in my
life, and I think in his."

Hillary Clinton found herself profoundly moved by the reconciliation story,
which she first heard from her future husband when they were dating classmates
at Yale Law School. "Here was a young man, not even an adult yet, who was big
enough and mature enough to love somebody who caused him and his family pain,"
she says.

Only a fool would try to tie too neat a ribbon around the conflicting elements
that shaped Bill Clinton. He's the son of a father he never knew -- an outgoing,
charismatic personality who died in an auto accident four months before he was
born -- but was doted on from Day 1 by a strong-willed, quick-witted mother. He
grew up in Hot Springs, Ark., a town that was part Bible Belt, part Las Vegas
(complete with race track and casino gambling).

Clinton says that because of the recurring melodrama at home, he turned "40 at
14." A friend of Clinton's, also the child of an alcoholic parent, contends that
children of drinkers fall into three groups: healers, hiders and jokers. Shaped
both by the chaos at home and an aching sense of mortality from his father's
early death, Bill Clinton became a healer. "He was my best friend," says his
half brother, Roger Jr., now a 35-year-old singer and songwriter in Los Angeles.
"He was my brother. He was my father. He was my protector."

That healing instinct comes to the fore not only in Clinton's private life but
also in his public life -- in the way he works a room like a preacher, lacing
his campaign speeches with personal stories of distress and pain. It also shows
up in his compulsive need to please, to bring people together at some hazily
defined, accommodating center -- as if he were still re-enacting in politics the
role he played at home.

"I can feel other people's pain a lot more than some people can," Clinton says.
"I think that's important for a politician. I think you literally have to be
able to sit in the quiet of a room and accurately imagine what life must be like
for people growing up on mean streets, people living their lives behind bars,
people about to face death's door."

But politics is full of people who practice empathy on a large public scale and
who can't always translate this gift into their private lives. Clinton is the
first to acknowledge this limitation in himself. "In a funny way, I'm reluctant
to commit myself, to reach out past a certain point and get involved with
people, because you're always, in a subconscious way, aware that this can all be
taken away."

He was born William Jefferson Blythe IV on Aug. 19, 1946. Relatives say he has
his father's magnetism and good looks; they can even see Bill Blythe in his
son's long fingers and the way he tilts his head. When he was nearly 2, he was
left with his grandparents, who ran a grocery store in a black neighborhood in
Hope, Ark., while his mother studied to be a nurse-anesthetist in New Orleans.
At the age of 7, he moved with his mother and stepfather, Roger Clinton Sr., to
the resort town of Hot Springs, where Roger's brother had a Buick dealership.

Growing up in a neat ranch house overlooking a field of peonies, Clinton was
greatly influenced by his mother, who would be widowed three times in her life
and is now remarried to Richard W. Kelly. A smart, voluble woman, she had an
affection for the local race track and an opinion on everything, After a long
day at the hospital, she'd rush in to the kitchen, muttering "It's just not
right -- it's just not fair" about some outrage, idiocy or injustice she'd
witnessed at work that day. Engaging her son in endless political discussions,
she was, says a friend of Clinton's, consciously feeding his mind, pushing her
precocious son toward a life far beyond Hot Springs.

Clinton thought fleetingly of careers in medicine, journalism and music, but
after he met John F. Kennedy in 1963 as a delegate to the American Legion Boys
Nation program, he never wavered from the idea of a political career. His
politics defined by the antiwar and civil rights struggles of the 60's, he went
to work for Sen. J. William Fulbright of Arkansas in Washington in 1967 and ran
George McGovern's ill-fated Presidential campaign in Texas in 1972. When Clinton
won the Arkansas Statehouse in 1978 at the age of 32, he became the youngest
Governor since the 31-year-old Harold E. Stassen was elected in Minnesota in
1938.

As Governor, Clinton came in like a whirlwind. He had a program for every
problem, from energy to education to economic development, and a passel of
bearded young liberal aides to carry them out. He took on powerful timber and
trucking interests and slapped on an unpopular license-tag tax increase to pay
for a road program.

And then, suddenly, he was out of office, defeated by an obscure Republican
named Frank White, a sour economy and the growing perception around the state
that he was a little too full of himself. A year later, he went on television,
apologized to the voters and asked them to give him another chance. In 1982, he
made a successful comeback by unseating White, picking up 55 percent of the
vote. He has been Governor ever since.

Clinton's record is a mix of genuine innovation and unfulfilled promise. In
education, where he pushed through the nation's first teacher competency testing
program, his achievements live up to their hype. But in other areas,
particularly tax fairness and the environment, his record does not match his
rhetoric.

Clinton's toughest decision in office was a personal one. In 1984, State Police
officers learned his half brother, Roger Jr., was selling drugs. Without
hesitation, the Governor approved a sting that resulted in his brother's arrest
and conviction on drug charges. For about six weeks, while he and Hillary
characteristically read everything they could find on drug abuse, he waited in
agony for the arrest to occur.

It was a pivotal moment for both Bill and Roger Clinton. The whole family,
including their mother and Hillary, sat through counseling sessions that opened
up some of the rawest wounds from their youth. Roger Jr. says he felt betrayed
by his brother at first, but then realized he had saved his life. Bill Clinton
says that for the first time he was able to see how much he'd ignored the needs
of those around him, how much his own ambitions had gotten out of control. "I
finally realized how my compulsive and obsessive ambition got in the way," he
says. "And I think that dealing with that helped me to achieve some better
balance."

Still, no one doubts the intensity of Clinton's ambition today. Talking about
what got him into politics, he harks back to his first race. "It taught me
you've got to stand for something bigger than yourself," he says.

The question that lingers from his personal history is just what kind of
politician it produced: a charismatic leader with a real passion for making
government work for people or an eager-to-please politician whose positions come
from his polls rather than his heart? Clinton's campaign so far has shown he can
take a punch, make a speech and spout policy with the best of them. What's not
clear is whether he meets his own standard: does he stand for something bigger
than himself?

THE MOST GLARING IRONY about Bill Clinton's wild ride is this: after spending a
lifetime honing his political skills, he's running for President at a time when
the rules of the game are no longer clear. Larry J. Sabato, a University of
Virginia political science professor and author of "Feeding Frenzy," says
Clinton's problems offer a textbook case in the way marginal issues now
obliterate substantive ones in American politics. "I've said all along the
standards are going straight down, and that's what we're seeing," Sabato says.

Once it was the party bosses who sized up candidates, picked at their entrails
and decided their fate. Now that process is largely left to the news media -- a
great unwieldy beast of mainstream newspapers, television news, supermarket
tabloids and talk shows featuring Washington windbags. Clinton's troubles
provide a particularly vivid example of how Byzantine the media food chain has
become, how blurred the lines are between the bottom feeders and the
"respectable" press, between entertainment and journalism.

But it's clear that a candidate who thinks he can inspire the country as
President can't do it without inspiring confidence in himself first. It's clear
that a candidate whose campaign preaches personal responsibility has to practice
it as well. Clinton's problem goes beyond the muck. Having based his campaign on
the notion of his electability, he now has to cut through the haze and give
voters a reason to elect him.

Before his campaign is over, Clinton may yet find himself in the hot seat again
-- as he did after a recent outburst against the Rev. Jesse Jackson over a
misunderstood interview question. Even Clinton's supporters expect additional
allegations about his private life. But some critical questions about his fate
may be answered Tuesday. If he wins big in the South and can pull off a victory
the week after in Illinois, where he has a formidable organization, his campaign
could be back on track.

But after a lifetime of preparation for this race, Clinton says he's sure of
only one thing: "Of all the people running, I'd be the best President. That's
the only case I wanted to make to the voters."

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover: Bill Clinton in Dover, N.H. (Photograph by Mark Peterson/J. B.
Pictures for The New York Times.); Photos: Clinton never wavered from his
pursuit of a political career after meeting President Kennedy, top left, in 1963
as a delegate to the American Legion Boys Nation program. Above: The Governor
makes a campaign stop in Providence, R.I. (pg. 26)(Photograph by Mark
Peterson/J. B. Pictures for The New York Times); Hillary Clinton at a
fund-raising event in Montpelier, Vt. The Clintons met as law students at Yale.
(pg. 28)(Photograph by Mark Peterson/J. B. Pictures for The New York Times);
"Best campaign I ever ran," Clinton says fondly of his almost-successful bid to
unseat a popular Republican Congressman in 1974. Clinton's half brother, Roger
Jr., was arrested and convicted on drug charges after a sting approved by the
Governor. (Arkansas Democrat)(pg. 28); Clinton speaking at the South Carolina
Democratic Party Leaders Conference in Columbia. (Photograph by Mark Peterson/J.
B. Pictures for The New York Times)(pg. 29); Gennifer Flowers's allegations
about having a longtime affair with Clinton knocked his campaign for a loop.
(Photograph by Hoda Bakhshandagi/Black Star)(Pg. 60)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 30, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

METRO MATTERS;
Obviously Also-Ran: He Talks About Real Issues

BYLINE: By Sam Roberts

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


People are angry. Perhaps they are angrier, even, than they were four years ago.
. . . The most disturbing point most of those we spoke with made was that they
had no faith at all in the system -- the government and the private wielders of
power -- as a protector or a provider.

"The State of the Cities" by Senator Fred R. Harris and Mayor John V. Lindsay
(Praeger, 1972).

THE first name printed at the top of New York State's Presidential primary
ballot belongs to Lawrence A. Agran. That random placement may mark the high
point of his campaign.

"People don't even know who I am," Mr. Agran (pronounced AAAY-grin) said the
other day, lapsing just a little into uncharacteristic political hyperbole.
Actually, he got 2,640 votes in last week's Connecticut primary, which doesn't
necessarily mean that those voters knew him, but they were enough to put him in
fourth place, ahead of Senators Tom Harkin and Bob Kerrey; Eugene J. McCarthy,
the former Senator, and Lyndon H. LaRouche.

"If you're not on television, you just don't count in American politics," Mr.
Agran lamented, and that is indisputable.

The threshold for taking the Presidential candidacy of a defeated former mayor
of Irvine, Calif., seriously is higher than it is for a former governor of
California, whose own candidacy wasn't taken very seriously either until last
week, when he won the Connecticut primary. Edmund G. Brown Jr. was the most
visible protest candidate for another generation of angry people who have lost
faith in government and who may regard not only the incumbent President but also
Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, anointed as the Democratic front-runner, as handy
targets for frustration.

New York Democrats decisively eliminated Albert Gore Jr. in favor of Michael S.
Dukakis four years ago, and Gary Hart against Walter F. Mondale four years
before. They voted for another eventual nominee, George S. McGovern, in 1972.
Just as often, though, New Yorkers are contrarians in Presidential primaries,
delivering most of their delegates to Eugene McCarthy in 1968, Henry M. Jackson
in 1976 and Edward M. Kennedy in 1980.

By this time in 1972, Mayor John V. Lindsay of New York was on the verge of
abandoning his short-lived presidential campaign after Wisconsin voters, heeding
his last-minute message that "the switch is on," switched, but to one of his
rivals. Mr. Lindsay's celebrity helped him on to television, but he got less
than 7 percent of the vote, only marginally better than Mr. Agran, who got about
2 percent in Connecticut and who estimates he has spent about $200,000 and
received about 20,000 of the 13 million votes cast in primaries so far.

There is no shortage of self-styled protest candidates on the New York ballot on
April 7, including Mr. Clinton, who denies he is part of the establishment, and
Mr. Brown, who has courted it. And the on-and-off campaign of Paul E. Tsongas,
the former Senator, seems to be inspired by the same ambiguity that has
characterized Gov. Mario M. Cuomo. Now that Mr. Cuomo has struck a timely budget
agreement with legislative leaders, he has five days to get on the California
primary ballot by declaring his candidacy.

This may be the first time, though, that neither of the leading candidates is a
veteran of Washington.

Mr. Agran, who is 47 years old, is the only former mayor running -- even if
Irvine, with a population of 111,000, is the nation's largest planned community,
in contrast to more spontaneous cities like New York, whose motto might be,
"Tomorrow we've got to get organized." As Mayor until 1990, he banned
ozone-depleting chemicals produced by local companies, began curbside recycling
and enacted gay-rights legislation, which proved too radical for Orange County.
Mr. Agran and his allies had already been called the Agranistas, after inviting
a Nicaraguan baseball team to Irvine.

He said, though, "You're probably looking at the only guy who was at Berkeley in
the 60's and never smoked a joint." He said that he enlisted in the Army
reserves in 1962 "before anybody even knew about Vietnam" and that he had never
had an extramarital affair.

What distinguishes Mr. Agran's quixotic campaign is its urban agenda, which
would halve the military budget and give cities the proceeds -- $700 million
more for general purposes and $400 million more for education in New York City
alone. He characterizes Mr. Clinton's plan to pare military spending as "timid,"
Mr. Brown's as "not believable."

Earlier this year, dozens of mayors meeting in Washington agreed that Mr. Agran
was the single candidate who understood urban needs. Governor Cuomo said he was
impressed by Mr. Agran's performance in a subsequent South Dakota Presidential
candidates' debate. But the former mayor has been largely overlooked in a state
where the usual ideological tests are being graded on a curve by progressives
this year to assure passing scores for Mr. Brown, whose tax plan has been
denounced by city officials as a fraud on the poor and working people, and for
Mr. Clinton, who is from a closed-shop state and supports the death penalty.

Neither candidate has been compelled to deal explicitly with gun control,
integration, AIDS, welfare requirements, ailing industries and other issues that
are usually defined as urban, but which have grown so pervasive that the former
mayor of a Utopian city in the suburbs is discussing them instead.

NAME: Lawrence A. Agran

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOXING;
50 Candles for Ali: Let Them Glow Awhile

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 826 words


Muhammad Ali is 50 years old today, which surprises me. I never thought he would
become middle-aged, certainly not fat and slow and patronized, adored in the way
elderly former pin-up girls are adored for evoking a time when we had the hot
blood to want to be them or have them. In that dazzling time when his beauty,
his skill, his outrageousness, made Ali worshiped and feared, I thought that if
he survived the controversies he illuminated, he would become a major actor of
our times, an elder, a peacemaker.

I remember the moment I first began to have such grand thoughts. The photograph
helps. It was Feb. 26, 1964, the morning after he won the heavyweight
championship. His name was still Cassius Clay, although Malcolm X's presence in
Miami Beach made credible the rumors that he had joined the Lost-Found Nation of
Islam and would soon change his name. He had already brought African-American
style back into the world sports arena. But at this morning-after press
conference, he was subdued, modest, almost, incredibly, boring. In the picture,
many sportswriters are already looking toward the right, where the beaten Sonny
Liston was being incredibly amiable.

Clay began to lecture those of us still watching (I am in the lower right
quadrant, eyes burning, tie loosened). "In the jungle," he said, "lions are with
lions and tigers with tigers and redbirds stay with redbirds and bluebirds with
bluebirds. That's human nature, too, to be with your own kind. I don't want to
go where I'm not wanted."

Reporters began to argue with Clay, about civil rights and integration and
citizenship and the role of the sports idol. Quite suddenly, his voice rose and
he said: "I don't have to be what you want me to be. I'm free to be who I want."

That was his mightiest moment, his most influential message, a declaration of
independence from traditional SportsWorld values of the athlete as chattel,
child, product. The revolution he began has taken its turns, most of them
material rather than ideological, but his stands and his persecution were noted
and debated and internalized in every schoolyard in America.

He was 22 years old when the photograph was taken. I was 26. Yesterday, I turned
54 and studied my unformed face in the picture. In 1964, I thought Clay was the
child and I the man. Yesterday, I thought, that pale boy knows nothing and
hasn't a clue to what will happen to Ali. He will write about Ali for years,
make his sportswriting career on Ali, and never believe that Ali, like so many
others, would not know when to quit boxing, would not grow emotionally, would
insulate himself within religion.

And that Muhammad Ali would simply enjoy growing old as Muhammad Ali.

"He is a benign and venerated figure," says Thomas Hauser, author of the
incomparable and indispensable "Muhammad Ali, His Life and Times (Simon and
Schuster, 1991), "who is assumed to be more damaged than he is. The motor skills
are diminished, but the mind is as good as it ever was."

The mind, of course, was superficially quick and bright enough for the sports
pages and for middle-class white college students who saw him as a Sixties
outlaw, a cross between the Beatles and the Panthers. Many middle-class blacks
saw him as an embarrassing loudmouth who put down other blacks, often mocking
their facial characteristics and their integrationist dreams. The American
establishment was afraid that Ali would talk the black working class out of
supporting the Vietnam War. Then, as now, he was Icons-R-Us, a sticker to be
slapped on one's own symbolic baggage.

At 50, Ali has more money than most people, not nearly as much as he should
have, based on his earnings. He is living with his fourth wife and his ninth
child on a farm in Michigan. His longtime business associate, Herbert Muhammad,
son of the Nation's founder, frequently steers him around the Mideast raising
money for the Muhammad Ali Foundation, whatever that might be. A 10-hour
television documentary by a British director has been in the works for several
years. More than $7 million in Japanese financing has been spent, and the
project is still struggling to fly.

Hauser's book, like its subject, has received more honor abroad than in the
United States. It won an award as best sports book of the year in Britain, where
it lingered on the best-seller list, and it will be translated into Japanese and
Arabic.

Once, Ali said to me, "When you're with me you always got something to write
about." I should just be grateful. Muse over old photographs, venerate this
benign figure, remember the feelings he evoked, the hope he offered, the fun he
shared. He was "the onliest boxer in history people asked questions like a
senator." And he always had answers. Happy birthday, Muhammad, you are never far
out of my mind. You don't have to be what I want you to be. As if I knew. I am
both sad and relieved you never became more important than you were when we were
young.

NAME: Muhammad Ali

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali, then known as Cassius Clay, delivering a subdued
oration the morning after he knocked out Sonny Liston in Miami Beach. Some of
the sportwriters were not even listening to him. (UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Passes Times Publisher's Post to Son

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3011 words


Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, chairman and chief executive officer of The New York
Times Company and for 29 years publisher of The New York Times, relinquished the
publisher's title yesterday to his son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr.

As publisher, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. will oversee all aspects of the newspaper,
including its editorial-page policy. He will report to the elder Mr. Sulzberger,
65 years old, who intends to continue active participation in the overall
company day to day as chairman and chief executive.

Mr. Sulzberger Jr., 40, has been deputy publisher since 1988. He represents the
fourth generation of his family to head The New York Times, and he is the fifth
member to serve as publisher in the 96 years since the family acquired the
newspaper. Through several trusts, the family controls about 84 percent of the
stock that elects 9 of the Times Company's 14 board members.

Forming Management Team

In a statement yesterday after a meeting of the board, the elder Mr. Sulzberger
said: "This promotion is another important step in forming the management team
that will lead The New York Times in the years ahead. The appointment will allow
me more time to work directly with our other lines of business and to
concentrate on the further development of the company."

In an interview, Mr. Sulzberger said: "If you believe in the process of an
orderly transition, then you have to 'tran-sit.' It gives me great fatherly
pride to turn the publishership over to someone not only qualified, but a son."

Mr. Sulzberger Jr. has worked at The Times since 1978 in many departments,
including news, advertising, production and strategic planning. His appointment
has been expected throughout the industry as Mr. Sulzberger neared his 66th
birthday, on Feb. 5.

Planning New Printing Plant

In recent years, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. has taken a leading role in shaping the
paper's future -- helping, for example, to plan the $450 million color printing
and distribution plant in Edison, N.J., which is expected to open this year. Mr.
Sulzberger Jr. took part in creating the paper's redesigned sports and
metropolitan news sections, and has been one of the newspaper industry's most
outspoken advocates of diversity in the workplace.

In a letter to the paper's staff, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said, "I pledge my devotion
to the precepts that make this paper great: the fairness and honesty of its
journalism, the integrity of its business practices, and the decency of its
treatment of all individuals."

Reporting to Mr. Sulzberger Jr. will be Max Frankel, The Times's executive
editor; Lance R. Primis, the paper's president and general manager, and Jack
Rosenthal, editorial page editor.

Founded in 1851, The Times was on the verge of bankruptcy when it was acquired
in 1896 by Adolph S. Ochs, a former printer in Tennessee who had become the
successful proprietor of The Chattanooga Times. Mr. Ochs, at 38, became
publisher of The New York Times and moved north, to live with his wife and
daughter, Iphigene. Mr. Sulzberger Jr. is Mr. Ochs's great-grandson.

Upon Mr. Ochs's death in 1935, Iphigene's 43-year-old husband, Arthur Hays
Sulzberger, was named publisher. He served until 1961, when the publisher's
chair passed to Orvil E. Dryfoos, 48, whose wife, Marian, was the oldest child
of Arthur Hays and Iphigene Sulzberger. The Sulzbergers had four children; the
youngest, and the only son, was Arthur Ochs Sulzberger.

In 1963 Mr. Dryfoos died. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger -- known all his life by the
nickname Punch -- became the paper's president and, at age 37, its youngest
publisher. He was elected chairman and chief executive of the paper's parent
company in 1973.

In 1979, the company gave the title of president and chief operating officer to
Walter E. Mattson. Mr. Mattson, 59, retains responsibility for the operating
groups of the Times Company, which now includes numerous broadcast, magazine and
newspaper properties, and will continue to report to Mr. Sulzberger.

Career Marked With Landmarks

As publisher, Mr. Sulzberger has steered the paper through an era marked by some
of the most significant journalistic achievements in the paper's history,
including Times v. Sullivan, a landmark First Amendment decision by the United
States Supreme Court shielding journalists against many libel suits by public
officials. And it was Mr. Sulzberger who made the decision in 1971 to publish
the secret Government history of the Vietnam War known as the Pentagon Papers,
and who led the company's successful Supreme Court defense of that decision. He
said he took particular pride in the 31 Pulitzer Prizes -- out of the paper's 63
-- awarded during his tenure.

The Times has also expanded considerably as a business, with revenues of $1.7
billion in 1991, compared with $100 million in 1963. Weekday circulation is now
1.1 million, compared with 714,300 in 1963, and Sunday circulation grew to 1.7
million, from 1.4 million, making the Times the nation's largest Sunday paper.

Mr. Sulzberger has been a quiet but active force in the industry and served as
chairman of the American Newspaper Publishers Association and on many other
industry boards.

Yesterday, assessing Mr. Sulzberger's contribution to publishing, Katharine
Graham, chairwoman of The Washington Post Company, said: "Above all, he took the
quality of the product up to an entirely new level. I think he's been an
outstanding publisher and a modest and wonderful man -- and he's really funny."

Both those who worked closely with Mr. Sulzberger and members of his family
cited as perhaps his greatest overall achievement a refusal to abuse the power
that went with being publisher of The Times. While taking his responsibility
seriously, they said, he also bore it with a lightness, warmth and and
self-deprecating wit that made him a beloved figure throughout the paper.

"It was like inheriting the White House," said A. M. Rosenthal, who served as
The Times's executive editor during much of Mr. Sulzberger's tenure, "and he has
never used the paper for personal, family, political or financial advantage,
ever. That's his monument."

Susan W. Dryfoos, daughter of Mr. Sulzberger's predecessor Orvil Dryfoos, said:
"He is so modest, so understated and so wise. It never went to his head." She
described the Sulzberger family as "bursting with pride" at Mr. Sulzberger's
performance as steward of the family's great jewel.

'Shellshocked' Upon Taking Job

When Mr. Sulzberger became publisher in 1963, The Times and the city's other
papers were still reeling from a prolonged strike. And though Mr. Sulzberger was
working as an executive at The Times, he was regarded even by some within the
family as unprepared for such demanding responsibilities.

In an interview yesterday, Mr. Sulzberger recalled being "shellshocked" by
having to assume the job.

"My sister Ruth called me after my first day as publisher and asked me how it
had gone," he recalled, "and I said, 'I've made my first executive decision.
I've decided not to throw up.' "

Gradually, Mr. Sulzberger negotiated critical agreements with unions that
effectively opened the door to a new era of using high technology to make the
paper's operations more efficient, a process that continues today in the form of
the new Edison plant.

But in the early 1970's, The Times faced a financial crisis that the company
viewed as a threat to the paper's very existence.

The Arab oil embargo had plunged the nation into recession, and New York City,
after years of free spending, was on the verge of bankruptcy. Advertising at The
Times plunged by 25 percent from 1969 to 1974.

Mr. Sulzberger's predecessors had fought their way out of similar fiscal
emergencies by investing in improvements and by expanding the paper rather than
slashing costs in ways that damaged journalistic quality.  During World War II,
for example, when newsprint was rationed, newspapers had had to choose between
reducing space for news or advertising. The Times elected to reduce advertising,
which hurt immediate profits but attracted news-hungry readers who remained with
the paper when rationing was lifted. The New York Herald Tribune, then The
Times's main competitor, reduced its news coverage and never recovered the
resulting loss of readership, ceasing publication in 1967.

Taking his family's example, Mr. Sulzberger elected to solve The Times's
financial problems by attracting new readers -- and thus advertisers -- by
investing heavily in new sections, to broaden the paper's appeal.

The daily paper went from two parts -- a front section and a Metro section -- to
four. Each weekday edition was given its own special section: SportsMonday,
Science on Tuesday, Living on Wednesday, Home on Thursday and Weekend on Friday.
In addition, a daily business section -- Business Day -- was begun. Each of the
sections not only had audience appeal, but also offered a new environment for
specialized advertising, like financial ads for the business section.
Circulation and advertising -- and profits -- rose accordingly.

Mr. Sulzberger also accelerated the policy of acquiring compatible businesses to
diversify the company's sources of income.

The Times Company, which he continues to direct, now includes 32 regional
newspapers; a one-half interest in The International Herald Tribune, based in
Paris; 17 consumer and trade magazines including Family Circle, McCall's and
Golf Digest; five television stations; an AM and an FM radio station, WQXR in
New York; a news service and other information services, and interests in three
paper mills.

Finding Lesson In Paper's History

Mr. Sulzberger Jr. assumes the paper's helm at a time when the New York region
is in deep recession and advertising has declined steadily for several years.
The company has projected earnings of 55 cents to 60 cents a share for 1991
compared with 85 cents a share in 1990.

But in an interview, he said the fundamental lesson in the paper's history was
that "if you have quality information, profit will follow," and he pointed to
the recent investments in expanded sports and metropolitan coverage as an
indication of his approach.

While Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said the paper would continue to evolve, he said he
planned to make no executive changes in the foreseeable future and predicted
that The Times would look essentially the same a year from now, except for color
in some Sunday sections after the Edison printing plant opens.

As publisher, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. plans to confer daily with Jack Rosenthal, the
editorial page editor, as his father did. He said that he and his father were in
virtually total agreement about the paper's editorial positions, and that he
intended to consult with his father on editorial policy. Indeed, Mr. Sulzberger
Sr. said he would continue to write occasional editorials.

Father and Son Grew Closer

The new publisher was born in Mount Kisco, N.Y. While he was still a child, his
parents divorced. He lived with his mother, the former Barbara Grant, and his
stepfather.

At 14, with his mother's blessing, he elected to live with his father, who had
since married Carol Fox Fuhrman. Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said he had made the change
to come to know his father better, though their relationship was somewhat
strained when the younger Sulzberger adopted the trappings of the 1960's,
including wearing his father's old Marine Corps jacket on all occasions.

But he said his father's "civility of spirit" was such that he allowed his son
to go his own way largely without criticism, and the two grew very close and
remain so. For instance, in his statement on today's editorial page, Mr.
Sulzberger Jr. said of his father, "It gives me great comfort to know that his
presence and counsel will continue for years to come."

In 1970, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. entered Tufts University, outside Boston, where he
studied political science and spent several vacations working at various
newspapers, including The Boston Globe and The Vineyard Gazette. He said he had
already concluded that his essential life ambition was to follow his father's
footsteps as publisher of The Times.

"I do not recall ever having that debate with myself, which I consider lucky,"
he said. "I was not pushed to do it either by myself or some strange sense of
responsibility." He added, "It was something I wanted to do as long as I can
recall."

Upon graduation in 1974, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. took a job as a general-assignment
reporter at The Raleigh Times in North Carolina. The paper, which has since
closed, was operated by the Daniels family, which continues to publish The News
& Observer in Raleigh.

While in Raleigh, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. married Gail Gregg, whom he met on a visit
to his mother in Topeka, Kan., Ms. Gregg's hometown. She was also a journalist,
and worked for The Associated Press at the time. The couple have two children.

After two years, Mr. Sulzberger Jr.  became a correspondent for The Associated
Press in London.

In 1978, when Mr. Sulzberger Jr. finally joined The Times as a reporter in the
Washington bureau, he said, he felt he knew what he was doing.

"I wasn't the greatest reporter in the world, but I wasn't starting at zero," he
said.

In Washington, Mr. Sulzberger worked on a wide array of subjects ranging from
the long-term impact of nuclear testing to the decisions of the Federal Trade
Commission. He recalls with some pride an article he wrote about the Panama
Canal treaty that "led the paper," meaning that it appeared in the upper-right
corner of the front page, the position reserved for the day's most important
news article.

In the early 1980's, the family moved to the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the
neighborhood where they have lived since then.

As a member of the metropolitan staff, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. worked as a general
assignment reporter and covered City Hall. He then became an assignment editor
for a year, which he described as "the single most exhausting job I ever had."
This was his first management experience.

"I was not a great manager, but I walked around a lot, often without shoes on,
and that walking around will cover a multitude of sins," he said, adding that he
concluded that the fundamental role of a good manager is motivation.

"It's no different from now," he said, and, indeed, he still walks around a lot,
speaking to people in the newsroom, but wearing shoes.

In 1982, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. transferred to the advertising department, where he
sold advertising and supervised an advertising sales team.

Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said it was during this period that he began to think
carefully about his own management style, which he characterized as a belief in
group decision-making that taps the energy and insight of a wide array of
participants.

"I don't think leadership demands yes or no answers; I think leadership is
providing the forum for making the right decision, which doesn't demand
unanimity," he said.

Not Afraid Of Mistakes

This month, in keeping with his management views, he oversaw changes in the
paper's business management organization intended to streamline decision-making
and encourage innovation and accountability.

After advertising, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. moved to corporate planning, where he
learned more analytical skills, and there followed a period in production,
including two nights each week as night production manager overseeing the
presses at the paper's Times Square plant.

In time, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said, the threads of his multifaceted training began
to come together and he was named deputy to his father.

While he said the paper would continue to have "the honesty of its journalism
and the honesty of its business practises" as its guiding principle, he said he
was not afraid of experimenting and making mistakes.

"If you don't occasionally make a mistake, you aren't trying hard enough," he
said.

The appointment of Mr. Sulzberger Jr. as publisher was announced after a meeting
of the company's board, which includes the elder Mr. Sulzberger's three sisters
-- Marian S. Heiskell, Ruth S. Holmberg and Dr. Judith P. Sulzberger.

The chairman said that while his son's appointment was not subject to board
approval, the members had expressed enthusiasm for the change.

The news also seemed well received by the industry. "Arthur is clearly a very
worthy successor to Punch as publisher," said Robert F. Erburu, chairman of the
Times Mirror Company.

Yesterday afternoon, at a gathering of hundreds of staff members in the
newsroom, Max Frankel, the executive editor, toasted the Sulzberger family for
its long commitment to the paper's independence and excellence.

A Generation Remains Close

As a child, during weekend visits with his father, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. often went
to Hillandale, the Connecticut estate of his paternal grandparents -- Arthur
Hays and Iphigene Sulzberger, whom he and the other 13 Sulzberger grandchildren
called Bumpy and Granny.

His generation of cousins remain close, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said, attributing the
friendship in part to their time together as children at Hillandale, where the
family's heritage was lightly but constantly present. That generation has
created a charitable trust, the Hillandale Group, to which they all contribute.

Four of Mr. Sulzberger Jr.'s first cousins also work at the Times Company:
Stephen Golden, Ruth Holmberg's son, is vice president for forest products; his
brother Michael Golden is senior vice president and general manager of the
women's publishing division; Daniel Cohen, Judith Sulzberger's son, is director
of sales development in the circulation department of The Times, and Susan W.
Dryfoos, Marian Heiskell's daughter, is director of the Times History Project, a
continuing video documentary of the paper and the company.

Speaking of his family generally, Mr. Sulzberger Jr. said, "The New York Times
is inherent in what we are, but not worn as 'what we are'; it's important and
crucial to all of us, but not something that was drilled in, in any specific
ways."

NAME: Arthur Ochs Sulzberger; Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr.; Adolph S. Ochs; Arthur
Hays Sulzberger; Orvil E. Dryfoos

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. with his father, whom he succeeded as
publisher of The New York Times. The portrait is of Adolph S. Ochs. (Burk Uzzle)
(pg. A1); Adolph S. Ochs, Publisher 1896-1935; Arthur Hays Sulzberger, Publisher
1935-1961; Orvil E. Dryfoos, Publisher 1961-1963; Arthur Ochs Sulzberger,
Publisher 1963-1992 (Burk Uzzle); Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., Publisher 1992.
(Burk Uzzle) (pg. A19)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

An Arrest Divides the Generations

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: PARKSVILLE, N.Y., Feb. 6


Outside an unassuming storefront in the hamlet of South Fallsburg hangs the
traditional shingle for the law offices of "Joel M. Proyect, Esq." Several miles
away, at the foot of a long twisting driveway, there is another sign, a
weathered plank with white letters that reads "L'Avocat Sauvage." It means the
wild lawyer.

This week, Mr. Proyect's wild side caught up with him.

On Wednesday the 49-year-old lawyer pleaded guilty to Federal charges of growing
marijuana, a felony carrying a potential sentence of 5 to 40 years in prison and
$2 million in fines.

As part of the plea, he agreed to forfeit the 30 acres where he had grown
patches of marijuana, along with his house and cabin. He also faces possible
disbarment.

Over the years, folks in the close-knit, rural community of Sullivan County had
come to respect the lawyer and accept the man. His downfall has not brought
whispers of disgrace but rather expressions of sympathy.

Mr. Proyect, the lawyer, is a former assistant district attorney here and was
the vice president of the county bar association.  "He's a very intelligent guy
and has a lot of compassion for human beings, including his clients -- even the
quote-unquote scoundrels," said John Ferrara, a fellow lawyer. "It's a loss
because he's just a fine lawyer."

Mr. Proyect, the man, is a free spirit who built a log home by hand on his
100-plus acres and is a past president of the local chapter of the National
Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws. Needless to say, he had a
penchant for marijuana and smoked it, by his own estimate, almost every day for
the last 20 years.

"Many of the judges and lawyers knew I smoked," Mr. Proyect, who is free on
bail, said in an interview. "They used to tease me about it."

The Federal Government was not amused, however. Acting on information from a
local police department, agents from the Mid-Hudson Drug Enforcement Task Force
raided his property at 7 A.M. on Aug. 7. They bypassed the 15-foot gate across
his driveway by flying in on Army National Guard helicopters.

The effort to smoke him out was, in Mr. Proyect's mind, excessive. "This is the
U.S. Government," he said, "and I'm just an ex-hippie living on top of a hill."

Initially, Mr. Proyect was charged with distributing marijuana in addition to
growing it, but that was later dropped. All charges against his girlfriend were
also dismissed. Mr. Proyect says he grew the plants strictly for his own
consumption.

Still, he makes no excuses for having flouted the law and says he hasn't had a
puff since his arrest.

"I was grossly careless," he said. "I'm a lawyer, and it was a betrayal of the
trust given to me. I had no business doing it, and I'm not going to grow pot
again until it's legal."

Had he been prosecuted under state narcotics laws, the charge would have been a
misdemeanor with a maximum sentence of one year and a more likely sentence of
probation. But Federal penalties for the same crime are stiffer.

While the Government says that Mr. Proyect was growing more than 150 plants, his
lawyer will dispute that number at the May 4 sentencing in White Plains. The
sentence for growing fewer than 100 plants would range from no imprisonment to
63 months. The lawyer, Ronald E. DePetris, plans to present expert testimony on
some of the finer botanical distinctions with regard to marijuana in arguing
that the crop was actually smaller.

Mr. Proyect says he is terrified by the thought of going to jail. A few months
wouldn't be so bad -- he could use the time constructively to learn new skills
such as computers and electrical wiring. But not years.

"I haven't wasted 10 minutes of my life," he said. "I speak three foreign
languages. I've built two homes. I've been to France 80 times. I've raised two
beautiful daughters. We grow our own vegetables and heat everything with wood.
I'm scared they're going to take it all away from me."

His neighbor, Dr. Barry J. Friedlander, a 37-year-old veterinarian, said that he
felt the punishment did not fit the crime. "Growing marijuana is not like
dealing cocaine or heroin," he said. "To cut off his whole livelihood would be
ridiculous. The guy has been an outstanding citizen. They're trying to set an
example because he's an attorney."

Merlina Friedlander, an accountant, agreed. "I'd hate to see him go to jail,"
she said. "He didn't mean any harm. He's the best neighbor anybody could have.
He baby-sat our dogs when we were away and plowed our driveway when it snowed."

The reaction in the county appears to be divided between the generations. "The
people who came of age during Vietnam and after don't see this as a heinous
thing," Mr. Ferrara said. "A lot of it depends on your view of pot. If you think
it leads to the downfall of civilization, then you should hang from a tree. If
your view is somewhat more liberal, you see this, at best, as unfortunate and,
at worst, vindictive."

But the county District Attorney, Stephen F. Lungen, says that he admired Mr.
Proyect's work but that no one is above the law. "You hate to see anybody get
into trouble, but Joel's a lawyer. He knew the law and he knew what he was doing
was wrong."

A graduate of the University of Miami and of St. John's Law School, Mr. Proyect
was not always the rebellious type. In fact, in the late 1960's he ran an
unsuccessful campaign for town magistrate in Fallsburg, pledging a war on drugs
and the "thrill-seeking drug experimentation" in vogue among teen-agers. Shortly
after, as a county attorney, one of his tasks was to stop the Woodstock music
festival from descending on Sullivan.

"I was super-straight and really obnoxious, cheating on my wife and driving
fancy German sports cars," he recalled. "The more money I spent, the more
miserable I was."

He and his wife, whom he later divorced, began smoking marijuana in the early
70's, he said, and that sent him headlong in the other direction: India, est,
gurus. "I've done a lot to deal with that internal emptiness," he said.

Last year, he finished building a big log house made entirely of maple and
cherry trees that he cut down on his property. The stones in the foundation also
came from his land. Inside, oversized windows look out over a small lake and the
Catskills beyond.

"I had hoped to live here until I died," he said, showing a visitor the home
that took him 10 years to create. "I hope George and Barbara like it."

NAME: Joel M. Proyect

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I'm just an ex-hippie living on top of a hill," said Joel M.
Proyect, a lawyer, who pleaded guilty on Wednesday to Federal charges of growing
marijuana in Parksville, N.Y. (Joyce Dopkeen/The New York Times) (pg. 23)

Map of New York indicating Parksville (pg. 27)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 9, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noah's Ark of the North

BYLINE: By Karal Ann Marling;  Karal Ann Marling writes about American icons.
Her latest book, written with John Wetenhall, is "Iwo Jima: Monuments, Memories,
and the American Hero."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1118 words



THE BLACK CANOE
Bill Reid and the Spirit of Haida Gwaii.
By Robert Bringhurst.
Photographs by Ulli Steltzer.
173 pp. Seattle:
University of Washington Press. $45.

THE black canoe called "The Spirit of Haida Gwaii" is a bronze boat, some 20
feet in length, filled to overflowing with figures who wield the paddles
doggedly -- two men, including a somber chieftain; three women, two of them with
animal features; and eight mythological creatures in animal guise. They bite and
claw one another as they glide along; one entity merges with another in a welter
of eyes and beaks and nostrils until they form a unitary mass of teeming life.

The vessel and its strange cargo of passengers ply the waters of a reflecting
pool in the courtyard of the new Canadian Embassy in Washington. But for all the
signs of furious activity aboard, according to the Canadian poet and cultural
historian Robert Bringhurst, who once collaborated with the sculptor Bill Reid
on a volume of the narratives of the coastal peoples of British Columbia that
are embedded in the work, "these figures are now as motionless as the canoe:
caught in mid-stroke by the black bronze, while the water -- so long as the
pumps work -- skirls beneath them." They are art, now: public art, rhetoric, a
symbol of Canada.

For readers of "The Black Canoe: Bill Reid and the Spirit of Haida Gwaii" in the
United States, the emblematic function may be the main point of interest of Bill
Reid's sculptural grouping, given its prominent location on Pennsylvania Avenue
across the way from the National Gallery of Art, at the very heart of symbolic
America. We expect grand totemic statements in three dimensions in a city
defined by its ideological and historical icons, from the Lincoln Memorial and
the Washington Monument to the giant Iwo Jima statue and the Vietnam Wall.
Indeed, the site of the chancery, close to the centers of power, was granted to
Canada in visible recognition of its close relationship with the United States.
Arthur Erickson, the Vancouver architect who designed the building and who
invited Bill Reid to become its principal sculptor in 1985, has been criticized
both for missing the opportunity to represent somehow a Canadian identity in the
fabric of his building and for being so dazzled by the grandiose Federal
Classicism and Official Modernism of the capital that his Embassy became an
empty pastiche of borrowed American motifs.

"The Black Canoe" seems to offer a powerful corrective to the symbolic
shortcomings of the structure -- with its native iconography and defiantly
unassimilated forms, its hints at the Canadian Government's continuing troubles
with Indian tribal rights, the essential separatism of its oddly assorted
constituent parts and its rejection of the uniformity of the melting pot.

During most of 1987, in fact, Mr. Reid stopped work to protest a dispute between
Canada and the provincial government of British Columbia over logging in the
southern half of Haida Gwaii ("Haida land," the Haida Indians' name for the
Queen Charlotte Islands, the archipelago occupied by the tribe to which Mr.
Reid's maternal grandparents belonged). It was a dispute in which both
governments tended to ignore the claims and interests of the Haida people. Yet,
for Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's fractious Canada, obsessed with its near
neighbor to the south, symbol making is plainly no easy business. If the black
canoe is a sort of Noah's Ark of the North, full of doubt and tension, it is
also a backhanded tribute to the nation-making fortitude conjured up in the
Emanuel Leutze painting "Washington Crossing the Delaware."

Mr. Bringhurst is aware of these artistic quotations and resonances; although he
knows that, as official Canadian art, the sculpture exists in a social and
political context in which the competing claims of artist, nation and tribe must
ultimately find their balance (like paddlers in a Haida canoe), his story
concerns the deepest spiritual meanings of the piece. Or rather, it concerns
Bill Reid's voyage of exploration through the Bear and Raven and Beaver myths of
the first Canadians -- myths of earth, sky and water -- to a new sense of
selfhood, to an ecology of humanness that puts people back in the world of their
fellow creatures.

Neither Mr. Reid nor the attentive poet say so, but the concept of nationhood,
if it ever figured among the sculptor's motivations, pales in comparison to the
demands of lifehood. As "The Black Canoe" finally shows, we're all -- Canadian
and Americans -- in the very same boat, afloat on an ancient sea of biological
interdependence that forms our common North American heritage. A salutary
scripture, that, to preach along Pennsylvania Avenue as nuclear waste storage
and offshore drilling and the disposition of public lands are being debated up
on the Hill, as industrial smoke from American chimneys befouls Canada with acid
rain.

But the sculpture is not that simple, either. It is as complicated as the life
of Bill Reid, a former CBC radio announcer who worked his way out of white
Canadian culture and back into the imagistic world of his grandparents through a
study of Haida art. Both historical components of his personality -- the
contemporary and the essentially timeless; English-Canadian texts and the oral
tradition of his forebears -- are intertwined in his work. Mr. Reid even appears
in the canoe in the guise of what he calls "the Ancient Reluctant Conscript," a
grudging oarsman of the ship of state, a participant in a drama of cultural
interpenetration and violence begun in 1787 with the British "discovery" of
Haida Gwaii.

The style of the ensemble, explored in the series of searching work-in-process
photos by Ulli Steltzer, reinforces the notion of complex layers of time,
meaning and feeling knit together in an uneasy whole. Following the practice of
Celtic manuscript illumination of the seventh and eighth centuries, which Mr.
Reid appropriates to his own ends, the body of one animal bears the pictorial
likeness of another (the wing of the Raven contains the face of a salmon, for
example), conflating their stories and blurring distinctions between one order
of reality and another. The end result is neither Celtic nor Haida. It is,
perhaps, Canadian.

Mr. Bringhurst never insists that this is so. There is nothing narrowly
chauvinistic about the book. But by treating public art as art rather than
polemic -- by insisting that the creator and his beliefs remain central to the
genesis of the black canoe -- he reminds us that the democratic state is an
aggregate of pungent individuals like Bill Reid and the remarkable bronze
spirits who share his voyage of life.

NAME: Bill Reid

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "The Spirit of Haida Gwaii," sculpture by Bill Reid. Bill Reid
at work on "The Spirit of Haida Gwaii" in 1989. (Photographs by Ulli
Steltzer/From "The Black Canoe")

TYPE: Review; Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BASEBALL: Sports of The Times Dunston Reminded of Old School

BYLINE: By IRA BERKOW

SECTION: Section C; Page 5; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 994 words


TWO days after the shootings, Shawon Dunston, busy on his own, still hadn't
heard the news. Two students had been killed by a fellow student bearing a
grudge and a .38-caliber pistol in a hallway between classes last week at Thomas
Jefferson High School in the East New York section of Brooklyn. "Oh man," said
Dunston, the Chicago Cubs shortstop, by telephone from Mesa, Ariz. "Oh man. In
the hallways."

Dunston is in spring training with the Cubs, entering his eighth major league
season. That is a long way from where I first saw him, in 1982, when he was an
18-year-old infielder playing in a game for Jefferson. He would soon become the
No. 1 draft pick in the nation.

Dunston was then wearing the high school team's white uniform with blue
pinstripes and bright orange sanitary hose, which, when the players ran, made
them look very fast, as if their feet were on fire. I remember Dunston and his
teammates playing against John Jay. They played on a ball field built on a
desolate landfill close to a garbage dump where scavenger birds wheeled in the
air.

Jefferson was a tough, sometimes violent school 10 years ago, and it might be
even tougher and more violent today. One of every two students who enters the
school drops out without graduating. One-fourth of the student body is absent
every day. There have been three murders there this school year, and more than
50 assaults, robberies and cases of drug or weapon possession have been
reported.

"School is like Vietnam," said James Sinkler, the father of Tyrone Sinkler, a
16-year-old boy who was shot to death Wednesday.

Jefferson isn't the only school like this in New York, nor in the country. It is
an all too common, all too desperate situation.

Shawon Dunston is one person who got out. He grew up in the Linden Apartments, a
Federal housing project situated not far from the high school. Dunston lived
there with his father, Jack, who delivered furniture and drove a cab; his
mother, Brenda, who worked in a women's clothing store, and his younger sister,
Kindra.

His father once described the area to me: "It's in a ghetto, or slum, or
whatever you want to call it. The block's not beautiful, no green trees, there's
an abandoned building next door. But there's no dishes piled up in our home, and
when the kids do their homework, the TV is off."

"I always thought I was rich," Dunston said the other day, after a Cubs workout.
"I always had a nice pair of Pro Keds or Cons or Pumas, whatever the style was.
But I had to work for it. Had to do my homework. They said, 'No matter what you
do in life, you'll need to have an education to fall back on.' My parents were
strict about it. There were Saturdays and Sundays when I was behind in class and
they made me stay in. I'd be looking out the window at everybody playing
outside. It was rough."

He said he remembers the same kind of strong discipline at Thomas Jefferson.

"I don't know what it's like there now. I'm sure things have changed in 10
years," Dunston said, "but back then there were teachers who really cared, I'd
say about 85 percent of them. White teachers and black teachers, but we didn't
see color. We saw the teacher.

"We'd ask some of them, 'Aren't you afraid to come out here, of someone hurting
you?' They said, 'No, we just want to help.' I remember Mr. Eisenberg, who
taught algebra, and he told the baseball coach, Mr. Nathanson, that he was going
to fail me if I didn't do better, even if I was the best player on the team. It
meant I wouldn't play baseball. And they were good friends. But Mr. Nathanson
was a good disciplinarian, too. 'You'd better shape up, Shawon,' he said. I
studied and passed. They wouldn't let me get away with anything."

Dunston said he was fortunate to have "good parents" and "good teachers." He
also said he was "focused" on a goal: baseball.

"I didn't feel peer pressure," he said. "I knew when guys were doing something
wrong and just went the other way. Yeah, I jumped turnstiles on the No. 2 train,
and I got into fights -- sometimes you couldn't just let a guy hit you upside
the head -- and sometimes I'd throw rocks at buses, but nothing really serious.

"I also never drank beer or did drugs or carried a gun. That stuff wasn't in my
house. And if it's not in your house, and your parents tell you that it's wrong,
you think, 'Wow, they don't do it, maybe they're tellin' the truth.' "

In the summer of 1989, Dunston was in a batting slump and was visiting his
parents in the home he bought them away from the old neighborhood. "We were
playing the Mets in New York and I was cryin' and mopin' around," he recalled.
"My father said: 'What's wrong with you? You're in the major leagues. You're
making $550,000 a year. You have a wife and baby girl. A nice house. A
Mercedes-Benz.' He said, 'Come with me.' And he took me back to the old
neighborhood."

They drove around the old streets of Linden Boulevard and New Lots Avenue and
Pennsylvania Avenue. "Just eased around," Dunston said, "and I saw what I might
have been. I recognized some people I grew up and played with still on the
corners, people who had talent in different areas. But they went nowhere. I felt
sorry. And I realized that I was lucky and that there wasn't any pressure on me.
Or shouldn't be. I broke out of the slump the next week."

What advice would Dunston, now earning $3 million a year, give kids going to
Thomas Jefferson today?

"I don't go in for preaching and talking," he said. "Who am I to tell someone
that they should stop selling drugs for $3,000 a week and get a job for $20,000
a year? I think they should -- the drugs are a dead end, I think -- but why
should they listen to me?

"But if they want to get out, I think there's always a way. There's always
someone who is willing to help. If you aren't lucky enough to have good parents,
then maybe there's an uncle, or an aunt, or a teacher, or your best friend's
parents. Good people do not turn their backs on kids."

NAME: Shawon Dunston

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 18, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
American Stores to Make Its Vice Chairman President

BYLINE: By EBEN SHAPIRO

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 345 words


The American Stores Company, one of the nation's largest supermarket retailers,
said yesterday that its vice chairman, Victor L. Lund, would succeed J. L. Scott
as president and chief executive.

Mr. Scott and Mr. Lund will serve as co-chief executives during a transition
period that is expected to be completed by the end of the year. Mr. Scott, 62,
then plans to retire, but he will remain on the board.

Mr. Lund, 44, joined American Stores in 1977. He has been vice chairman, chief
financial officer and a board member since 1988.

American Stores, which is based in Salt Lake City, has been selling assets to
pare down debt taken on when it acquired Lucky Stores Inc. in 1988 for $2.4
billion.

"We will have that part of our past behind us," Mr. Lund said, referring to the
asset sales and adding that he did not expect the company to announce any more
major asset sales.

The company recently agreed to sell 74 of its Jewel-Osco stores to Albertson's
of Boise, Idaho. Other asset sales included 142 Alpha Beta stores in Southern
California and the Buttrey Food division for $184 million in 1990. The company
is also closing stores and operations that are not performing well.

Traditional supermarkets are being threatened by price clubs and discounters
like Wal-Mart and K Mart, both of which are increasingly interested in the food
retailing business. Also, time-pressed consumers are spending more at
restaurants than they did 10 years ago.

As a result, Mr. Lund said, supermarkets are emphasizing more prepared foods
that shoppers can take home and eat immediately. To combat warehouse clubs,
supermarkets are adding more fresh produce and meats.

American runs its business through wholly owned subsidiaries, including Acme
Markets, Jewel Food Stores, Star Market, Osco Drug and Lucky Stores. Last year,
the company had profits of $200 million on sales of $20.8 billion.

Mr. Lund, who began his business career as an accountant, served in Vietnam from
1969 to 1971.

He and his wife, Linda, have two children and live in Salt Lake Ci ty.

NAME: Victor L. Lund

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
William Harnett and the Trompe l'Oeil Still Life

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 30; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words


Still life wasn't a subject greatly favored by American painters of the 19th
century; maybe the pull of nature outside the studio door was just too strong.
But among its practitioners, William M. Harnett (1848-1892) was one of the
greatest.

Harnett attained fame in his own day for his virtuosic, trompe l'oeil realism,
and his illusionist's skills still have much appeal. Yet, as "William M.
Harnett," a small but superbly mounted survey of his paintings at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art, demonstrates, his work is equally interesting for
what it has to say about the America of its time.

The facts of Harnett's life are vague. He was born in Ireland and grew up in
Philadelphia, the city that had produced America's first notable still life
painter, Raphaelle Peale, and its pre-eminent figurative realist, Thomas Eakins,
with whom Harnett briefly studied. Moving in 1869 to New York, where he worked
as a silver engraver, he painted his first still life in oil in 1874 and began
exhibiting and selling work almost immediately.

Although his schooling was sound, his career took place outside academic circles
and his clients were mostly middle-class bankers and tradesmen -- dry-goods
merchants, saloon owners and the like -- who became prosperous during the years
after the Civil War. From 1880 to 1886, Harnett lived in Europe, spending time
in France, Germany and England. The last few years of his life back in New York
were marked by repeated hospitalizations for a kidney disease. He died at the
age of 44.

The Met's show is organized by date, and it reveals a career of remarkable
stylistic consistency. From his early paintings of fruit to later ones crowded
with domestic bric-a-brac, Harnett's innovation lay in the extreme, almost
clinical realism of his approach. He renders objects with an engraver's minute,
linear precision, and sometimes literally sculptures their physical properties
in paint. (Bets were made by the customers in saloons where his paintings hung
as to which of the objects were painted and which were real.)

In "Still Life With Ginger Jar," cracker crumbs scattered on the tabletop are
actually dabs of thick impasto carefully placed on the painting's surface, and
matches are miniature ridges of pigment that look as if the real objects had
been glued in place.

Although Harnett seems to have been considerably influenced by American artists
like Peale, he also emulated European models. "Music and Literature" is
ostensibly a homage to the arts, of a type painted by Chardin 100 years before.
But it is also an enigmatic little melodrama enacted by a group of inanimate
objects.

A stack of precariously piled books, a dismantled flute, a torn page from the
score of "La Traviata" and a letter whose writing may have been smudged by tears
together suggest a despondent lover just departed. Harnett said he wanted all
his paintings to tell a story, real or allegorical, and so they do.

In Europe he produced large paintings that helped make him famous back home.
Some of these are still lifes in which the props simply change nationality (The
Philadelphia Ledger becomes, for example, Le Figaro) much as they did in Stuart
Davis's still lifes decades later.

The most important works, however, are the four titled "After the Hunt," here
exhibited together for the first time. They are his grandest pieces, though by
no means his most attractive ones. Their piled-up vertical compositions of dead
game and weapons have an overbearing men's- club flavor that is implicit but
subdued in much of his earlier work.

Later paintings, like "Still Life -- Violin and Music (Music and Luck)" and
especially the delightful "Letter-Rack" paintings, are spacious and buoyant in
comparison. As in much of his work, sociability is the theme and the objects
evoke the modest pleasures of leisure activities and gentlemanly commerce.

The artist knew his clients well. He custom-tailored paintings for some of them.
"Mr. Hulings' Rack Picture" comprises that man's correspondence, professional
and personal, and Harnett seems to have invented the still life devoted entirely
to a depiction of cash. "Still Life: Five Dollar Bill" is one example in the
show.

Yet Harnett claimed that "new things do not paint well," and he preferred to use
old objects. In this he resembles Eakins, who, deeply affected by the United
States Centennial observances of 1876, began painting figures dressed in
clothing of an earlier American time. Nostalgia was in the air in Harnett's
time. Reconstruction was over, leaving war wounds unhealed; the country's wealth
was great in the Gilded Age, but its morale was a shambles.

The pervasive sense of depression and negativity was similar to the national
mood that for so long marked the aftermath of Vietnam. Many Americans seemed to
yearn for a vanished time, when life was simple, a time, perhaps, of quill pens,
candles and hand-turned crockery, all of which are staples of Harnett's
paintings. That many of these works, like "Emblems of Peace," also featured
ash-filled pipes, burned-out matches and yesterday's newspapers suggests,
however, that at some level the artist was unconvinced of the healing power of
his own historical allusions.

And in some ways Harnett's paintings are unconvincing today. The ultrarealism
that made them such popular entertainment in their time is a bit less
astonishing to media-saturated eyes. The objects included often lack a sense of
vulnerability and warmth; it is as if they had never been caressed by the
painter's hand or eye. And set beside the great, towering landscape images of
their era (Albert Bierstadt's Yosemite, say), they seem modest in concept.

Yet they have their ambitions, and those are not small. They strive to capture
imperfection perfectly and to create symbols of human vanity that look
machine-tooled. Both goals suggest an obsession, sometimes identified as
American, with the hard, pure facts of the material world, but in Harnett's
hands they also produced paintings that sometimes go beyond technical brilliance
to approach the poetic, even the metaphysical.

"William M. Harnett" remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through June 14.
The exhibition will travel to the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth (July 18 to
Oct. 18), the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco (Nov. 14 to Feb. 14) and to the
National Gallery of Art in Washington (March 14 to June 13, 1993).

NAME: William M. Harnett

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Music and Literature" (1878), by William M. Harnett.
(Metropolitan Museum of Art)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Adm. George W. Anderson, 85; Was in Charge of Cuba Blockade

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


Retired Adm. George Whelan Anderson, the Chief of Naval Operations in charge of
the American blockade of Cuba during the Soviet missile crisis in 1962, died
Friday at the Arleigh Burke Pavilion nursing home in McLean, Va. He was 85 years
old and lived in Washington, D.C.

He died of congestive heart failure, his family said.

Many military experts had expected that the four-star Navy admiral would become
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. But a series of major policy disputes
with Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara sidetracked Admiral Anderson's
36-year Navy career, and he was abruptly replaced as operations chief in 1963.

But shortly after that, President John F. Kennedy, who was pleased with the
Navy's handling of the blockade, appointed Admiral Anderson as the United States
Ambassador to Portugal. During his three years there, he encouraged plans for a
peaceful transition of the Portuguese colonies in Africa to national
independence.

After leaving his post in Portugal, Admiral Anderson returned to Government
service from 1973 to 1977 as a member and later chairman of the President's
Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

Conflicts With McNamara

In the Cuban crisis, the United States forced the removal of Soviet nuclear
missiles from the island. President Kennedy was quoted as telling Mr. Anderson,
"Well, Admiral it looks as though this is up to the Navy," to which he replied,
"Mr. President, the Navy will not let you down." Time magazine featured him on
its cover, calling him "an aggressive blue-water sailor of unfaltering
competence and uncommon flare."

But he bridled at the extent of Mr. McNamara's insistence on civilian
involvement in running the operation, regarding it as a usurpation of
traditional military authority.

Historians say that the two men even debated specific ship deployments in an
argument that erupted in the Situation Room at the Pentagon.

They also differed on other issues. Mr. McNamara proposed using the TFX fighter
plane for both the Navy and Air Force, but the Admiral rejected it as unsuitable
-- and Congress agreed with him. Mr. McNamara thwarted the Navy's long-held
plans to make all its aircraft carriers nuclear powered. And Admiral Anderson
ruffled feelings when reporters obtained and publicized his private letter
criticizing the adequacy of a military raise.

War Service in Pacific

Born in Brooklyn, he entered the Naval Academy in 1927 and trained as a pilot
after graduation. He flew as a test pilot and served on cruisers and carriers.
In World War II Admiral Anderson helped the Navy's huge expansion of its air arm
and participated in strikes in the Pacific as a navigator on the second carrier
Yorktown.

After the war he commanded the antisubmarine carrier, Mindoro. Then he was
picked to assist General Dwight D. Eisenhower at the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. The general had asked the Navy to "send me the smartest naval
aviator you've got."

Among his posts, he was commander of the carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt and a
special assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He also
commanded Task Force 77 between Taiwan and mainland China and became chief of
staff to the Pacific commander, commanded Carrier Division Six in the
Mediterranean during the Lebanon landing and later commanded the Sixth Fleet.

After leaving the Navy, he was the chairman of the Lamar Corporation, an outdoor
advertising company, and served on the boards of Value Line, National Airlines
and Crown Seal & Cork. He was also a president of the Metropolitan Club in
Washington.

Mr. Anderson's first wife, the former Muriel Buttling, died in 1947. Two sons
who became Navy pilots are also deceased. George W. Anderson 3d, died of cancer
and Thomas Patrick Anderson, who flew more than 200 combat missions in Vietnam,
died in a plane crash in the Mediterranean.

Surviving are Mr. Anderson's second wife of 44 years, the former Mary Lee
Sample; a daughter, Mary Annette Coughlin of Washington; a stepdaughter, Carolyn
Sample Abshire of Alexandria, Va.; 12 grandchildren and two great-grandchildren.


NAME: George W. Anderson

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Adm. George Whelan Anderson (The New York Times, 1962)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 24, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In Film, a Career Of Trying to Balance The Inequities of Life

BYLINE: By SHEILA RULE

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1269 words


Barbara Kopple says that she never knows what's in store when she sets out to
make a documentary film and that "life has a way of taking you with it and you
just have to be flexible enough to go along." After reading about plant closings
and wage cuts around the nation, Ms. Kopple decided in the mid-1980's to explore
how the industrial landscape had changed since she directed "Harlan County,
U.S.A.," her 1977 Oscar-winning film about a coal miners' strike in eastern
Kentucky.

Ms. Kopple turned to what she said she considered a "very American industry" --
meatpacking -- and traveled to Minnesota in the hope of capturing on film how
harsh economic realities were affecting workers in America's heartland. She
happened upon a labor dispute at the George A. Hormel Company meatpacking plant
in the town of Austin.

"I knew there was a poignant story out there about what was happening in Middle
America to people who believed in the American dream, the American work ethic,
the whole notion of upward mobility, and who were watching those beliefs become
unraveled," Ms. Kopple said in an interview the other day in her Manhattan loft
apartment. "We had no idea of the kind of, not physical brutality, but mental
brutality people would endure to try to keep decent jobs with decent pay, the
kinds of things they learned to believe in all their lives. "

The 39-year-old Ms. Kopple spent five years chronicling what became a
devastating strike that paralyzed Austin, turned brothers against one another
and pummeled generations-old ideals into gaping emotional wounds. This resulted
in "American Dream," a political and social documentary that she directed and,
with Arthur Cohn, produced.

Although the film was shown at the 1990 New York Film Festival and won an
Academy Award for Ms. Kopple last year (making her the only woman to be so
honored twice in the documentary-feature category) its first commercial run did
not start until last week, at the Angelika Film Center, in Manhattan. The film
will be opening throughout the country and shown free in early April in Austin.
It is only now being released, Ms. Kopple said, because it took months to work
out a way to pay back an investor who wanted his money before the film opened
commercially.  The film was released by Prestige Films, a subdivision of
Miramax.

When "American Dream" was shown at the film festival, Janet Maslin wrote in The
New York Times: "Ms. Kopple's stirring, forthright film captures an American
town, the strength of its traditions and the deep and permanent ways in which
those traditions can be destroyed. Her work is as important as it is good."

Ms. Kopple made "American Dream" the way she made "Harlan County": by getting
close and intimate. She immersed herself in the Austin community, lived with its
people and let them get to know and trust her. That trust made it possible for
proud, strong union men to sit in front of the camera and cry when talking about
no longer being able to provide for their families.

Leading to a Strike

The film shows what happened to Austin after Hormel tried to roll back its meat
processors' wages in 1984 to $8.25 an hour from $10.69. In the process, the
documentary asks fundamental questions about the survival of union traditions in
1990's America.  Resisting the idea of lower wages, Local P-9 of the meatpacking
division of the United Food and Commercial Workers' Union rebelled against both
Hormel and its own international parent union. As a strike became inevitable,
the local met opposition even inside its own ranks. Workers went on strike in
August 1985.

By the end of the film, P-9's parent union has thrown out the rebels and, nearly
a year after the strike began, made its own settlement with Hormel. They agreed
on a $10.25 wage but made no allowance for restoring jobs to those who honored
the picket lines; their names were instead placed on a waiting list. In 1989,
Ms. Kopple notes in a closing title, Hormel rented half its Austin plant to a
manufacturer who paid only $6.50 an hour.

"As you're filming, you see themes emerge," said Ms. Kopple, who used a
two-member crew, made up of a cameraman and herself as sound technician. The
film cost nearly $1 million and, in addition to the investor's financial
backing, was made with contributions from foundations, church groups and others.
"For me, what emerged was that we are not living in a very humane society and
workers in this country shouldn't have to make choices that these people made
and that these are systemic problems."

A Confidence Bred in Childhood

Ms. Kopple's "Harlan County, U.S.A." was chosen in 1990 by the Library of
Congress as 1 of 25 films to be placed on its Film Registry, tantamount in film
terms to conferring it the status of a national treasure. Like "American Dream,"
it had a strong political theme. But Ms. Kopple said she herself was not so much
political as socially conscious and a person who "really cares what happens to
people." She says she feels confident taking risks. When she made "Harlan
County," serious, independently made documentaries were not crowd-pleasers at
movie theaters nor widely distributed -- hers was the breakthrough -- and at one
point in filming "American Dream" she had only $275 left for the project.

She says she owes that confidence in part to her experience of growing up in
affluent Scarsdale, N.Y., where life was stable and centered on family,
community and education, allowing her to "grow up believing that there was
nothing I couldn't do in my life." Protective of her private life, she will say
only that she has a "loving mate and child." Her uncle is the playwright Murray
Burnett, a co-author of the play "Everybody Comes to Rick's," on which the
screenplay for "Casablanca" was based.

Ms. Kopple studied clinical psychology at Northeastern University in Boston for
a while but decided to return to New York. While taking a course in cinema
verite at the New School, she was told that David and Albert Maysles -- brothers
regarded as two of the founders of the genre and makers of such documentaries as
"Gimme Shelter" and "Salesman" -- needed help. Ms. Kopple ended up working with
them, learning a lot about film making and deciding that it was what she wanted
to do with her life.

For Oliver Stone

In addition to her award-winning documentaries, Ms. Kopple has directed or
co-directed the documentaries "Winter Soldier," about Vietnam veterans; "No
Nukes," which included performances by Bruce Springsteen and Bonnie Raitt;
"Civil Rights: The Struggle Continues," and "Out of Darkness: The Mine Workers
Story." She also directed a dramatic feature, "Keeping On," a 1983 American
Playhouse presentation about union organizing among millworkers in a Southern
town. She recently completed "Beyond J. F. K.: The Question of Conspiracy," a
documentary about those who witnessed, wrote books and developed theories about
the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, which she made at the request of
the director Oliver Stone.  Her next project will be a feature film titled
"Women," about four men, love and relationships.

"My overall goal," Ms. Kopple said of her documentary work, "is to let people
speak and let them be heard, because what they are saying is really important,
as important or more important than anything President Bush has to say. It's to
film stories about people that you wouldn't ordinarily get to see. To think that
these people's stories are going to be shown, that other people will hear them,
as a film maker that gives me a tremendous amount of strength to carry on."

NAME: Barbara Kopple

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barbara Kopple (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 328 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Which Tyson Will Emerge From Behind Bars?

BYLINE: By PHIL BERGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


For now, Mike Tyson is a convict, with the prospect of six years of prison time
awaiting him.

But with good behavior, that jail term could be reduced by half, and three to
four years from now Tyson could be ready to return to the boxing business.

Would anybody care?

"Are you kidding?" said Dan Duva, the promoter of the heavyweight champion,
Evander Holyfield. "When Tyson comes out there will be intense feelings about
him either way. For or against him. When you have intense emotions, that
translates to a great deal of interest."

It also translates to commercial success. "Big numbers, huge numbers when he
comes back," said Butch Lewis, who promoted Michael Spinks into a $13.5 million
payday against Tyson in June 1988. "Tyson will be almost the same level as a
public attraction as he initially was. More so because of the curiosity."

Lewis saw a similarity in the public's response to George Foreman's comeback and
the anticipated return of Tyson, who is now 25 years old.

"George went away from the sport for 10 years, but because he had that marquee
value, he's able to fight bums and the public will still watch," said Lewis. "I
mean, you guys in the press said his fight against Jimmy Ellis was a joke. But
people didn't care. They wanted to see George, and that fight with Ellis did big
numbers.

"Same thing with Tyson. The curiosity. The whole thing. People will want to see
him again."

But just what will the public get the second time around? Will Tyson be a
crude-ore version of Iron Mike? Or will he be able to recapture the fury and the
laser focus he once had?

Dennis Rappaport, promoter of the former heavyweight champion Tim Witherspoon,
speculated that prison time might damage Tyson.

"You know, there's an interesting syndrome that people have told me about prison
fighters," said Rappaport. "They say that because these guys are deprived of
sunlight, it has an adverse affect on their stamina. They look like they're in
great shape, but for some reason they peter out physically."

But Lewis dismissed the notion that the few years behind bars would necessarily
result in a diminished Tyson.

"Look at Foreman," said Lewis. "He came back at 300 pounds and middle-aged and
still managed what he did. How do you figure Tyson's going to be worse at 27 or
28 than that? There's got to be something there because he's a young man."

The question is whether that "something" will be enough to make him the
formidable fighter he was before a Marion County, Ind., jury found him guilty of
rape in February.

Teddy Atlas, who trained Tyson as an amateur, thinks Tyson's style will be less
affected by his ring idleness than if he were a finesse fighter like, say,
Muhammad Ali, who was suspended from boxing after he refused to be drafted
during the Vietnam war. The Supreme Court later ruled in his favor and Ali
returned to boxing after a layoff of about three and a half years, in 1970. Four
years after returning to the sport he regained the heavyweight title.

"Tyson's style is based on strength and quickness, not finesse and reflexes,"
said Atlas. "He won't be tarnished and destroyed by a layoff. What will be left?
Obviously the three years off doesn't heighten a career. But I don't think
Tyson's career was at its height. My opinion is the best Tyson was gone."

Kevin Rooney, Tyson's first trainer as a professional, agrees with that
assessment.

"He's slipped," said Rooney. "You don't see the head movement Cus D'Amato taught
him and the way to fight that he learned."

Yet both Atlas and Rooney felt that given the current state of the heavyweight
division, a Tyson emerging from prison three to four years from now would have
the capability of regaining the heavyweight title.

"I don't see anybody out there," said Rooney.

Said Atlas: "I don't see any great heavyweights being around three years from
now."

The chances of Tyson's continuing to fight professionally while in prison appear
unlikely. Fred Berns, a promoter in Indianapolis, said that while members of the
Indiana athletic commission have said they would not oppose his fighting while
in prison, he expects that correction officials would be resist.

Berns said he had petitioned state correctional officials in the past, asking
for permission to stage fights at a prison for another inmate fighter.

"They never said no," said Berns. "They just stalled me until I gave up."

However, there is a relatively recent precedent for an incarcerated fighter
being allowed to fight. Beginning in 1978, a light heavyweight named James Scott
fought several bouts -- some that were televised -- at Rahway State Prison in
New Jersey.

PUNCH LINES

In Philadelphia yesterday to tape a public service commercial, MICHAEL SPINKS,
the former International Boxing Federation heavyweight champion, said he was
back in the gym working out again. "To see whether it lights up my love of
boxing again," he said. In other words, Spinks might be the latest former
champion to come back again. His promoter, BUTCH LEWIS, said that after former
heavyweight champion LARRY HOLMES beat RAY MERCER last month, Spinks phoned him
to say, "I'll knock out Holmes right now." But Lewis said he was not encouraging
Spinks to come back." It'll be 110 percent his decision," said Lewis.

NAME: Mike Tyson

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Camille Ewald, who helped rear Mike Tyson, breaking down outside
court after Tyson was sentenced yesterday. (Pool photo by Gary Mook) (pg. B12)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
