



Download Request: All Documents: 1-259
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:06:29 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(07/01/1994) and leq(09/30/1994)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

30 Drown as Haitian Police Fire on Refugees

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti, June 30


A police launch fired on a 60-foot boat carrying Haitian refugees early
Wednesday, causing a panic in which at least 30 refugees drowned, two foreign
journalists said today.

The journalists, Edward J. Barnes of Time magazine and Simon Dring of the BBC,
who arrived at the scene Wednesday afternoon, said witnesses had told them that
most of the victims were women and children.

Mr. Barnes, quoting witnesses, said just three shots from four policemen riding
in a motor launch caused the panic. The refugee boat capsized about 300 yards
offshore from Nan L'Etat, about 15 miles east of Les Cayes, a southern port.

[Mr. Barnes's report was circulated on Thursday by America On Line as part of
Time Daily, a news bulletin prepared by Time magazine. According to the report,
monitored in New York by Reuters, the refugees were among about 400 Haitians
waiting in surrounding coves for boats that would take them to sea.

["The boat people froze in fear," the report said. "The refugees tried to stay
quiet and hide, hoping the boat would pass. Then three shots rang out in the
darkness and there was chaos," with panicky passengers pushed others into the
water. The boom on the refugees' boat broke free, knocking women and children
into the sea.]

No Confirmation

There was no independent confirmation of the account.

It was the first reported instance of soldiers trying to stop a refugee vessel
since the surge in boat people began a week ago. Since then about 4,700 Haitians
have been intercepted at sea by Coast Guard cutters and Navy warships; at least
1,056 were picked up today, a Coast Guard spokesman, Rob Wyman said.

Most of the 38 boats intercepted today were off Haiti's southern peninsula, he
added.

The military-backed Government threatened in May to arrest anyone leaving on a
refugee vessel. On May 21, about 50 people in Petit-Goave, 40 miles west of
Port-au-Prince, were arrested when they tried to board a boat and flee. Others
have been arrested on La Gonave, an island that is another common departure
point.

50,000 Boat People

More than 50,000 Haitians have been intercepted at sea by the Coast Guard since
the elected President, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was overthrown in
September 1991. Father Aristide, who lives in exile in Washington, said this
week that he could not restrain Haitians from fleeing the military repression in
Haiti, which he called "a house on fire."

Intensified economic sanctions on Haiti and a new, liberalized Clinton
administration refugee policy may have provoked the refugee wave.

The Coast Guard, backed by warships enforcing a trade embargo on Haiti, has
deployed 15 cutters and patrol craft in its biggest operation since Vietnam. The
Administration has repeatedly appealed to Haitians not to risk their lives at
sea and to apply instead for asylum at United States consular offices in Haiti.

Before June 16, Haitian boat people were repatriated without a hearing to
determine whether they were fleeing political repression. Criticism by human
rights groups and increasing political violence prompted President Clinton to
change the policy. Washington has moved the Navy hospital ship Comfort, with
1,000 beds for refugees, to Kingston, Jamaica, where refugees now get hearings.

                             --------------------


Inching Toward a U.N. Force

UNITED NATIONS, June 30 (Special to The New York Times) -- The Security Council
tonight adopted a resolution that would prepare for an expanded international
presence in Haiti if and when the United Nations thinks it necessary.

The resolution, adopted unanimously, did not specify how this would affect the
military Government of Haiti, which would presumably have to leave if a large
international force were to be landed.

The resolution was a result of more than a week of talks between United States
officials and senior United Nations administrators. The chief United States
delegate, Madeleine K. Albright, has met several times with Secretary General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

The United Nations currently has about 90 relief workers in Haiti.

The resolution also calls on Mr. Boutros-Ghali to report to the Security Council
by July 15 on the need for further action.

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 2, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Selects Admiral to Lead Forces in Pacific

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 379 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 1


President Clinton has nominated Vice Adm. Richard Macke to be commander of
United States forces in the Pacific, the Pentagon said today.

A week ago, the Navy withdrew the name of the previous nominee, Adm. Stanley R.
Arthur, after objections arose in Congress over his handling of a sexual
harassment case.

Admiral Macke had already been nominated to take Admiral Arthur's place as vice
chief of staff in the Navy, and his paperwork is already before Congress. If
Admiral Macke is confirmed, he will become a four-star admiral.

One reason Navy officials cited for withdrawing Admiral Arthur's name was the
potential for a delay in filling the Pacific post, which could be critical
because of the tension in relations with North Korea over its potential nuclear
arsenal.

Admiral Macke, 56, is a veteran of more than 150 combat missions in Vietnam and
was commander of the aircraft carrier Dwight D. Eisenhower.

Senator Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, had threatened to delay
Senate confirmation of Admiral Arthur because of a sexual harassment case
involving a Navy officer from Minnesota.

Lieut. Rebecca Hansen, 28, filed the complaint last year against her instructor
in helicopter flight training in Corpus Christi, Tex. The officer was
disciplined and later left the Navy. But in the meantime, Lieutenant Hansen was
ordered to undergo a psychiatric evaluation. She later failed the Navy
helicopter pilot school in Pensacola, Fla.

Admiral Arthur reviewed the failing grade and affirmed it.

Mr. Durenberger said he did not object to Admiral Arthur's decision but was not
satisfied with the Navy's response to his questions about why Lieut. Hansen had
been put through the psychiatric evaluation, said an aide to the Senator, Rick
Evans. Mr. Durenberger said he was also concerned that the Navy had not
adequately explored the possibility that her failing grade was tied to her
filing the sexual harassment complaint.

The Navy's action raised eyebrows among many senior officers, who contended that
Admiral Arthur, who played an important role in the war in the Persian Gulf, had
been treated unfairly.

But even Defense Secretary William J. Perry said that while he had the chance to
intervene on Admiral Arthur's behalf, he chose not to do so.

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Cut Them Some Slack

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words


Americans of my generation," President Clinton told U.C.L.A. students this
spring, "have been bombarded by images on television shows, and even one book,
about the so-called 'Generation X' filled with cynics and slackers. Well, what I
have seen today is not a generation of slackers, but a generation of seekers."

The Clinton use of the word slacker calls to mind the reaction of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt when Republicans complained of continuing depression:
"There is an old and somewhat lugubrious adage that says, 'Never speak of rope
in the house of a man who has been hanged.' In the same way, if I were a
Republican leader speaking to a mixed audience, the last word in the whole
dictionary that I think I would use is that word 'depression.' "

The last word we might expect from Mr. Clinton, frequently accused of using
deception in avoiding the draft during the Vietnam War, is slacker. Perhaps he
took a current sense from the title of Richard Linklater's 1991 film, "Slacker,"
celebrating the lazy life of Texas drifters and castoffs in their 20's who are
now more frequently called Generation X'ers than 20-somethings. (That term is
derived from the title of the TV series "Thirtysomething." Curiously, the longer
something has replaced the suffix -ish.) And perhaps a young speech writer
wanted to contrast those slackers with seekers, presumably from "seekers of
truth," as in Jeremiah's efforts to "find a man . . . that seeketh the truth."

The noun slacker -- from the adjective slack, meaning "loose" -- first appeared
in 1898 to refer to "one who avoids work or physical exercise; a shirker."
During World War I, it was a derogation of anyone avoiding military service,
including conscientious objectors. In World War II, it was used interchangeably
with draft dodger.

Since the late 1960's, it has regained its original, general meaning as a second
sense, which may be what Bill Clinton had in mind. The harsh edge of the word
may have been softened by the influence of cut him some slack, derived from
loosening a taut rope in sailing, its meaning extended to "ease up on him; allow
room for maneuver."

Slacks are also casual trousers, not part of a suit; in the 90's, slacking now
denotes the wearing of loose jeans: "The hip-hopsters' trademark blue jeans five
sizes too big (a.k.a. slackin')," wrote the magazine Essence, "created such a
noise that clothing giants like Levi Strauss & Company began manufacturing
oversize jeans to quench demand." (Take it from me: baggy or "relaxed fit" jeans
have long been the favorite of 60-somethings.)

And what of Generation X, that non-slacker but often happily slacking cohort of
seekers referred to by the President? "The Myth of Generation X" was the cover
line of a recent Newsweek, with the subtitle "Seven Great Lies About
20-Somethings." These myths include "They're slackers . . . whiners . . . white
. . . psychically damaged children of divorce . . . [devotees of the suicide]
Kurt Cobain . . . [and they'll] buy anything." Seventh "myth" is that Generation
X exists at all; the writer held that many in the cohort thought that their
stereotyped X-hood was a plot by the previous generation -- the middle-aged baby
boomers -- to put them down.

Although the coinage is usually attributed to the title of a 1991 novel by
Douglas Coupland, the philologists John and Adele Algeo note in the forthcoming
Fall 1994 issue of American Speech magazine that it was also the title of a 1964
book by Charles Hamblett and Jane Deverson about the "alienated" generation of
that time.

Everybody wants to be part of a generation; it's an exclusive cultural club.
According to Ernest Hemingway, the poet Gertude Stein found a there there in
France with the lost generation after World War I; Winston Churchill, in 1930,
called it "a generation shorn by the war." Jack Kerouac is generally credited
with coining the Beat Generation. John F. Kennedy, in his Inaugural, said "the
torch has been passed to a new generation of Americans." And we have recently
seen "Star Trek: The Next Generation."

Generation comes from the Latin genus, "birth, kind," which has generated other
words like general and generous. Grammarians clasp the related genitive to their
bosoms, a case showing possession. We all have that yearning to belong.

Bookbag: Get Onpage

Now that we can no longer lollygag in the sun on summer weekends while
pretending to be assiduously "getting a tan," what is there to do in the shade?

Read. Get onpage. Here is a small bag of books, from best sellers to hidden
treasures, for writers and other readers:

"Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness," by Peggy Noonan (Random House,
$23). What is it in her pointillist, impressionistic, highly original style that
enthralled some reviewers and drove some ideologues up the wall and through the
roof? See for yourself: this ongoing memoir keeps getting better.

"Peter Porcupine in America," by William Cobbett (Cornell, $29.95). The muscular
style of the first great media vituperator -- the 1790's English journalist
about whom the fourth estate was coined -- is made accessible here with an
illuminating introduction and helpful editing by David A. Wilson. How to write
with fists clenched.

"Fine Lines," by Jim Lehrer (Random House, $20). I'm well hooked on the
"One-Eyed Mack" comic mysteries by the PBS anchor. This one is made even easier
to read by the publisher's use of the contrasty Bodoni type, well leaded; what a
pleasure to find a novel well written and well published.

"Guide to Home Language Repair," by Dennis Baron, a breezy but not windy stroll
through lingo controversies. The $16.95 paperback comes from the National
Council of Teachers of English, 1111 West Kenyon Road, Urbana, Ill. 61801.
Especially nice piece on the gentling of the word tough.

"American Politics in the Early Republic," by James Roger Sharp (Yale, $30). You
think George Washington & Company had it easy? Professor Sharp of Syracuse
University takes us from the Whisky Rebellion to the Alien and Sedition Acts in
the liveliest exposition yet of the roots of our present political power
struggles.

"The Power to Persuade," followed by a 13-word subtitle, by Richard N. Haass
(Houghton Mifflin, $21.95). A primer on setting up "murder boards" and public
opinion snares for pols and business managers working toward their spin
doctorate.

"The Alphabet From Z to A (With Much Confusion on the Way)," by Judith Viorst
(Atheneum, $14.95), illustrations by Richard Hull. This delightful children's
book of rhyme gently chides spelling errors: "R is for ring, rang and rung,/And
yet rong would be wrong, dear."

Eschew the trashy and embrace the readworthy. Remember the acronym Gwigwo: Good
Writing In, Good Writing Out.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 3, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 861 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 2     1   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 3    20   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 4     6   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer
           pursues his firm's missing partner and a
           multimillion-dollar fund.

 5     2   PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $6.50.) A model young
           woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.

 6*    3   DARK APPRENTICE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam,
           $5.99.) Volume 2 of the "Star Wars" Jedi Academy Trilogy.

 7     7   THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $6.99.) A
           former naval officer versus a woman who heads a terrorist
           conspiracy.

 8     3   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 9    11   I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.)
           A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while
           covering a story.

 10    2   THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A
           Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers and
           dope smugglers.

 11    5   HILL TOWNS, by Anne Rivers Siddons. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) Americans on holiday in Italy learn a lot about
           themselves.

 12*   1   A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Bantam, $6.50.)
           The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish
           Catholic family.

 13*   1   HONOR AMONG THIEVES, by Jeffrey Archer. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) Saddam Hussein plots to steal the Declaration of
           Independence.

 14   10   CRUEL & UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.)
           Dr. Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for
           murder.

 15   100  A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged
           with murder.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    25   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2     9   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 3     7   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 4    556  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 5*    6   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.

 6     5   FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The
           autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated
           in combat in Vietnam and recently committed suicide.

 7     3   THE LONGEST DAY, by Cornelius Ryan. (Touchstone/S&S, $11.)
           The Allied assault on Normandy, June 6, 1944.

 8    72   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 9    25   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 10    8   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           memoir of a young woman's mental illness.

 11   11   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues
           affecting black Americans.

 12   35   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 13   142  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 14    9   BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A
           history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting
           is now going on.

 15   57   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 16*   1   LENIN'S TOMB, by David Remnick. (Vintage, $14.) The decline
           and fall of the Soviet Union.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    172  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2     5   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 3    114  LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr.
           (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for
           achieving a self-fulfilling life.

 4    179  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 18, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Can This Patient Be Saved?

BYLINE: By David Shribman;   David Shribman is the Washington bureau chief of
The Boston Globe.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 21;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 593 words



DEMOSCLEROSIS
The Silent Killer of American Government.
By Jonathan Rauch.
260 pp. New York: Times Books/Random House. $22.

IF books are supposed to make us more aware of our surroundings, then Jonathan
Rauch's is a success. The morning I finished his diagnosis of America's
governmental disease I paused for a moment at the directory in the lobby of the
Washington office building where I work and looked at the list of my neighbors.
Among them: the American Insurance Association, the Physician Insurers
Association, and a consortium of five Southern utilities, including Georgia
Power, Gulf Power and Savannah Electric and Power.

That afternoon came news that the House, which in February had voted to trim a
quarter of a million jobs from the Federal payroll in the next decade, had voted
to exempt the Veterans Health Administration (which accounts for one-sixth of
Federal employees outside the Pentagon and Postal Service). One major reason:
the opposition of the National Association of V.A. Physicians and Dentists, the
Paralyzed Veterans of America, the Disabled American Veterans, Amvets, the
American Legion, the Nurses Organization of Veterans Affairs and the Vietnam
Veterans of America.

Washington, thy name is "Demosclerosis."

Mr. Rauch, a contributing editor of National Journal in Washington, calls the
disease "Government's progressive loss of the ability to adapt." He doesn't
think we can cure this disease: after all, he points out, we the people are the
special interests. He hopes only to identify it and so help us bring it under
control.

The disease, Mr. Rauch argues, is not good for liberals because old programs get
so entrenched that there's no room (or money) for new ones. It is not good for
conservatives because it keeps archaic regulations in place forever. It is not
good for you and me because it diverts Government from the things it can and
should do well and forces us to pay for things like a $200 million annual
subsidy for wool and mohair producers set up in 1955 when wool was a strategic
commodity; within five years the Pentagon started using synthetic fabrics. The
subsidy has more than a year and a half of life to run.

Mr. Rauch has a few suggestions, most of them sensible, none of them likely.
Such as eliminating subsidies. Or forcing Government-subsidized enterprises to
compete against one another or against private competitors. Or, one of my
favorites, pitting one parasitic lobby against another.

Unfortunately we have heard a lot of these suggestions before and we are still
in the same old mess. But Mr. Rauch makes his argument in an attractive,
accessible way, without much of the jargon that usually accompanies these sorts
of prescriptions for fixing things up. There are anecdotes galore, and in this
case they are not funny. They are distressing. But the nice thing is that even
political professionals -- and political junkies -- can come away from this
quick read having learned a little something about how the Government works, or,
more precisely, how it doesn't.

The day the House bowed to the veterans' groups, Representative Tim Penny,
Democrat of Minnesota, in effect endorsed Mr. Rauch's thesis. "Every program of
the Government," he said, "has a constituency and each constituency has a
national association and a lobbyist and a membership list and many of them have
political-action committee money and it's hard to say no." Mr. Penny, a budget
hawk well respected by members of both parties, wants no more of Demosclerosis.
He's leaving Congress in the fall.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A TASTE OF INDEPENDENCE

BYLINE: By Molly O'Neill

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 41;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1700 words


Traditionally, a Fourth of July feast is an ode to its locale. Crab cakes, for
instance, sing of the Eastern Shore of Maryland; so do sandwiches made of
deep-fried soft-shell crabs pressed in a soft bun layered with mayonnaise and
shredded lettuce. Wisconsin has its traditional trout boil, while the Pacific
Northwest feasts on planked salmon and fresh peas. A meal of sweet corn and the
season's first beefsteak tomatoes is the way many Midwesterners ring in the day.

Specialties from the barbecue belt -- vinegary pork from the Carolinas, smoky
brisket from Texas -- are now as all-American as chicken, hot dogs and
hamburgers from the grill. There are, after all, hours to while away between the
morning's parade and the fireworks after dark. Tending a slow fire on the Fourth
of July makes a certain kind of sense.

And America's most recent arrivals continue to add new spices and flavors to the
holiday barbecue. But rather than be dogmatic about their culinary heritage, the
newcomers choose to flatter the ingredients -- and the appetites -- of their
adoptive land.

There was, for instance, no doubt in the mind of Allan Vernon -- a.k.a. Vernon,
the King of Jerk -- what he would cook on his first Fourth of July, 20 years
ago. But as a concession to his health-conscious American guests, he added jerk
snapper to the jerk chicken, jerk pork and jerk beef already on the menu. "It
was fish," he says, sounding slightly pained, "but it was jerk!"

For his first Fourth, Binh Duong, who was born in Vietnam and is now the chef
and owner of Truc Orient Express, a restaurant in Hartford, chose to grill Maine
lobsters in the shell, serving the sweet, smoky meat with a chili-fired,
sweet-and-sour Vietnamese dipping sauce. Even those habituated to drawn butter
couldn't resist.

Madhur Jaffrey, the cookbook author who designed the menu for Dawat in
Manhattan, cooked game hens in a hot skillet with pungent Indian spices. Teamed
with basmati rice, or a rice salad, this familiar food, albeit in an exotic
package, makes a fabulous Fourth.

Douglas Rodriguez, the chef at Patria in Manhattan, recalls his family's
Cuban-style picnics on the Fourth of July. Like other children raised during the
60's, he remembers a surfeit of chips and dips that accompanied the barbecue.
To continue the tradition, he deep-fries plantains for a crunchy chip with a
hint of sweetness and tops them with spicy black beans to make muneta. The chips
are delicious with salsa or guacamole, as well, and make soulful, satisfying
snacks for nibbling while waiting for the barbecue coals to turn white.

Next to a genuine all-American barbecue, the dishes suggested by America's
newcomers, though exotic-sounding, don't seem odd or jarring. Just more
exciting, and less resistible. Smoke, it seems, is the secret ingredient of the
melting pot.

Cornish Hen Biryani

(ADAPTED FROM DAWAT, MANHATTAN)

 2 teaspoons saffron threads
 3 tablespoons hot milk
 3 cups basmati rice, washed
 2 tablespoons salt
 1 2-inch piece fresh ginger, peeled and coarsely chopped
 5 cloves garlic, peeled
 2 cups plain low-fat yogurt
 1/2 cup coarsely chopped fresh mint leaves
 1/2 cup coarsely chopped fresh coriander leaves
 1 to 2 hot green chilies, thinly sliced
 4 2-inch cinnamon sticks
 12 cardamom pods
 10 cloves
 2 bay leaves
 3/4 cup vegetable oil
 3 medium onions: 2 halved lengthwise and thinly sliced; 1 finely chopped
 1/2 teaspoon cumin seeds
 2 Cornish hens, legs halved and breasts quartered
 1/4 cup slivered almonds, toasted
 1/4 cup golden raisins, plumped in hot water and drained
 2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
 1 teaspoon ground cumin
 1 1/2 to 2 teaspoons cayenne pepper
 Freshly ground pepper to taste.

1. Heat a small skillet over medium heat. Add the saffron and stir until it
turns a few shades darker. Place the milk in a small cup and crumble in the
saffron. Let stand for 3 hours. Place the rice in a large bowl, cover with
water, stir in 1 tablespoon of the salt and let stand for 3 hours.

2. Place the ginger and garlic in a blender with 2 tablespoons of water and
blend to a fine paste, stopping several times to scrape the sides of the jar.
Place the yogurt in a bowl and stir in the mint, coriander and chilies. Divide
the cinnamon sticks, cardamom, cloves and bay leaves into 2 equal parts.

3. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. Working in 2 batches,
fry the sliced onions until crisp, about 2 to 3 minutes per batch. Remove from
the oil with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towels. Pour off all but 2
teaspoons of oil.

4. Place half the spice mixture in the skillet, stir once and add the cumin
seeds. Stir once and add the chopped onion. Cook until the edges begin to brown,
then stir in the ginger mixture. Stir for 1 minute. Add the hens in 2 batches
and cook until browned.

5. With the hens in the skillet, lower the heat and stir in half of the yogurt
mixture, 1 1/2 teaspoons of salt, half the almonds, half the raisins, the lemon
juice, ground cumin, cayenne and 1/4 cup of water. Bring to a simmer, cover and
cook for 10 minutes. Uncover and stir in half the fried onions. Cook, stirring
often, until the sauce is thick and the meat is just tender, about 10 minutes.
Stir in 1 teaspoon of salt and pepper to taste.

6. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees. Bring a large pot of salted water to a boil.
Meanwhile, place the hen mixture into a large, ovenproof pot. Stir 1/2 teaspoon
of the salt and 2 teaspoons of saffron milk into the remaining yogurt. Spread
over the hen mixture. Drain the rice and place in the boiling water with the
remaining spice mixture. Boil until almost tender, about 7 to 8 minutes. Drain
and place over the yogurt mixture.

7. Working quickly, make a well in center of rice and pour in remaining saffron
milk. Cover with a damp dishcloth, then foil, then a lid. Bake for 30 minutes.
Uncover and bake for 10 minutes longer. To serve, stir the mixture to combine
and season with more salt if needed. Place on a large platter and garnish with
remaining fried onions, almonds and raisins.

Yield: Six to eight servings.

Black Bean Muneta With Fried Plantain Chips

(ADAPTED FROM DOUGLAS RODRIGUEZ, PATRIA, MANHATTAN)

The beans:

 1/2 pound dried black beans, soaked in water overnight and drained
 1 bay leaf
 2 teaspoons olive oil
 1 medium onion, diced
 4 cloves garlic, minced
 1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh oregano
 1 teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
 Freshly ground pepper to taste
 1 tablespoon chopped fresh cilantro
 The plantains:

 Vegetable oil for frying
 2 green plantains, peeled and cut on the diagonal into 1/8-inch slices
 Salt to taste.

1. To make the beans, place them in a large saucepan with 2 cups of water and
the bay leaf. Bring to a boil, reduce heat and simmer until tender, about 1 1/2
hours. Add only a little water, if needed, to keep the beans barely covered
while they cook. Meanwhile, heat the olive oil in a medium-size nonstick skillet
over medium heat. Add the onion and cook for 5 minutes. Add the garlic and cook
for 1 minute. Stir in the cumin and oregano and cook a few minutes longer.

2. When the beans are cooked, stir in the onion mixture, 1 teaspoon of salt and
the pepper and cook for 5 minutes more. Let cool. Place the beans in a food
processor and pulse until pureed. Taste and adjust seasoning if needed. Scrape
into a serving bowl and garnish with cilantro.

3. To make the chips, heat enough oil in a large skillet to make a depth of 1/8
inch. Working in batches, add the plantain slices to the skillet and cook until
browned and crisp, about 2 minutes per side. Drain on paper towels and sprinkle
with salt. Serve immediately with the bean dip.

Yield: Four servings.

Vernon's Jerk Snapper

(ADAPTED FROM "NEW YORK COOKBOOK," BY MOLLY O'NEILL, WORKMAN, 1992)

 3/4 cup jerk sauce
 1 onion, coarsely chopped
 1 fresh thyme sprig
 1 scallion, trimmed
 1 Scotch bonnet or jalapeno chili, stem removed
 1 cup port or sherry (optional)
 4 red snappers (1 to 1 1/2 pounds each), cleaned and boned, heads and tails
intact.

1. In a blender, combine the jerk sauce, onion, thyme leaves, scallion, chili,
port (if using) and 2 cups of water. Process until smooth. Pour the mixture into
a shallow, nonreactive baking pan. Add the fish, cover and marinate in the
refrigerator for 2 hours, turning once after 1 hour.

2. Prepare a grill or preheat the broiler. Remove the fish from the marinade and
place on a fish grid. Grill or broil until the fish flakes easily with a fork, 5
to 8 minutes per side.

Yield: Four servings.

Grilled Lobster With Vietnamese Dipping Sauce

(ADAPTED FROM BINH DUONG, TRUC ORIENT EXPRESS, HARTFORD)

 4 cloves garlic, minced
 4 small hot chilies, seeded and minced
 3 tablespoons sugar
 3 tablespoons Vietnamese fish sauce (nuoc mam)
 3 tablespoons fresh lime juice
 4 1 1/2-pound lobsters
 1 teaspoon canola oil.

1. In a bowl, combine the garlic, chilies, sugar, fish sauce and lime juice. Set
aside. Prepare a charcoal grill. Steam the lobsters for 5 minutes. When cool
enough to handle, twist off the claws and tails. Cut the tails in half
lengthwise and rub the exposed meat with the oil.

2. Place the tails and claws on the grill over medium-hot coals and grill until
just browned and cooked through, about 15 minutes, turning once. Serve hot with
the dipping sauce.

Yield: Four servings.

Avocado Salad

(ADAPTED FROM DOUGLAS RODRIGUEZ, PATRIA, MANHATTAN)

 3 Haas avocados, ripe but not too soft, peeled and diced

1/4 cup diced scallions

1 large red bell pepper, diced

1 medium red onion, peeled and diced

1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded and cut into 1/8-inch

slices

2 small tomatoes, seeded and diced

1/4 cup fresh lime juice

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil

Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste.

Toss together the avocado, scallions, red pepper and onion. Add the cucumber and
tomatoes. Add the lime juice and then the olive oil. Season with salt and
pepper.

Yield: Four to six servings.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Add a Vietnamese dipping sauce to grilled lobster and you've got
instant fireworks. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALAN RICHARDSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Out of the Attic and Asylums And Into the Camera's Eye

BYLINE: By MARIA LAURINO;   Maria Laurino writes frequently about social issues.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2519 words


IN THE OPENING SCENE OF "Forrest Gump," Tom Hanks, playing the title character,
sits squarely on a park bench in a starched cream suit, his shirt buttoned to
the collar, holding a box of chocolates. He turns to a stranger and offers her a
piece of chocolate, and a taste of his life. Forrest speaks in the vowel-laden
chords of the South, but the sound of his voice, like the cadence of his speech,
is a note off. Soon Forrest tells us what we already suspect. With an I.Q. of
75, he has spent a lifetime being labeled dumber than most anybody.

But do not expect to pity Forrest; rather, audiences may leave the theater
pitying themselves. During the course of the film, which opens on Wednesday,
Forrest becomes an all-American football player, a Vietnam War hero and an
international Ping-Pong champ. With each accomplishment, Forrest is ushered into
the White House to shake the hands of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon;
through the use of digital effects, Forrest appears in actual film clips.

Forrest -- who drinks Dr Pepper and makes a good foot soldier -- is a 90's
Everyman, but this time Everyman is mentally retarded.

Characters like Forrest Gump are appearing more and more frequently on screen.
In recent years, a genre of film has emerged about people who are mentally
retarded (or mentally ill) and the families who care for them. These stories are
putting problems on the kitchen table that were previously tucked away. Yet a
caveat remains: Now that it's O.K. to not be O.K., will each season usher in a
new form of dysfunction?

In the past, Hollywood occasionally delved into the life of the "other" who
struggles to survive in a world out of sync with the rhythm of our own.
Confusion and chaos penetrated the mind of the drifter Lennie in "Of Mice and
Men," John Steinbeck's 1937 novel, which was filmed several times; audiences
rooted for Cliff Robertson in the 1968 film "Charly," with the odd hope that a
retarded man had the potential for brilliance. The words "medication time" rang
through the 1975 film "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" as a heartbreaking
assortment of lost souls with darkened eyes, hollowed temples and ashen
complexions mechanically reached for paper cups and pastel pills.

Barry Levinson says he was initially laughed at for making "Rain Man," a movie
about an autistic man, in 1988, but the film's subsequent commercial and
critical success allowed a host of mentally impaired characters, at long last,
to exit their distant worlds and barbed-wire institutions and enter daily life.
That same year, "Dominick and Eugene" followed a young medical student as he
tried to balance a career and the care of his mentally retarded brother.

Last year "Benny and Joon" and "A Dangerous Woman" dealt with mentally
unbalanced women. "What's Eating Gilbert Grape" depicted a family whose youngest
son, Arnie, is mentally retarded, and landed Leonardo DiCaprio an Oscar
nomination this year for the role.

"These movies are reflecting what's happening in real life," says Liz Moore,
director of communications and development for the Arc, a national organization
that deals with the mentally retarded. "The trend of people moving out of the
institution and coming into the community began 20 years ago. It took a few
years for that to become a normal part of our society before the arts caught
up."

Hollywood's eagerness to take on these subjects also reflects a time when
America is more willing to talk about (or listen in on) its problems. From
afternoon talk shows to Court TV audiences breathe in dysfunction as if it were
secondhand smoke. Art used life as a casting call when the film makers of
"Gilbert Grape" spotted Darlene Cates, a participant in a "Sally Jessy Raphael"
show on agoraphobia. She was immediately recognized as the perfect Mama Grape,
the monumental matriarch of the family who refuses to step outside the house
because of her awe-inspiring obesity.

Oneness
People Like Us, Only More So

Many of these films tell the story of a mentally retarded or mentally ill person
through a sibling, usually a brother, which helps focus the conflicts,
difficulties and sacrifices inherent in such a relationship. The structure is
similar to the narrative in "Of Mice and Men," in which George reveals his
abiding love for, but never-ending frustration with, his slow friend Lennie.

Generally, the story unfolds as the "normal" sibling reveals how ordinary
situations become extraordinary predicaments when living with a person who has a
mental disability. "Forrest Gump," unlike the other films, is narrated by a
mentally retarded man, allowing the audience to hear his albeit singular story
firsthand and directly react to his world. Robert Zemeckis, director of "Forrest
Gump," says he hopes audiences can identify: "Wouldn't it be nice if we could
look at things without an agenda, and take things at face value? It's kind of a
fantasy -- to not have to look at everything so cynically."

In "Dominick and Eugene," Eugene tells his crying and enraged brother that he
didn't want to miss his birthday but was forced to work late in the hospital --
an abstract explanation to Dominick. In "Rain Man," the Charlie Babbitt
character (played by Tom Cruise) slowly abandons his illusion that rational
arguments can triumph: if Raymond (Dustin Hoffman) must see "People's Court,"
Charlie will bang on the door of the nearest house to get his brother a seat in
front of the television set.

Usually, viewers can relate to the characters who are developmentally disabled
each time they reveal a trait that audience members share but that societal
expectations have forced them to repress. Who wants a brother to miss a birthday
despite a difficult work schedule? Isn't Raymond's sense of order an extreme
version of choosing to eat the same breakfast cereal every morning?

"The character has to have what people have in general: irrational behavior that
seems totally irrational but rings emotionally true," says Lasse Hallstrom,
director of "What's Eating Gilbert Grape," "If you can capture that irrational
moment that rings true, then you are on the way."

Arnie Grape's unfiltered emotions reveal the simple childhood joys of watching a
police siren's swirling flash of red or the universal pain of losing a parent.
His volatility keeps the audience on guard because even a minor quip can tip
Arnie's emotional balance. During one family dinner, Gilbert taunts his sister
about talking with food in her mouth. She responds, "Thank you, Dad," and
Gilbert retorts dryly, "Dad's dead." In most other families, the comment would
end with angry glares darting across the table, and the family would continue to
pass the salt. But not with the Grapes. Arnie begins to giggle "Dad's dead,"
which he repeats with increasing ferocity, as if to exorcise all the demons of
his father from his lanky body.

Mama Grape screams for order and bangs her fist against the kitchen table and
Arnie's cry continues unabated. Earlier she asks the question "Can't we just do
something as a family?" Well, for the Grapes, perhaps not -- if American family
is defined as the perennially grinning Cleavers.

But if audiences recognize that the responses of people with mental retardation
will never comply with prescribed notions of behavior, let alone sanity, the
scene is rather liberating. All those who sometimes feel closer to the Addams
Family than the Cleavers can take solace in Arnie's attempt to overcome pain,
and in the hope of redemption that the end of the film suggests.

Today audiences are shedding tears for characters like Arnie, Raymond and
Dominick. Their lives cannot be discounted or discarded. They will not meet the
brutal fate of their ancestor Lennie in "Of Mice and Men" -- who accidentally
kills a woman and is in turn executed by his friend George. Ms. Moore says she
believes that this greater public tolerance has emerged because of the increased
presence of mentally retarded people in schools, offices and neighborhoods since
deinstitutionalization; the once demonized "other" has become the boy next door.

Television was years ahead of feature films, she adds, with the series "Life
Goes On," which featured a mentally retarded boy, and the weekly appearance of
Benny on "L.A. Law." Then came the larger-than-life images of film. "Seeing a
movie like 'Rain Man,' " she says, "makes a connection and allows the public to
feel affection for the character."

Of course, for every serious portrait, there are silly ones, which feature the
stereotypical caricature of the mentally retarded -- the lovable man-child. With
the lack of subtlety that defined "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle," a dimwitted
handyman named Solomon wisely sees evil before everyone else does. The Harrison
Ford character in "Regarding Henry" is absent the normal rage that any person
should experience after a debilitating accident that caused brain damage.

Perhaps the idea of the pure and simple innocent still has a romantic hold in an
increasingly corruptible society. In "Forrest Gump," the audience sees the
idiocy and hatred of others through Forrest's own naivete.  After Forrest
describes how he met John F. Kennedy, he says, "Some time later, for no
particular reason, somebody shot that President." At another point in the film,
he repeats the words almost verbatim about John Lennon.

In a time of constant analysis, Forrest is an anti-analysand who lacks the
ability to explore his own pain or frustration. When he runs (literally) around
the country after a sorrowful experience, he explains that he made this journey
"for no particular reason." Just as Chance the gardener's empty wisdom drew
vacuous politicians in "Being There," Forrest attracts a flock of Gump groupies
who follow him because, in their words, he "has it all figured out."

"It's interesting that we can accept these decent values so readily in an
innocent or impaired person," says Mr. Zemeckis. "We don't accept them as
readily in any other kind of character."

Correctitude
Tripping Over The Tongue

If Hollywood has the courage to tackle the subjects of mental illness and mental
retardation, it certainly has the jitters about the language it uses. During the
course of interviews for this article, an executive who was involved with a
movie about mental illness questioned whether it was "politically correct to say
mentally ill." The reporter was asked to find the appropriate word and to insert
it in the executive's quotes.

No one associated with "Forrest Gump" wanted to label their lead mentally
retarded, suggesting that the words conjured an image different from what
Forrest really is. Other film makers described their characters as "mentally
challenged," a choice of language that the Arc says is misleading and perhaps
even regressive. While the debate over language also exists within the group of
advocates for the disabled, Ms. Moore explains that the Arc does not use
euphemisms.

"I have trouble with that idea," she says. "It's as if there is something wrong
with a person with mental retardation that we can't talk about it." However, in
1991 the Arc changed its name from the pronounced acronym ARC, which stood for
the Association for Retarded Citizens. Jim Gardner, president of the group, said
at the time: "We quit using 'idiot' and 'imbeciles,' so why do we have to use
'retarded'?"

And while eager to embrace the situation of a character dealing with mental
problems, the movies often avoid discussing the very medical condition the
character has, leaving the audience perplexed. Joon was originally called a mild
schizophrenic in "Benny and Joon," but the label was removed from the final
version after test audiences objected to the ending, in which Joon chooses to
live by herself.

"There's a lot of confused ideas about what schizophrenia is," says Susan
Arnold, a producer of "Benny and Joon," "and people would say, 'She couldn't
live by herself. It would never have a happy ending if she were schizophrenic.'
"

So the diagnosis of schizophrenia was changed to "the episodes that she's
having." (Don't we all have episodes?) The new words were to convince audiences
that Joon could leave the house she shares with her brother for an apartment of
her own. Joon begins a relationship with a lost, eccentric soul (Johnny Depp),
and together they make cheese sandwiches with a hot iron. The movie trivializes
mental illness by suggesting that Joon can find happiness once she discovers a
quirky mate.

Another gooey Hollywood ending was tacked on to "A Dangerous Woman," based on
the haunting novel by Mary McGarry Morris. The novel's bleak conclusion
describes a tragic outcome for Martha Horgan, a mentally unbalanced woman
tortured by her turbulent emotions, and suggests that there is little tolerance
in society for such a person. Yet the movie enables Martha to fall in love and
bear a child, whom she sees on a day pass from her prison cell.

Maybe Hollywood gives us the endings we want -- most of the time, at least.
Barry Levinson recalls that test audiences for "Rain Man" protested the downbeat
ending, which shows Raymond boarding a train back to his group home. The
audience scribbled their reactions on cards, and Mr. Levinson recounts his
favorite response. A man wrote, "I was hoping the little guy would snap out of
it."

Dazed and Confused
Beyond All: Anxious

In "Jimmy Hollywood," Barry Levinson's most recent movie, the director added
another personality type to the growing repertory of characters with mental
problems. William, played by Christian Slater, checks into Hollywood Medical to
have his head examined. At the film's conclusion, William's tests are found to
be negative; the dazed and confused character merely suffers from anxiety.

Mr. Levinson says he intended to leave William's condition unclear: "I think on
the streets you find an enormous amount of the walking wounded, casualties of
war, whatever war they are involved in, with mental problems of some degree.
Some people become so overwhelmed that they just shut down."

The director's ambiguous description may reflect some confusion over what
constitutes mental illness or an increasing anxiety that people are stepping
closer to the threshold of craziness. What tipped the balance for the nerd
turned vigilante in "Falling Down," the 1993 Michael Douglas film? John Waters's
recent satire "Serial Mom" stars Kathleen Turner as the seemingly perfect
mother, who goes to P.T.A. meetings, makes meat loaf and recycles, until she
begins murdering anyone and everyone who gets in her way.

Perhaps audiences yearn for the simplicity of a Forrest Gump, steady as a
Rockwell drawing, because reality may be as fragmented and frayed as the jagged
edges of a Picasso portrait. If Mr. Levinson detected society's willingness to
acknowledge its problems when he made "Rain Man," he may be putting his finger
on this new-found fear.

The director paraphrased Charles Manson, who once said in an interview that he
was crazy "when being crazy meant something."

"Nowadays," said Mr. Manson, "everybody is crazy."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 'Charly' -- Cliff Robertson portrays a mentally retarded man
with a a sympathetic caseworker and a potential for brilliance. (Selmur
Pictures); 'What's Eating Gilbert Grape' -- Arnie (Leonardo DiCaprio) is the
retarded youngest son of a woman who won't leave her house. (Peter
Iovino/Paramount Pictures); 'Of Mice and Men' -- Gary Sinise, top, plays a
drifter frustrated by the behavior of his "slow" friend Lennie (John Malkovich).
(Andrew Cooper/MGM)(pg. 18); 'Rain Man' -- Charlie (Tom Cruise, left) takes
advantage of his autistic brother (Dustin Hoffman). (United Artists); 'Benny and
Joon' -- Sam (Johnny Depp) and Joon (Mary Stuart Masterson) find happiness.
(MGM)(pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
Celebrating a Birthday and a Battle

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1688 words


TINA LANDAU'S "STONEWALL: Night Variations," the new site-specific production by
En Garde Arts, is in the great American tradition of the hometown historical
pageant. The show is the kind of busy, upbeat spectacle that celebrates a
birthday or a battle with, it seems, almost as many actors as there are people
watching. With a cast of more than 50 performers playing against the magnificent
backdrop of the Hudson River and the Jersey skyline, "Stonewall: Night
Variations" celebrates both a birthday and a battle. The occasion: the 25th
anniversary of the Greenwich Village riots that are now accepted as the start of
the gay liberation movement.

It was on the night of June 27, 1969, that a routine police raid on the
Stonewall Inn, a Christopher Street hangout for homosexuals, run by the Mafia,
prompted not cowed obedience from the customers but uncharacteristic fury and
outrage. Just why is anybody's guess now. Some say it was the heat of the night.
Others say it had something to do with the death of Judy Garland five days
before in London. Whatever the reason, patience had run out. Bricks and bottles
were thrown. In the aftermath of the melee, gays and lesbians left closets,
never to return. At the end of the decade that had witnessed marches on
Washington on behalf of civil rights for blacks and protests against the war in
Vietnam, gay pride was born. Its time had arrived.

More than anything else, it's this pride that informs and gives coherence to the
huge, lively, sometimes chaotic, open-air show that Ms. Landau has written and
staged, not on Christopher Street, where there would scarcely be room, but some
blocks south and west at Pier 25, near the foot of Chambers Street. Someone says
early on that the legacy of that night "is not in the facts but in the
mythology, the metaphor, the mystery." The metaphor is extended to include the
Hudson River site, said to represent the outer edge of society inhabited by the
more flamboyant self-declared gays before Stonewall.

"Stonewall: Night Variations," which is scheduled to run through July 17, begins
at 8:30 P.M., just as the summer sun is setting. The audience enters the site
off West Street as if going to a circus. That is, through a series of sideshows
in which the pageant's principal characters are presented as freaks in their own
little booths, which could be closets. Instead of the usual tattooed man,
bearded lady and two-headed baby preserved in formaldehyde, there is a cross
section of the pre-Stonewall Manhattan gay world: mannish women, effeminate men,
transvestites, hippies, queens, aggressively masculine men, almost-straight Ivy
League types, white, black and Hispanic. In this walk-through prologue, Ms.
Landau is not only preparing the audience for the show to come, but also
recalling the kind of theater-as-environment that was the rage in the late
1960's.

In the course of the show proper, the audience sits in bleacherlike seats facing
the principal playing area, a large rectangular sand-covered "stage." This is
separated from the remains of Pier 25 beyond by a double-decker steel catwalk (a
leftover from the pier's recent past when it was a miniature golf driving
range). As adapted by James Schuette, the show's designer, the catwalk stands in
for the Stonewall. Through the catwalk you can still see the fake grass on the
pier's deck (the superstructure is gone).

For approximately two hours, the events leading up to Stonewall are recalled in
vignettes involving song, dance, film clips and a couple of dozen characters,
not all of whom are defined to the point of being especially memorable. Among
those who very much stick in the memory are an uptight fellow (Bruce Katzman)
who was subjected to hours of aversion therapy that was meant to cure his
homosexuality; a pretty young woman (Theresa McCarthy) who still isn't sure
she's a lesbian; a good-looking, muscular man (Steven Skybell) who was
dishonorably discharged from the Army for being gay, and Andy Warhol (Andrea
Darriau), who appears from time to time to deliver one of his woozily funny
insights. Sample: "I don't think people die. They just go to department stores."

Particular mention should also be made of Joseph Mahan, who, as the Carnival
Barker, acts as the emcee for the night's festivities. With his white facial
makeup, his shaved head and his gown of white tulle, he becomes a suitably
bizarre, aloof and sometimes leering spectral presence, a cautionary reminder of
mortality in this era of AIDS, and of the mortality of all liberation movements.

"Stonewall: Night Variations" is something of a technical wonder that remains a
rather chilly theatrical experience. The space is simply too big and too spread
out to invite much in the way of emotional involvement. This is iconographic
theater. Most of the figures of the drama are uninflected representations of
types. The evening comes to vivid dramatic life only in its big moments, such as
the tumultuous Stonewall raid near the end and, early on, in the rousing "Secret
Love" production number. This appears to make use of most of the cast, with
everyone acting out his or her story in the gestures of music and dance. Because
there's no mention of a choreographer in the program, I assume the choreography
is Ms. Landau's work. It's spectacular, at least in part because it can't be
easy to dance with such enthusiasm when up to your ankles in sand.

The smaller moments carry less weight. You watch the show as if it were a
parade: something else is always coming by. It doesn't help that because of the
great distance between actors and audience, all dialogue is heard through
loudspeakers, which denature the voices and often make it difficult to tell who,
in fact, is speaking. I had the same difficulty last summer with Ms. Landau's
equally spectacular-looking production of "Orestes," presented by En Garde Arts
in front of a Hudson River pier at 59th Street. Maybe I'm spoiled. I'm too used
to theaters equipped with roofs.

'Movieland'

In "Movieland," Everett Quinton's expert, very funny one-man show presented by
the Ridiculous Theatrical Company, he appears as Ruby Stevens, which also
happens to have been the real name of Barbara Stanwyck. Mr. Quinton's Ruby is
somebody quite other, a self-described former "male actress on the illegitimate
stage." She has the only mildly disguised build and voice of, well, a man. "Not
being very beautiful," she confides girlishly at the start of the show, "I had
to be" (significant pause) "good." The line brings down the house, and Mr.
Quinton is off and running.

"Movieland," which was directed by Eureka, ends its run next Sunday at the
Charles Ludlum Theater. It's a frequently hilarious take on Hollywood's
so-called golden age, written and acted by Mr. Quinton with the kind of rare
discipline and control that elevates drag to theatrical art. The frame of the
show is this (with no apologies to Scheherazade or "Kiss of the Spider Woman"):
the aging Ruby, pursued by a voracious dragon that could be death, keeps the
monster on the other side of her door by acting out the plots of a bunch of old
movies, most successfully "The Spiral Staircase," "The 10 Commandments" and the
Lana Turner version of "Madame X."

Mr. Quinton is far more than a mimic. He does imitate some of the actors whose
roles he plays, including both Yul Brynner and Anne Baxter in a priceless
give-and-take scene from "The 10 Commandments." More important, he evokes the
sense of the performances and the effect such performances had (and possibly
still have) on the audiences that adored them. As he moves around the stage,
picking up, using and discarding props with the speed of light, he has the
low-comedy grace of Groucho Marx and the timing of Jack Benny. He also possesses
a sense of the absurd that embraces both highly sophisticated contemporary camp
and the innocent comedy of "Charley's Aunt." He's a wizard.

A fan is born.

'Mugen'

Presented for four performances at the La Mama Annex during the gay games,
"Mugen" ("Endless") is an example of Japanese gay theater rarely seen here or,
for that matter, it's said, in Tokyo. Ken Togo, the play's star and head of the
company, is someone who apparently came to gay life and theater fairly late,
after marrying and having three children. Though "Mugen" was written and
directed by Shiro Mihara, it's based on Mr. Togo's own experience as the
operator of a gay Tokyo bar.

Because the play was acted in Japanese (a brief English synopsis was provided in
the program), it was not easy to get the exact meaning of each scene, though the
meaning of the performance was always clear. AIDS figures in the plot as well as
police brutality. Mr. Togo is firmly committed to the fight against gay
repression and to gay sex as an expression of romantic love. The play is
melodramatic with comic touches, realistic with moments of giddy fantasy.

After a lame young man committed suicide because of his "ugliness," he
reappeared on the stage in a startling resurrection: dressed in a skimpy
loincloth that showed off his fine, lean physique, he did a celebratory dance
that was part ballet, part disco and part bump-and-grind go-go.

In his role as the bar operator, Mr. Togo, a small handsome man who appears to
be ageless, was father and mother (and, in one instance, lover) to his
employees. As the star of the club's floor show, he took one brief turn as a
dancing geisha who twirled a plastic parasol and moved about with what seemed to
be extreme care. The young men and women in the supporting cast were both
attractive and talented. The play's elegant, handsome single set and complex
lighting plan would indicate that a lot of trouble was taken to bring "Mugen" to
New York, even for this brief exposure.

STONEWALL: NIGHT VARIATIONS -- This is iconographic theater, and that means a
few rousing big moments and too many smaller ones viewed at a chilly distance.

MOVIELAND -- Everett Quinton elevates drag to theatrical art.

MUGEN -- A rarely seen example of Japanese gay theater that through melodrama
emphasizes the struggle against repression.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Everett Quinton in "Movieland" at the Charles Ludlam Theater --
A frequently hilarious take on Hollywood's so-called golden age. (Tom
Brazil)(pg. 16); Tyrone Mitchell Henderson, right, in the En Garde Arts
production of "Stonewall: Night Variations" -- A huge, lively, sometimes
chaotic, open-air show. (Tom Brazil)(pg. 3)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 197 words



BIOGRAPHY
FIGHTING THE ODDS
The Life of Senator Frank Church.
By LeRoy Ashby and Rod Gramer.
Washington State University, $32.

Frank Church (1924-84), a Democratic senator for 24 years, stood in the front
rank of the opponents of the Vietnam War and on dozens of issues cast votes that
were tough for a lawmaker from a state as conservative as Idaho. He managed
important, high-profile investigations of the Central Intelligence Agency and of
the practices of multinational corporations. He made an awkward, belated run for
the Presidency in 1976. "Fighting the Odds," a thoroughly researched biography,
sets forth the story of a distinguished career. Unfortunately, the authors --
LeRoy Ashby, a history professor at Washington State University, and Rod Gramer,
a television journalist in Boise -- daub their prose with passages like this:
"The Senator was emotionally as hot as the steaming cup of coffee in his hand."
Even more damaging, the book's intensely repetitive detail hardly ever leads the
reader to reflect on Church as a skilled but sometimes curiously inept
politician, or on his place in the American politics of his time.   ADAM CLYMER

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Encountering a Nation

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 23;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


To the Editor:

Reading Susan Brownmiller's "Seeing Vietnam: Encounters of the Road and Heart"
was for me like spending a perfect weekend on a terrace listening to Ms.
Brownmiller spin her tale of a visit to Vietnam. Her descriptive power and depth
of detail combine to create a strong sense of place for Vietnam today and during
the war years. There is much to learn here about the country's history, food and
accommodations.

What a joy to read! The beautifully written conversational style carries the
reader on and leaves him wishing for more.

Having enjoyed the book so much, I found it frustrating to read the review (May
15). One got the impression that the reviewer felt he was better qualified to
write the book.

DANIEL D. STEWART
New York

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Taking a Positive Step on North Korea

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Carter Opening" (editorial, June 21), on Jimmy Carter's trip to North
Korea.

For months, we have been hearing the same kind of rhetoric from the same kind of
so-called experts about North Korea and its intentions and capabilities as we
heard in the post-World War II period about China. The rhetoric then was all the
reasons we should not sit down with the Chinese because they had aspirations to
control Asia. History has shown that the rebuff of Zhou Enlai by Secretary of
State John Foster Dulles and others was a mistake, and even former Secretary of
State Dean Rusk acknowledged in his last book he was wrong in his fear of the
"yellow peril."

All of this emotional reaction by Democrats and Republicans against any kind of
negotiations with the Chinese led in my opinion to the wars in Korea and
Vietnam, where hundreds of thousands of United States soldiers were killed,
maimed or wounded. Only in 1971 did President Richard M. Nixon, one of the most
vociferous anti-Chinese, begin talks that led to normalization of United States
relations with China.

North Korea now and China then may be different, but only in degree. North Korea
is smaller and less important, but very few people in this Administration or
country know anything about it.

If we have learned anything from nonrecognition of China after World War II and
normalization with it in the 1970's, it is that all the bluster about the
strength and determination of North Korea to start an atomic war should cease,
and we should sit down and even force South Korea to sit down and offer to treat
North Korea as a nation in a normal way, irrespective of ideology, leaders or
history.

If something comes of that, as I think it will, and North Korea joins the
community of nations, all the talks are worth it. Military options are always
available.

Asia is our largest expanding commercial market. We have spilled enough American
blood, causing a loss of a generation of our youth and the depreciation of our
dollar. Let's follow what the British did in 1953 when they sent a trade group
called the 48 Group to give confidence.

President Clinton need not apologize for President Carter's trip; he should be
proud of it, as there is nothing wrong with a policy of offering trade and
recognition if North Korea stops its nuclear program.

But such a change will not come by the threat of arms or annihilation, with
embargo as a first step. It will come by offers of trade and commerce, as it did
with China, and I think the country and world will applaud Mr. Clinton if he can
accomplish it.

LAURENCE W. LEVINE
New York, June 23, 1994

The writer was one of the third parties who spoke with the Chinese in the
1960's, paving the way to recognition.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Never Mind Yen. Greenbacks Are the New Gold Standard.

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


YOU want to know the oddest thing about the dollar story? Right at this moment
when all the headlines are about the dollar crumbling against the yen, when
traders in Tokyo are supposedly dumping American currency by the wheelbarrow,
the dollar has never been more popular around the globe.

Always remember, the dollar is two things: It is a financial asset, the value of
which floats against the currencies of other countries, going up or down at any
given time. But the dollar has an additional life overseas. There, the
greenback, that piece of crisp, folding paper with the picture of dead
Presidents, is in demand not only as a financial asset for transactions, but
also as a store of value -- like gold -- and as a trusty standard against which
many developing nations are now pegging their own pesos, dinars or cruzeiros.

Yes, the dollar has been declining in value a little against the Japanese yen.
For Americans who wanted to hail a cab in Tokyo or buy a Honda last week, that
is bad news. But the dollar is actually holding steady or rising in value
against most other currencies. That is why in the former Communist world and
other developing countries, the dollar is viewed today as more solid than ever.
Not only are more and more countries tying their currencies to the dollar, but
in some of them the greenback is also becoming the day-to-day medium of
exchange.

This phenomenon is now so widespread the Federal Reserve estimates that 60
percent of all of the dollar bills printed this year, compared with about 40
percent 20 years ago, will end up going overseas via American banks -- for use
in Russia, Romania, Tajikistan, China, Vietnam and other countries where the
dollar has become the official unofficial tender.

Whether these foreigners are stashing $100 bills in their mattresses to keep
them for a rainy day, hiding twenties under their floorboards for insurance
against local hyperinflation or swapping briefcases with stacks of fives for
illegal drug deals, most of the world can't get enough dollar bills these days.
The Federal Reserve estimates that about $190 billion in American bills are now
circulating overseas, and that pile is rising at a rate of about $15 billion to
$20 billion a year -- not counting counterfeit notes.

Behind this phenomenon are two economic trends that coincided in the last
decade: global inflation and American disinflation. Since the mid-1980's
inflation in this country has been under tight control; the dollar as a store of
value against a basket of other major world currencies has been quite stable. At
the same time, since the late 1980's, much of the former Communist world has
disintegrated, and the developing world has increasingly opted for capitalism.

A Symbol of Stability

But many of these economies, particularly in Eastern Europe, Latin America and
the former Soviet Union, do not have their monetary affairs under control and
have suffered hyperinflation as their governments have printed money to solve
every problem. It's likely more countries have been gripped by hyperinflation in
the last decade than during the rest of the century. This is one of the
unexpected diseases of the new world order and explains why so many people
prefer to store their wealth, or peg their exchange rates, in dollars or in a
few other "hard" currencies instead of their local paper money.

Lithuania, like Argentina and Brazil, has formally pegged its currency to the
dollar. Many others have done so informally. Estonia has fixed its currency to
the German mark. It is not hard to understand why. In 1990 Argentina suffered
from currency inflation of 2,300 percent a year. Its money supply was out of
control. Three years ago, the government of President Carlos Menem decided to
fix the Argentine peso, by law, at parity with the dollar. That forced the
Argentine central bank to control its money supply to maintain that parity. The
move brought inflation down to 3.4 percent in May, the lowest level in 41 years.
For the first time in a generation Argentina has seen a return of coin-vending
machines, because coins now hold the same value for more than a few weeks.

Brazil's inflation-weary population has long been paying cab fares with checks.
They've tried six different currencies in the past decade. Last week, they began
issuing yet another new currency, the real, but this time pegging it to the
dollar on a one-to-one basis.

"This would not have happened in 1978-79, when we had high inflation at a rapid
deterioration in the dollar," said William Poole, a professor of economics at
Brown University. "But over the last decade, with inflation under control,
people have become increasingly confident about using and holding dollars. It is
still the only currency in the world that is acceptable everywhere."

Today so many foreign countries, Mr. Poole said, "have a tremendous need for a
stable currency, and we are providing them with a benefit that they cannot get
any other way."

Indeed there is no gold standard anymore -- that officially went out the window
in 1971 -- but there is a dollar standard. And if some countries are pegging
their currencies to the dollar, then what is the dollar pegged to? Answer: Alan
Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. America, and the world,
are now on the Greenspan standard.

"The dollar is pegged to the political consensus of the American electorate,"
said H. Erich Heinemann, chief economist at Ladenburg, Thalmann & Company
investment bank in New York City. "Basically, the Administration and Congress
together define the national consensus on economic strategy, and the Federal
Reserve chairman, even though he is independent, operates within that consensus.
That consensus has been, and hopefully will be, for low inflation."

While this has costs for the United States, in the area of job growth and
interest rates, it also has benefits. The United States has an advantage few
other countries enjoy: It prints green paper with George Washington's and Ben
Franklin's and Thomas Jefferson's pictures on it. These pieces of green paper
are called "dollars." Americans give this green paper to people around the
world, and they give Americans in return automobiles, pasta, stereos, taxi
rides, hotel rooms and all sorts of other goods and services. As long as these
foreigners can be induced to hold those dollars, either in their mattresses,
their banks or in their own circulation, Americans have exchanged green paper
for hard goods.

"As long as we maintain low inflation and currency stability, those dollars will
circulate abroad forever," said Mr. Poole. "It's a very good deal."

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Reaction at the Sydney Futures Exchange as the Australian dollar
declined along with its American cousin. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

John Dyson, Upstart From Upstate, Speaks Up (Again)

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1512 words


It was a John S. Dyson kind of moment.

Gov. Hugh L. Carey was in office and Republican state legislators were
complaining about the appearance of Mr. Dyson, the 34-year-old Democratic
Commerce Commissioner in "I Love New York" ads promoting New York State.

Suspicious that Mr. Dyson was promoting himself as well as the state, the
lawmakers were considering legislation to bar the appearance of state officials
in publicly financed ads. And Mr. Dyson, mocking it all, showed up to be
questioned at a legislative hearing in a black Lone Ranger mask, prompting a
Republican walkout.

It was the gesture of a man who never wanted to be a faceless bureaucrat, a
commissioner with such a penchant for the flamboyant gesture or outrageous quote
that even admiring former colleagues still groan that if there is a propeller he
will walk into it, if there is no controversy he will create one.

And last week, Mr. Dyson, now 51 and a deputy mayor to Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani, struck again, in a dispute with City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi over
whether a company owned by a black woman should be rehired to market New York
City bonds. "The Comptroller ought to know the difference between a bid and a
watermelon," he said to The Bond Buyer, in a remark that was denounced by many
Democratic officials as racist or offensive and revived questions about whether
Mr. Giuliani's administration is insensitive to blacks.

Mr. Dyson apologized, saying he had not intended to be offensive, but was trying
to compare something "fixed and firm like a bid" to something he considered
"soft and mushy" -- Mr. Hevesi's contention that two financial advisers could be
used to market city bonds for the same price as one.

"Upstate we say about someone whose head is mushy, that he has a watermelon for
a brain," he said. "It is not a racial remark in upstate New York. I didn't
realize, in fact, how intensely it had become such a thing in New York City."

But that, Mr. Dyson's critics say, is just the problem: that he shows a lack of
appreciation for the care needed by public officials in a racially divided city.
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall was highly critical of the remark said he
couldn't judge whether Mr. Dyson had intended to use bigoted language. "But in a
city like New York one should understand that a remark like that will be
perceived that way and you should avoid making them," said Mr. McCall, the lone
black official holding statewide office. "If you don't understand that, you are
out of your element."

'Enjoys Being Outspoken'

Yet controversy has always been Mr. Dyson's way, across a decade of public life
that saw him serve as State Agriculture Commissioner, Commerce Commissioner and
then chairman of the State Power Authority, until 1985. One year later, he made
a failed bid to win the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate, then
returned to his Dutchess County home in Millbrook, where he ran his own
investment firm and a winery.

"John enjoys being outspoken," said Phil Friedman, a political consultant who
ran Mr. Dyson's 1986 campaign. "He is the kind of person who gives himself
credit for saying things he believes other people won't say, and even though he
apologizes later and retracts, he's managed to continue the pattern."

Mr. Dyson admits that some of his style is attributable to the freedom granted
him by wealth. "It comes in part because I can afford to do it, you know, to be
honest," he said. His father, Charles H. Dyson, founded an investment firm, now
known as Dyson-Kissner-Moran, which has made the elder Mr. Dyson one of the
wealthiest men in the country.

"He invented something," Mr. Dyson said of his father. "He invented the friendly
version of the leveraged buyout." Forbes magazine estimates Charles H. Dyson's
worth at $550 million. The Deputy Mayor indicated on financial disclosure forms
required by the city that he earned at least $1 million last year in interest
and from partnerships and investments.

But Mr. Dyson chose not to go into the family business, showing a zeal for
government and politics. He made his first, unsuccessful bid for public office
in 1968, running a close Congressional race against the Republican,
Representative Hamilton Fish 3d. The Conservative candidate was the
not-yet-notorious G. Gordon Liddy, who withdrew.

After Mr. Dyson served in Vietnam as an Army intelligence officer, he returned
to New York and within several years was a member of the Carey administration.

In office, Mr. Dyson's ability to antagonize opponents was not limited to his
masked appearance. He feuded publicly with New York City officials when he moved
most of the Power Authority's operations from Manhattan to White Plains, because
of a rent increase and lack of space at its Columbus Circle headquarters. He
complained at the time that the city had made little effort to help him, while
city officials said he refused even to consider space outside Manhattan. "Even
here, we've had several people killed at Columbus Circle," he said at the time.
"It's hard to persuade anyone to come to a place that has the reputation of
being less safe than where they are now."

Mr. Carey, now a Washington lobbyist, still praises him as one of the more
effective members of his administration. "What we did mainly is turn the city
around, and the biggest thing we did is create job opportunities," Mr. Carey
said. "John is one of the key three or four people around me who worked on
jobs."

It was Mr. Dyson's record as Commerce Commissioner that led the Liberal Party
leader, Raymond B. Harding, and the media strategist David Garth to recommend
him to Mr. Giuliani as deputy mayor for finance and economic development.

'Sheer Ability'

"When I think of John Dyson I think of sheer ability," Mr. Harding said.

As Deputy Mayor, Mr. Dyson has negotiated for the city in the sale of the
Coliseum site to the developer Mortimer B. Zuckerman, and worked out the
boundaries of the city's Federal empowerment-zone proposal with Representative
Charles B. Rangel of Harlem. He solicited private donors to help support the
city's museums and cultural institutions. And partly because Mr. Giuliani's
other deputies are so studiously low-profile, Mr. Dyson has emerged as one of
the most visible members of the government.

When he was negotiating the Coliseum deal, Mr. Dyson made public the Giuliani
administration's offer to restore $50 million in capital funds to the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, owner of the Coliseum site, to persuade
it to come to terms with Mr. Zuckerman. Under criticism, Mr. Giuliani backed
away from the proposal, saying, "That is John Dyson's proposal, not mine."

The 'Do Not Worry' Comment

Last week was not the first furor for Mr. Dyson over remarks some perceived as
insensitive to black New Yorkers. After a newspaper article asked whether Mr.
Giuliani and his chief deputy, Peter J. Powers, were capable of governing a
diverse city, Mr. Dyson wrote in a memo to Mr. Powers that was intended to
remain private: "Do not worry. Two white guys have been running this city of
immigrants for over 200 years."

At another point, after the administration held a Cabinet meeting on Staten
Island, Mr. Dyson suggested that a similar Cabinet session was unlikely in
Harlem, which he said had received "the vast proportion of the attention over
the last four years."

But it was Mr. Dyson's reference to watermelon last week at prompted calls from
some black and Hispanic lawmakers for his resignation. "There is no way he can
come and make an excuse for what he said," said Councilwoman Una Clarke, a
Brooklyn Democrat. Mr. Giuliani came strongly to Mr. Dyson's defense, even as
others outside the administration questioned whether Mr. Dyson was becoming a
liability.

And by 1 A.M. yesterday, Mr. Dyson had come full circle. Nominated for the
M.T.A. board by Mr. Giuliani, he was again facing a Senate committee. And while
Mr. Dyson ultimately won committee approval, the early morning hearing took on
the tones of a morality play.

What He's Learned Recently

"I would really like for you to articulate what you have learned from this very,
very painful experience to so many people -- so many people that are not
represented around this table or this legislature," said a weary looking Senator
Norman J. Levy, a Long Island Republican and chairman of the transportation
committee.

Mr. Dyson looked contrite. "I suppose it's hard to describe all the things that
have gone on in the last 48 hours or so, but coming from where I come from in
upstate New York, I've learned a great deal," he said. "'Will I be more careful
in the words I use?" he asked "Yes. Have I made mistakes in what I've said in
the past? Yes.

"I've apologized for what I said. I've learned some more about the extreme
sensitivities in the city of New York, which is more so than in other parts of
the state of New York where I have served before. And I think we all in the city
of New York have learned a lesson, which is that we need to come together and
stop fighting."

NAME: John S. Dyson

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 4, 1994, Monday

CORRECTION:

A subheading in some copies yesterday in a profile of Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson
misstated his party affiliation. He is a Democrat.


GRAPHIC: Photo: The debate surrounding Deputy Mayor John S. Dyson's use of
language last week is just one of the controversies that have been part of Mr.
Dyson's public life. (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conceived in Sin

BYLINE: By George F. Will;   George F. Will's new book, "The Leveling Wind:
Politics, the Culture and Other News, 1990-1994," will be published in October.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2094 words



A NEW WORLD
An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the Fall of
Quebec.
By Arthur Quinn.
534 pp. Boston: Faber & Faber. $35.


"FRESH, green breast of the new world," my foot. F. Scott Fitzgerald so
described Long Island in the elegiac close of "The Great Gatsby." Fitzgerald
surmised that "for a transitory enchanted moment man must have held his breath
in the presence of this continent, compelled into an esthetic contemplation" and
faced "for the last time in history with something commensurate to his capacity
for wonder."

Well, Mr. Fitzgerald, meet Arthur Quinn, a professor of rhetoric at the
University of California at Berkeley and the author of a book that will tell you
just how transitory that enchanted moment was. The book is "A New World: An Epic
of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the Fall of Quebec." No
reader of this soaring, swooping story will ever again think of this continent
in the 17th century as other than a place where transplanted Europeans were too
busy getting the breath kicked out of them to have any time for esthetic
contemplation.

Mr. Quinn's tales of strangely exhilarating woe are told in prose that sings and
crackles. The tales begin in 1608, the year Samuel de Champlain founded Quebec
and the adventurer John Smith became president of the Jamestown colony in
Virginia. It also was the year the Pilgrims began their voyage west from England
by sailing east to the Netherlands, from which they would flee 12 years later,
hoping to escape the corruptions of prosperity. They escaped those corruptions
but in America found others, including prosperity.

Let Mr. Quinn introduce you to John Smith, "a perfect specimen of lusty
Elizabethan exuberance," who believed that "life from minnows to men was
incessant war" and whose "most exquisite pleasure was to make others fear for
their lives as he no longer did for his."

By Smith's own largely corroborated account, he had been "a soldier of fortune,
a vagabond, a castaway, a pirate, a consort with papists in Rome, a slave who
murdered his Muslim master, a celebrated guest in far Muscovy."

"His greatest glory in the Old World, however," Mr. Quinn says, "was service,
beginning in 1600, to the Hungarians in their wars against the infidel Turks.
First he helped the outnumbered Christian forces to a series of victories by
providing them with contrivances and ruses he had learned from a careful study
of Machiavelli's 'Art of War.' Then the Turkish commander, out of frustration,
challenged the Europeans to provide a champion to fight his own best warrior to
the death before the collected troops. On three successive days John Smith --
who else? -- met a Turkish foe, and each day returned with a Turkish head thrust
aloft as his trophy of victory. The Hungarians honored Smith with a pension and
a coat of arms dominated by three infidel heads with Smith's motto beneath:
Vivere est vincere (to live is to conquer)."

Smith was then 24, this progenitor of the state subsequently given to preening
its gentility. But refinement came to Virginia long after Smith had smoothed the
way by, for example, his treatment of Indians who stole food: "He would mutilate
their tongues so they could not swallow any food -- and then have them chained
to a tree where all could watch them starve to death."

Of death there was plenty in a colony to which between 1625 and 1640 there came
more than 15,000 immigrants but whose net population increased less than 6,000.
"After planting one husband, a widow would usually wait as much as a month
before taking another, but sometimes as little as a week. (It has been estimated
for one Virginia county that less than 10 percent of the families had both
natural parents caring for the children.)"

Family values in Virginia, multiculturalism in early Dutch Manhattan: "Among the
four or five hundred inhabitants as many as 18 different languages were spoken."
Spoken by slurred tongues ere long when "one out of four buildings in New
Amsterdam was a tavern." And life as Mr. Quinn relishes describing it was not
much nicer up in New England, whither the pilgrims had come "in their crowded
ship, which was also laden with their insufficient supplies, and as well with a
ghostlier freight, the first consignment of the New England conscience."

"It was a contrite consciousness," Mr. Quinn writes, "forever dividing itself
against itself, its only true enjoyment in its own unhappiness. In this house
divided, whatever was good came from God as an undeserved grace, whatever was
evil came from its own fallen self, an accurate expression of our worthlessness.
The fuller the soul with God's grace, the more excruciating the sense of guilt
it felt for the remaining taint of corruption. Satisfaction was an accurate
gauge of sinfulness."

Of sinfulness there was plenty, as in the extermination of the Pequot Indians at
Mystic in the Connecticut Valley: "What had been a thriving people was now only
the emptiness of a name (that would fittingly survive on the side of Ahab's
ship)." The Indians responded, and by the end of one war in the 1670's, Mr.
Quinn writes, "at least 1 out of 10 European adult males in New England had been
killed or wounded -- and numerous women and children had been taken captive,
many never to be seen again." So the Europeans responded: "One hundred fifty
Narragansett Indians . . . surrendered themselves to remain out of the fighting,
only to be quickly sold -- every one of them, man, woman and child -- into West
Indian slavery."

Between New England and Virginia lay William Penn's "Holy Experiment." It was
supposed to be a reproach to England, but Mr. Quinn says it soon fell victim to
the tension of "the Inner Light versus the Outer Pocketbook," a tension resolved
in favor of much smuggling, a good way to get around government. Penn had only
the consolation of knowing that his colony, although much spotted by the world,
was part of a pattern. Visiting New York, he found Long Island declaring
independence. "Penn," Mr. Quinn writes, "felt called to preach earnestly to all
factions that they should love one another, be kind and forgiving and generous.
. . . One can imagine the New Yorkers listening attentively, trying to figure
out the catch."

Mr. Quinn's book is a kind of literary chorus, with each chapter echoing the
literary style of a writer contemporaneous with the events described. Edward
Gibbon's is one of the voices in the chapter on the "worldly war" of the 1750's,
but, in fact, Gibbon's spirit, passion sublimated in a sardonic style, suits
what seems to be Mr. Quinn's literary tone of voice, as when he tells how Roger
Williams wore out his welcome in Salem.

WILLIAMS, "with sweetness and sanctity and a consummate lack of good sense,"
decided that the charter for the colony granted by Charles I was blasphemous
because, in the name of God, it granted to the colonists lands belonging to
American Indians. The government of the colony retaliated by refusing Salem's
request for an allocation of land on which to expand. So, Mr. Quinn writes,
"Support for Williams in Salem suddenly began to wane, as more and more
Salemites began to weigh good land against high scruples." That is Gibbonesque
in sentiment, and in a syntax suited to it.

Gibbon's "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" is among the wittiest works in
the English language, but it also is a work of high moral purpose. Mr. Quinn,
too, uses wit and drollery in the service of a similar serious theme, which is
the crushing of glittering hopes by the hardness of nature, including human
nature. His implicit warning is that if the Americans have a sentimentalized,
prettified notion of their past, that misconception will prevent history from
doing what it should do, which is to inoculate the present against improvident
aspirations. The inevitable grinding down of extravagantly high hopes produces
unnecessary bewilderment and cynicism.

Mr. Quinn intends "an implicit critique of the Romantic interpretation of
history that sees the past as culminating in the present." To that end he wants
readers to see through the eyes, and hear the voices of, those people who first
clung by their fingernails to a fringe of this continent. His success is
considerable but only partial, because the dominant voice, insistent and
beguiling and entertaining and instructive, is Mr. Quinn's. His book is a
scrumptious reminder of the pleasures of historical writing that rises to the
level of literature. "A New World" can be opened at any page and read for the
delights of the sinewy sentences through which Mr. Quinn casts a cold eye on the
past.

However, a danger for someone who writes as felicitously and zestfully as he
does, who revels in the richness of the English language, is that style can come
to shape, not merely express, substance. Mr. Quinn's problem is that the
pleasures of mordancy, like many pleasures, can be a compulsion, causing a
writer to find more occasions for enjoying it than the facts warrant.

He seems to share Gibbon's cheerfully dour belief that history is "little more
than the register of the crimes, follies and misfortunes of mankind." But it
isn't. There is much more, including nobility and other virtues, some of which
are even occasionally crowned with success. A reader swept along by the powerful
current of Mr. Quinn's narratives of crimes, follies and misfortunes may be too
entranced by the entertainment of it all to pause to consider this: Much good
grew from the beginnings Mr. Quinn details so darkly.

WHAT came of it all was -- is -- a continental democracy of mostly temperate
politics, where the rule of law has provided a coveted destination for scores of
millions of storm-tossed immigrants not altogether unlike those whose
misfortunes Mr. Quinn recounts. What came of it is a nation that has several
times in this century saved from chaos the continent from which the subjects of
Mr. Quinn's story traveled west. Given that Benjamin Franklin and George
Washington make appearances near the end of the book, a reader may well wonder
how such nice people show up in a place such as Mr. Quinn has described.

Still, many Americans do pick up the thread of their nation's narrative only
well into the story, in the Revolutionary era. Hence they believe that the
nation was born of the flinty realism of the Founders. That realism is
expressed, for example, in the Federalist Papers' unsentimental appraisal of the
role of interestedness in imparting motion to government and indeed to all of
social life. But if you begin at the beginning, with Mr. Quinn as a tour guide,
you will be forcefully reminded of how many flavors of utopianism set up shop
here, and how perishable they all were when beaten upon by the harshness of the
wilderness, the weaknesses to which human character is prey and not least by the
perils of prosperity. Hence Mr. Quinn makes an oblique contribution to an
endless controversy among historians.

A recurring theme of American historiography is the "loss of American
innocence." When did this loss occur? Some say it was as recent as the war in
Vietnam, when noble intentions were neither effective nor appreciated. Some say
innocence was lost with the coming of the cold war, when the war after the war
to make the world safe for democracy proved not to have done so. Or perhaps with
Pearl Harbor, when the world brutally intruded. Or in the Depression, when
prosperity became problematic. Or in the 1920's, when prosperity made virtue
problematic. Or at the Versailles Conference, where the old Adam appeared as a
survivor of the Great War. Or in 1917, when America touched pitch: Europe. Or in
1898, when America tasted imperialism in the Caribbean and the Philippines and
found it savory. Or in Gilded Age corruption, when machines clanked into the
American garden. Or in Civil War fratricide. Or in the war with Mexico, which
demonstrated that an indefensible war can have good consequences. Or in Andrew
Jackson's war against the Bank of America, when the rise of low speculation
seemed to have coincided ominously with the passing of the Founders' generation.
Or in the 1790's, when factionalism became institutionalized in political
parties and grew fierce in measures like the Alien and Sedition Acts. Or under
the Articles of Confederation, when the afterglow of the Revolution proved
evanescent. Or during the Revolution, when unity proved elusive.

But enough. Mr. Quinn knows when innocence was lost: 1608, or shortly
thereafter. Which means it never existed.

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Despite U.N.'s Effort, Cambodia Is Chaotic

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2058 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, July 2


Less than a year after the largest and costliest United Nations effort to bring
peace and a freely chosen government to a war-torn nation, Cambodia remains
mired in warfare, chaotic administration, official corruption and the endemic
poverty that breeds malnutrition, illness and ignorance.

The United Nations and the major powers that organized and paid for the $1.8
billion international effort called it a success because honest elections were
held in May 1993.

But the results have been negated by the effective dominance of the defeated
Cambodian People's Party, a Communist party on the Soviet model, and the
inactivity of the elected Parliament.

The war continues against the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who boycotted the
elections and were responsible for the deaths of countless hundreds of thousands
during their rule from 1975 until Vietnam drove them out in 1979. Poverty has
been worsening in the crowded slums of the capital and among the 80 percent of
the people who live in rural areas. And corruption flourishes in an illegal
economy that is reported to be much larger than the official economy.

A scandal over the exporting of timber from the nation's forests, long pillaged
by the military, erupted in late June, heightening a crisis of confidence in the
Government and causing ambassadors from countries that provide economic aid to
send alarm signals to their capitals.

The elections were won by the United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful
and Cooperative Cambodia, led by Prince Norodom Ranariddh, a son of King Norodom
Sihanouk. It defeated the People's Party, the party of the Vietnamese-installed
Communist Government that ran Cambodia since 1979. But a virtual Communist coup,
consisting of a declaration of secession of seven provinces in protest against
the results, led Prince Sihanouk to impose a coalition Government on the victors
to avoid strife. He was subsequently chosen as King.

The dominance of the People's Party is reflected at the top of the Government.
Prince Ranariddh is First Prime Minister and Hun Sen, the Khmer Rouge defector
who headed the Vietnamese-backed Government before the elections, is Second
Prime Minister.

Yet Mr. Hun Sen is believed by ambassadors, many of the Prince's associates in
the Cabinet and what seems to be a majority of private citizens to hold the
upper hand because of Communist discipline in this nearly anarchic nation.

The royalist party, known by the acronym Funcinpec, is deeply divided over what
many of its top figures consider Prince Ranariddh's disdain for them and
submissiveness to Mr. Hun Sen. King Sihanouk, being treated for cancer in
Beijing, has sent a stream of fax messages critical of his son's actions,
contributing to the party's disarray.

Angered by a proposal backed by the Communists and Prince Ranariddh to outlaw
the Khmer Rouge, which the King and many here consider an empty gesture
endangering chances of peace and reconciliation, the King announced on Thursday
that he would not return.

The timber scandal came to light when leaders of the royalist party, including
the Foreign Minister, Prince Norodom Sirivudh, a half-brother of the King, and
Economics and Finance Minister Sam Rainsy, obtained copies of a letter that the
two Prime Ministers, in the name of the Government, addressed to Prime Minister
Chuan Lekpai of Thailand on June 17. They informed the Thai leader that
effective immediately, timber could be exported only by the Defense Ministry.

The disclosure caused consternation on many counts. Under an earlier Government
decision, timber exports have been "prohibited under any circumstances" since
April 1. Also, the Prime Ministers made the new ruling on their own, without
consultation with the four ministries previously concerned with timber exports.
Moreover, it was communicated only to Thailand, not to the Cambodian Government.


Khmer Rouge Gains From Timber Sales

Cambodians resent the fact that precious woods, their country's most lucrative
product, have been pillaged by the military and sold across the Thai border. The
commerce began under the American-backed Government of President Lon Nol during
the 1970-1975 war. Since the defeat of the Khmer Rouge by Vietnam in January
1979, the Maoist-inspired rebels, who enjoy strong backing, have financed their
guerrilla war through this trade.

Giving the military the right to sell timber independently also violates the
budget law, said Mr. Rainsy, the most respected member of the Government among
many Cambodians and foreigners because, rare among ministers, he is regarded as
competent. "All state revenues should be centralized in the budget," he said.

Although legislators have expressed dismay in conversations, the issue has not
been raised in Parliament. Members of the two non-Communist parties said in
interviews that the legislature functioned mainly when the Government submitted
draft bills, which it rarely does.

The Parliament. whose election was the cause of the claims of success for the
United Nations operation, is a dormant body presided over by Chea Sim, the
People's Party's leader who is considered Cambodia's strongman. His party's 51
lawmakers vote as one, said Son Soubert, the second deputy chairman of
Parliament, whose Liberal Democratic Party, a Buddhist group, holds 10 of the
120 seats.

Mr. Soubert, an art historian, could recall only two measures that had been
passed since Parliament became a legislature after adopting a Constitution last
September: the budget and a financial reorganization. He smiled in embarrassment
when asked how many days Parliament had been in full session. "Maybe one week in
'93," he said, and fewer than 20 days altogether.

Om Radsady, the royalist who is chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said
of his party, which holds 58 seats, "We won, but we don't have the keys to the
house yet."

Communists Remain From Top to Bottom

A senior official in the Interior Ministry, which controls administration down
to the village level and the pervasive, Communist-style security apparatus, said
People's Party officials were in disarray when their election defeat was
announced by the United Nations and expected the victors to move in and claim
the spoils.

But he said that because of lack of organization, the royalists never did, and
as a result the repressive Communist apparatus remained in place "from top to
bottom."

In consequence, the official said, confirming a view shared by many
international agency officials and aid workers based here, villagers believe
that the feared Communists remain in power.

High officials of the two non-Communist parties in the governing coalition
reported threats and pressure from People's Party followers. Voicing opposition
puts one's life at risk, said Say Bory, the Secretary of State for Relations
With Parliament. Asked whether he meant his political life, he replied, "No."

Officials of the old regime continue to surround royalist ministers, controlling
access and the information that reaches them. Prince Sirivudh, the Foreign
Minister, said a protest by the Japanese Embassy against the timber ruling,
delivered to the Foreign Ministry on June 21, did not reach him until June 27.

The war against the Khmer Rouge continues. Earlier this year the army, in two
major actions, captured the stronghold of Pailin in the west and threatened
Anlong Veng, a major redoubt, in the north.

But the offensive ended in embarrassment when, with far fewer troops, the rebels
regained all that they had lost and got within six miles of Battambang, the
country's second-largest city. A foreign specialist who visited Pailin while it
was held by the Government said officers "stole like rats" in the town, which is
the center of sapphire mines that help to finance the Khmer Rouge, which sells
the gems, along with timber, in Thailand.

The army numbers 145,000 on paper, but a Western expert said that many were
phantoms, for whom officers drew pay. Officers and noncommissioned officers far
outnumber privates, and the number of generals is estimated at 2,000 to 3,000.
The two Prime Ministers are among those holding five-star rank.

Military corruption often takes violent forms, said Christophe Pleschoux of the
Cambodia office of the United Nations Center for Human Rights. He said the
office, for which the organization's Geneva headquarters has yet to appoint a
director and whose budget trickles in belatedly, had gathered evidence in more
than 100 cases in which officers and enlisted men were running rackets involving
illegal detention, murder, torture, rape and blackmail.

Most of the cases investigated are in Battambang Province, which is crisscrossed
by traders from the Thai border carrying money. Suspicion extends to the top
officials of the province, which is controlled by the People's Party. The cases
reported to the agency are only "the tip of the iceberg," Mr. Pleschoux said.

Corruption became visible when the Communist Government, after the cutoff of
Soviet and Vietnamese aid in the late 1980's, officially foreswore its doctrine
and opened Cambodia to foreign trade and investment. It grew rampant with the
large United Nations presence in 1992 and 1993.

The 1991 Paris Agreements for a Comprehensive Political Settlement of the
Cambodian Conflict was imposed upon the Cambodian factions by 18 countries,
including the United States, the Soviet Union and China. It brought to this
underdeveloped, long-isolated country of perhaps nine million people 16,000
soldiers from 32 nations, 4,000 police officers and 2,000 diplomats, experts,
secretaries and guards. They were well paid, many of the civilians receiving a
daily allowance of $130 in addition to their pay.

When the present Government brought non-Communist officials into positions of
influence, many are known to have taken little time to profit from them. Asked
about officials of his royalist party, Economics Minister Sam Rainsy said,
"Corruption touches the whole country, everybody."

It flourishes in an environment in which, says Tioulong Samura, vice governor of
the National Bank, the illegal economy is two or three times as big as the
official economy. Cambodia is "a paradise for money launderers," said Mr.
Rainsy, who is Ms. Samura's husband. "It is a cash economy, and the legal
framework is weak," he said. His wife, interviewed separately, said Thais and
overseas Chinese from all of Southeast Asia profited most.

Prospects for Most: Disease and Poverty

The poverty of those who have no share in the boom -- that is, most Cambodians
-- reeks powerfully in the densely crowded quarters that lie right off the main
streets of Phnom Penh. In what before 1970 was one of Southeast Asia's cleanest
cities, large sections now consist of shacks packed against one another,
surrounded by children and heaps of fetid garbage that stays and stays. In this
monsoon season, the ruined drainage system often backs up, spreading foul
smells.

The average Cambodian dies before reaching 50. Of every 1,000 children born, 184
die before they reach 5; 120 do not live a year. The comparable figures for
neighboring Thailand are 33 under 5 and 28 under 1. The World Health
Organization reports that 900 mothers die per 100,000 giving birth but believes
the real number to be much higher.

Only 18 percent of the population has access to safe drinking water, and the
United Nations Children's Fund estimates that only 13 percent benefit from
adequate sanitation.

Dr. Beat Richner, a Swiss pediatrician who has established a large children's
hospital, said the declining state of nutrition among children and parents
indicates that poverty is rapidly increasing. He estimates that every third
Cambodian has had tuberculosis.

Anne H. Dykstra of the United Nations Children's Fund said 65 to 70 percent of
children started school, but many repeated first grade two or three times and
dropped out by the second grade, particularly girls. "This is a lethal
combination," she said. "They can't build an economy on that, not even
agrarian."

Cambodian officials look hopefully for outside help. Om Radsady, the
parliamentary Foreign Affairs chairman, said: "The big powers should take
responsibility. When you buy a car, you get a service guarantee. Maybe we drove
the car badly, but you should share responsibility."

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Battambang. (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Says It Foiled An Attempted Coup

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 4;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 773 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 3


The Government of Cambodia said today in Phnom Penh, the capital, that it had
foiled a coup attempt.

One of the two men identified as the leaders, Prince Norodom Chakrapong, an
estranged son of King Norodom Sihanouk, was sent into exile. The other, Gen. Sin
Song, was arrested.

The two men were Cabinet members in the Vietnamese-installed Government that
ruled Cambodia until elections last year supervised by the United Nations. The
voting made Prince Norodom Ranariddh, leader of a royalist party and a son of
King Sihanouk from another marriage, the First Prime Minister.

Prince Chakrapong boarded a plane for Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, shortly before
noon. His half-brother attended his departure at Pochentong Airport.

Official Version of Events

Interior Minister You Hockry said General Sin Song had confessed to planning a
coup. In the official version of events, 200 to 300 soldiers, coming from the
eastern province of Prey Veng, advanced toward Phnom Penh overnight but were
stopped by Government troops about 20 miles east of the capital, on the old
French colonial highway linking Phnom Penh and Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City.

The Information Ministry spokesman, Sieng Lapresse, said the rebel soldiers had
ridden in 12 armored personnel carriers and 5 trucks. The spokesman said they
surrendered their arms and returned to their barracks. Their officers were said
to have been arrested.

The Associated Press reported that the American Ambassador, Charles Twining, had
been called to a hotel where Prince Chakrapong had been hiding while the Prince
negotiated his departure into exile with Mr. Hockry. Mr. Twining said the
atmosphere had been "very friendly."

The Government radio said the conspirators had intended to overthrow the
Government. It said the Government was in full control and assured soldiers who
may have taken part that there would be no action against them.

Mr. Lapresse said the plot had intended to "destroy national institutions" and
create "public disorder." He said 28 weapons and 21 walkie-talkies had been
seized in houses in Phnom Penh that belonged to Prince Chakrapong and General
Sin Song. Most senior Cambodian officials keep arms.

An Expert's View

Government officials are the only sources for the coup accusation, and an expert
knowledgeable in Cambodian politics, reached by phone, said it was uncertain
whether the events had been a coup or a possible murky maneuver at a time of
restlessness on the political scene and much discontent with Prince Ranariddh in
his own party. The number of troops involved does not indicate a serious attempt
to seize control of Cambodia, said the expert, who spoke on condition of
anonymity.

After the elections in May 1993 resulted in victory for the royalists, Prince
Chakrapong, who had been a Deputy Prime Minister in the Vietnamese-backed
Government, and General Sin Song, who had been the Interior Minister, led a
secession movement of seven eastern provinces.

They charged that the Cambodian People's Party organized by the old Government
-- an orthodox Communist party until it nominally abandoned its dogma -- had
been cheated of victory by balloting irregularities.

The secession movement led to a decision by Prince Sihanouk, who was later made
King, to urge the inclusion of the losers in a coalition Government. Prince
Ranariddh was named First Prime Minister, Hun Sen, the head of the former
Communist Government, was named Second Prime Minister and some ministries have
two co-ministers.

Political leaders and diplomats say there is strong evidence that the secession
was engineered by the People's Party to secure it a place in the Government.
Neither of the Prime Ministers made a statement.

A journalist in Phnom Penh said Prince Chakrapong had telephoned a local
American journalist from a small hotel in the capital on Saturday night and said
he was hiding there. The American went to the hotel and said it was surrounded
by troops for five hours while the Prince negotiated his departure into exile.

Two issues are the immediate cause of political unease, but there is no evidence
linking them to the reported coup. The King, who is undergoing cancer treatment
in Beijing, is openly at odds with Prince Ranariddh, who is supporting a move by
the People's Party to outlaw the Khmer Rouge rebels, who have been waging a
guerrilla war against the Government. King Sihanouk and his supporters in
Cambodia oppose this as a move that would preclude any chance for peace.

The King has also criticized an independent initiative by the two Prime
Ministers to give the military the right to sell timber abroad.

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Prince Norodom Chakrapong of Cambodia, estranged son of King
Norodom Sihanouk, was escourted to the Phnom Penh airport yesterday and sent
into exile after he was accused of attempting a coup. (pg. 1); Government troops
guarded the Phnom Penh airport yesterday after the Cambodian Government reported
that it had foiled an attempted coup. (Reuters) (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Taiwanese Investors, The Mainland Loses Luster

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words

DATELINE: TAIPEI, Taiwan


After pouring billions of dollars into China in recent years, Taiwan's investors
are slowing their activity there and are looking elsewhere at countries in
Southeast Asia.

The slump in Taiwanese investment has accompanied a sharp slowdown in general
foreign investment in China. Late last month, China Daily, an English-language
newspaper in Beijing, reported that contracts for foreign investments for the
first five months fell 45 percent from a year earlier, to $32.7 billion from
$58.76 billion.

Taiwan's attitudes toward China have fluctuated wildly in the last decade, from
virulent anti-Communist isolationism to wary and tentative contacts with the
mainland to a flush of enthusiasm by small and medium-sized businesses in
Taiwan.


The Fever Has Broken

But the mixed economic performance of many investments in China, the country's
lack of legal protections and guarantees and the slaughter in March of a
boatload of Taiwanese tourists in eastern China have soured many Taiwanese
business people on the nation that lays claim to their island.

"Mainland investment fever is finished," said Chiu Chen, a lawyer here who
advises investors on business in China. Many of her clients, she said, are now
spreading through Southeast Asia. "All the provinces are reporting sharp drops
in investment," she said. "Me personally, I would never put a dime in China."

Although precise data are unclear, Taiwan has emerged as the largest foreign
investor in Vietnam. But investors have also been drawn to Indonesia and the
Philippines, a foreign trade official said, following a "go south" policy that
the Taiwanese Government started this year.

"Whenever Deng dies is overhanging people's thinking," said the official,
alluding to the fragile health of China's 89-year-old leader, Deng Xiaoping.
"They think it will have an effect on the economy in China and on their
business. But by and large, the risks they face are commercial risks, not
political risks."


Cheaper Labor

The rapid growth of Taiwan's economy, the increasing cost of labor and a shift
away from labor-intensive manufacturing to high-technology and service
industries, had made China attractive to many Taiwanese manufacturers.

"Traditionally, Taiwanese businessmen have not been very international," T. C.
Lee, a banker at Citibank in Taipei, said. "But in the last two years, the
tension between the two sides, between Taiwan and China, has been loosening. And
that's why a lot of businessmen have started to make business in China."

Mr. Lee continued: "Here there are lots of labor-intensive industries --
garments, shoes, toys. All of them started to look outside to invest. They
started to relocate initially to Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and in the last
two years, China, to enjoy cheap labor, cheap land, cheap living costs."

Estimates of the size of Taiwan investments in China vary wildly, from the
Taiwanese Government's figures of about $9 billion to estimates of independent
economists that range from $15 billion to $20 billion. The discrepancy results
partly because Taiwan businesses must use foreign subsidiaries or shell
companies, since the Taiwanese Government does not officially permit its
citizens to invest directly in mainland China.

Yet Taiwan's Ministry of Economic Affairs recently released figures suggesting
that Taiwanese business investment in China fell more than 60 percent last year,
from slightly more than $5.5 billion in investments in 1992 to just $2.1 billion
last year.

"A Taiwanese businessman who walks around China feels very comfortable," said
Diane Ying, the publisher of Commonwealth, Taiwan's leading business monthly.
"But the degree of freedom, property rights, privacy -- that's not there."


'A Lot of Problems'

Michael M. C. Lin, the president of the Hiclin International Company, a group of
companies in Taiwan that make furniture, mirrors and glass and do printing,
built a furniture factory in Guangdong Province in China three years ago.
Despite making money, he remains wary of prospects on the mainland.

"Labor costs were the most important thing for us," Mr. Lin said. "Of course,
China has a lot of problems, political problems, transport problems, a crazy
bank system. But every country has problems, of course. So we built near Hong
Kong so we can take advantage of its ports, its banks. So we are making money."

But Mr. Lin, a stocky, tousle-haired executive, said he would never bet his
company on China. "I think there should be a balance," he said, "so that not
everything is in China."

As Mr. Lin and some fellow China investors sat recently in the office of a small
trade organization they created to help other businesses invest on the mainland,
the talk was of the March 31 massacre of 24 Taiwanese tourists who were boating
on Qiandao Lake in the Chinese coastal province of Zhejiang. The Chinese
Government insists that three young men committed the murders, but many people
here think a renegade group of Chinese soldiers was responsible.

"For businessmen and people in Taiwan," Mr. Lin said, "Qiandao Lake has made
them see clearly what is China. Most Taiwanese know what the reality is there.
They can change their policies very quickly there. It's not a lawful society."


'Like Speculation'

This perception that China lacks a credible legal system is at the root of much
of the concern here, said Wu Rong-i, president of the Taiwan Institute of
Economic Research, a private consulting and research organization.

"Chinese investment is like speculation," Mr. Wu said. "You don't have legal
protections. In China, it's easy for provincial officials to have different
interpretations of the law. It's quite natural for the Chinese to squeeze the
Taiwan investor. Taiwan investors now think that China is not such a good place
to invest. In some cases, you can have a very big profit, but in other cases,
very small."

Mr. Wu also argued that too great a concentration of investment in China, as
opposed to diversification across Asia, would create both economic and political
difficulties.

"If our market depends too much on China, that is not healthy," he said. "After
Deng Xiaoping dies, there are many economic scenarios about what could happen
there.

"This even affects politics here," he continued. "There's a hot debate now. Some
people say, 'How can you ignore such a big market?' Other people say, 'No, China
will use business to influence policy here.' So we are trying to diversify our
investments and markets."


Not Always Profitable

A recent survey by the Taiwanese Government indicates that China has not been a
completely profitable investment. Only 31 percent of the 400 investors surveyed
said they had made money on their operations in China, while nearly 40 percent
reported losses. Another 26 percent gave ambiguous answers, suggesting that
their operations might be profitable. The rest had no response.

So far, Taiwan's large business groups have resisted the lure of China. But
there are now signs that the sharp drop in investment by small and medium-sized
businesses may be followed by a surge in investment by large Taiwanese
companies.

One senior executive of a big Taiwanese developer, who insisted that he not be
quoted by name, said his group was looking at buying real estate in China. And
Mr. Lee of Citibank also said he was seeing some signs of movement into China by
bigger groups.

"In the past 12 months, there are more bigger investments, not so many little
ones," Mr. Lee said. "A lot of the investment is going into real estate, and a
lot into industrial development."

But, he concluded, 'a lot of businessmen do not put everything in China."

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Not So Fast" shows new Taiwanese investment in China from 1987
1993. (Source: Taiwan Ministry of Economic Affairs)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Mobil Will Buy Vietnamese Oil

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: HANOI, July 4


The Mobil Corporation has agreed to buy Vietnamese crude oil from an offshore
field it discovered in 1974.

Mobil will buy one tanker load of oil produced at the Bach Ho (White Tiger) oil
and gas field, about 60 miles southeast of the southern port of Vung Tau, an
executive said last week.

Will Darken, general manager of the MJC Petroleum Company, said Mobil would ship
the oil to Japan for refining. MJC is a consortium of exploration companies in
which Mobil holds a half-interest. Mr. Darken did not indicate the quantity of
oil purchased.

Bach Ho is Vietnam's only source of commercial quantities of petroleum. Mobil
first identified the field and drilled there in what used to be South Vietnamese
waters. It pulled out after the Communist North Vietnamese overran the south in
1975 and united the country. VietSovPetro, a joint venture between Vietnam and
Russia, is the producer now.

Mobil is the first American company to buy oil from Vietnam since the United
States ended its 19-year ban on trade with Hanoi on Feb. 3.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clashing Stories of 4 Ships And a Disputed Heroism

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 664 words


At the end of April 1975, as the war in Vietnam drew to a close, Tran Dinh
Truong says, he used his fleet of cargo ships and tankers to rescue United
States soldiers and civilians stranded in remote areas of the country. At the
time, he says, he owned 24 ships, along with more than 100 trucks, four hotels,
and an airline.

Mr. Truong has told the story of his heroism ever since he arrived in the United
States. But parts of it are disputed by those who took part in the evacuation,
by a ship captain who worked for Mr. Truong, and by Mr. Truong's own conflicting
stories in various court documents.

"First of all, there weren't any soldiers left in 1975," said Richard L.
Armitage, the former assistant Secretary of Defense who supervised the United
States Navy evacuation of 31 ships and nearly 30,000 refugees. "Second, we
didn't use merchant ships to carry American civilians."

Recall of a Rescue

Mr. Truong's own account of the rescue names four of the ships he says took
part. Two of these did sail from the harbor on April 30, 1975.

One, the Bong Hong 9, carried Mr. Truong and other civilian refugees to the
Philippines.A second ship, the Truong Xuan, was hijacked to Hong Kong that day
by its crew with refugees on board, according to Mr. Troung's court testimony.

However, a third ship sat in port with a $200,000 cargo of frozen shrimp and
never left the harbor and a fourth was anchored in Singapore that day, Mr.
Truong said in a lawsuit trying to show losses he had suffered.

Am Bang, who worked as a captain for Mr. Truong from 1970 to 1975, said he
refused to set out himself that day because his ship was dangerously overloaded;
as a result he stayed behind in Saigon and spent six years in a Communist
re-education camp. His memory of his employer in those final days was that he
was trying to rescue his family, not the Americans.

According to Mr. Bang, as the Communists advanced, Mr. Truong was running
frantically around Saigon, unable to leave until the last day, in part because
of the complex logistics of arranging for the departure of his family members.

Nguyen Cham, who worked as the Kenmore manager until the seizure, went to the
Saigon branch of the Chase Manhattan Bank on April 24, 1975, to withdraw the
money Mr. Truong kept there, according to her testimony in a lawsuit that
ensued. But she was too late. The bank had closed without warning at noon. Mr.
Truong, who later successfully sued the bank, said he found himself unable to
pay his crews.

"There was many crew members who came to see me, to look for me in my office,"
he said in court, "and I was obligated to hide myself from room to room."

Without pay, the crews refused to leave port, he said. All this happened at a
time that he has said he was organizing a rescue mission.

Mr. Truong said 15 percent of his shipping business involved work for the United
States Government, carrying items like food and fertilizer. The wealth he
brought with him in fleeing Vietnam, he said, consisted of gold he carried in
his suitcases. Asked how much he thought the gold was worth, Mr. Truong said,
"Maybe a million." He paused, then corrected himself, as he often has when
speaking about money. "Less than a million."

Mr. Bang said his former boss shipped whatever made money: rice, fish, building
supplies and arms. He recalled that one of Mr. Truong's ships carried containers
marked "aluminum" from Saigon to Hong Kong, where the cargo could be sold to
China for three times the going rate in South Vietnam. The containers were
really filled with ammunition made in the United States.

Mr. Truong emphatically denied these allegations in an interview.

But people who knew him in Vietnam say he operated there as he has in New York.

"He thinks with money and resourcefulness he can get away with anything," said
Kiem Do, former deputy chief of staff in the South Vietnam Navy, who knew Mr.
Truong during the war. "He was a war profiteer. But now the war is over."

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Mole's Manual

BYLINE: By Jeff Stein;   Jeff Stein is author of "A Murder in Wartime: The
Untold Spy Story that Changed the Course of the Vietnam War."

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: FREDERICKSBURG, Va.


Aldrich Ames, the former high-ranking C.I.A. officer who sold secrets to the
Russians for nine years, will receive a visit in jail this summer from Senator
Dennis DeConcini, chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.

Mr. DeConcini has negotiated with the Justice Department for months to talk with
Mr. Ames, who, as a result of his plea agreement with prosecutors, has been
telling the C.I.A. and F.B.I. how he escaped their notice for so long. The
Senator wants to hear first-hand "how Ames beat the security system," an aide
said.

The House Intelligence Committee wants Mr. Ames to testify. But both the House
and Senate Intelligence Committtees already have abundant firsthand testimony
about how easy is it to steal Government secrets. It has been gathered from 30
other spies interviewed in prison by intelligence agencies under a program
called Project Slammer.

The interviews were conducted with some notorious traitors, including members of
the Walker spying clan, which stole Navy cryptological codes; William Kampiles,
a C.I.A. clerk who sold a highly secret manual on KH-11 spy satellites to the
Russians, and Jonathan Pollard, a Navy analyst who provided thousands of
top-secret documents to Israel.

The videotaped interviews are classified, but a summary and excerpts were made
available to me by a former counterintelligence official who is concerned that
elementary lessons will be missed in the Ames case. One is that traditional
security programs alone don't work. The usual background investigations and
polygraph exams have to be more rigorous but won't succeed without a marked
change in all employees' attitudes toward security.

Consider the interview with a former Air Force sergeant, Jeffrey Carney, who
sold secrets to the East Germans. "I took a huge document and another huge
document with me, went across the hall into an unsecured room, laid the
documents out on the table, secured everything, and had my camera ready, and
started photographing. . . . I was walked in on two times while I was
photographing. . . . My face went red as a beet because my blood pressure was
unbelievable, and the people went, 'Oh, excuse me, I didn't know you were busy.'
And they turned around and walked out."

Michael Walker said fellow sailors in the code room of a Navy command ship "saw
what I was doing but never took any notice." He added, "There were a couple of
times when it got kind of close, but I was good at lying."

Most convicts said stealing secrets was so easy that they were motivated to
gather classified documents outside their normal areas of access. Far from
dangerously exposing themselves, they were viewed as eager beavers striving to
get ahead.

"I was ostensibly trying to further my education and get the big picture," Mr.
Carney said. "I was putting my nose in books where I didn't belong . . . talking
to people, gathering information from conversations. It was actually very
obvious, I felt. Somebody should have noticed."

The reason people didn't notice, Arthur Walker said, is that "a lot people just
tend to mind their own business."

The authors of the Project Slammer report emphasize that behavioral changes are
often associated with acts of espionage. Heavy drinking, drug dependence, signs
of depression or stress, extramarital affairs and divorce could be warning signs
of a security problem. The authors believe that if co-workers and bosses could
be educated to intervene with a troubled employee early on, damaging espionage
might be prevented.

Of course, foreign intelligence officers are experts in identifying and
exploiting the weaknesses of people with access to secrets. Thomas Dolce, a
clandestine-warfare specialist in the Army, was motivated to provide documents
to South Africa out of an intense anti-Communism. A psychiatrist testified at
his 1988 sentencing that he also suffered from "low self-esteem" and "high-level
anxiety" and "had a great need for being accepted and liked." When his South
African handlers showed great interest in his life and became "father figures,"
the psychiatrist said, they gained complete mastery over him.

Mr. Kampiles suggested that if someone had noted his "problem" -- constant
conflicts with supervisors and co-workers -- and brought in outside counseling,
he might not have stolen the KH-11 manual.

Not all traitors wear their troubles on their sleeves; some have the nerves of
cat burglars. The Project Slammer report concedes that "it is not possible to
determine whether employee assistance, private counseling or other therapeutic
applications would have made a significant difference in these cases." But it
points out that no traditional counterintelligence methods -- background
investigations, lie detectors, surveillance -- worked either.

Almost all of the spies were discovered by accident. If Congress ever gets to
question Mr. Ames (and his wife, Rosario, who said she was coerced into helping
him), it could keep that in mind. He might be asked, "If someone outside your
chain of command, observing your sudden new wealth, supplied by the Russians,
had taken you aside and said, 'Hey, pal, what's the story here?' would it have
made a difference?"

His answer might be surprising. It might save taxpayers the millions the
intelligence community wants for aggressive new internal-security programs.

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 131 words



French Back Off in Rwanda

With Rwandan rebels near victory, the French appeared to pull back and said they
did not intend to influence the outcome of the civil war. Page A6.

Winds' Role in Crash

Federal safety officials said the plane crash on Saturday in which 37 people
died showed indications of being caused by wind shear. Page A12.

Chipping at Simpson Alibi

Testimony from a limousine driver helped prosecutors challenge O. J. Simpson's
alibi. Page A16.

From Saigon to the Kenmore

He left Vietnam with two suitcases of gold and ended up with a string of shabby
New York hotels. Page B1.

Italy and Bulgaria Advance

Italy beat Nigeria in overtime and, in the first game in this World Cup decided
on penalty kicks, Bulgaria defeated Mexico. Page B9.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Empire of Hotels Riddled With Crime and Drugs

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON with JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1829 words


On April 30, 1975, the day Saigon fell to the Communists, Tran Dinh Truong
boarded one of his 11 ships in the harbor and fled with two suitcases full of
gold.

After arriving in New York, Mr. Truong used his gold and his shrewd sense of
opportunity to buy up shabby hotels. In Buffalo, he bought the Lafayette. In New
York, he bought the Opera, sold it, and bought the Longacre, the Carter and the
Kenmore.

A practicing Roman Catholic, he named his parent corporations after St. Anthony
and St. Jude, and he filled his hotels with the old and the poor. When the city
needed a place to send welfare families and the homeless, he took them too. But
to Mr. Truong it was business, not charity.

To cut costs, he slashed security. Before long, thieves and drug dealers roamed
the halls. He skimped on repairs, and his buildings reeked of garbage and urine.

For nearly 16 years, Mr. Truong adroitly slipped through the fingers of city
officials who tried to make him improve conditions in his buildings. His wealth
and his claims to heroism in South Vietnam -- a version of events that is
doubtful but has rarely been challenged -- helped him portray himself as a man
who would do the right thing.

When city inspectors flooded him with health and safety violations, he took care
of hundreds of citations while incurring hundreds of new ones. Ultimately, the
Federal Government took over the Kenmore Hotel on East 23d Street last month. In
court papers, the F.B.I. said drug dealers used the hotel to operate "a virtual
supermarket for crack cocaine."

Mr. Truong, 62 years old, recently sat in a cluttered West 43d Street office in
the Carter Hotel, where he lives in three rooms , and sipped coffee from a paper
cup as he tried to explain himself.

"Those big hotels, Helmsley and Trump, they send the bad people to Truong," he
said. "The city should thank me for taking care of so many poor and homeless."

But William H. Daly, head of the Mayor's office of Midtown Enforcement and one
of many city officials who has tried to make Mr. Truong comply with the law,
sees him differently. "He's been considered a slumlord for some time," Mr. Daly
said. "He just bleeds these places dry.'

(Although Federal authorities have referred to him by his family name, Tran, he
said he prefers Vietnamese usage, Mr. Truong.)

Mr. Truong, a stocky man with piercing brown eyes, deflects most questions about
his finances. He blames unruly and unkempt tenants for dragging down living
conditions in his hotels, and says the authorities have unfairly singled him out
because he is an Asian immigrant who speaks halting English.

"They came after me because I'm a foreigner," he said. "They think I'm like one
of those Japanese buying Rockefeller Center. But I'm not. They don't understand
all I did for this country."

What he did, he says, was to use his merchant ships to rescue stranded
Americans, military and civilian, in the last days of the Vietnam War. He has
offered this tale several times in court as proof of his good character.  Others
challenge this version of events, however, and his own sworn testimony casts
doubt on at least part of it.

Still, the account of his war efforts, along with his business experience and
the pleas of creditors, helped persuade a Federal bankruptcy judge, Tina L.
Brozman, to allow Mr. Truong to take over the management of the 735-room Times
Square Hotel on West 43d Street in 1988, over the objections of tenants, former
employees, and city officials who warned about the way he had run the Kenmore,
and the Carter Hotel across the street.

Those hotels swarmed with roaches, they testified. Excrement was smeared on the
bathroom walls, and passenger elevators did not work. One tenant testified he
had seen frail, elderly people compelled to jump out of the freight elevator of
the Kenmore as it lurched past their floors.

As a safeguard, Judge Brozman appointed an examiner, Edward J. Rhineschmidt to
keep track of the situation at the Times Square Hotel, which had 1,000 building
code violations and 230 tenants on a rent strike when Mr. Troung took charge.

After four months, Mr. Rhineschmidt reported that "Mr. Truong has been totally
unresponsive to my requests for documentation of repairs." After six months, Mr.
Rhineschmidt resigned. The situation did not improve.

In a report to the court, the next examiner, Alan Nisselson, noted that the
elevators broke down at least once a day, trash piled up for three or four
weeks, and fire extinguishers were stored in the basement and inaccessible. The
number of housekeepers had been cut to 6 from 20, the maintenance staff reduced
to 3 from 16.

Security guards had been reduced to 3 from 10. Muggings, assaults and physical
attacks had risen greatly. Mr. Nisselson's inspectors had seen drugs sold and
heard gunshots in the building. "Residents were constantly complaining he told
the court that their living conditions were unbearable," Despite these
conditions, the city was paying as much as $2,640 a month for each homeless
family it housed at the hotel.

A Promise From Truong

Mr. Truong had promised to use the hotel's income to pay its operating expenses
and first mortgage: only if the hotel made a profit would he collect a
management fee. But the Federal trustee reported that Mr. Truong had paid his
company a fee even though the hotel was losing money and not paying its mortgage
regularly.

"Each month there are several payments in large dollar amounts to related
parties of Truong," Mr. Nisselson told the bankruptcy court. "No invoices exist
whatsoever for payments made to these parties."

The health and safety and building code violations climbed past 1,500.  Hundreds
of children were living in the building, and the city said it would refuse to
issue rent checks to homeless families housed there. Within days, Mr. Truong
said he would no longer operate the hotel, and it was taken over by the city in
January 1990. On the first day, workers took out 200 bags of garbage.

"You have to be like a laser beam to go after him," said Anne B. Rudman,
director of the asset forfeiture unit in the Manhattan District Attorney's
office. "Every time you talk to him, he gives you different information."

'Confidential Sources'

When Ms. Rudman wrote Mr. Truong about the drug problem at the Kenmore in
November 1992, he replied three months later with a long account of his
activities in South Vietnam and a promise to cooperate. He also attached a 1979
letter from a Washington lawyer that vouched for Mr. Truong and cited
"confidential sources associated with the United States Government."

After a meeting with La D. Tran, Mr. Truong's representative, on Feb. 22, 1993,
Ms. Rudman suggested in a letter on Feb. 25 that Mr. Truong screen his tenants,
keep building entrances locked, require an identification system, install
surveillance cameras and hire suitable security guards.

"Our records show that your security guards are either selling drugs or
permitting individuals for a sum of money to enter the lobby and buy drugs," she
wrote. She warned that drug trafficking was "causing a serious problem to the
surrounding community's health, safety and welfare" and said that he risked
fines and forfeiture.

Named the Drug Dealers

Mr. Truong points out that he identified the drug dealers to city officials, and
says that the police should have been able to gather enough evidence to evict
them for drug trafficking. For his part, he says, he was trying to evict them
for nonpayment of rent.

"I paid $120,000 last year in property taxes," Mr. Troung said. A moment later,
he said the figure was $228,000. Yet City Finance Department records show he
paid $75,239 in property taxes in 1993, and Eamon Moynihan, a spokesman for the
finance department, said Mr. Truong did so only after the city threatened to
shut him down. At the time the Kenmore Hotel was shut down, Mr. Moynihan said,
Mr. Truong's companies still owed $242,998 in back taxes on the Kenmore and
$491,242 in unpaid taxes on the Carter.

The city's efforts to compel Mr. Truong to maintain his hotels yielded little.
The New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development has taken
him to court four times over conditions at the Kenmore.

In one case in 1988, Mr. Truong was sentenced to 20 days in jail for contempt of
court and ordered to pay a $750 fine for refusing to comply fully with orders to
fix broken elevators, but an appeals court reduced the sentence to $250 with no
jail time.

In April of this year, Mr. Truong was fined $10,000 for failing to correct 251
violations found a year earlier.  Separately, the New York City Environmental
Control Board fined him $35,500 in April for failing to correct health code
violations.

"He's been very clever at working the system," said Miriam Calabro, a lawyer at
the housing preservation agency. "As far as violations go, he'll fix just enough
to get by. But he caused untold human misery."

The real terror, tenants say, came as drug dealers found that the absence of a
working security system allowed them to deal crack from hotel rooms. Dealers,
addicts, prostitutes and more crime followed.

Joseph M. Saponaro, president of a security company hired by Mr. Truong in 1988,
said the hotel owner was interested only in minimizing expenses, insisting that
a single guard was enough, even though the Kenmore had other entrances. Guards
were told to admit anyone who showed a key, Mr. Saponaro said, even after it was
clear that some tenants were throwing keys out the window to people on the
street.

"If we'd sent a scarecrow in a uniform, we could have gotten away with it," Mr.
Saponaro said, adding that his company quit the job in 1992.

In 1991, a 72-year-old woman was raped in a communal women's room on the 11th
floor.

When two killings occurred inside the hotel this spring, one in mid-May and the
other in early June, Federal agents preparing a case to seize the hotel decided
not to wait any longer.

Complicated Cash Flow

Prosecutors said they had difficulty sorting out the cash flow at the hotel.
They estimated its annual rental income at $2.08 million, not including rent
from a handful of commercial tenants along 23d Street, but Mr. Truong's chief
assistant, Mr. Tran, said the hotel took in well under $1 million each year.

Mr. Truong said that he lost $50,000 a month on the Kenmore in 1993, after
breaking even for several years.  "These marshals say I'm making so much money,
but you know what those people pay?" Mr. Truong said. "Seven dollars a day! How
can you pay for water and heat with that price?

"We are very hard working here. I am often here working late. I work all hours.
Seven days. I never take a day off. I haven't taken a day off in 19 years."

Mr. Tran, the assistant, said: "I've known him for many years, but I don't
understand him. He works like a horse. He never enjoys what he has. If I had the
money he has, I wouldn't stay here."

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Those big hotels, Helmsley and Trump, they send the bad people
to Truong," Tran Dinh Truong said. "The city should thank me for taking care of
so many poor and homeless." Mr. Truong's Kenmore Hotel was seized by Federal
agents last month in connection with drug trafficking there. Mr. Truong is shown
in January at his office in the Carter Hotel. (Stephanie Berger for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
Tom Hanks as an Interloper in History

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 9;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words


When a television news report overheard in "Forrest Gump" mentions American
astronauts, the audience can be forgiven for wondering whether the title
character will soon be seen walking on the moon. The charmed life of Forrest
Gump has led him practically everywhere else, from the White House (where
Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon appear to be greeting him amiably) to an
Alabama boarding house (where he gives pelvis-shaking lessons to a guest, the
as-yet-unknown Elvis Presley).

And "Forrest Gump" is such an accomplished feat of cyber-cinema that it makes
these tricks, not to mention subtler ones, look amazingly seamless. As he did in
"Who Framed Roger Rabbit?" and the "Back to the Future" films, Robert Zemeckis
is bound to leave viewers marveling at the sheer wizardry behind such effects.
Even the opening credit sequence, featuring a feather that drifts along a
perfectly choreographed trajectory until it reaches its precise destination -- a
fine visual embodiment of Forrest's own path through life -- is cause for
astonishment.

But as with Mr. Zemeckis's "Death Becomes Her," the audience won't simply ask
how; it will also wonder why. This film maker, the one who made Meryl Streep
appear to speak with her head on backward, remains much more successful at
staging brilliant technical sleight-of-hand than at providing the dramatic basis
for his visual inventions. Structured as Forrest's autobiography, and centering
on his lifelong love for an elusive beauty named Jenny, "Forrest Gump" has the
elements of an emotionally gripping story. Yet it feels less like a romance than
like a coffee-table book celebrating the magic of special effects.

Luckily, "Forrest Gump" has Tom Hanks, the only major American movie star who
could have played Forrest without condescension and without succumbing to the
film's Pollyanna-ish tone. "Let me say this: bein a idiot is no box of
chocolates," says the slow-witted narrator of Winston Groom's tart, playful
novel, on which Eric Roth's screenplay is based. The film's Forrest expresses
this thought in much more saccharine fashion, announcing that his mother used to
say life was like a box of chocolates because "you never know what you're gonna
get."

On screen, "Forrest Gump" doesn't get much tougher than that. It's a loose
string of vignettes, presented at an unemphatic, page-flipping pace by Mr.
Zemeckis, and establishing Forrest as an accidental emblem of his times.
Forrest's love of Jenny (Robin Wright) is the film's only unifying thread, but
it's a thread stretched almost to the breaking point. You are sure to watch this
story chiefly for its digressions, especially those expressed with Forrest's
comically oblivious powers of description: "Now the really good thing about
meetin' the President of the United States is the food."

Forrest says this when, having been named an All-American, he visits the Kennedy
White House and winds up drinking too much Dr. Pepper. Typical of the film's
magic is a brief glimpse of Forrest writhing uncomfortably and telling the
President that he has to go to the bathroom, with a naivete that makes Mr.
Kennedy chuckle.

The President's voice sounds authentic, his mouth movements match his movie
dialogue, and he and Mr. Hanks appear to be on precisely the same film stock, in
the same frame. Special kudos for this go to Ken Ralston, the film's
special-effects supervisor, and to Industrial Light and Magic, pushing the
technical envelope further than ever. Superb gamesmanship like this is its own
reward, even if it accounts for only a fraction of the film's screen time and
sometimes is allowed to wear thin (a patently phony shot seating Forrest next to
John Lennon on the Dick Cavett show, with Mr. Lennon's small talk consisting of
"Imagine" lyrics).

Disabled as a young boy but goaded by his loving Mama (Sally Field) to make the
best of his abilities, Forrest eventually becomes a football star, a war hero, a
successful businessman and an international Ping-Pong champion. Is Mr. Hanks
hitting real Ping-Pong balls at high speed? Or have the balls and whacking
sounds been artificially added? By the time this sequence comes around, viewers
will have lost all ability to distinguish real images from clever counterfeits.
The single most dazzling special effect turns Gary Sinise, as Forrest's Vietnam
friend and subsequent business partner, into a double amputee.

Meanwhile, American popular culture explodes around Forrest, allowing Mr.
Zemeckis to contrive a string of Zeitgeist-laden picture postcards. Jenny goes
from country girl to hippie to political activist to druggie and onward. When
she goes to San Francisco during the flower-power days, viewers will know
exactly which pop song to expect in the background.

In fact, "Forrest Gump" is so loaded with hit songs and eye-catching costumes
that these superficial elements often supplant the narrative. When Forrest,
demonstrating the kind of benign whimsy that brings to mind Kurt Vonnegut's
early fiction, decides that he feels like running across America for a couple of
years, "Running on Empty," "It Keeps You Runnin'," "Go Your Own Way" and "On the
Road Again" are all used for musical accompaniment. While en route, he also
invents one very popular bumper slogan and the "Have a Nice Day" T-shirt logo.

If Forrest is a holy fool, Mr. Hanks makes his holiness very apparent. Only in
this touching, imaginatively childlike performance does the film display any
emotional weight. Sitting on a bench at a bus stop during most of the film,
eagerly recounting his life story for a succession of strangers, Mr. Hanks's
Forrest has an unerring sincerity and charm. If it's difficult to reconcile this
sweet, guileless performance with the film's technical obsessiveness (a special
satellite was used to track the sun's position and determine optimum lighting
for the film's outdoor scenes), well, maybe it should be.

Deserving of special mention among the actors are Mykelti Williamson, as the
Army buddy who turns out to be a perfect match for Forrest, and Mr. Sinise,
whose dark, bitter performance offers an element of surprise. Ms. Wright's role
is structured mostly as a set of costume changes, but she is as strong and
resilient as the material requires. Ms. Field, unfazed by the job of playing Mr.
Hanks's mother, charges through the story in flowery, emphatically genteel
Southern costumes. Like everything else about "Forrest Gump," she looks a little
too good to be true.

"Forrest Gump" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes brief
nudity, sexual references and mild profanity.

FORREST GUMP

Directed by Robert Zemeckis; written by Eric Roth, based on the novel by Winston
Groom; director of photography, Don Burgess; edited by Arthur Schmidt; music by
Alan Silvestri; production designer, Rick Carter; produced by Wendy Finerman,
Steve Tisch and Steve Starkey; released by ParamountViacomcoei. Running time:
140 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

WITH: Sally Field, Tom Hanks, Gary Sinise, Mykelti Williamson and Robin Wright.

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gary Sinise, left, has words for Tom Hanks, who stars in
"Forrest Gump" as an innocent caught up in great events of the 20th century.
(Phil Caruso/Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

STANDOFF IN HAITI: THE WHITE HOUSE;
Clinton's Haiti Problem: What Price Democracy?

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 6


As American commandos rehearse for war and Administration officials insist that
the crisis in Haiti must end soon, the unanswerable question is whether
President Clinton himself is really willing to risk American lives to restore
democracy to Haiti.

His aides insist that despite intensified military planning for an invasion and
increased war talk, Mr. Clinton has not yet decided what to do.

The decision on Tuesday to change policy on Haitian refugees once again was an
ad hoc response to a particular problem and not part of an overall strategy to
oust Haiti's military leaders. And officials stress that they are still
considering other ways the United States can pile more pressure on Haiti's
military leaders before sending in the marines.

The Administration's public actions and statements offer little help in
deciphering Mr. Clinton's intentions. As happened with the shift on refugees,
the White House seems to be lurching from one short-term solution to another,
often creating new problems that in turn require new quick fixes.

The President's special envoy on Haiti, William H. Gray 3d, said today that
Washington does not expect the Haitian military to be in power six months from
now. But the Administration has delivered no such formal ultimatum to the
military junta, ordering them to leave or risk an invasion by a date certain,
despite the request by the American Ambassador to Haiti, William Swing, that he
be given the authority to do so, officials say.

No Consensus on Sanctions

The Administration has debated, but failed to agree on, authorizing a covert
program by the Central Intelligence Agency to sow dissension among the military
or finance the departure of the country's three top military leaders, the
officials add.

Moreover, there is no consensus among Mr. Clinton's national security advisers
on how much longer the United States should give the stringent economic
sanctions to work before it moves to an invasion.

Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott, for example, argued strongly in recent
interagency meetings that American credibility was at stake and that there had
to be a change in government by the end of the year at the latest, even if it
took an invasion, officials said. The Pentagon remains strongly opposed to an
invasion, and Pentagon officials have continued to point out the problems with
an invasion.

Part of the problem in the Administration's decision-making on Haiti is that the
tension between Mr. Clinton's desire to do what he calls the "moral" thing has
clashed with political reality; another part of the problem is that the
Administration has imposed punitive measures on the military only in stages. The
result: a policy that seems to shift with every new development at home or in
Haiti.

A Temporary Solution

Mr. Clinton's decision on May 8 to end the practice of forcibly returning
Haitians intercepted at sea came after he told aides that he could no longer
continue a policy that was "making Haitians choose between being drowned at seas
or having their faces cut off on land."

But the Administration estimated that only hundreds of Haitians a day would try
to seek refuge in the United States; when thousands a day began to leave, Mr.
Clinton found a way to deny them the opportunity to settle in the United States
eventually by finding refuge for them in other, less attractive countries.

Senior Administration officials admit that Mr. Clinton's decision to divert
refugees to third countries is at best a temporary solution that buys a few more
weeks or months to test whether the strategy of painful economic sanctions will
topple the military.

By contrast, the decision to send a landing force of 2,000 marines into the
Caribbean and statements by Mr. Gray that American lives in Haiti must be
protected at all costs, move the United States closer to war.

Mr. Clinton is hoping that what his senior aides call a "credible threat of
force" to restore the exiled President, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, will
somehow persuade Haiti's military leaders to leave the country quietly. Instead,
it may simply push Lieut. Gen. Raoul Cedras to call Mr. Clinton's bluff by
threatening the lives of American citizens.

Clinton Called Ambivalent

"The Administration has created a situation it may not be able to control," said
Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, who has been highly critical of
the Administration's policy to try to restore Father Aristide to power. "Armed
intervention is becoming its only option."

Still, Mr. Clinton is said to be ambivalent about whether he should exercise his
prerogative as commander and chief and order the use of force in Haiti.
According to people familiar with his thinking, he has vowed not to let the
Haitian crisis become a vehicle for overcoming lingering skepticism about his
attitude to the use of force stemming from his opposition to the Vietnam War and
his avoidance of the draft. On the other hand, he has told intimates that he is
not willing to prove the skeptics wrong by risking people's lives.

Last May, for example, Mr. Clinton laid out six good reasons why an invasion was
justified, among them: "It's in our backyard"; several thousands Americans live
there, and there is a "continuous possibility" of a huge exodus of Haitians if
democracy is not restored. But that same month, at a "town meeting" on the Cable
News Network he undercut his own position when he said, "We are doing our best
to avoid dealing with the military option."

If Mr. Clinton wants to invade Haiti, he may not have much of a battle with
Congress. In a little-noticed action last Wednesday, the Senate rejected, by 65
votes to 34, an amendment to the 1995 Foreign Operations Appropriations bill
binding President Clinton to get Congressional approval or justify the use of
force before ordering an invasion of Haiti aimed at ousting its military rulers.

Not that Mr. Clinton is insensitive to the wishes of Capitol Hill. Even though
he has not decided whether to invade, he knows that there are certain blackout
dates for the use of military force. Aides say that he is keenly aware that the
optimal time to invade is after Congress recesses in the first part of August
and before Labor Day, because lawmakers do not want their campaigns complicated
by an invasion.


LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Striking Oil but Straining Families

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: HOUMA, La.


When Jimmy Josey left for work recently, he hugged his two young sons and kissed
his wife goodbye.

But instead of heading to nearby Bilco Tools in his pickup truck, he drove about
40 miles northeast to New Orleans International Airport. Then, starting his
28-hour journey to the oilfields of Kazakhstan, he moved into the routine that
is now part of his life in the domestic oil industry: He heads overseas, for a
month at a stretch, to teach Kazakh, Hungarian and Russian workers to operate
drill pipe-handling equipment made by his company.

Stocky and deep-voiced, Mr. Josey, who is 38, has worked on rigs across the Gulf
of Mexico and thought he always would. "If you worked hard and hustled," he
said, "there was always a place for you because there was so much activity."

Now that activity is shifting, to Russia and other former Soviet republics,
Brazil, China, Angola and, soon, to Vietnam. And oil workers like Mr. Josey are
learning to adapt in mid-career -- a time when many Americans expect to be
settled into a work and home routine -- to spending up to half their time
working abroad, living in dormitories and struggling to learn other languages,
diets and ways of life.

Though energy companies have always gone overseas in search of oil and natural
gas, that activity has picked up in the last four years and is likely to
accelerate as more deals are completed. Encouraged by firming oil prices and
promises of big profits from abroad, big oil companies now spend almost 65
percent of their exploration budgets overseas, up from 51 percent in 1990,
according to the American Petroleum Institute.

The industry does not tally how many of its employees work abroad, but
executives and blue-collar workers say there is no question that companies are
increasingly relying on overseas projects for future earnings. Being in the
domestic energy industry, they say, now means being willing to go overseas.

"I didn't anticipate I'd be working in a foreign country, but that's what it
takes these days," said Jim Henley, regional manager for
the<cobi>Chevron<coei>Corporation's offshore operations in Cabinda, Angola. He
is gone from his wife, Frances, and their home in Mandeville, across Lake
Pontchartrain from New Orleans, for a month at a time.

Mr. Josey once believed that the oil in the warm, rich gulf would always put a
paycheck in his pocket. But now he and other lone men, lugging duffel bags and
trunks, are seen more frequently among the travelers at the New Orleans airport.
Mr. Josey's neighbor, Kirby Falcon, routinely heads to Norway and the North Sea
for Hydraulic Well Control, a drilling support company also based in Houma.
Another man from Houma, John Triagle, oversees oil-rig crews for the Halliburton
Company in the Far East. And Jeff Cetodal teaches Brazilians about Bilco
technology that helps bring oil wells into production.

All had expected to finish their careers in the gulf. All now work overseas
several months or more each year.

Mr. Josey is gone for up to four times a year, 28 days at a stretch. When he is
overseas, he quadruples his usual weekly paycheck in Houma. But the work takes a
toll on him and his family.

Starting Support Groups

Overseas, many men work in such remote areas that they can call home no more
than once a week, and their employers try to limit them to 15 minutes a call on
scarce phone lines. So many men from Houma and the small nearby cities of
Thibodaux and Morgan City work overseas that their wives have formed small
support groups to ease their lives as single mothers.

Mr. Josey's wife, Dana, belongs to a group that she and four local friends call
the Oilfield Wives.

"Sometimes you just feel that the whole burden is on you," said Mrs. Josey, 35,
lighting a cigarette. The mother of two sons, ages 4 and 8, said the boys tested
her when their father was not around. "You have to be real tough like daddy,"
she said, looking at the two. "Then you have to be tender like mama."

Jamie Falcon, who is 23, says that when her 2-year-old son hears a plane
overhead, he sometimes asks: "Is Daddy coming home?" Recently, her husband was
home for two days before his schedule changed and he had to board a flight back
to Norway. This time, he'll be gone for several months.

The changes have hit blue-collar workers and managers alike. Mr. Henley,
Chevron's manager in Angola, is 50 years old and had worked his way up the
corporate ladder to become manager of environment and safety in an area that
includes the gulf. But seven years ago, when Chevron decided to step up its
exploration and production in Africa, it sent him to Angola. He recently left
Houma for a 28-day stint there.

"After a few years, you get used to it," said his wife, Frances, who teaches
piano and plays the organ at the First Baptist Church in Mandeville.

Dorms and 12-Hour Shifts

The men adjust, too, but differently. In Angola, Mr. Henley works 12-hour
shifts, six days a week, overseeing drilling and production platforms. He lives
in a self-contained complex with dormitories that house 580 workers.

Mr. Josey has learned to work on rigs in temperatures that sink 40 degrees below
zero. In the Tengiz oilfield of Kazakhstan, he works 12-hour shifts,
communicating with the workers through translators. He has widened his palate by
eating local foods like pig lung soup, cooked by his Kazakh colleagues, but he
stays close to the Americans.

"We sit at the same table," he said of his American co-workers from Mississippi,
Texas and Oklahoma. "You have somebody to talk to."

In their efforts to cope, the Joseys have found some rewards. Mrs. Josey, for
instance, has developed more of her own interests. She has set up a small
workshop in her home where she makes colorful ceramic bowls and lamps. But her
boys get restless during the weeks of their father's absence, and when he
returns she gives him three days to recover before handing them over to him. The
rebonding is intense.

"It just means so much to see the boys," Mr. Josey said. And Dustin, who is 8,
likes to pull the pay stub out of his father's shirt pocket and marvel that the
amount on it can be as high as $1,200 a week.

A Domestic Industry's Shrinkage

The need to send workers overseas is unlikely to change anytime soon, even
though a small recovery in drilling in the gulf is expected later this year. The
domestic energy industry has shrunk to 443,800 workers, from 920,000 in 1982,
the American Petroleum Institute said. Oil prices dropped sharply in the 1980's,
many domestic fields matured and hundreds of smaller companies went out of
business or were sold. Domestic exploration spending, which reached $29.9
billion in its heyday in 1982, fell to $7.4 billion by 1992, according to an
institute study of 18 big oil companies.

[The most recent example of how the domestic oil industry is shrinking came
Tuesday as the Texaco Corporation said it would put half of its 600 domestic
fields on the auction block as part of a wider effort to cut costs. It plans to
cut a total of 2,500 jobs in domestic and international operations.]

Louisiana has been whipsawed by the industry's volatility. Energy-related jobs
in the state had dwindled to 42,000 last year from 102,000 in 1981. One of the
hardest-hit areas includes Houma and Thibodaux, which is heavily tied to oil and
gas exploration.

Mr. Josey's employer, Bilco Tools, is one of the local survivors, and its
president, Bill Coyle, can rattle off the names of small neighboring companies
that went under or were sold at fire-sale prices during the 1980's. "People
bought companies for 15 cents on the dollar," Mr. Coyle recalled.

'Where the Action Is'

He decided that if Bilco was to survive, it needed new business from overseas,
and he scoured the world for orders. The first came from Abu Dhabi and India.
Now they range from the North Sea to the Far East.

"We had the choice of going out of business or going where the action is," he
said. Today, about 20 percent of his company's revenue comes from overseas and
about one-quarter of his 80 employees work abroad for some stretches of the
year.

As oil companies increasingly shift investments overseas, the area around the
gulf is "fighting to hold on to what it can," said Loren C. Scott, a professor
of economics at Louisiana State University. "Workers have had to readjust their
lives."

Mr. Josey, for one, is more than willing to do so and grateful for the work.
Without it, he would be one of the tens of thousands of oil industry workers who
have had to move to other states and take lower-paying jobs, flipping hamburgers
or pumping gas.

"If it weren't for Bilco," he said, "I don't know where we'd be."

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: As oil drilling shifts overseas, many American workers are
following. Chevron's Jim Henley, above, of Mandeville, La., kissed his wife,
Frances, before leaving for Angola in March. Jimmy Josey, below, of Bilco Tools
in Houma, La., worked on a rig in Kazakhstan last winter. (Photographs by Matt
Anderson for The New York Times) (pg. D1); Some oil drilling equipment made in
the United States is used overseas. At Bilco Tools in Houma, La., Bilco's
president, Bill Coyle, left, and Jimmy Josey inspected a friction grip unit used
in some foreign operations. (Matt Anderson for The New York Times) (pg. D2)

Graph: "Where Oil Is Sought" shows spending on oil exploration by 18 major oil
companies from '81 to '92 (Source: American Petroleum Institute) (pg. D2)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. C. L. Donnelly, 64, Dies; Allied Air Chief for Europe

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


Gen. Charles Lawthers Donnelly Jr., who rose from fighter pilot in Vietnam to
command all of America's and NATO's air power in Europe, died on Sunday in
Malcolm Grow Medical Center at Andrews Air Force Base. A resident of Arlington,
Va., he was 64 years old.

The cause of death was cancer, a spokesman for the Air Force said.

General Donnelly reached four-star rank in 1984, a few months after he took over
as commander in chief of United States Air Forces in Europe, and commander of
Allied Forces Central Europe. He had his headquarters at Ramstein Air Base, in
the German Rhineland, and he retired from those commands and from the service
three years later.

Before moving to Germany, he was stationed at Yokota Air Base in Japan for three
years, commanding the Fifth Air Force and United States Forces in Japan. That
placed him in charge of American air units in both Japan and South Korea and
made him overall the senior American military man based in Japan.

8,000 Hours of Flight Time

Born in Barberton, Ohio, he graduated from Otterbein College in Westerville,
Ohio, in 1950, a year before he joined the Air Force as an aviation cadet. He
later received a master's degree in public administration from George Washington
University and graduated from the Squadron Officer School, the Air Command and
Staff College, the Air War College, and the Royal College of Defense Studies in
London.

In all, General Donnelly was credited with over 8,000 hours of flight time in 38
types of aircraft. In the early 1950's he flew F-51's and F-86's for the 431st
Fighter-Interceptor Squadron at Selfridge Air Force Base in Michigan and what
was then Wheelus Air Base in Libya.

He completed a series of assignments as an instructor, operations officer and
aide-de-camp at a training command in this country before he was posted to the
555th Tactical Fighter Squadron at the Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Base in 1966. A
major and flight commander, he logged 100 combat missions over North Vietnam and
27 over Laos until he was attached to Air Force headquarters in Washington eight
months later.

Just before he took his post in Japan, he was the chief of the United States
Training Mission to Saudi Arabia. As such he oversaw the American
security-assistance and military sales programs in Saudi Arabia. He coordinated
all Department of Defense activities in that country.

Among his many decorations were the Distinguished Service Medal, Defense
Superior Service Medal, Legion of Merit with two oak-leaf clusters,
Distinguished Flying Cross and Air Medal with 12 oak-leaf clusters.

General Donnelly is survived by his wife of 42 years, Carolyn Vandersall
Donnelly; a daughter, Linda E. Wieland of Fredericksburg, Va.; two sisters,
Susan Hartfield of Columbus, Ohio, and Margaret Bischoff of Antioch, Ill., and
two grandchildren.

NAME: Charles Lawthers Donnelly Jr.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Charles L. Donnelly Jr. (1982)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 7, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

As His Backers Protest, Philip Berrigan Is Sentenced to Prison

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: ELIZABETH CITY, N.C., July 6


As scores of peace demonstrators outside the courthouse sang spirituals and
waved signs saying "War No More" and "Arms Are for Hugging," a Federal district
judge today sentenced Philip F. Berrigan to an eight-month prison term for
vandalizing an Air Force fighter-bomber last winter.

Such 60's-style scenes of protest may now be rare, but Mr. Berrigan's advocacy
of antiwar sentiment has outlasted the cold war and the transformation of
hippies to yuppies. Mr. Berrigan, a 70-year-old former Roman Catholic priest,
estimates that he has been arrested more than 100 times in the two dozen years
since he took up the fight against the Vietnam War. And he has spent more than
six of those years, including the last seven months, in prison.

Predawn Battering

Mr. Berrigan and three companions were convicted of willfully damaging Federal
property in using household hammers to batter the antennae, the landing gear and
the fuselage of an F-15E jet at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base in Goldsboro,
N.C., 145 miles southwest of here, before dawn last Dec. 7.

At the time, the demonstrators said they had chosen an F-15E because that model
of plane had been extensively used in the Persian Gulf war. And Mr. Berrigan
said in court today that they had wanted "to clog the gears of the killing
machine, even if only for a moment."

Judge Terrence W. Boyle sentenced Mr. Berrigan not only to eight months in
prison but also to four months of subsequent confinement at his Baltimore home
and then three years of supervised release. Judge Boyle also admonished him not
to "damage or destroy any property of the Government."

The three other protesters were the Rev. John Dear, a 34-year-old Jesuit priest
from Washington; Lynn Fredriksson, 30, an advocate for the homeless, who is from
Baltimore, and Bruce Friedrich, 24, of Washington. Each received a prison term
of 12 to 15 months and three years of supervised release.

Daniel Berrigan on Hand

Mr. Berrigan and his older brother, the Rev. Daniel Berrigan, 73, have been
protesting what they call "the warfare state" for a quarter of a century.
Although Daniel Berrigan was not involved in the North Carolina incident, he
said outside the courthouse today that he had been arrested at least six times a
year and was planning a day of civil disobedience next month in his hometown,
New York.

Many of the demonstrators who gathered with Daniel Berrigan outside the
courthouse view Philip Berrigan as the patron saint of American pacifism. "He
has the guts -- or the idiocy," said Anne V. Tucker, 68. "I just dream about
it."

Inside the courtroom, Mr. Berrigan was not treated with quite so much reverence.
At one point today, Judge Boyle, who was nominated to the Federal bench by
President Ronald Reagan in 1984, told the defendant that once he was released
from prison he would have to make partial restitution to the Air Force: $2,700,
one-tenth the cost of repairs to the plane. Mr. Berrigan stood. "My conscience
would not allow me to pay any restitution, or fine," he said.

The judge replied curtly: "My conscience, and the law, wouldn't permit me not to
order some. You cross that bridge when you come to it."

Mr. Berrigan will be credited with the seven months he has already served since
his arrest. But he still owes prison time for an act of vandalism at the
Pentagon last summer. So the time of his release is uncertain.

After the hearing, his wife, Elizabeth McAlister, hugged their 20-year-old
daughter, Frida Berrigan. "We'll get him back," Ms. McAlister said. "Sometime."


LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 9, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

KIM IL SUNG DEAD AT AGE 82; LED NORTH KOREA 5 DECADES; WAS NEAR TALKS WITH SOUTH

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3541 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Saturday, July 9


Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader since 1945 and the man who led the invasion
of the South and beganthe Korean War, died at 2 a.m. on Friday at the age of 82,
Pyongyang Radio said today.

At shortly after noon, the Korean Central News Agency, the country's official
news organization, issued a seven-page announcement of Mr. Kim's death, which
said that he would be remembered as a man capable of "creating something from
nothing."

"He turned our country, where age-old backwardness and poverty had prevailed,
into a powerful Socialist country, independent, self-supporting and
self-reliant," the statement said. It called him the "sun of the nation."

Mr. Kim, who is revered throughout the country as the "Great Leader," is
reported to have collapsed with a heart attack sometime on Thursday. It said his
son and heir apparent, Kim Jong Il, would direct the funeral of his father.

Mr. Kim's death just hours before the negotiations with the United States began,
seems certain to raise questions over whether he actually died of natural
causes.

Mr. Kim was also scheduled to conduct a first summit meeting with South Korea's
President, Kim Young Sam, in Pyongyang, the North's capital, on July 25. It
would have been the first such summit since the division of the Korean
Peninsula.

For months there have been reports of factional infighting within the Government
over whether to open up the country in return for financial aid, or to continue
defying the international community and press ahead with the nuclear program.

An odd announcement about Mr. Kim's recent medical treatment, issued in
mid-afternoon, included some mysterious wording that will likely fuel the
speculation. It said that "on July 7 he suffered from a serious myocardial
infarction) owing to heavy mental strains, which was followed by a heart shock."
It said he had been disagnoed as suffering from arteriosclerosis, and that a
"diagnosis of the disease was fully confimred in the pathological anatomic
examination" conducted today.

A "State Funeral Committee" in Pyongyang issued another announcement, saying
that the leader's coffin was lying in state at the Kumsusan Assembly Hall in
central Pyongyang beginning and that a period of mourning would last until July
17 when the funeral is scheduled. "Foreign mourning delegations will not be
received," the announcement said.

It added that artillery salutes would be fired in the capital and every
province. "All songs and dances, games and amusement will be banned," during the
mourning period.

Mr. Kim was last seen, apparently healthy, during a remarkable two-day meeting
with President Jimmy Carter at which he agreed to freeze North Korea's nuclear
program in return for restarting high-level talks with the United States over an
end to the country's five-decade-long isolation.

Mr. Carter said on Wednesday that Mr. Kim told him at the time that he planned
to "remain active for the next 10 years."

The renewed talks with the North, after a year of brinkmanship that seemed for a
while to be veering toward a new confrontation between North Korea and the West,
began in Geneva on Friday. The meeting was reported by both sides to have gone
well, and negotiators gave no indication of Mr. Kim's death, if they knew. The
meetings were supended today, and the chief United States delegate, Robert
Gallucci, as saying "further talks are meaningless."

Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who was told of the reports at 5 A.M.
here, telephoned his South Korean counterpart, Han Sung Chu, and was told that
the Government of South Korea regarded the reports as very credible, said
Michael McCurry, a State Department spokesman.

Japanese Government officials said today that they could not confirm the
announcement, which was delayed by Pyongyang for 34 hours.

For years South Korea and the United States have had extensive contingency plans
for Mr. Kim's death, including higher states of military alert. The South Korean
Defense Ministry said the army was on special alert today and that the same was
true of the North Korean army. But the Defense Ministry said there were no
special troop movements on the North Korean side. The north's military movements
are tracked almost minute by minute.

The President of South Korea called an emergency cabinet meeting, the Korean
Broadcasting Service in Seoul reported.

For half a century, North Korea has been essentially a family business headed by
Mr. Kim, whose image is captured in monuments in every town and who is credited,
in the national mythology and in song, with the country's creation and
development. His cult of personality is everywhere, celebrated in "mass games"
run on his birthday that involve hundreds of thousands, and in the everyday
invocation of his philosophy of "juche" or national self-reliance.

Years ago, in an attempt to create something of a Stalinist dynasty, Mr. Kim
designated his son, known as the Dear Leader, as his successor. But there have
been persistent doubts over whether the younger Mr. Kim, a reclusive and deeply
mysterious man who, according to Western intelligence reports may not be
mentally stable, would win the confidence of the North Korean military.

Many have speculated that the death of the elder Mr. Kim would touch off a power
struggle and perhaps a crumbling of the country's Communist Government.

But such a process could take years. There there is little understanding of the
country's leadership elite beyond the elder Mr. Kim, who has been widely
regarded as the only man able to make national decisions for the country.

With the nation's economy shrinking several percent a year and its factories
grinding to a halt, Mr. Kim's "Paradise on Earth," as his propaganda machine
calls it, seems headed toward collapse. Its nuclear program, which may or may
not have already succeeded in producing one or two weapons, has in the past two
years become the biggest security crisis in Asia.

Mr. Kim was installed by Stalin shortly after the end of World War II. Born on
the outskirts of Pyongyang, in a thatch house that is visited daily by thousands
of North Koreans, he spent nearly 20 years of his youth in Manchuria, the North
Korean border areas and the Soviet Union as a guerrilla fighter against the
Japanese.

Shortly after the official creation of the Democratic Peoples' Republic of Korea
in 1948 he consolidated his power. He launched the Korean war in 1950, in a
blitzkrieg attack that took Washington and Seoul by total surprise. His goal, he
said, was to reunite the Korean Peninsula, and it took three years to fight to
an armistice. Ever since the Demilitarized Zone, dividing North and South, has
been the most heavily-armed outpost of the Cold War, and 36,000 American troops
are still stationed near it.

The Weaker Korea

For years it appeared that his country would be the stronger of the two Koreas:
It had all the raw materials and, until the early 1960's, a healthier economy.

But that reversed as the capitalist South, with aid from the United States and
Japan, and a population of 40 million surged ahead as a producer of steel, cars
and semiconductors. The North, diplomatically isolated, went into slow decline,
increasingly dependent on China and the Soviet Union for oil and critical
industrial goods. Its own industrial base was left over from the Japanese
occupation, save for some major project that Mr. Kim was credited with directing
with "on the spot guidance."

With the end of the cold war, however, Mr. Kim was quickly abandoned by his
allies. Russia embraced the South, eager for its aid and its technological help.
China also began relations with Seoul, and Mr. Kim, on his periodic trips to
Beijing, was greeted with airport signs for Samsung, the huge South Korean
conglomerate. Recently South Korea's leaders began visiting Moscow and Beijing
regularly.

To save his regime, Mr. Kim turned to the nuclear option. He developed a small
reactor at Yongbyon, a heavily-guarded military installation north of the
capital, into a sprawling nuclear complex. While he signed the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty in 1985, he refused to allow inspectors into his country
until two years ago. And since that time, he has conducted an increasingly tense
cat-and mouse game with the United Nations and specifically the United States,
keeping inspectors at bay. In March, his nuclear scientists began unloading
spent fuel from a reactor at Yongbyon. The fuel, if processed, could yield
enough plutonium for five or so bombs. That prompted a move for sanctions
against the North in the United Nations, and those sanctions seemed likely until
Mr. Carter's trip last month, which raised hopes about relaxing tensions on the
Korean peninsula.

Mr. Carter was heavily criticized in the United States as he left Pyongyang for
appearing to accept Mr. Kim's assurances at face value. The former President
said that during his trip a "miracle" had occurred, and that Mr. Kim -- who had
never before met such a high-ranking American -- was simply looking for respect.

Mr. Carter declared that, by derailing the sanctions, he and the North Korean
leader had avoided a war. Sanctions, Mr. Carter declared, were a terrible idea,
one that would brand Mr. Kim "a criminal and a liar," and probably prompt his 22
million indoctrinated followers to renew hostilities simply to protect the image
of their President.

After all, Carter said a bit enviously later in Tokyo, "you have to remember
that at home, President Kim Il Sung is treated as a combination of George
Washington, Thomas Jefferson and Abe Lincoln."

In fact, in recent years there were two Kim Il Sungs who seemed to occupy the
world stage: The one who ran the Korean gulags, who had enemies purged or
executed, who presumably masterminded the attempt to assassinate the South
Korean Cabinet while on a trip to Burma in the early 1980's -- and the kindly
old man who met Mr. Carter.

Former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, who met Mr. Kim twice, once
in 1980 and then again in 1991, said of him: "He has this avuncular persona that
stands in stark contrast to the reality of the regime, which is without question
the most ruthless and tyrannical anywhere in the world. It is like meeting
Hitler at Berchtesgaden and commenting on how he got along with the dogs and the
children. He has the blood of millions on his hands; he has a society based on
Orwell's '1984.' So you expect someone who will act like Saddam Hussein, a
forbidding, threatening presence. And he is just the opposite, always smiling,
always speaking softly."

But in North Korea Mr. Kim seemed, at least in every public utterance, to be
nothing short of a god. Every gift a North Korean received from the government
-- clothes, rice, a new apartment -- was said to come directly from "the Great
Leader" or "the Dear Leader."

He held every important post in the country, including General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea, its one party, and president
of the country. His son was given increasing control over the military, but has
rarely been seen in public in recent times.

There is so much state-sponsored mythology about Kim Il Sung's youth that it is
nearly impossible to separate truth and fiction. But in all of the stories about
his early days, including those he has written himself, there is always a clear
subtext: Mr. Kim's struggles against greater powers around him, particularly the
Americans and the Japanese.

They control the world, and it is the Kim family's destiny to battle them. In
his memoirs, published in Pyongyang two years ago, Mr. Kim maintained that his
great-grandfather set fire to the General Sherman, a "U.S. imperialist
aggressors' ship" because its crew went about "stealing the people's possession
and raping the women" while sailing up the Taedong River to Pyongyang in 1866.
(Mr. Kim's biographer at the University of Hawaii, Suh Dae Sook, calls these
stories "politically motivated fabrications," but most of them seem impossible
to verify.)

Whether the stories are true or not, the myths have become the man. In the
outskirts of Pyongyang, thousands of the faithful line up every day to glimpse
the small mud hut where he is said to have lived with his parents, both of whom,
he says, fought the Japanese occupation of Korea.

But the hut serves as more than just proof of his of-the-people roots; Mr. Kim
often contrasted his own early life with that of the Americans (mostly
missionaries) and the Japanese in Pyongyang. "In the 'Westerners village' at the
time inhabited by Americans and the Japanese settlers, brick houses, shops and
churches increased in number," he recalled vividly many decades later, but
across town "the slum quarters were getting bigger."

It was around this time that he committed his first act of rebellion against
Japan's brutal occupation, using a pocket knife to scratch out the title "Mother
Tongue Reader" from the textbook issued by the Japanese colonial government that
required all children to speak nothing but Japanese. He scratched in "Japanese
Reader" on the cover, and from that moment, "whenever I saw children trying to
learn Japanese, I told them Koreans must speak Korean."

Neither his own memoirs or official biographies dwell on the fact that he spent
the vast majority of his youth in Manchuria, where he learned Chinese. That
later turned out to be a crucial skill, as he joined up with China's communist
guerrillas. And it is from China that Kim combined Communist philosophy with the
nationalist mission that his father bequeathed him -- along with two pistols --
on his deathbed: To free the Korean Peninsula from Japanese domination.

Mr. Kim served as an anti-Japanese guerrilla in Manchuria, Siberia and the North
Korean border areas starting in his early 20's, but it is impossible to verify
the claims of his astounding feats, including the killing of a unit of Japanese
special police who were tracking him in 1940. The next year, he was forced to
retreat to the Soviet Union of for the remainder of the war. He makes no mention
of that time, perhaps because it would be too obvious that his son, the "Dear
Leader" Kim Jong Il, was born there in February 1942, instead of on Korea's own
soil.

At the time, Mr. Kim was married to Kim Chong Suk, who died in 1949. His current
wife was scarcely seen until Jimmy Carter's visit last month, where she played a
surprisingly important role.

Mr. Carter had proposed that, as a gesture of good will, Mr. Kim allow the
United States to bring home the bodies of soldiers buried in the North's
territory, and search for other remains. Kim wavered, saying he would have to
check with his advisers and take the issue up through diplomatic channels. "His
wife spoke up and said, 'We should do it now,' " Carter recalled a few weeks
ago. "And he said O.K. And it was done."

In North Korea's official histories, Kim took control of the country as soon as
he singlehandedly kicked out the Japanese.

Of course, Kim's emergence was a far more complicated affair than the official
accounts suggest. When he arrived back in Korea in 1945, he had been absent from
the country for 20 years. His Communist party was tiny, outnumbered by other
nationalist groups. But he rose to power by denouncing the "lackeys" of the
Japanese and the Americans in his midst, and wiped out many of his enemies.

Most importantly, he won the confidence of the Soviets, who entered the Pacific
war in the last days and took administrative control of the North. They reached
for Kim, who quickly moved to consolidate power in the Korean Worker's Party.
But the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was not created officially until
September 1948, after the United States organized the first government in the
South, the Republic of Korea.

When Kim Il Sung led an invading army into the South in June, 1950 -- an
unbelievable scene of carnage that today seems like another world from modern
Seoul -- the Truman Administration saw the takeover as the first step in a far
broader Communist plot, directed from Moscow and Beijing, to seize much of Asia.

But a remarkable new study published earlier this year by Stanford University
Press -- one that is fairly chilling given the current nuclear standoff -- shows
it was Kim Il Sung who did all the plotting. Documents recently made available
in Russia, along with others that have slipped out of China, show that Kim was
convinced he could take the South in three days.

Stalin, who had put Kim in office five years before, was skeptical during a
meeting in April 1950, but said that he might go along if the Chinese did. Mao
was worried as well, fearful that the United States might step in. But Kim,
showing a talent that he still clearly still possesses, played the two men off
against each other brilliantly, inflating Stalin's interest when talking to Mao,
and Mao's when talking to Stalin. It was the first of many incidents in which he
manipulated his far bigger partners not only against the West, but against each
other.

After a brilliant beginning, Kim's war plans went astray. The American
intervention was a surprise. The war made a desperate economic situation in the
North worse. But Kim emerged in position to wipe out his remaining rivals. And
he never forgot the threats issued by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, and indirectly
backed up by Harry Truman, that the Americans might end the war with a mushroom
cloud. That, to many minds, was the start of the North's nuclear program.

But there were dozens of small clashes over the years along the DMZ, sometimes
resulting in the deaths of South Koreans and Americans. Both sides built up
enormous forces: Mr. Kim's army was 1.1 million strong, though in recent years
it has spent much of its time building apartments and dams rather than training.

In 1968, as the Vietnam War raged, North Korea and Mr. Kim surged into the
headlines again. The North seized an American intelligence ship, the Pueblo, and
its crew stayed in prison for 11 years. In 1972 there were the first gestures of
peace to the South, called the Red Cross Talks, in which both sides talked of
allowing families divided by the war to meet. But those talks broke off and were
not resumed for 18 years.

When they did come back together the two Koreas reached an historic accord: A
December, 1991 agreement on peace and denuclearization. It was not a peace
treaty. But it did provide for communications between the two Koreas: Roads,
radio broadcasts, exchange of mail, mutual inspection of each other's military
sites. None of that has happened, and relations worsened as the nuclear crisis
deepened.

Starting last year, suddenly North Korea was back on Washington's agenda. The
C.I.A. predicted the country could be a year to 18 months from building a bomb.
Its ambitions -- to build a weapon that could threaten Seoul and Tokyo, and to
assemble an arsenal of missiles to go with it -- has been the focus of America's
security problems in Asia for two years now, as officials have tried to
determine if the weapons project was a bargaining chip for economic aid or an
effort to remain independent.

Mr. Kim devoted a huge amount of the country's scarce resources to building a
nuclear complex centered on a 25 megawatt reactor based on old technology used
by the British in the 1950's. The design uses ordinary uranium as fuel and
graphite to control the nuclear reaction: The North has its own, ample supplies
of both, meaning it does not have to worry about being cut off by foreign
powers.

Conveniently, such old designs create waste that is high in plutonium content.
The plutonium can be extracted and converted into bomb fuel with the right
reprocessing technology. And the cat-and-mouse game over the past few years has
been all about the North's steady progress in building that technology, while
denying it all the way. For years the North denied it was building a
reprocessing plant, even though a football-field sized one sticks out on
satellite photographs. The Great Leader and the Dear Leader don't need a
satellite: They have a guest cottage was built amid the complex. In the Spring,
inspectors who got back into the non-existent reprocessing plant reported that a
second manufacturing line was under construction -- to allow greater throughput.

In Washington, successive administrations sleepwalked through the evidence of
the buildup. There was always another nuclear renegade to worry about: Qaddafi,
Saddam, the Pakistanis. And time and time again, Washington convinced itself
that this crisis was abating. When Mr. Kim signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty,
leading everyone to sigh in relief, even if he then violated the treaty by
barring inspectors for seven years. In 1991, the North and South signed an
accord denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula and banning reprocessing on either
side. Again there were cheers, and again the North ignored the ban, and kept
building.

Every time there was talk of finally taking action, the Asian allies fretted
that Kim should not be provoked. But the warning lights became impossible to
miss in March, 1993, when the North announced it would pull out of the
Nonproliferation Treaty rather than face continued pressure.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kil Il Sung embracing former President Jimmy Carter last month
after talks that led to a break in a dispute on North Korea's nuclear program.
(CNN via Associated Press) (pg. 1); Kim Il Sung (Reuters); north Korea's
President, Kim Il Sung, embracing China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, when
the two met in Beijing in May 1987. (New China New Agency via The Associated
Press); Kim Il Sung, pointing, with his son and heir, Kim Jong Il, 52, in front
of Baegdu San mountain in North Korea some time ago. The North Korean President
has designated his son to succeed him as leader in Pyongyang. (Reuters) (pg. 5)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 9, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Harry S. Sellers; Navy Captain and Businessman, 70

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 11;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 129 words


Harry S. Sellers, a retired Navy captain and the founder and chief executive of
a self-service storage operation, died on Wednesday at his home in Arlington,
Va. He was 70.

His family said he had died of cancer.

He was born in Glendora, Calif., and joined the Navy in World War II, spending
much of his career as an aviator. He served in the Korean War and commanded the
aircraft carrier Franklin D. Roosevelt off Vietnam in 1969. Captain Sellers
retired in 1972 after serving on the staff of the Chief of Naval Operations.

He then established U-Store, which operates in the Washington-Baltimore area and
in Florida.

He is survived by his wife, the former Helen Heald; two sons, Darrow, of
Monterey, Calif., and Richard, of Arlington, and four grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 9, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Guard Colonel Is Reinstated In Washington

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 297 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, July 9


A colonel discharged from the Washington State National Guard two years ago
because she is a lesbian will return to her job as the Washington Guard's chief
nurse on Saturday, officials said late today.

The order came after the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit,
in San Francisco, rejected the Clinton Administration's latest effort to block
the reinstatement of the colonel, Margarethe Cammermeyer.

Col. Cammermeyer, 52, who received a Bronze Star during her service in the
Vietnam War, said she received a call on Friday from the commander of the
Washington National Guard, Maj. Gen. Greg Barlow, who said he had been told she
should be reinstated. He asked her to report for duty on Saturday.

Col. Cammermeyer was originally ordered reinstated on June 1 by a Federal judge
who said her discharge had been based on prejudice and had violated her
constitutional rights.

But the Justice Department asked the appellate court to delay her reinstatement
during its appeal of the ruling by Judge Thomas Zilly of Federal District Court.

But on Thursday a two-judge panel of the appeals court denied the request to
block reinstatement. The Government's appeal of Judge Zilly's ruling on the
merits of the discharge is still pending before the appeals court.

"I never knew the military to move so fast," Col. Cammermeyer said in a
telephone interview tonight. "I'm more disappointed that it's taken two years to
get here. I would have liked to have continued straight through, but of course
I'm pleased with the outcome."

A National Guard spokeswoman, Donna Hubbard, said Col. Cammermeyer would return
to her old job in what the Guard hoped would be a smooth transition under the
military's new "don't ask, don't tell" policy toward gay service members.

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              32 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Flight-Noise Issue Stirs Debate on Parks' Role

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS AERIAL tours of national parks become more and more common, the Clinton
Administration is considering controls to cut down on the resulting aircraft
noise.

Federal agencies are most worried about the national parks at the Grand Canyon
and in Hawaii, but they are also considering a broad plan that might affect
sites from Mount Rushmore to the Statue of Liberty.

While the rules are being drafted, a vigorous debate has erupted among advocates
with very different ideas about how the parks should be enjoyed, including not
only airborne-tour operators and environmentalists, but also wilderness
adventurers, people with disabilities and private pilots.

The National Park Service and the Federal Aviation Administration, which have
joint responsibility for flights over the parks, have studied the issue for
years. But this spring, persuaded that the problem at a few parks needed
immediate attention, the two agencies said they would come up with a solution.
They have not yet decided what it should be.

Forty-two companies, operating from five states, offer flight tours of the Grand
Canyon. In the peak summer season there are more than 300 flights a day. About
750,000 people take the tours each year, spending more than $100 million.

There are nine tour operators on the island of Hawaii, and there are
approximately 60 commercial air tours a day over Hawaii Volcanoes National Park.
On Maui, seven companies now offer helicopter tours of Haleakala. On clear days,
helicopter noise is audible for 30 minutes of every daylight hour, the Park
Service says. The noise interrupts interpretive talks, wildlife observations and
censuses, and other activities on the ground.

Many nature lovers are bitter about the noise.

"Helicopter flights have intruded on our privacy and peaceful enjoyment while
hiking through our natural preserved areas," complained Douglas Petroni and
Rosialie Buss-Petroni, one of the dozens of couples who filed comments with the
Federal agencies in the past two months. The Petronis described themselves as
experienced hikers with no ties to any organized group.

But others, including employees of air-tour operators, said that helicopter
tours are environmentally benign.

"The fact that more and more people enjoy the national parks from the air also
creates an immense reduction of the surface visits, less gas used in cars, less
emissions, less foot traffic on trails, less trash on trails, less human waste,"
said Chris L. Reed, a tour pilot from Hawaii who said he has an undergraduate
degree in natural resource management with concentration in parks and
recreation.

Others argued forcefully that controlling air tours would discriminate against
people with disabilities.

"As a disabled American veteran, who lost my leg during the Vietnam conflict in
1969, I do not want Glacier National Park having any control of flights over the
park," commented Ed Cumming of Columbia Falls, Montana. "If a handful of
'fern-feelers' cannot comprehend what it feels like to be disabled, Lord, please
forgive them."

One solution might be to restrict flights to certain hours or places, said
several people who sent in comments.

Indeed, at the Grand Canyon, flight rules imposed in 1988 established
flight-free zones below 14,500 feet over large areas of the park, covering
virtually all of the visitors to the North and South rims and about 90 percent
of backcountry-park users.

But the Federal agencies said they are worried that exponential growth in
numbers of flights may be wiping out the gains achieved under the rule.

They said that measuring the environmental effects of the noise is difficult.
Detailed studies of the effects on wildlife have not been completed. The
agencies said that even "measuring degrees of quiet and perception of quiet is
very different from measuring amounts of noise."

The agencies will consider technical solutions to the problem as well as flight
restrictions.

Raisback Engineering, for example, said it can make a quiet turbofan propeller
for the de Havilland Twin Otter aircraft and other small planes. It developed
the device for two airlines that operate sightseeing flights over the Grand
Canyon. The propellers markedly reduce the noise at cruising speeds.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Flying tourism, Volcanoes park. (Douglas Peebles)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              33 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile;
She Always Said Feminism and Economics Can Mix

BYLINE: By BARBARA PRESLEY NOBLE

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2074 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS virtually any feminist academic knows, one occupational hazard of doing
scholarly research on women is the possibility of failing to be taken seriously.
Heidi Hartmann understands this and mostly chooses to ignore it. But she recalls
finding out that her research organization was excluded from a competition for
grant money on a subject it was well qualified to pursue. "You go along, you're
getting increased recognition and more respect," she said. "And suddenly, you
realize you're just a girl."

Ms. Hartmann, a Yale-trained economist who heads the Institute for Women's
Policy Research in Washington, admits that she shed some tears -- "for days,
literally" -- over that episode. She has shed more tears lately, but not over
insults from dismal scientists in Washington research circles. Last month the
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation in Chicago awarded her the
fellowship known far and wide as the "genius grant," provoking an outpouring of
good wishes that both surprised and somewhat overwhelmed her.

Ms. Hartmann's friends and colleagues read the $295,000 award much the way she
does herself -- as a vindication of feminist academic research, of Ms.
Hartmann's groundbreaking work on women's economic issues and of her decision,
long ago, to forge her own career path. Her doctoral dissertation was one of the
first to suggest that economic theory might look different if women's, rather
than men's, experience were taken as the norm, and her work on labor markets and
discrimination has provided the intellectual framework for efforts to correct
salary inequities.

In 1988, with a colleague, Teresa Odendahl, she co-founded the institute, a
think tank that now often provides the numbers that lobbyists for women's causes
take to Congress. The institute's research reports -- on topics like health
care, welfare reform, temporary and contingent work, child care, family and
medical leave and women in the labor force -- have usually been ahead of the
curve of national concerns.

For this work, Ms. Hartmann, 48, has by no means labored in obscurity, but even
close colleagues have urged her not to squander her talent on topics some in the
profession view as marginal. Yet she has stayed her own course, pursuing
real-world work on women in a field that values abstraction and takes "economic
man" as a central metaphor. Winning a MacArthur may be the best revenge.

"She has taken a high-brow Yale economic education and focused it down on some
hard, earthy questions about women in the labor force and the marketplace," said
Robert M. Solow, the Nobel laureate in economics from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. "She is extremely effective. She beats up the numbers,
does the hard statistical work, the way the rest of us do. I was delighted."

Ms. Hartmann's own delight was quiet but evident during a recent interview. "It
does feel great. It feels great because they cited my work in economics and my
'capacity for self-direction.' You can get to feeling very marginal," she said.
She stacked papers as she talked in her office near Dupont Circle, which looks a
bit like what would happen if the "Odd Couple's" Oscar Madison got loose at the
Library of Congress. Books in industrial-strength bookcases. Books on chairs.
Books on the floor, overflowing and buttressing piles of monographs, which
themselves overflow. A pair of fuzzy dice hang on one wall; a cartoon strip is
taped to the door.

There was a time, Ms. Hartmann insists, when she could put her hands instantly
on what she wanted. A shrug suggests this is no longer true. The pile of cards
and notes from well-wishers -- "even a real telegram" -- has already become one
with the chaos. Because for several years she has made less than she might have
as a member of the economics establishment, friends are urging her not to just
put her award money into the institute, but one obvious possibility is a larger
space in its offices near Dupont Circle -- or perhaps a dumpster conveniently
located outside her window on 20th Street.

"Heidi is somebody who has done a pioneering job under circumstances of
adversity," said Ann Markusen, a Rutgers University economist who has
collaborated with Ms. Hartmann. "She has been very committed, at some personal
cost."

Some economists might prefer the Nobel, but it is the MacArthur that most
stimulates the imagination, inspiring yearning and jealousy. It comes out of the
blue -- a phone call, then a letter -- with no strings attached, as if a divine
hand had reached out from some celestial aerie to reward the good, the true and
the quirky. "It's a very significant sort of applause from a good source," said
Barbara Bergmann, an economist at American University in Washington and the
author of "The Economic Emergence of Women." Ms. Hartmann said her own reaction
was a dumbfounded silence so interminable that Catharine Stimpson, an
acquaintance and director of the fellows program, who called to give her the
news, finally said, "Well, Heidi, dear, would you like to know how much money
you're going to get?"

THE grant, worth $235,000 to $375,000, depending on the recipient's age, with
older ones getting more, is paid out over five years. Ms. Hartmann's "class"
includes Adrienne Rich, the poet and essayist, Arthur Mitchell, founder of the
Dance Theater of Harlem, and Ornette Coleman, the jazz musician. The foundation
requires no progress reports, no attempts at self-justification. Fellows do not
even have to continue the work for which they presumably earned the award.
"Quite simply, your award is for you to use for whatever purposes you choose,"
Hartmann's notification letter reads. The only intrusion of reality is the
caution that recipients may want to consult a financial adviser, as the grant is
taxable.

Ms. Hartmann is not one of the MacArthurs who, as Gore Vidal once wrote in
another context, are well known to the few who know them. Since the late 80's,
she and the institute's small staff -- 12, plus interns, students and
consultants -- have carved out a solid and visible feminist foothold within
Washington's clamorous policy community.

She appears frequently at conferences and in front of Congressional committees,
and while Ms. Hartmann has been critical of the Clinton Administration, she
clearly recognizes a kindred wonkish spirit in the Oval Office. After the 1992
election, she attended both the now-legendary A-list weekend in Vermont known as
the Women's Economic Summit, a strategy and solidarity session organized to
prepare for the new Administration's less legendary but A-list Little Rock
Economic Summit.

When she went to graduate school, she had no intention of either hobnobbing with
le tout Washington in 20 years or even of working on the issues that are the
institute's reason for being. . "If someone had asked me in 1967 if the Family
and Medical Leave Act was a goal, I would have said, 'Are you from Mars or
what?' " she said.

Ms. Hartmann began at Yale in the fall of 1969, when the women's movement was
coalescing and on campuses the Vietnam war was being called part of a systematic
oppression of the third world. Ms. Hartmann arrived on campus, a young, married
graduate student from Swarthmore College and, before that, high school in Toms
River, N.J.

At Yale, the traditional economic theory of markets and enlightened
self-interest failed to explain the events that came blasting through the
television screen every night -- or to provide the tools to make the world a
better place. Like thousands of other American students, Ms. Hartmann for a time
embraced a leftish critique of capitalism, reading E. P. Thompson's "The Making
of the English Working Class" and joining the upstart Union for Radical
Political Economics.

She was not one of the visionary inhalers who thought a revolution was imminent.
"I knew you could use economics to advance the cause," she said, "but I was
never one of those really radical people who lived for a cause. I thought maybe
I would teach at a community college."

She did begin to think, because she was active in groups like New Haven Women's
Liberation, an early and influential feminist group, that there should be a
place where scholars could talk about women's issues.

Ms. Hartmann pauses for a genuine belly laugh at the suggestion that her career
has actually followed a plan. "In retrospect, it looks like a straight career
path. The students around here" -- she gestures toward the catacombs outside her
office -- "act like I always knew what I wanted to do."

One thing she knew she wanted to do was put women at the center of what she
might call, in the current academic fashion, "discourse." "Heidi actually looked
at what women did," said Ms. Markusen, the Rutgers economist. "All economic
theory had the household as a unit of analysis, as if the household operated in
lockstep. Heidi demonstrated that men and women had different stakes in both
wage work and household work -- potentionally antagonistic stakes that would
affect relations between them."

After Yale, Hartmann took a two-year position to help develop a gender and
economics program at the New School for Social Research in New York, an
institution known for being sympathetic to radical scholarship.

Ms. Hartmann's contract was not renewed, though, and a possible position at a
comparable school failed to materialize. Ms. Markusen says that economics, which
was becoming increasingly abstract and mathematical, simply wasn't prepared for
real human behavior. "Two of her research papers at that time were absolutely
seminal. It's clear in retrospect that economics was not ready to absorb
sociological ideas," she said.

Ms. Hartmann moved to Washington in 1976, by then separated and with a
4-year-old in tow, to take a job with the Federal Civil Rights Commission. She
soon moved to the National Academy of Sciences, where she stayed for 8 years,
running projects in areas like gender bias in comparable jobs and women in
nontraditional jobs. She also acquired the administrative and fund-raising
skills she would need to survive in nonprofit Washington. A last foray onto
campus in 1988, running the women's studies program at Rutgers, lasted only six
months, in part because the institute -- which had been in the back of her mind
since her graduate student days -- was actually becoming a reality.

Perhaps because she has always done almost exactly what she wanted, being
underpaid has not been a big concern, though she used to compute how far behind
inflation her salary was falling. She recently got a raise, to $75,000, that
reduced her losses.

MACARTHUR fellows tend to use their grants to ease financial pressure,
occasionally doing impulsive things like building a patio. At the interview, Ms.
Hartmann had not decided what to do with the money, and had not even figured out
how it would change her life, so she searched her bag and desk for a calculator.

"Oh, here's a paycheck I haven't deposited," she said. "Where is my calculator?
I always have it. Always. Always," she said, starting to do the math by hand.
The award means an extra $57,000 the first year, and climbs $1,000 each year
from there, enough to allow her to feel secure that she and her husband, John V.
Wells, an economist at the House Committee on Public Works and Transportation,
can send their two younger children to college. Ms. Hartmann's daughter from her
post-Swarthmore marriage just graduated from Macalester College in Saint Paul.

She will almost certainly take some time off to think and write about topics she
doesn't have time for now. She may provide seed money for an assistant. She has
already, since the interview, had an organizer in to beat her office into
submission. "Being financially secure just makes life easier," she kept saying.
It also turns the mind to indulgences that frugality generally keeps at bay. The
word "massage" entered the conversation. Hartmann said almost defiantly, "I
would like life to be easier, and if a massage once a week helps, well, maybe
I'll do that."

Heidi Hartmann

 Born: Aug. 14, 1945; Elizabeth, N.J.

 Family: Husband, John V. Wells; three daughters, age 22, 13 and 11.

 Favorite vacation: Sailing in the British Virgin Islands; "It's a paradise down
there."

 Recent reading: "Tell Them Who I Am," by Elliot Liebow.

 Drives: 1988 Dodge Caravan.

 Person most admired: Her mother, Heidi Hertzson.

NAME: Heidi Hartmann

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Heidi Hartmann seeks real-world answers on women in a field
favoring abstractions about 'economic man.' (Photographs by Stephen Crowley for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              34 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lesbian Returns To National Guard

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 15;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 248 words

DATELINE: CAMP MURRAY, Wash., July 9


A colonel discharged from the Washington State National Guard two years ago
because she is a lesbian returned today to her old job as a chief nurse.

A Federal court ordered the reinstatement of Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer last
month, ruling that a discharge based on sexual orientation was unconstitutional.
On Thursday, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San
Francisco, refused the Government's request to delay that order.

Colonel Cammermeyer, 52, is a 26-year military veteran who was awarded the
Bronze Star as an Army nurse in Vietnam. This morning, the colonel entered the
main gate at Washington National Guard headquarters here, south of Tacoma.

She returned to her position as chief of nursing services for the 164th Mobile
Army Surgical Hospital. As a regular reservist, she works two days a month and
takes part in a 15-day annual training mission. The colonel is also a nurse at a
veterans hospital near here.

The Guard's commander, Maj. Gen. Greg Barlow, asked Colonel Cammermeyer to
report to work after the appeals court refused to delay her reinstatement.

The Justice Department had asked the appeals court to delay her reinstatement
until its appeal could be heard, or at least until the court ruled in a similar
case involving a homosexual Navy sonar instructor.

Colonel Cammermeyer was discharged involuntarily in 1992, three years after
answering a question about her sexual orientation in a security-clearance
interview.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              35 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DEATH OF A LEADER;
Kim Il Sung, Enigmatic 'Great Leader' of North Korea for 5 Decades, Dies at 82

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2943 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Sunday, July 10


By the time Kim Il Sung died on Friday at the age of 82, there was not one
"Great Leader" running North Korea. There were three.

There was the man seen around the world as a Stalinist maniac, who 44 years ago
sent his troops pouring over the 38th parallel to unify the Korean Peninsula on
his own terms, and who four decades later burst again onto the front pages as a
man in search of a nuclear bomb to save his regime. This was the Kim who
intimidated his neighbors into silence, who used his unpredictability as a
weapon.

There was the Kim Il Sung of North Korean myth, whose likeness dominates
Pyongyang and every town square in the form of 30,000 statues, the man who was
lionized in song as the "sun of the country" for single-handedly defeating two
enemies in one generation: Japan and the United States.

And, in recent years, there was the grandfatherly Kim Il Sung, the smiling
leader seeking respect for his economically disabled nation, the man who three
weeks ago embraced Jimmy Carter and used him as a conduit to President Clinton,
who was not yet born when Mr. Kim was installed as North Korea's leader. It was
that incarnation of Mr. Kim that led the former President to declare, with
little hint of skepticism, that a "miracle" had occurred. One of the world's
most fearsome dictators actually sounded reasonable and eager to end his
confrontation with the West.

They were all images that Mr. Kim, the peasants' son who went on to become the
longest-surviving Communist leader of the cold war, knew how to exploit
brilliantly.  When his death came early Friday morning, he had been staging a
remarkable international comeback, a shadow from the old newsreels of the Korean
War who thrust himself into the atomic glare of the 1990's.

An Enduring Puzzle To the Outside World

For those who met him, he was the incongruous dictator of a hard and unforgiving
land. Former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn, who met Mr. Kim
twice, said a few days ago:

"He has this avuncular persona that stands in stark contrast to the reality of
the regime, which is without question the most ruthless and tyrannical anywhere
in the world. It is like meeting Hitler at Berchtesgaden and commenting on how
he got along with the dogs and the children. He has the blood of millions on his
hands; he has a society based on Orwell's '1984.'

"So you expect someone who will act like Saddam Hussein, a forbidding,
threatening presence. And he is just the opposite, always smiling, always
speaking softly."

In fact, to step into Kim Il Sung's North Korea was to enter a laboratory from
Orwell's wildest imaginings: a country that could not afford to keep the lights
on at night, and yet which built -- but may never open -- Asia's tallest hotel,
a country where the people seemed almost robotic in their praise of their leader
and his son, Kim Jong Il, his presumed successor.

Millions of North Koreans, until this morning's news, have never lived in a
country not run by Kim Il Sung.

During his rule North Koreans were urged to devote at least two hours a day, and
four on Saturdays, to "Kim study," memorizing his sayings. His birthday was, for
decades, the nation's greatest holiday, celebrated with "mass games" in which
North Korean youth performed remarkable gymnastic feats.

It is a country of operas like "My Happy Country with a Great Leader," whose
lyrics include:

O, Generalissimo, Kim Il Sung,
Our fatherly leader!
The people are unfailingly loyal to you!
Our party is the best in the world!
Socialism is the best in the world!
Let's defend Socialism,
Under the unfurled red banner!

Mr. Kim seemed, in every public utterance, to be nothing short of a god.
Everything North Koreans received from the government -- clothes, rice,
apartments -- were said to come directly from "the Great Leader" or "the Dear
Leader," his son.
 Pyongyang considered 50,000 new apartments to be the Great Leader's birthday
gifts to his people. But when a reporter toured these "gifts," no one discussed
the fact that there was little heat and electricity.

"You have to remember that at home, President Kim Il Sung is treated as a
combination of George Washington, Thomas Jefferson and Abe Lincoln," Mr. Carter
said this week in Tokyo.

Mr. Kim's philosophy centered on the principle he called "juche," which he said
meant "holding fast to the principle of solving for oneself all the problems of
the revolution and construction of one's own efforts." This was to be
accomplished, he added, while "applying the universal truth of
Marxism-Leninism."

He held every important post in the country, including General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea, its one party, and President
of the country. And when he died, no one had yet really figured out his game:
whether he was using the threat of an atomic weapon to get economic aid for his
bankrupt country, or whether he was wielding it as a suicide pill to save his
regime from absorption by the South.

"It is possible," one American official who has met Mr. Kim, said today, "that
we will now never know."

From Humble Origins, A Steep Climb to Power

Kim Il Sung was born to a peasant couple in a small, mud-walled house on the
outskirts of Pyongyang on April 15, 1912, shortly after the Japanese began their
formal occupation of Korea. For years that house has been visited daily by
thousands of North Koreans.

Mr. Kim often used his simple birthplace to contrast his own early life with
Pyongyang's American missionaries and Japanese residents. "In the 'Westerners
village,' at the time inhabited by Americans and the Japanese settlers, brick
houses, shops and churches increased in number," he recalled vividly many
decades later, but across town "the slum quarters were getting bigger."

It is nearly impossible to separate truth and fiction in the state-sponsored
mythology about Kim Il Sung's youth, but in all the stories there is a constant
subtext: Mr. Kim's struggles against greater powers around him, particularly
America and Japan.

Those two countries controlled the world in Mr. Kim's view, and it was the Kim
family's destiny to battle them. In his memoirs, published two years ago, Mr.
Kim maintained that his great-grandfather set fire to the General Sherman, a
"U.S. imperialist aggressors' ship" because its crew went about "stealing the
people's possessions and raping the women" while sailing up the Taedong River to
Pyongyang in 1866. Mr. Kim's biographer at the University of Hawaii, Suh Dae
Sook, calls these stories "politically motivated fabrications." but most of them
seem impossible to verify or disprove.

Whether the stories are true or not, the myths have become the man.

Mr. Kim said he was a schoolchild when he committed his first act of rebellion
against the Japanese occupiers, using a pocket knife to scratch off the title
"Mother Tongue Reader" from the textbook issued by the Japanese colonial
government, which required children to speak only Japanese. He said he wrote
"Japanese Reader" on the cover, and from that moment, "whenever I saw children
trying to learn Japanese, I told them Koreans must speak Korean."

Neither his memoirs nor official biographies dwell on the fact that he spent
most of his youth in Manchuria, where he learned Chinese. That later turned out
to be a crucial skill, as he joined China's communist guerrillas. And it was
from China that Kim obtained the Communist philosophy that he combined with the
nationalist mission his father bequeathed him -- along with two pistols -- on
his deathbed in 1926: to free the peninsula from Japanese domination.

Images of Resistance, Masterfully Manipulated

Mr. Kim served as an anti-Japanese guerrilla in Manchuria, Siberia and the North
Korean border areas, but it is impossible to verify the claims of his astounding
feats, including the killing of a unit of Japanese special police who were
tracking him in 1940. The next year, he was forced to retreat to the Soviet
Union for the remainder of the war. He makes no mention of that time, perhaps
because it would be too obvious that his son, the "Dear Leader," was born there
in February 1942, instead of on Korea's own soil. Mr. Kim was married to Kim
Chong Suk, who died in 1949.

When he reappeared in Korea in late 1945, after the Soviet Union was already
administering the area, it was in the uniform of a Soviet major. It was a ticket
back home: At the war's end, the country was cut roughly in half at the 38th
parallel, with the Soviet Union assuming the temporary occupation of the
northern part and the United States the occupation of the southern zone.
Reunification of the nation was the Allies' announced goal.  Quickly, and with
Stalin's apparent backing, he took control of the Korean Workers Party and
called for a reunification under Communist control.

Of course, Mr. Kim's emergence was a far more complicated than the official
accounts suggest. When he returned to Korea after 20 years' absence, his
Communist party was tiny, outnumbered by other nationalist groups. But he rose
to power by denouncing the "lackeys" of the Japanese and the Americans, and
wiped out many of his enemies -- 60,000 people in his first purge.

The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was created in September 1948 after
the United States organized the first government in the South, the Republic of
Korea.

When Mr. Kim led an invading army into the South in June 1950 -- a scene of
carnage that today seems a world away from modern Seoul -- the Truman
Administration saw the takeover as the first step in a far broader Communist
plot, directed from Moscow and Beijing, to seize much of Asia.

But a remarkable new study published earlier this year by Stanford University
Press, one that is fairly chilling read in the context of the current nuclear
standoff, shows that it was Kim Il Sung who did all the plotting. Documents
recently made available in Russia, along with others that have slipped out of
China, indicate that Mr. Kim was convinced he could take the South in three
days.

His forces met little resistance in the first weeks, and by early September had
driven the South Korean Army and its American allies to the Pusan area, at the
southeastern tip of the Korean peninsula.

After a brilliant beginning, Mr. Kim's war plans went astray. He was surprised
when, five days after his soldiers began streaming across the 38th parallel,
President Harry S. Truman authorized American land, sea and air forces to go to
South Korea's aid. Eventually 15 other nations responded to the United Nations
call for help. Led by Gen. Douglas MacArthur, they reacted with a
counteroffensive on Sept. 15, staging a large-scale invasion at Inchon, a
conquered South Korean port on the west coast about 20 miles from Seoul.
MacArthur's forces pursued them back over the parallel and, on Oct. 19, captured
Pyongyang. By late November Mr. Kim and his troops had been driven almost to the
Yalu River on the Chinese border.

But he was a wily strategist, and with "volunteers" from the Chinese Army and
Air Force and some from the Soviet Union he recaptured Seoul in January 1951 and
held it briefly. For the rest of the war bitter fighting was centered nearby and
roughly along the 38th parallel.

MacArthur, who wanted to carry out another invasion of North Korea, advance
beyond the Yalu into China and mount a full-scale assault on Communism, was
relieved of his command by Truman.

As talks on a truce dragged on, battles continued. Finally an armistice was
signed on July 27, 1953, ending the war that Mr. Kim had thought would reunite
Korea under his control. It was a dream he never gave up.

According to official South Korean statistics, roughly 225,800 South Korean
troops were killed in the war, along with 294,150 North Koreans, 184,000 Chinese
and 57,440 United Nations troops, of whom more than 54,000 were Americans. In
addition, 250,000 civilians are estimated to have been killed in combat, and
millions were left homeless on both sides of the border.

Rivals Eliminated, Power Consolidated

Mr. Kim emerged in a position to wipe out his remaining rivals. In later years
he was to send his political enemies to work in the uranium mines, where the
life expectancy was about two years. Those mines turned out to be critical
assets. Years later he never forgot the threats issued by MacArthur and Truman,
that the Americans might end the war with a mushroom cloud. The fear that the
North could be subject to nuclear attack from the United States, to many minds,
was the real start of North Korea's nuclear program.

At the end of the war, it seemed as if the North was destined to be the truly
successful Korea. It had abundant natural resources, and with Chinese and Soviet
help, Mr. Kim began an ambitious program of rehabilitation and industrialization
with Soviet-model collective farms and heavy industry. A propaganda campaign led
citizens to believe their country was an oasis of wealth and stability in a
world impoverished by cruel capitalism. They had no way to see or hear about
anything else: To this day there is no television from outside the country and
no foreign publications allowed. The few foreign visitors are kept on a tight
leash.

Mr. Kim courted his allies, but kept a measure of independence. In a single week
in 1961, he signed treaties of friendship, cooperation and mutual military and
economic assistance with both China and the Soviet Union. He continued to accept
aid from both countries when the need arose. Through the years that need arose
increasingly often.

The cost of the country's huge army took its toll on the economy. The DMZ, along
the 38th parallel, became a eerie landscape of mines, tank traps and heavy
artillery, and remains so to this day. Both sides built up enormous forces: Mr.
Kim installed artillery that could shell Seoul from the North. But Mr. Kim also
worried about his Communist allies. He was eager to maintain his slightly
distant relationship with China and the Soviets, juggling them to keep from
getting crushed.

In 1968, as the Vietnam War raged, North Korea and Mr. Kim surged into the
headlines again. The North seized an American intelligence ship, the Pueblo, and
its crew stayed in prison for 11 months. In 1972 there were the first gestures
of peace to the South, called the Red Cross Talks, in which both sides talked of
allowing families divided by the war to meet. But those negotiations broke off
and were not resumed for 18 years.

The country began its slow spiral down in the 1970's. South Korea, with twice
the population and a booming economy built on steel, cars, computer chips and
other consumer goods, began to pull ahead: its economic growth was far faster,
and the South's per capita income in 1990 was five times higher than the
North's.

With the end of the cold war came the greatest blow of all: An end to the
subsidies from Russia and, to some extent, from China that kept the North Korean
economy going. Since 1989, by South Korean estimates, the North's gross domestic
product has actually shrunk 2 or 3 percent a year.

For decades the Kims had been building a nuclear complex at Yongbyon, a
mountainous area 60 miles north of the capital. Around 1980, construction began
on a 25-megawatt reactor, that American intelligence agencies argued that the
plant was designed for making plutonium, not for making electricity.

The cat-and-mouse game over the past few years has been all about the North's
progress in building that technology, while denying it.

But every time there was talk of finally taking action regarding North Korea's
nuclear development, the Asian allies fretted that Mr. Kim should not be
provoked. The warning lights became impossible to ignore in March 1993, when the
North announced it would pull out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty rather
than face continued pressure for disclosure and inspections. Their withdrawal
was later suspended, but inspectors were kept out.

When North Korea began removing more fuel from its reactor this spring,
potentially creating material for five more nuclear weapons, the United States
moved for United Nations sanctions.

As fears of a confrontation grew, the United States sent more equipment to its
bases in Japan and South Korea, from Patriot missiles to ammunition to
laser-guided bombs.

In the last weeks of his life, Mr. Kim had one brilliant maneuver left. He let
Mr. Carter, who was deeply opposed to sanctions, take up a two-year-old
invitation to come visit Pyongyang as a private citizen. After the first night
of talks, Mr. Carter went on television to announce that the Great Leader was
ready to deal: He would freeze the country's nuclear program while the United
States talked about a range of diplomatic and economic benefits that might end
the North's isolation from the world. Meanwhile, international inspectors, who
had been barred from parts of the nuclear sites, could stay there.  The Clinton
Administration was suspicious, but eventually dove through the opening. Mr
Carter also emerged with an invitation from the South: A summit meeting between
the Presidents of North and South Korea, a first since the peninsula was divided
in 1945. Five decades after Asia's the war ended in a precarious stalemate, it
would have been a symbolic melting of the last Cold War division. For many
Koreans it would have undoubtedly raised a surge of nationalism that Kim Il Sung
would have applauded: differences aside, we are all Koreans, our country divided
only because we were pawns of the Cold War. He died 17 days before the meeting
was to begin.

NAME: Kim Il Sung

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kim Il Sung (Associated Press); Kim Il Sung embracing former
President Jimmy Carter in Pyongyang last month after talks that led to a break
in a dispute on North Korea's nuclear development program. (CNN via Associated
Press); Kim Il Sung, pointing, with his son, heir and designated successor, Kim
Jong Il, in front of Baegdu San mountain in North Korea in an undated
photograph. (Reuters); Kim Il Sung, right, in Beijing in May 1987 passing an
honor guard at a welcoming ceremony, acccompanied by Li Xiannian, who was
President of China at the time. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              36 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Christopher to Meet Hanoi Counterpart

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 9


Secretary of State Warren Christopher is scheduled to meet with the Vietnamese
Foreign Minister in Bangkok this month, senior Vietnamese officials disclosed
today. The meeting would be the first between the foreign-policy chiefs of the
former foes since the Communist victory in 1975.

Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, who oversees relations with the United States,
declined to confirm formally that the meeting was set. But he said in an
interview, "I think there is a high possibility."

Mr. Christopher and the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, will be in
the Thai capital to attend consultations among 18 nations on security matters
after the annual foreign ministers' meeting of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations.

The high-level Vietnamese-American meeting was arranged during a visit here
earlier this month by Assistant Secretary of State Winston Lord and Hershel
Gobel, the Deputy Secretary of Veterans Affairs. Their talks were part of a
longstanding effort to normalize Vietnamese-American relations, which took a
major step forward in February when President Clinton lifted the trade embargo
that had been in force since the end of the Vietnam war.

Liason Offices to Open

Mr. Mai said liaison offices -- the precursors of embassies - would be opened in
Hanoi and Washington once American officials found a suitable building here.

The United States owns the building of its former consulate here in Hanoi. But
Mr. Mai said "dozens of families" lived in the building now and it would take
time to relocate them.

"We think there should be an interim solution," he said. United States officials
here are looking for interim quarters.

The diplomat who has been named to head the American office, James H. Hall, is
visiting. Now the director of the State Department's Office of Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia, he served as an adviser during military service in South Vietnam.

Vietnamese officials said they expected the liaison offices to open within a
month or two but that they doubted Mr. Clinton would soon raise them to embassy
status.

Americans Divided

"The division in American society on the question of Vietnam remains deep," an
official said, speaking on condition that he not be named. "It will take some
time."

But he said Vietnam saw the difference between a liaison office and a
full-fledged embassy largely as one of name, and that it was ready to give the
top American representative here the same access to Government leaders he would
have if he were an ambassador.

Mr. Mai said Mr. Lord and Mr. Gobel had come to Hanoi this month "to thank the
Vietnamese people for their cooperation" in working to resolve the issue of the
2,231 Americans still listed as missing from the war in Indochina. Despite both
officials expressing satisfaction with the continuing progress, leaders of
American veterans organizations who accompanied them "had a different opinion."

The Deputy Minister said Vietnam had agreed to two requests made by the
officials and the veterans' leaders. One was for greater unsolicited efforts by
the Vietnamese, particularly in searching through the records of various
ministries for clues to the fate of the missing. The Hanoi Government also
agreed to appeal to its citizens to come forward with any information they might
have on a missing serviceman's case.

Concerns Over Instability

Mr. Mai said Vietnam was concerned about instability in Cambodia but was
determined to remain "disinvolved." Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978
and overthrew the regime of Pol Pot, the leader of the widely feared Khmer
Rouge. It withdrew its last troops in 1989.

The Deputy Foreign Minister said that the agreements reached in 1991 on a
transition to peace in Cambodia had committed all major and regional powers to
preserving the country's stability, and Vietnam would adhere to the
"multilateral approach" even in seeking protection of the ethnic Vietnamese
there. Vietnamese are widely resented in Cambodia and have fallen victim to mass
killings there since last year.

The Deputy Minister said that in discussing human rights, Mr. Lord had asked for
information on the well-being of four Vietnamese imprisoned for political
offenses. He toldthe Americans that the four were in good health.

Ten Americans are imprisoned here, some for political offenses. A European
diplomat with connections to Vietnamese officials said the authorities were
nervous about possible opposition activity by former Vietnamese citizens
visiting from the West.

Mr. Mai said Vietnam would recognize as foreign nationals only those emigres who
had taken legal steps to divest themselves of Vietnamese citizenship.

The American Presence



 Alluding to Vietnamese concern about American interest in human-rights cases
here and possible linkage to trade privileges, the Deputy Foreign Minister said
he considered Mr. Clinton's decision to extend most-favored-nation status to
China as "suitable to international trends."

Mr. Mai disputed a widely held view that Vietnam's eagerness for an American
presence here was based on a desire to use Washington as a counterbalance to
China, Vietnam's historic enemy. He said it would be bad diplomacy to play off
one big power against another now that the cold war is over.

"All major powers, without exception, should be able to play an active role in
Southeast Asia, and none should have a feeling of being left out," he said.

Mr. Mai said Vietnam and the United States had agreed to recognize ownership of
Government assets in each others' countries and that senior legal officials
would meet in Bangkok on Aug. 1-3 to work out details.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 12, 1994, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article and a headline on Sunday about a meeting planned between Secretary of
State Warren Christopher and Vietnam's Foreign Minister described it
incorrectly. It would be the fifth between an American Secretary of State and a
Vietnamese Foreign Minister since the country was unified, not the first.



GRAPHIC: Photo: Nguyen Manh Cam (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              37 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Saving the Memory of Self'

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 1;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 4280 words


The Striggles family goes like this: Doris is the daughter of Zollie, and Zollie
was the son of Jasper. Jasper was the son of Sam, and Sam was the eldest son of
Archibald. Archibald was the second son of Nicholas, who was the son of George
Striegel, a German expatriate who received a land grant of 450 acres from the
British crown in 1762 and settled along Brier Creek, an offshoot of the Savannah
River, on what would become red-clay Georgia farmland.

All across that quiet lineage, in black and in white, are the fingerprints of
American history: battles against the British, struggles with Mother Nature, the
seesawing of race relations in the South, one family's sorrows and successes.
Much of the story was handed down in the oral tradition, the sometimes
embroidered memories of parents and grandparents gathered from elders who could
not read or write. But most of it has been documented by Doris Striggles Porter
of West 87th Street in Manhattan, who has spent parts of the last 14 years
poring over dusty archives in Georgia county seats and reels of microfilm in
Harlem and lower Manhattan, stringing ancestors like beads to reach the present
and figure out how she herself fits into the pattern.

She is driven, she says, by the desire "to save the memory of self," not just
her own but the identities of people -- many of them obscured by time and
cruelty -- who came before her.

"I really believe in that," she said. "You have to know your roots so you know
who you are."

Knowing your roots has long been an American passion. In recent years, it has
become one of the central American obsessions -- as the image of the melting pot
has lost ground to the pull of cultural identity, stirred along by epics like
Alex Haley's "Roots" and more recently by remembrances of the Holocaust and the
Great Migration to the North.

"We think of genealogy as being fairly objective, but actually it's fairly
subjective," said John H. Mollenkopf, a professor of political science at the
City University Graduate Center. "People make a selection about which of their
lineages they want to connect to: parts of the world, periods of history, famous
ancestors," forging an identity apart from simply being "American."

All of this, he added, springs from the void left by the absence of a
standardized culture. "Our national character is not having a national
character," he said, "and this gives people space to construct their own."

Little surprise, then, that New York, this so self-consciously immigrant city,
is a boomtown of genealogical construction, as well as a vast, well-organized
repository of the kinds of materials that reward its practitioners -- from books
like "Index to Mennonite Immigrants on U.S. Passenger Lists, 1872-1904" at the
New York Public Library on Fifth Avenue to the "yisker" memorial books,
documenting Holocaust victims town by town, at the YIVO Institute for Jewish
Research, to the lists of World War I draftees available at the National
Archives branch for the Northeastern United States, on Varick Street.

There are also dozens of resources available on CD-ROM and through various
on-line computer services. There is even a recently formed bulletin-board
service run by the American Genealogical Lending Library, where people can
inquire electronically about long-lost relatives.

Doris Striggles Porter, a soft-spoken, self-described "organizer" who arrived in
the city from Augusta, Ga., when she was 6 years old (she gives her age as
"fiftyish"), began tracing her family history in 1980. From the mists of oral
tradition, she knew the principal players; her quest has been a matter of
filling out their stories, finding paper proof that they existed the way
everyone remembered them, or did not, as the case may be.

Ms. Porter, who with her husband, Alfred Porter, runs a family real-estate
company, has spent countless hours before the dim screen of a microfilm
projector, both at the Schomburg Center for African-American Culture and the
National Archives. She has traveled to tiny Sylvania, Ga., to search for old
graveyards and examine records in the local municipal building. In her journeys
South, and at the biennial Fourth of July family reunions she first organized in
1980, she has combed the memories of aging relatives like her great-uncle Henry
Striggles, who vividly remembered his grandmother, a slave named Barbara Sapp.

Her great breakthrough was a list of the Striegel descendants, found in a
genealogy feature in the local newspaper by Maudie Powell, a cousin living near
Sylvania, where the family settled. It gave her a date for one of the crucial
ancestors, her great-great-grandfather Archibald, to guide her search for more
members of her father's line.

Going through present-day directory assistance, Ms. Porter even managed to make
contact with Cliena Stregles, one of the few surviving members of the white side
of the family, who, as it happens, also has a keen interest in genealogy.

In a telephone interview from her home in Savannah, where they pronounce the
family name "STRAY-gulls," Cliena Stregles explained that her husband, Evans,
was a descendant of Archibald's brother, Nicholas. And while Evans, who died of
a heart attack 30 years ago behind the counter of his downtown Savannah grocery
store, had dispensed few details about his family, many of the discoveries Ms.
Porter has made seem to correspond to what Mrs. Stregles does know.

"In my mother-in-law's telling there was a place they called the Hill," she
recalled. "And there were some yellow-skinned people and their name was
Striggles. They had a nice home and a lot of land. I had judged they were
probably the offspring of Archibald."

A FATHER'S MEMORIES: 'GRANDPA SAM' STANDS TALL

But that's getting ahead of the story. It really begins around the breakfast
table in Brooklyn, oh, 45 years ago, when Ms. Porter's father, Zollie Striggles,
told her about his family.

Many of his reminiscences revolved around his "Grandpa Sam," the oldest child of
Archibald and Barbara. Sam stands high across the family memory, a husky
6-footer (though some say 7) with bright red hair and a handlebar mustache.

Born in 1853 and 12 years old when the Civil War bled to a halt, Sam had his own
farm as a young man and raised 10 children there, outliving three wives in the
process. Sherman's march burned through much of the area, but the Striggles
holdings escaped untouched. In an old family portrait, Sam stares straight away,
his huge farmer's hands resting squarely on his knees, not a man to fear a
machine that was only taking his picture.

And as Ms. Porter grew up, Grandpa Sam came to life over the bacon and eggs. "My
father would say, 'Your Grandpa Sam was so tall, when he sat on his horse his
feet would touch the ground,' " Ms. Porter says, "and I would sit there, and
laugh and laugh."

There were also stories of aunts and uncles and families with a dozen children
or more.  There were fortunes made and lost on the land, and migrations North in
search of another life. There was old-time religion, and hard work, and families
bound by common ancestors all but lost to the passing of time.

In 1980, Ms. Porter decided she was going to document as much of this as she
could. And she began, as the experts recommend, by interviewing her elderly
relatives.

Her first and most important source was her great-uncle Henry Striggles, then in
his 90's, her grandfather's younger brother. He told Ms. Porter that Archibald,
the colonist's grandson, lived at different times with two slave women, Eliza
Lovette and Barbara Sapp, with whom he had a total of eight children. Barbara
Sapp was Sam's mother, and Ms. Porter's great-great-grandmother.

All this had been part of family lore as well, but Ms. Porter was anxious to
find proof. For years, she had tried to find evidence of Archibald, and was
finally rewarded in 1990 when a history of the Striegel family was published in
The Sylvania Telephone, the weekly newspaper of that rural Georgia town where
they had settled more than 200 years before.

There, Ms. Porter found a date for Archibald (born in 1814; date of death,
unclear). And searching through census data, she found Archibald easily enough,
despite inconsistent spellings of the family name.

In 1860, he is recorded in a census-taker's looping cursive as Archy Streggle, a
farmer, age 46, though other records indicate he was an overseer on a plantation
owned by a family called Williamson. In 1880, he appears as A. Stragles, a white
male, age 66, head of a family that included E. A. Lovette, a female servant,
age 38; and their four children, among them 13-year-old Lucy Ann.

Ms. Porter has even found the old homestead, a three-room farmhouse where
Archibald and his family lived. It is built of carefully fitted planks, and
stands vacant above Brier Creek amid overgrown trees and weeds. There is a small
graveyard out back, caught up in a tangle of grass and brambles.

But Barbara Sapp eluded her, and continues to do so.

She has combed the 1870 census, the first one in which slaves freed after the
Civil War were named instead of merely numbered and bunched as someone else's
possessions. But nowhere does Barbara's name appear, nor does any other sign of
her. Ms. Porter's assiduous search of the 1880 census turned up nothing, and the
1890 records were destroyed in a courthouse fire.

"I've spent a lot of time trying to find Barbara," she said. "I really feel a
need to see her listed somehow."

She also knows nothing about her African ancestors before Barbara.

"We have to consider that maybe they were from the west coast of Africa, but
that may not be right," she says. "I have no idea."

THE LAST CENTURY: THE FAMILY DISPERSES

Here is how Ms. Porter says the rest of the story goes, then, from Archibald on
down:

As Archibald lay dying sometime in the late 1880's -- she has not been able to
determine Archibald's date of death, although she did find, in the Screven
County records, that he had been jailed for battery in 1886 -- he tried to leave
his farm to his common-law wives and their children. But rural Georgia was in
disarray, ruled as much by the Ku Klux Klan as by official government, and Eliza
and Barbara and their children were run off their land.

(A point of disagreement: Cliena Stregles in Savannah insists that Archibald
eventually married a white woman named Martha Brown. There appear to have been
no children from that marriage, if it indeed took place; Archibald is listed as
"never married" in the family lineage published in The Sylvania Telephone in
1990.)

So Archibald's children and their mothers dispersed, most of them ending up in
Waynesboro, about 30 miles northwest of Sylvania, where Sam was already farming.

Sam became the protector of his younger brothers and sisters. In 1877, he had a
son named Jasper, who also lived out his life as a farmer. In turn, Jasper and
his wife Ocie had 12 children, 10 of whom lived to adulthood; he died in 1959.

His son, Zollie, was born in 1913, married Dorothy Nell Hampton in 1935 and they
had a daughter, Ms. Porter. Zollie died in 1980, just before the first Striggles
family reunion. "He was the motivating force," Ms. Porter says, "but he wasn't
there for the big party."

The Striggles family had continued as farmers in Waynesboro until the 1920's and
1930's, when waves of Southern blacks migrated to manufacturing jobs up North.
Zollie, worked polishing and maintaining floors in New York. The father of Ms.
Porter's cousin Vernita Ellison Wade, of Southfield, Mich., worked the Ford
assembly line before starting a construction business.

Still, Ms. Porter's family remained close to its Southern roots. She spent
summers as a child with her cousins on their farm near Sylvania, picking green
beans and cotton. The house where she grew up in Brooklyn was constantly filled
with relatives seeking a chance at life in New York, she recalls.

"We always had people coming from the South, their bags tied up with string,"
she says. "They would stay with you until they got a job or whatever."

The white and black branches of the Striggles family did occasionally have
contact more recently in rural Georgia.

"They never actually, openly claimed us," says Maudie Powell, Ms. Porter's
cousin, who is an assistant principal in Sylvania and whose mother was a
Striggles, descended from Archibald and Eliza. "But I knew some of them. My
mother worked for one of them when we were small. She used to drive a school
bus, and during the day, she would do some housework to make extra money."

JULY 4 REUNIONS: JOINING THE FAMILY CIRCLE

Screven County is small and poor, with most of its 14,043 residents farming
fields of corn and cotton or working in factories that make carpets, auto parts
and T-shirts. There are few Striggleses or Stregleses left in that section of
northeast Georgia these days.

But much of the Striggles family's identity is recalled at the biennial Fourth
of July weekend reunions. More than 300 relatives showed up for the first one,
in 1980 in Augusta -- a tribute to Ms. Porter's organizing skills and power of
persuasion. "It was just a shock, I'm telling you," said Thomasenia Lively Key,
a cousin living in Augusta, who helped her with the planning.

Since then, there have been seven reunions, the most recent last weekend in
Memphis. They bring together all the descendants of both slave women, Eliza
Lovette and Barbara Sapp -- in families named Ellison, Ziegler, Wright and Sapp,
as well as Striggles. The oldest relative this year was an Ellison, Viola
Ellison Moore, who is 98. "We make a big fuss over her," Ms. Porter said.

The centerpiece of the weekend is a formal banquet. There is also a picnic and
church services. This year there was a cookbook project to compile favorite
family recipes, like a comforting concoction of hot dogs, onions and celery
simmered in a tomato sauce that Thomasenia Key often served her three children.

But most of all, there is the comfort, pride and unity that come from so many
people, all joined by a common ancestor, converging from points like Detroit and
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., as well as New York and Georgia, to talk, laugh and share
their lives.

"I started to see the same physical types," Ms. Porter said of the first
reunion. "My Aunt Murry looked like some of the Ellisons. Then I saw other
people who look like I look. You bring all these people together and you can
just tell they're all related."

At the enormous picnics, as the young people play softball, the older ones
linger under the trees, remembering. "The old people, they like to sit and,
talking, they can tell you a lot of things," Ms. Porter said. At the first few
reunions, she spent hours interviewing her great-uncles and great-aunts; many of
them are now gone.

Ms. Porter has yet to research her mother's family, although her mother would
like her to. Most of Dorothy Nell Hampton Striggles's family were farmers, Ms.
Porter said; one of Dorothy's grandmothers was a Seminole Indian. "I'm ready to
go soon," Ms. Porter says of the new project.

But first things first. At the reunion last weekend, in front of 300 relatives,
Ms. Porter gave a lecture about the two slave women who bore Archibald's
children, discussing how they had no rights and were subject to the whims of
others.

"I tried to deal with that," she said, "and I told the young people, you do have
control over yourself. And if they could survive, you can certainly survive."

That was her contribution to the memory of Eliza Lovette and Barbara Sapp. She's
still looking for Barbara.


A Wealth Of Sources In New York

New York, city of immigrants, is unusually fertile ground for the American
genealogical obsession, with a vast variety of resources to help people trace
their family pasts. Here is a selection of research centers and other resources,
with a look at what they offer.

THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY , American history, local history and genealogy
division. Fifth Avenue at 42d Street, Room 315S. Hours: 11 A.M.-7:30 P.M.
Tuesday; 11 A.M.-6 P.M. Wednesday, and 10 A.M.-6 P.M. Thursday-Saturday.
Published family histories, primary sources like passenger lists, indexes to
births and deaths, and Government records, including the census, on microfilm.

THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES , northeast division, 201 Varick Street; (212) 337-1300.
Hours: 8 A.M.-4:30 P.M. Monday-Friday. Also the third Saturday of every month,
8:30 A.M.-4 P.M., for microfilm only. Census records from 1790-1920, passenger
arrivals, immigration and naturalization records, Revolutionary War records,
World War I draft records, Federal court records.


FAMILY HISTORY CENTERS , run by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Two in the city: 125 Columbus Avenue, near 65th Street, (212) 873-1690, in
Manhattan, and the other at 86-16 60th Avenue, Rego Park, Queens, (718)
478-5337. Hours for Columbus Avenue: noon-5:30 P.M. Monday; 10 A.M.-8 P.M.
Tuesday-Friday; 10 A.M.-5:30 P.M. Saturday. Also 1-5:30 P.M. Sunday, for church
members only. Hours for Rego Park: 6:30-9 P.M., Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday;
1-7 P.M. Saturday and 5-8 P.M. Sunday, open to all. FamilySearch, the CD-ROM
search system copyrighted by the church, which includes ancestral files, indexed
by name and town, as well as pedigree charts and birth, marriage and death
records; also the Social Security Index for deceased recipients, a military
index for troops killed in Korea and Vietnam, and electronic card-catalogue
access to books and other records.

THE SCHOMBURG CENTER FOR RESEARCH IN BLACK CULTURE . 515 Malcolm X Boulevard (at
135th Street), (212) 491-2200. Hours: Noon-8 P.M., Monday-Wednesday; 10 A.M.-6
P.M. Thursday-Saturday. Published family histories, genealogical research
guides, microfilm with census records, and electronic catalogue services of the
New York Public Library, known as Catnyp. Also an enormous photographic archive.


YIVO INSTITUTE FOR JEWISH RESEARCH . (212) 535-6700. Now at Fifth Avenue and
86th Street, but moving to West 57th Street and reopening in September. Hours:
9:30 A.M.-5:30 P.M., Monday-Thursday. Appointments are advisable. Books,
periodicals, manuscripts, photographs, microfilms covering the history of
Eastern European Jewry, including one of the country's premier Holocaust
collections, including memorial books and materials in many languages.

NEW YORK GENEALOGICAL AND BIOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY , 122 East 58th Street. Hours:
9:30 A.M.-5 P.M., Tuesday-Saturday. (212) 755-8532. Admission fee: $5 for
nonmembers; $50 annual membership. Manuscripts, microfilms, land records,
probate records, Surrogate Court decisions dating to the reign of George I.
Major focus is New York, but collection also includes materials on New England
and the South. The society also publishes a quarterly, The Record.

CITY REGISTER OFFICE , Manhattan. 31 Chambers Street. (212) 788-8528. Hours: 9
A.M.-4 P.M., Monday-Friday. Borough of Manhattan deeds, mortgages, maps and
real-estate items, including some wills and rights transfers, dating to 1654.

BRONX COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY , 3309 Bainbridge Avenue. (718) 881-8900. Hours:
9 A.M.-5 P.M., Monday-Friday (by appointment). Photographs dating to the 1860's,
postcards of Bronx scenes, back issues of Bronx newspapers like Bronx Home News
and Mosholu Parkway Press, old Fire Department and police blotters.

SURROGATE'S COURT RECORD ROOM , Kings County. 2 Johnson Street, Room 109,
Brooklyn. (718) 643-8016. Hours: 9 A.M.-12:30 P.M. and 1:30-5 P.M.,
Monday-Friday. Surrogate's Court record from 1785 to the present, including
probate, administration, guardianship and adoption proceedings. Adoption
records, however, are sealed.

QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LIBRARY , Long Island Division. 89-11 Merrick Boulevard,
Jamaica. 718-990-0770. Hours: 10 A.M.-9 P.M., Monday and Friday; 10 A.M.-6 P.M.,
Tuesday-Thursday; 10 A.M.-5:30 P.M. Saturday, and noon to 5 P.M. Sunday, except
during the summer. Pictures of different spots in Queens and Long Island and
postcards dating from 1890; state census records for Queens and Long Island;
city directories from 1796, telephone books from 1927 and local newspapers.

For more information, the following are useful reference books:


Genealogical Resources in the New York Metropolitan Area, edited by Estelle M.
Guzik (Jewish Genealogical Society, 1989)

The Source: A Guidebook of American Genealogy (Ancestry, 1984)

Shaking Your Family Tree, by Ralph J. Crandall (Yankee Publishing, 1986)


Of Litigation and Lineage

Genealogy, of course, has its more mercenary side. The hunt for ancestors at
times attracts those who wish to defraud, those who think they have been
overlooked, and those who simply wish they were someone else.

Frequently, people try to pass themselves off as "the only first cousin" of
someone who has died and left no children but a decent estate, said Marsha Saron
Dennis, a professional genealogist and the president of the Jewish Genealogical
Society. She is hired by lawyers and others to verify such relatives and, if
they prove to be legitimate, to see if there are any others.

"Sometimes they're mistaken, other times they accidentally-on-purpose forgot,
and other times I think they know damn well," she said of such claimants. "I
keep turning people up, people who aren't supposed to exist."

Claims filed in Surrogates Court by people who insist they are the
unacknowledged children of famous wealthy people are not uncommon, she added,
and there are professional "heir searchers" who scour the earth for potential
legatees and will, for a sizable fee, usually a percentage of the inheritance,
inform them of their luck.

Among cognoscenti, one of the most celebrated, and longest-running cases of
genealogical litigiousness involves the heirs of Anneke Jan Bogardus, one of the
earliest Dutch settlers in New York, who died in 1663, leaving eight children
and, by now, hundreds of thousands of descendants.

Mrs. Bogardus owned a sizable chunk of lower Manhattan, then mostly farmland. In
1670, five of her children transferred the property to Col. Francis Lovelace,
then Governor of New York. The name of a sixth child, Cornelis Bogardus, was
left out of the paperwork, although he had left a widow and a child, and thus
began a series of legal challenges that lasted more than 100 years, according to
an article by William J. Parry published in April in The New York Genealogical
and Biographical Record.

The family motto might be, "Never give up." Starting in 1738, individual
descendants of Anneke Bogardus filed lawsuits and otherwise claimed ownership of
her farm, part of which had become the ground beneath Trinity Church. The
Trinity Corporation was most often named as the defendant. Over the years, the
tussle grew internecine; in one claim, 127 heirs brought action against 17 of
their distant cousins. The last lawsuit brought a ruling for the Trinity
Corporation in 1838, and the heirs' motion to introduce further evidence in 1846
was denied.

Sometimes Americans trace their way overseas and then don't understand some of
the fine points of European genealogy. In the New York Public Library's
genealogy division there is a sign advising people not to simply help themselves
to a coat of arms that bears an ancestor's name unless they are sure they are
entitled to use it.

"Every Christmas somebody wants to embroider a seat cover with the family coat
of arms and if they can't get one, they're just desperate," said Ruth Carr, the
chief of the division. You're not entitled, she added, unless you can prove an
armigerous ancestor -- one to whom the distinction was awarded, usually by a
monarch.   C.L.H.


Your Roots: How to Start

Here are some guidelines for people researching their genealogies, as
recommended by the New York Public Library and by Marsha Saron Dennis, author of
a handbook, "Genealogy: How to Start."

1. START WITH WHAT YOU KNOW

Write down dates and places of birth, marriage and death of all family members,
as well as where ancestors came from, what languages they spoke and family
stories passed down through the years.

2. FIND OUT WHAT OTHERS IN THE FAMILY KNOW

Every family seems to have its historian aunt or uncle. Ask relatives to check
what you have written down for accuracy.

3. INTERVIEWS

Talk to relatives recommended by others as good sources. It makes sense to start
with the oldest and frailest. Ask open-ended questions, like "What can you
remember about your family gatherings when you were a child?" rather than simple
yes-no questions. Ask for details and descriptions. Try to get relatives not
born in the United States to recall life in the old country, as well as the
journey to America.

4. RESEARCH

Once you know which details are missing, you can start searching, beginning with
records of birth, marriage and death. In New York City, these are indexed and
available through the Municipal Archives and Department of Health. Individual
census records are also good sources; because the census is kept confidential
for 72 years, the most recent available census is 1920. New York State also took
its own census from 1825 to 1925.

Don't forget to check family Bibles.  Other records used by genealogists are
passenger ship arrival lists and newspaper obituaries. For other sources, see
facing page.

5. DEFINE YOUR GOALS

At the beginning, set small and reasonable goals: your father's and mother's
families, perhaps, but not every one of your collateral relatives (descendants
of all of your ancestors' siblings), which could take forever.

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Doris Striggles Porter, holding a photograph of her mother, has
traced her family back to pre-Revolutionary Georgia. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times) (pg. 1); More family history was documented as the extended Striggles
family gathered for a portrait at its reunion last weekend in Memphis. The
biennial reunions began in 1980, and this year's celebration drew about 300
relatives.; The oldest person at the reunion, Viola Moore, 98, holds a member of
the family's newest generation, her great-great-great nephew, Ronald Roseman
Jr., 8 months. (Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times) (pg. 10)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              38 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Political Correctness Infects the Pentagon

BYLINE: By By James Webb;   James Webb was Assistant Secretary of Defense and
Secretary of the Navy in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 19;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


In looking for someone to head the United States' complex and dangerous military
operations in the Pacific (including the Korean Peninsula), one could hardly
have found an officer more qualified than Adm. Stanley R. Arthur -- who until
recently was indeed the nominee for the job.

And in seeking an example of how far Pentagon leadership has fallen, and how the
issue of sexual harassment has descended into ugly McCarthyism, one could hardly
find a more telling case than Admiral Arthur's sudden dispatch to early
retirement.

Admiral Arthur is a hero of two wars -- a pilot who earned an extraordinary 11
Distinguished Flying Crosses while flying more than 500 combat missions in
Vietnam, then commanded the allied naval armada in the Persian Gulf. His
Pentagon experience is exemplary, too, including high-level budget planning,
nearly three years as chief of the Navy's worldwide logistics system and two
years as Vice Chief of Naval Operations.

After Admiral Arthur was nominated for the Pacific command, Senator David
Durenberger of Minnesota indicated that he would raise questions about the
treatment of a constituent, a female officer who claimed the Navy treated her
unfairly when she failed flight training after accusing an instructor of sexual
harassment. Admiral Arthur's only role in the case was that of final reviewing
officer. He approved earlier findings that although the woman, Lieut. (j.g.)
Rebecca Hansen, had been harassed (the Navy had already disciplined an
instructor), she failed to quality as a pilot because of a poor flight record,
both before and after the incident.

The inspectors general of the Navy and the Defense Department agreed with this
finding. Navy Secretary John H. Dalton approved a recommendation that the Navy
prepare to discharge her. Key senators told the Pentagon that Admiral Arthur
would be approved for his new command but that because of Mr. Durenberger's
"hold" his confirmation might be delayed until fall.

Then on June 24, the Navy said in a terse statement that Admiral Arthur "agrees
with Chief of Naval Operations Adm. Mike Boorda" that his nomination should be
withdrawn because an "anticipated delay in Senate confirmation" would not permit
"a prompt relief" for Adm. Charles R. Larson, the current commander in the
Pacific, who is scheduled to become Superintendent of the Naval Academy. Admiral
Arthur is to be retired as soon as his job is filled.

The Navy's explanation was disingenuous at best. Admiral Larson's new assignment
is not time-sensitive; in fact, it also awaits Senate action. It has been widely
reported that Admiral Boorda is less concerned about a delay in Admiral Arthur's
confirmation than about becoming ensnared in another sexual harassment scandal.
Even Senator Durenberger's key staff assistant said he was "flabbergasted" by
the decision to end Admiral Arthur's 37-year career in such a manner.

More important, this episode raises serious questions about Admiral Boorda's
fitness to be Chief of Naval Operations and demonstrates the Clinton
Administration's lack of regard for military leaders.

Admiral Boorda has gained a reputation for political expediency. In 1992, when
he was Chief of Personnel, he summarily relieved one of the Navy's brightest
young admirals, Jack Snyder, after the initial revelations about the Tailhook
scandal. Admiral Snyder, who had gone well beyond what was required in his
efforts to assist the key female witness and urge an investigation, was not even
allowed to defend his actions. This abandonment of a deserving officer in the
face of political attack did not hurt Admiral Boorda's chances for advancement
-- which may well have encouraged his shoddy treatment of Admiral Arthur.

After quashing Admiral Arthur's career, Admiral Boorda disregarded Secretary
Dalton's recommendation to discharge Lieutenant Hansen and went to Great Lakes,
Ill., to meet with her. She presented him with 10 demands, including that the
Navy rewrite her fitness reports using words of her choosing, that they send her
to law school at the Navy's expense and then assign her to work as a lawyer
handling women's issues, and that the Secretary officially apologize to her.
According to The New York Times, Admiral Boorda responded by offering her a job
on his personal staff. (She did not accept it.)

Under any standard of leadership, Admiral Boorda's conduct is seriously
deficient on several grounds: disloyalty to deserving subordinates, faulty
judgment and usurping the authority of the Secretary of the Navy.

Which leads us to the Clinton Administration's handling of this event. Once his
nomination went forward, Admiral Arthur was the President's candidate, and it
was not within Admiral Boorda's jurisdiction to withdraw. In fact, since the
Pacific command is "purple" -- that is, commanding military units from all the
services -- Admiral Arthur was technically never Admiral Boorda's candidate from
the beginning. And yet after the withdrawal we heard no word from either the
Secretary of the Navy or the President, and Defense Secretary William J. Perry
merely said he had decided not to intervene.

On July 1 the Administration announced that Vice Adm. Richard Macke, a capable
but far less experienced officer who had been slated to replace Admiral Arthur
as Vice Chief of Naval Operations, would be nominated instead to the Pacific
command. Thus a three-star officer is to be placed in the Navy's most senior and
prestigious four-star billet, partly because his paperwork was already in the
White House.

The casual way in which the Administration has dealt with command replacement
for a theater where war could be imminent indicates either naivete or arrogance
when it comes to the importance of strong military leadership. And it is a grim
omen for the future of the U.S. military when competent warriors are sent home
by political admirals.

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              39 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Uninsured: Who Are They? A special report.;
Frayed Nerves of People Without Health Coverage

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2436 words


At the age of 52, unemployed after an international career as a manager, Bob
Hughes is astonished to find himself without health insurance and wishes
Washington would do something about it.

"I don't want a dole from the Government," said Mr. Hughes, who lives with his
wife next to a golf course near Houston and cannot afford the $568 monthly
premiums they were quoted this year. "Just a little help, a little protection
until I get re-employed."

Mark Elias, a 36-year-old self-employed woodworker in New Orleans, has plenty of
business, but he and his wife think they would rather spend their money on
private schools for their three children than on health insurance.  Mr. Elias,
who makes custom doors and windows to the sonorous voice of Rush Limbaugh, would
rather live with risk than see the Government meddle with health care.

Lauren Bright, a 26-year-old actress, survives in New York City by waiting on
tables. "I'm honestly thinking of giving up acting in search of a career with
benefits," she said. "It's a sad thing."

In San Francisco, Trinidad Estrada, a 29-year-old mother of three who stands in
a restaurant all day making burritos, wonders how she will come up with $1,000
for foot surgery; she resents the free coverage the state gives to people she
regards as loafers.

These are some of the 39 million uninsured people, more than one in seven
Americans, at the center of an epic political battle as Congress decides how far
the country will go toward universal coverage. Their plight has been called a
crisis and a non-crisis, their numbers called understated and overblown.

Whatever the politics, evidence points unequivocally to serious hardships for
tens of millions of Americans. But this problem cannot be swept away, it is
clear, without costly Government subsidies or painful mandates on employers and
possibly both -- a predicament that goes a long way toward explaining the
pitched combat that will resume this week in Congress.

"All the studies are finding the same numbers," said Drew E. Altman, president
of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation in Menlo Park, Calif. "The argument
over the size and shape and seriousness of the problem is really a smokescreen
for the more legitimate debate over how to solve it."

Profile of the Uninsured

The burdens fall largely on working families with low-to-moderate incomes. In
half of uninsured households, a person works full time and in another third of
households a person works part time or part of the year, according to Federal
data analyzed by the Employee Benefit Research Institute.

Many uninsured people work for small businesses offering no benefits, or in
low-wage or contract jobs. A vast majority believe they simply cannot afford to
pay hundreds of dollars a month in insurance premiums.

The uninsured do not include the group that would otherwise be most vulnerable,
the elderly. Since the creation of Medicare in the looser fiscal climate of the
1960's, everyone 65 and over has basic coverage that is largely paid for by the
public.

The uninsured also do not include many of the poorest Americans, who are often
covered by Medicaid, the Federal-state program. Yet, fewer than half of
Americans who live below the official poverty line -- an annual income of around
$15,000 for a family of four this year -- are on Medicaid, leaving millions
uncovered who live in stifling need.

Minority members with lower-than-average incomes are disproportionately
uninsured. While 14 percent of white Americans under 65 were uncovered in 1992,
23 percent of blacks under 65 and 35 percent of Hispanic Americans under 65
were.

Disparities among the states are also striking. In much of the South and the
West, where jobs without benefits are more common and Medicaid is often less
generous, more than one in five people under 65 are uninsured. In many Northern
and Midwestern states it is closer to 1 in 10.

People who are excluded by insurers because of pre-existing medical conditions
-- a history of cancer or a chronic disease -- have provided heart-rending
stories in the health care debate. Banning such exclusions is a goal of many
bills in Congress. Yet, these account for only a small fraction of the
uninsured, perhaps one million of them, studies suggest.

The commonly quoted figure of 39 million or so uninsured is a snapshot of the
population at any point and includes a changing mix of people. Over the course
of a year, 58 million people are uncovered at least temporarily, research shows,
but many regain coverage when a family member finds a new job with benefits,
just as Mr. Hughes in Texas hopes to do.

This turnover has been seized on by both sides in the health care debate.
Seeking broad support from the middle class, the White House stresses how widely
shared the insecurity is, noting that one in every four currently insured
Americans will spend vulnerable months at some point over the next two years.
Opponents, asserting that relatively small numbers are chronically uncovered,
say the whole problem has been exaggerated.

Going Without Care

But a closer reading of the statistics shows that despite the turnover, the
long-term uninsured remain numerous. A new analysis by Timothy D. McBride, an
economist at the University of Missouri, finds that three-fourths of those who
are uninsured on a given day, or about 29 million people, remain uncovered for
one year or more and more than half of them, or 21 million people, for at least
two years.

Beyond anxiety, being uninsured takes a medical toll. Most people find ways to
get care when it is vital, either paying out of pocket or finding charity care.
But they tend to seek help less often and late.

"All the studies show that the uninsured get less care and end up sicker than
people with insurance," Mr. Altman of the Kaiser Foundation said. "Insurance per
se makes a huge difference."

Many younger, healthy people voluntarily forgo the expense of insurance. In a
survey last year of 2,000 adults, conducted by Louis Harris and Associates for
the Commonwealth Fund and the Kaiser Foundation, 7 percent of those who lacked
insurance said they did not want it, though the reasons were not specified.

Owners of restaurants and other small businesses who have offered to help pay
for premiums note that some employees choose to be uncovered rather than pay
their share.  But it is not clear whether this is more a reflection of lack of
interest or the financial strains on many workers.

Between Jobs
Medical Insurance Or Their House

The home of Bob and Susie Hughes, in Conroe, Tex., north of Houston, is filled
with mementos of a career abroad: dolls from Shanghai, an incense burner from
Indonesia, a painting from Vietnam. Mr. Hughes admits he never thought much
about health costs during his years as an executive and sales manager with
several companies. That changed after Mr. Hughes left his last job in early 1992
as Southeast Asian sales manager for a petroleum equipment supplier, just as the
company was going under.

With no new job in sight, the couple bought a private insurance policy. "They
kept raising the premiums and the deductibility to the point where we couldn't
afford it," he said of the premiums that jumped this year to $568 a month with a
$2,500 deductible. "Faced with the choice of a house or medical insurance, I
chose my house," he said. Their coverage ended two months ago.

"I've never taken unemployment from the state or the Federal Government," he
said. "I've gone though my savings and I've had to take money from my 401(k).
All I want is a little parachute."

Mr. Hughes said his main focus was on finding a job, not on politics, and he is
active in Forty Plus, a group that helps experienced professional people find
work. Asked about the Washington debate, he chuckled heartily. "I'd like to get
the same kind of coverage Bob Dole gets for the same premium," he said,
referring to the Republican Senator who has called universal coverage too
expensive.

"I think if the Federal Government has their employees on a master plan, they
ought to offer it to everybody in career transition," Mr. Hughes said.

Out of Reach
No Funds for Care Or for Insurance

Enrique and Trinidad Estrada of San Francisco, parents of children aged 9, 7 and
4, are struggling toward the middle class. Mr. Estrada, who is 31 and has lived
in this country nearly all his life, works all night delivering tortillas; his
wife, who came from Mexico to marry him at age 19, works all day making burritos
in a restaurant. Neither receives health benefits.

For years they lived with Mr. Estrada's parents, saving to buy their small blue
house in the Mission District. To meet the $1,800 monthly payments they rent out
the bottom floor for $700, cramming themselves into the top floor, where they
have one bedroom and a fold-out sofa on which all three children sleep. Between
house payments and baby sitters, Mrs. Estrada said, buying health insurance
would be unthinkable.

Mrs. Estrada has not paid much attention to the battles in Washington over
health care, but she wonders about the fairness of things.  Because of their
jobs and home ownership, she said, her family did not qualify for MediCal, the
California version of Medicaid. "The people who are working -- why shouldn't we
have it?" she asked. "I see people who are as young as I am begging on the
streets, and they get everything from the Government."

Still, the Estradas do not seem to dwell on the issue of health care. Mr.
Estrada has never been to a doctor. Mrs. Estrada received free care under a
public program when she was pregnant, but has not seen a gynecologist in the
four years since she gave birth, she said with no sense of alarm.

The children get low-cost checkups at a publicly financed clinic. "They look so
healthy," Mrs. Estrada said, "and I don't worry about it."

But a painful condition in her right foot has caused her concern and highlighted
the family's vulnerability. She had one operation at a cost of $300, which she
paid in monthly installments. But the operation did not cure her, and doctors
say she needs another procedure, which will cost $1,000. "It's going to be very
difficult for us to find the money," she said.

Out of Luck
Aspiring Actor Gets Pneumonia

Milo Pacheco is a 26-year-old aspiring actor who has lived in New York City
since 1991, working as a waiter or bartender to pay the bills. Like many of his
friends in the arts and the restaurant world, he was last covered during
college, when he stayed on his parents' policy, but now he has no money to spare
for insurance.

Until March he was lucky, paying for doctors as he needed them. Then disaster
struck, a severe pneumonia and infected fluid around the lungs. He had a chest
tube inserted and spent 18 days in the hospital, racking up bills of more than
$25,000.

Mr. Pacheco said he now owed several thousand dollars for doctor bills and a CAT
scan, which he will slowly pay off. A thoracic surgeon near his parents' home in
southern New Jersey, where he sought treatment, was a guardian angel, accepting
a surfboard in lieu of a hefty fee. The hospital is chalking off his $20,000
bill to charity care and will recoup much of that from the state and the bills
of the well-insured.

Mr. Pacheco's experience has only added to the fears of his girlfriend, Lauren
Bright, who is also 26 and waits tables between acting jobs. "When you're paying
rent and trying to save a little money, you just hope that you don't get sick,"
she said.

She has avoided going to the doctor but is grateful that gynecological care, at
least, is available on a sliding scale through Planned Parenthood. But now,
largely because of the threat of health costs, she said, she is rethinking her
choice of careers.

Mr. Pacheco and Ms. Bright both scoffed at the suggestion, made by some
economists, that many young adults were not worried about living uninsured.
Among people working in restaurants, who seldom receive benefits, for example,
"health care is a regular topic of discussion these days," Mr. Pacheco said.
"It's always a concern."

He added that he believed that employers ought to contribute at least a share of
the cost of worker coverage, as President Clinton proposed.

Ms. Bright said she would welcome Government health subsidies; if a plan with
complete coverage were made available in the range of $100 a month, she would
take it. But existing cut-rate plans, she said, are not worth it because of
their limited benefits.

"I have friends who are Australian and Canadian, and I so envy the fact that
they have national health care," she said. "They end up waiting to go home to
see a doctor."

Against Principles
Business Owner Hates Regulation

A talk with Mark Elias, the woodworker, suggests why the President's proposals
for universal coverage have not drawn an irresistible groundswell of support.
Running his own business in Slidell, La., a gritty town east of New Orleans, and
making an annual income of about $40,000, he feels he cannot afford to buy
insurance for his own family, including his wife, a 13-year-old and 11-year-old
twins, let alone his three employees. But his sense of independence extends to
his attitude about Government regulation of health care.

The family has been uninsured for two years, since Mrs. Elias left a job with an
insurance agency. They looked into buying a policy but especially in light of
their desire to send their children to private school, they believed they could
not afford rates of $300 a month, with a $2,500 deductible.

"Fortunately, we haven't had any kind of doctor bills," said Mr. Elias, who
admits to some worry. He guesses that someone in the family goes to a doctor
about once a year, but he cannot remember the last time anybody went.

"I'm not one to run to the doctor for every ache and pain," he said. "Maybe if I
was older I'd be more concerned."

At its income, the Elias family would not qualify for subsidies under the main
health care plans being debated in Washington, although proposed changes in
insurance rules might reduce the price of available policies.  Mr. Elias is
dubious in any case.

"Even if it was a good deal, I'd rather not have the Government give me
something," he said. "I'd rather not have my taxes go for social programs."

But he also knows that if medical catastrophe strikes, he could get help. "I'd
probably have to go to the clinic," he said, referring to a nearby public
medical center. "We'd work something out. They couldn't leave us out on the
street, at least that's the way I understand it."

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Trinidad Estrada, Restaurant Worker -- "People who are working
-- why shouldn't we have it?" Mrs. Estrada said about health insurance. Both she
and her husband, Enrique, work long hours in San Francisco to support their
three children, including 7-year-old Esmeralda. (Fiona McDougal for The New York
Times); Mark Elias, Self-Employed Woodworker -- "Even if it was a good deal, I'd
rather not have the Government give me something. I'd rather not have my taxes
go for social programs." He feels he cannot afford to buy insurance for his
family and the employees of his business in Slidell, La. (Alex Brandon for The
New York Times); Bob Hughes, Sales Manager, unemployed -- "They kept raising the
premiums and the deductibility to the point where we couldn't afford it. Faced
with the choice of a house or medical insurance, I chose my house." He stood by
his home in Conroe, Tex., with his wife, Susie. (F. Carter Smith for The New
York Times); Milo Pacheco, Aspiring Actor -- "Health care is a regular topic of
discussion these days," Mr. Pacheco, who has worked as a waiter, said of
restaurant workers in Manhattan. "It's always a concern." He contracted
pneumonia in March and incurred $25,000 in hospital bills. (Monica Almeida/The
New York Times)(pg. A12)

Chart: "BY THE NUMBERS -- The Uninsured: A National Snapshot" shows the
percentage of people under 65 in each state who were uninsured in 1992. (Source:
Employee Benefit Research Institute)(pg. A12)

Graph showing job status of people under 65 who lack health insurance in 1992.
(Source: Employee Benefit Research Institute)(pg. A1)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              40 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Berlin Journal;
The Elite of the Classless Society, Now Declasse

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: BERLIN


The group of slightly shabby retirees chatting outside a library in eastern
Berlin one recent afternoon hardly looked like former members of an
international elite, comfortable with power and at ease in the company of kings
and presidents.

But until 1990, these men and women were East German diplomats, among them
specialists with unique webs of contacts in foreign lands. As punishment for
their service to East Germany, they are now banned from diplomatic posts,
forbidden to practice the only trade most know.

No longer do they enjoy the privileges of large staffs, limousines, official
residences and gilt-edged invitations to state functions. Instead, many live
anonymously in drab apartments, the glitter of their former lives only a fading
memory.

Some, brooding in their forced retirement, have become angry and embittered. But
others have found new careers and are making more money than East German
functionaries ever dreamed of.

Unwilling to fade silently from history, the former diplomats have formed a
club, the Association for International Politics and Human Rights. At their
recent meeting in Berlin, the chairman, Siegfried Bock, a former Ambassador to
Romania, announced seminars on Cuba, Russia and "the Albanian factor in Balkan
politics."

The nearly 200 former diplomats in the audience represented an aging but unique
resource, a veritable foreign-ministry-in-waiting with sweeping knowledge of
languages, history and personalities.

But the German Government, fearful of the implications of hiring diplomats who
spent their careers serving Communism, wants nothing to do with them.

Many of the unwanted diplomats have found lucrative work in countries where they
had been posted.  Former East German Ambassadors to China and Vietnam, for
example, now run thriving businesses representing European companies in those
countries. A former Ambassador to Cuba runs a travel agency that specializes in
vacations there.

Other former diplomats, particularly those who were at lower and middle levels,
now work as cooks and taxi drivers. A few are unemployed and without prospects.

For a brief period while German unification was being designed in 1990, it
appeared that at least some East German diplomats would be allowed to remain in
the Foreign Service. Many had forged ties with their West German counterparts,
and in some foreign capitals, they even began informal planning for joint
embassies. But the German Government rejected such ideas and decided not to hire
anyone from the East German Foreign Ministry except for a few translators.

Officials in Bonn are reluctant to discuss their decision, but one Foreign
Ministry official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there were fears
that some of the former diplomats might have been involved in espionage or other
unsavory sorts of diplomatic work.

"Only a few of the former ambassadors, maybe a dozen or so, were really
qualified," the official said.  "But even with them, there was a problem because
we decided not to recognize their diplomas from the East German diplomatic
institute.  Our view was that these guys had been giving us trouble for years
and that there was no reason for us to reward them by giving them jobs."

Not surprisingly, many of the former East German diplomats are angry. Although
Westerners often viewed them as evangelists of repression and apologists for a
police state, they insist that they were a moderating and even liberal force
within Communist society.

"We have been sent into exile in the desert," Erich Wentzl, 56 years old, a
specialist in Scandinavia who served as Ambassador to Denmark and Sweden, said
with a sigh. "Without having committed any crimes, we are being punished like
criminals. I'm not even allowed to work as a custodian at City Hall."

"I had some illusions about this new country, this united Germany," Mr. Wentzl
added. "I thought nobody was going to be excluded, that everyone would be equal
before the law. It didn't turn out that way."

Mr. Wentzl's business card says he is an economic consultant, and he has found
work advising companies that buy and renovate formerly state-owned housing
complexes. But one of his former colleagues, Heinz-Dieter Winter, has not been
so lucky. His card identifies him only as "Former Ambassador."

Trained as an Arabist, Mr. Winter served as East Germany's Ambassador to Syria,
Tunisia and Jordan. He said he had been unable to find work in
Government-sponsored research agencies or in private industry, and he lives off
the reduced pension he receives as a 59-year-old early retiree.  "I'm a little
surprised that the people in Bonn decided not to take any of us," Mr. Winter
said. "They seem to want to exclude the entire East German intellectual elite
from the national life. For me personally, it's a shame that I can't do my part
to improve Germany's relations with countries I know well. But what's sadder is
that there could have been a real integration of East and West Germany.
Instead, people like us are written off as losers who have nothing to
contribute."

Nearly all East German ambassadors were Communist Party members, but Mr. Bock
insisted that none were intelligence agents.

"Even the United States, which in my time filled about one-third of its embassy
positions with C.I.A. agents, never sent agents as ambassadors," he said. "That
just isn't done."

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Heinz-Dieter Winter, left, was East Germany's Ambassador to
Syria, Tunisia and Jordan. Siegfried Bock, in former days, was the envoy to
Romania. There is no place for them in the German diplomatic service. (Christian
Schulz and Stefan Doblinger/Paparazzi, for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              41 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 11, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The New Military Order

BYLINE: By Barry M. Blechman;   Barry M. Blechman is chairman of the Henry L.
Stimson Center, a non-profit research and educational organization.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As the House and Senate prepare to confer on the Defense Authorization bill,
Democrats and Republicans have largely set aside their conflicts and are
sticking with the spending target of $252 billion -- a cut of 4 percent,
adjusting for inflation, from last year. But a growing number of lawmakers and
military commanders are arguing that the planned cuts go too deep and could
endanger military readiness.

By the end of the decade, defense outlays are projected to decline in real terms
by more than one-third from the highs of the 1980's. No complex organization can
be reduced so quickly without incurring problems. And, as troubles from Haiti to
the former Soviet republics underscore, the world remains an uncertain place.

The U.S. military should move gradually to adapt to the new world order. But
when we peer into the next decade, can we see a way to reduce defense spending
without risk to national security? The answer is yes, but not by further
reducing the size of the military. The real promise of savings lies in simply
making the armed forces more efficient.

Technology is transforming the U.S. economy. Corporations are increasingly
taking advantage of emerging technologies to improve their product lines, slash
payrolls and adopt cost-saving procedures. Military technology is also changing
radically, and the Defense Department is taking advantage of it by improving its
product lines. But unlike American corporations, the military has been slow to
reorganize; the challenge facing Defense Secretary William Perry is to
accelerate the reform.

Two kinds of reform in particular need bipartisan support from Congress. First,
the U.S. needs to change the way it buys military equipment. The complicated
process through which we develop and purchase weapons and equipment includes
perverse incentives that drive up costs.  Mr. Perry knows very well what needs
to be done, having had hands-on experience in the defense industry, and he has
begun to make concrete improvements, like issuing an executive order last month
mandating wide-ranging changes in the Defense Department's business practices.

One reform he is advocating is especially promising: eliminating special
military requirements, making it possible to purchase equipment more cheaply.
Military commanders need not shop at their local Wal-Mart, but hundreds of
thousands of weapon components could be purchased more cheaply if the military
accepted commercial standards of performance. These standards are quite
stringent, particularly in the highly competitive field of electronics. Yet
military specifications, even ordinary pieces of equipment, often run dozens of
pages and demand absurd levels of performance that drive costs sky-high.

The shift to commercial standards will also mean that our armed forces could
expand more quickly in an emergency. The fewer military requirements there are,
the easier it would be for the Pentagon to piggyback on commercial industries.

No one knows exactly how much money could be saved eventually through this and
other procurement reforms, but Mr. Perry has estimated that they could reap $5
billion to $10 billion a year beginning in 1999. Last year, the Defense Science
Board, which advises the Pentagon on technological issues, put the figure at $20
billion. Certainly, the high end of Mr. Perry's range is a reasonable target.

Another area that needs significant improvement: how the military uses its
personnel. We must do more to reduce duplication in the support staffs of the
armed services, a move singled out by Gen. Colin L. Powell Jr., the former
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, in his 1993 report on the services' roles
and missions.

Because the Army, the Navy and the Air Force have each historically tried to
remain as autonomous as possible, they often replicate one another in such areas
as training of electronics technicians, providing medical care and maintaining
vehicles and aircraft. If a single service could be named executive agent for
each of these functions, fewer people would have to be kept in uniform to
support combat-ready troops. And eliminating duplication also would mean fewer
civilians working for the Defense Department and fewer military bases.

A second way to reduce personnel would be to review the way that manpower
requirements are calculated. Before Richard Nixon abolished the draft in 1972,
it was cheap to hire servicemen and women. Now personnel are paid competitive
wages, but they continue to be used inefficiently as if they were still
inexpensive.

Congress should undertake a comparison of military schools, hospitals, supply
centers, administrative headquarters and repair depots with their civilian
counterparts to assess how serious the problem is. American corporations have
found their greatest savings by streamlining middle management; this would be a
good place for the armed services to look as well.

If the Pentagon reduced its civilian work force and uniformed personnel assigned
to supporting roles by 20 percent -- in line with the cuts now being made by
many U.S. companies -- annual savings could reach $12 billion over the next
decade.

Adding these savings to those from procurement reform would bring the Defense
Department budget down from the $230 billion (in today's dollars) planned for
fiscal 1999 to below $210 billion. These cuts would be made without reducing the
size of the combat forces, risking their technological edge or compromising
their readiness.

Of course, it is a great deal easier to theorize about these potential savings
than to pocket them. The Defense Secretary must initiate the changes and his
staff must follow up aggressively, but only the services can take action on the
thousands of individual steps that are required to nail down the cost
reductions.

Twenty years ago, as the nation's armed forces wound down after the Vietnam War,
then Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger offered the services additional
combat units if they were able to make deeper reductions. This kind of creative
management is worth another look as the services recover from the cold war.

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              42 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 52 words


An article and a headline on Sunday about a meeting planned between Secretary of
State Warren Christopher and Vietnam's Foreign Minister described it
incorrectly. It would be the fifth between an American Secretary of State and a
Vietnamese Foreign Minister since the country was unified, not the first.


LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              43 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Called Diplomacy, Senator

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, is preparing to run for the Republican
Presidential nomination in 1996. He thus invites us to measure his words and
actions against that lofty aspiration, to treat him not just as a partisan
politician but as a potential world leader. By that standard, his captious
criticism of President Clinton's comments following the death of the North
Korean leader Kim Il Sung is disturbing.

What provoked his ire was Mr. Clinton's statement extending "sincere condolences
to the people of North Korea" and expressing appreciation for Mr. Kim's
leadership in resuming talks with the United States. Whatever stumbles Mr.
Clinton may have made in foreign affairs, in this case he struck the right note.
After months of nervous diplomacy, Mr. Kim had offered to resume conversations
about North Korea's nuclear program; it was clearly in Mr. Clinton's interest to
thank him for that and to encourage Mr. Kim's successors to continue along the
path of accommodation.

One would like to believe that if Mr. Dole were now President, he would have
been equally sensitive to the diplomatic niceties of the moment. But candidate
Dole gave no hint of that. He complained that Mr. Clinton should have reminded
the world of Mr. Kim's "brutal dictatorship" and his responsibility for a war
that cost "54,000 American lives and 100,000 Americans wounded."

Mr. Dole cannot seem to overcome his reflexive instinct for the jugular or shake
his habit of using American casualties to pummel the political opposition. As
Gerald Ford's running mate in 1976, he managed to blame the Democrats for every
American casualty during two world wars, the Korean War and Vietnam. This did
not help Mr. Ford.

Representative Newt Gingrich also complained. He credited Mr. Clinton for
reaching out to Mr. Kim's successors, but he did not like the "condolences" line
at all. "I don't think we sent any condolences when Mao Zedong died," he said.

In fact, President Gerald Ford and his exiled predecessor, Richard Nixon, fell
all over themselves with praise for Mao, despite the Chairman's significant
contribution to American casualties in the Korean War. The reason was that Mr.
Nixon and Mr. Ford wanted the newly opened door to China to stay open. That Mr.
Clinton might have a similar interest in North Korea seems obvious to nearly
everyone but Mr. Dole.



LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              44 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Moscow Journal;
Tattooed Lady, 2,000 Years Old, Blooms Again

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, July 12


A 2,000-year-old woman's body discovered frozen in the Siberian permafrost by
Russian archeologists is undergoing a rejuvenating make-over by the same
scientists who preserved Lenin's body.

Already, she doesn't look a day over 1,800.

Lying rather daintily on her side in a glass tank filled with bright green
alcohol solution, the Russian mummy -- named Lady by the archeologists because
of her regal bearing and rich burial trove -- is painstakingly being brought
back to the surprisingly good shape in which she was found last July.

"Our main task is to keep her remaining flesh preserved for all time," said
Sergei S. Debov, the 75-year-old biochemist who did the same for Ho Chi Minh of
Vietnam and who has helped maintain Lenin in his mummified state.

The 2,000-year-old is the first woman that Dr. Debov and his team have treated.

Now Lady lies in their Moscow laboratory wrapped only in a white sheet. But when
unearthed, she was elegantly laid out in a white silk blouse, red skirt and
white stockings. She had been buried in a hollowed tree trunk alongside horse
harnesses, a mirror, dishes and a small container of cannabis, which
archeologists believe was smoked for pleasure and used in pagan rituals.

That, and the intricate tattoos on her left arm, led the archeologists who found
her to conclude that she was a Scythian princess and a priestess. To preserve
her as a mummy, her vital organs had been removed and replaced with moss and
peat.

"She is our first tattooed lady," said Anatoly P. Derevyanko, director of the
Institute of Archeology and Ethnography in Akademgorodok, the academic town that
is the site of the Siberian branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

In 1991 the institute began excavations at Ukok, an area in the Altay mountain
region in southern Siberia, southeast of Pasyryk, where a Scythian burial ground
was discovered in the late 1920's.

Scythian nomads, based in the steppes north of the Black Sea, were ancient
warriors who at one time occupied much of Eastern Europe and Russia. They were
mentioned by the Greek historian Herodotus, though not always flatteringly.

In 1991 the Russian team of archeologists found a husband and wife buried
together at Ukok, both wearing armor. All that was left of them, however, were
their skeletons.

Other Scythian graves have been found in the area, but Dr. Derevyanko said that
none of the mummies were as well preserved.

"In terms of the preservation of flesh, this is a unique discovery," he said.

The Scythian Lady has not received the kind of attention accorded the
4,000-year-old herdsman, nicknamed the Iceman, who was found frozen in a glacier
in the Tyrolean Alps three years ago, or even Dima, the 12,000-year-old frozen
baby woolly mammoth found by fishermen in Siberia in 1977. But Russian
archeologists say Lady is the most important Scythian discovery since Pasyryk.

"The Iceman died accidentally," Dr. Derevyanko said with a trace of scorn. "He
was not buried with an inventory of possessions around him."

The effort to restore the Russian mummy unites two of the oddest sidelines of
Russian science, Dr. Debov's secret embalming method and the theories of the
late Mikhail M. Gerasimov. He was an anthropologist and sculptor who developed a
method for approximating the faces of figures like Ivan the Terrible and the
poet Schiller by analyzing their skulls.

The laboratory founded by Dr. Gerasimov has agreed to try to reconstruct what
the Lady may once have looked like. At 5 foot 4 inches, she was tall for her
time, and had long legs.

"She was young, 18 or 20, and had European features," said Tatyana S. Baluyeva,
the senior researcher at the laboratory for anthropological reconstruction at
the Institute of Ethnology and Anthropology, who conducted a preliminary study
of the skull. "I think it is all right to say she was pretty."

But her appearance was not helped by exposure to the elements and some
transportation mishaps.

Her skull had separated from her body before it was discovered, but what was
left of her flesh was still firm and fresh when her body was dug up. It quickly
shriveled and darkened, and the archeologists decided to send the mummy to Dr.
Debov to repair the damage and prevent further deterioration.

Already, Dr. Debov and his team have lightened her skin, making visible again
the curling blue tattoos up and down her left arm. When they have completed
their work, she will be flown back to Novosibirsk and eventually put on display.

They were unable to determine the cause of her death. But her fictional
contemporary, Mel Brooks's 2,000-Year-Old-Man, discussed the subject in a famous
interview with Carl Reiner when asked about health care in ancient times. He
explained that there were no hospitals or insurance.

"You just lay there," he said, "until you got better."


LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: She lived 2,000 years ago and she may have been a Scythian
princess. Now her body, discovered frozen in Siberia, is being brought back to
the surprisingly good shape in which it was found. The scientist in charge of
preserving her, Sergio S. Debov, right, has done the same for Lenin. Dr. Yuri A.
Romanov, the laboratory's deputy director, is at left and Vladislav L.
Kozblitzev, the research director, at center. (Otto Pohl for The New York Times)


Maps shows the location of Ukok, Russia.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              45 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lars-Eric Lindblad, 67, Pioneer Of Tours to Exotic Destinations

BYLINE: By JANET PIORKO

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


Lars-Eric Lindblad, a peripatetic entrepreneur whose tour company pioneered
commercial trips to China, Antarctica and other remote parts of the world, died
on Friday in Stockholm while on vacation. He was 67 and lived in Wilton, Conn.

The cause of death was a heart attack, according to his son, Sven-Olof.

Mr. Lindblad, a native of Sweden who immigrated to the United States in 1951 and
became an American citizen, was president and chief executive officer of
Lindblad Travel in Westport, Conn., for more than 30 years. The company ceased
operations in 1989. In that year, the company was penalized more than $75,000
for violating United States trade embargoes against Vietnam and Cambodia by
offering tours there.

Fees and Penalties Hurt

Mr. Lindblad said the penalties and legal fees incurred in his dispute with the
Government contributed to the company's going out of business.  President
Clinton lifted the trade embargo against Vietnam in February, and a number of
American companies now offer tours there. The embargo against Cambodia was
lifted by President Bush in 1992.

In an interview when the penalties were levied, Mr. Lindblad said he had
intentionally violated the sanctions. "I would do it again," he said. "Travel in
my opinion is not ordinary trade. Travel is a way of communication. To embargo
travel is like burning books or imprisoning journalists."

Mr. Lindblad later helped form another tour company, Creative Travel of
Westport, Conn., which continues to operate.

Among Mr. Lindblad's early tours were cruises to Antarctica, in 1966; to the
Galapagos, in 1967, and along the coast of China in 1978. In 1972, one of his
company's ships ran aground in Antarctica; its passengers, including Mr.
Lindblad, were rescued by the Chilean Navy.

Bob Whitley, president of the United States Tour Operators Association, of which
Mr. Lindblad was a longtime member, called him "probably one of the most
creative people who was ever involved in organizing travel."

Mr. Lindblad was the author of an autobiography, "Passport to Anywhere," with an
introduction by the ornithologist Roger Tory Peterson, who was a friend.

Honored for Services

Mr. Lindblad was awarded the Order of the Golden Ark by the Netherlands for
services to wildlife conservation, and was made a Knight of the Northern Star by
the King of Sweden.

He is survived by his wife, Ruriko, of Wilton, Conn; a son, Sven-Olof of New
York City; two daughters, Cristina and Ana Maria, both of New York City; three
sisters, Anne Charlotte Tatar of Ridgefield, Conn., Else-Britt Cederblad of
Abbekas, Sweden, and Mona D'Orchimont-Lymark of Stockholm; a brother, Karl-Bruno
of Atlanta, and two grandchildren.

Mr. Lindblad's first marriage, to Sonja Stevenson, ended in divorce. His second
wife, Cary Ann, died in 1984.

NAME: Lars-Eric Lindblad

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lars-Eric Lindblad (The New York Times, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              46 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Gump,' a 9-Year Personal Campaign

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 12


It did not take a lifetime to make "Forrest Gump," but it certainly felt that
way to Wendy Finerman.

"Nine years," said Ms. Finerman, the 33-year-old producer who nurtured the
project to fruition, almost obsessively and despite a general unwillingness in
Hollywood to make a film about a slow-witted man who follows the tide of history
from the 1950's onward.

"Actors, directors, agents, studio people were just not interested in the
project, partly because of 'Rain Man,' " she said, referring to the Dustin
Hoffman-Tom Cruise drama about a mentally handicapped man and his brother.
"People would ask me what I was working on, and I'd say, 'Forrest Gump,' and
they'd get that glazed look. I knew they were thinking, 'When is she going to
give up?' "

She didn't. And the film, starring Tom Hanks and directed by Robert Zemeckis,
opened last Wednesday to large audiences that exceeded just about everyone's
expectations in Hollywood. The film grossed $24.5 million over the weekend,
tying for first place with "The Lion King."

"It's beyond anyone's dream," Ms. Finerman said in an interview. Barry L.
London, the president of the Motion Picture Group of Paramount, who oversaw the
marketing for the movie, said, "Astounding!"

All Kinds of Hero

The quirky and sweet-natured film, which opened to reviews that ranged from
mixed to enthusiastic, was adapted by Eric Roth, a screenwriter, from the novel
by Winston Groom.

It deals with a slow-witted man who becomes a football star at the University of
Alabama, a Vietnam War hero, a Ping-Pong champion in China and a dumb-luck
millionaire. In the process (and with the help of dazzling special effects
involving archival film and digital technology), Forrest meets Presidents
Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon and an array of icons and celebrities of the last
four decades.

The centerpiece of the film is a gentle love story between Forrest and his
lifelong friend, Jenny, played by Robin Wright, whose paths intersect and
diverge. Others in the cast are Gary Sinise, Sally Field and Mykelti Williamson.

Ms. Finerman's effort to make "Forrest Gump" over nine years ended, of course,
happily. But this is the exception in Hollywood. Most producers struggle for
years, come close to a deal and then watch it unravel overnight because studio
chiefs change, stars get cold feet, directors drop out.

Beyond this, Ms. Finerman has a distinct advantage over other producers. She's
the wife of a top executive, Mark Canton, chairman of Columbia/ Tri-Star Motion
Picture Companies, (they have three small children), so she has at the very
least been able to develop friendships with stars like Mr. Hanks and top
directors like Mr. Zemeckis. Most 33-year-old producers don't travel in those
circles.

Proving Yourself

But Ms. Finerman says, quite forcefully, that knowing stars and directors on a
first-name basis guarantees nothing in terms of their committing to a movie.
"The challenge is to make people realize they're dealing with a separate person
and not the wife of," said Ms. Finerman. "The challenge is to prove yourself
separate from your spouse. And 'Forrest Gump' does that."

In Hollywood, some spouses of top executives, especially wives, dabble in
producing and even have lucrative (and ludicrous) production deals. But Ms.
Finerman has never been viewed as a dabbler. She grew up in Baltimore and Los
Angeles, the daughter of an orthopedic surgeon. Ms. Finerman graduated from the
Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania and, instead of going to Wall
Street like many of her friends, sought a job in the entertainment industry.

She worked at the Movie Channel in New York, then as a business affairs
executive at Universal Television in Universal City. Ms. Finerman then joined
producer Steve Tisch as vice president of production and development at his
company in Los Angeles. It was there, in 1985, that she read the galleys of
"Forrest Gump."

"I was floored," she said. "When do you come across material that literally
makes you laugh and cry almost at the same time. The characters were timeless."

Mr. Tisch said in an interview, "She came into my office one morning and said:
'I found a piece of material that's brilliant. We've got to make this.' It
became her child. In the best sense of the word, she brought this baby to life."
(Mr. Tisch is also listed as a producer, together with Steve Starkey, who is Mr.
Zemeckis's longtime collaborator.)

The Many Steps

But bringing the baby to life was arduous.

Mr. Groom, the author, wrote a screenplay, and was followed by two other
writers. But the unconventional and episodic nature of the book, whose plot
flowed but didn't build, hampered the adaptations. "We couldn't quite catch the
book's special nature," Ms. Finerman said.

Then Warner Brothers, which bought the novel for the producers, dropped out
because of concern that "Rain Man" had somehow reduced the commercial viability
of the project.

Ms. Finerman, who created her own producing company in 1988, finally signed a
deal with Paramount to produce the movie. In the meantime, Tom Hanks, who had
read the book, told her that with the right script he would be interested in
starring in it.

Ms. Finerman turned to a friend, Eric Roth, whose screenplays include "Mr.
Jones," "Suspect" and "Memories of Me." It took Mr. Roth a year to complete the
adaptation. "I knew I couldn't get discouraged," Ms. Finerman said.

In December 1992, Mr. Roth handed in his screenplay. "The script broke all the
traditional rules of movie making," Ms. Finerman said. "Yes, it was episodic.
But it was also told from the point of view of Forrest. It dealt with exposition
in an unusual way. Eric created the idea of a feather floating in the wind
that's used in the film, a metaphor for destiny that says we're all out there
afloat."

"Most important, he anchored the movie on the love story," she said. "That's the
spine of the film."

Hanks Agrees

Ms. Finerman sent the script to Mr. Hanks, who immediately agreed to make the
movie to follow "Philadelphia," for which he won an Academy Award as best actor.
At that point Sherry Lansing, the head of Paramount Studios, promptly gave the
film the green light. The movie was budgeted at more than $40 million.

The producer's first choice to direct the film was Mr. Zemeckis, one of
Hollywood's most successful film makers ("Who Framed Roger Rabbit" "Romancing
the Stone" the three parts of "Back to the Future"). By mid-January, Mr.
Zemeckis had agreed to direct.

"The script was like nothing I've ever read before," Mr. Zemeckis said in an
interview. "It was completely compelling and yet it had none of the conventional
storytelling elements."

Ms. Finerman, who has been besieged with congratulatory phone calls in the last
few days because of the film's success, said that she could finally gaze back at
the last nine years with some perspective.

"Did I get discouraged?" she said. "Absolutely. Was it frustrating? Absolutely.
But as soon as I got that script I knew, with certainty, that the time had come
for 'Forrest Gump.' "


LOAD-DATE: July 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Wendy Finerman, a producer of "Forrest Gump," with its director
Robert Zemeckis, outside a theater where it was sold out. (Bart Bartholomew for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              47 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Henry Koren, A Diplomat For 23 Years

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


Henry L. T. Koren, a retired Foreign Service officer who dealt with knotty
issues like the American civil pacification program in South Vietnam and the new
Panama Canal treaty, died on July 6 at home in a retirement community in
Williamsburg, Va. He was 83 years old.

The cause of death was cardiac arrest, his family said.

Mr. Koren left the State Department with the rank of Ambassador in 1971 after 23
years in the Foreign Service. From then until 1975, he held the post of Deputy
Under Secretary of the Army in Charge of Panama Affairs. At the time, the
Pentagon and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were trying to overcome their earlier
difficulties with the treaty terms being negotiated by the State Department.

He then moved to Florida, where he had an active role for 12 years in the
Gasparilla Island Conservation and Improvement Association. He had lived in
Williamsburg since 1988.

Colonel in the Army

Henry Lloyd Thornell Koren was born in Princeton, N.J., and graduated cum laude
from Princeton University in 1933. He was employed by the Bank of New York
before World War II, when he served in the Army in Europe and reached the rank
of colonel.

He worked for the Central Intelligence Agency for a year before he joined the
State Department in 1948. He was posted to Haiti, Switzerland and the
Philippines, and was the Director of Southeast Asian Affairs in 1964, when
President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed him Ambassador to the Republic of the
Congo.

His next assignment in the 1960's took him to South Vietnam as the third-ranking
officer of the American Embassy in Saigon. He was the Director of Civil
Operations for the country's strategic northern provinces, where the American
pacification program had run into severe problems by the time he returned to
Washington in 1968.

Mr. Koren is survived by his wife of 54 years, Virginia Cain Koren; a son, Henry
L. T. Jr. of Colorado Springs, Colo.; a daughter, Anne Koren of Paris; and three
grandchildren.


NAME: Henry L. T. Koren

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry L. T. Koren. (1964)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              48 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 14, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hilton Vietnam Venture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., July 13


The Hilton Hotels Corporation announced plans today to build a luxury hotel in
Vietnam south of Ho Chi Minh City. The 500-room hotel would open in 1997 and
accommodate visitors to a planned world trade and civic center complex. "This is
a very preliminary nonbinding agreement," a spokeswoman, Kendra Walker, said
today. "We have no further details at this time." Hilton's international
subsidiary, Conrad Hotels, is also planning to expand into Indonesia, Malaysia
and Brisbane, Australia. The company already has a Hong Kong location.

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              49 of 259 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 15, 1994 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Changing Young Lives On the Streets of Italy

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 830 words


The story of a teacher who changes the lives of streetwise students in a
Neapolitan village seems utterly predictable. It also sounds totally wrong for
Lina Wertmuller, who made her name with savvy, tough-minded films like "Seven
Beauties." Yet in the delightful, sweet-tempered comedy "Ciao, Professore!" the
teacher is transformed in ways that link him to earlier, imperfect Wertmuller
characters. By the end of this idealistic teacher's brief stay in the village of
Corzano, his most rebellious student tells him: "You stole a van; you smacked a
nun against a wall. A few weeks more, and you'd learn how to live." The boy
means it as a compliment, and in this case he's right.

The teacher, Marco Sperelli (Paolo Villaggio), was assigned to his
rough-and-tumble third-grade class by a minor computer error. He was meant to
teach in the more refined northern town of Corsano but instead was assigned to
Corzano in the crime-ridden south. In that crowded village, education means
nothing next to scraping together a living. Even the children help in the family
businesses: hawking stolen cigarettes on the street, or working in restaurants,
barber shops and fruit stands.

It doesn't take long for Sperelli to see where the problem is. The school
janitor is so corrupt he sells the children essentials like chalk and toilet
paper. The principal, accustomed to the criminal life of Corzano, knows better
than to try to change it. Sperelli, of course, was dropped into this movie to do
exactly that.

He begins by dragging the kids to school, in an energetic scene that has him
gathering the children kicking and screaming from the streets. The little boys
who have been pulled away from the cafe and barber shop are still wearing their
white uniform jackets, and the daughter of the fruit-stand owner has a large
rope of garlic around her neck.

Much of the humor comes from the way the children act like little adults,
despite their missing front teeth and innocent faces. That approach can be as
much of a trap as making kids too sugary. But the children are so natural that
they prevent the film from becoming mawkish or coy. They are all amateur actors,
but they are also movie-ready Italians, complete with hand gestures and rough
language. From the fat boy who identifies with his portly teacher to the pretty
little girl who develops a schoolgirl crush, the characters are types. The film
is lively enough to make those types seem adorable all over again.

Raffaele, the toughest boy in the class, has the weakest story, though. His
desperate mother persuades Sperelli not to give up on Corzano, a scene that
plummets "Ciao, Professore!" down to its lowest, most predictable point. But it
recovers quickly. By the time the mother becomes ill and Sperelli is called on
to help, he learns an important lesson: when in Corzano, do as the Corzanans do.
That is, bend the law and speak the local language of insults. When an ambulance
refuses to come, he steals the van. When a nun at the hospital refuses to treat
the mother fast enough, he screams what any other villager would: "You ugly
raghead." He gets results.

Although Mr. Villaggio is effective as Sperelli, he has a too-pat sad-sack look
much of the time. And the song that ends the film, Louis Armstrong's version of
"Wonderful World," is so blatant a steal from "Good Morning, Vietnam" that the
idea backfires. "Ciao, Professore!" (formerly called "Me, Let's Hope I Make It")
doesn't need to nudge the audience into responding to its children.

Ms. Wertmuller has been off the radar in recent years. Films like "Saturday,
Sunday, Monday," with Sophia Loren, have not been released commercially in the
United States. "Ciao, Professore!" is one of her slighter films, but it brings
her back with the most accessible, comic and commercial movie she has made in a
long time. And she hasn't completely lost her tough-mindedness. The film that
"Ciao, Professore!" brings to mind is Francois Truffaut's "Small Change," from
1976. The films share an awareness that while children are cute, it's their
resilience that often plays best on screen.

"Ciao, Professore!" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes strong language.

CIAO, PROFESSORE!
Directed by Lina Wertmuller; written by Ms. Wertmuller, Leo Benvenuti, Piero De
Bernardi, Alessandro Bencivenni and Domenico Saverni, based on the book "Io
Speriamo Che Me Lo Cavo" (Me, Let's Hope I Make It") by Marcello D'Orta (in
Italian with English subtitles); director of photography, Gianni Tafani; edited
by Pierluigi Leonardi; produced by Ciro Ippolito, and Mario and Vittorio Cecchi
Gori; released by Miramax Films. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is rated R.


WITH: Paolo Bonacelli (Ludovico), Pier Francesco Borruto (Peppiniello), Esterina
Carloni (Esterina), Isa Danieli (The Principal), Ciro Esposito (Raffaele), Gigio
Morra (Custodian), Sergio Solli (Cardboard Dealer), Marco Troncone (Giustino)
and Paolo Villaggio (Marco Sperelli).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              50 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi's Trade Deficit

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 15;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 82 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 14


Vietnamese foreign trade is growing rapidly, but imports are increasing faster
than exports. Vietnam exported goods worth $1.6 billion in the first half of
1994, a 26 percent increase from the corresponding period last year, according
to figures released this week by the General Statistical Office. The value of
imports was 30.6 percent higher, at $1.8 billion, amounting to a $200 million
deficit. Communist Vietnam is moving toward a mixed economy, adopting some
free-market principles.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              51 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
In the Rowdy Back Alleys of English

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 850 words



Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang
 Volume I: A-G
 Edited by J. E. Lighter
 1,006 pages. Random House. $50.

To Ambrose Bierce, slang was "the grunt of the human hog (Pignoramus
intolerabilis)." To S. I. Hayakawa, it was "the poetry of everyday life." Now,
thanks to the herculean efforts of J. E. Lighter, a research associate in the
English department of the University of Tennessee, American slang has its very
own dictionary, a historical dictionary that stands as both a glossary of our
ribald daily speech and an irreverent index of our nation's cultural evolution.

Although it's frustrating that only a portion of this dictionary is now
available -- the second volume (H-R) is to be published in the spring of 1996,
and the final volume (S-Z) is scheduled for the spring of 1997 -- researchers
and browsers alike will find Mr. Lighter's first volume as deliciously readable
as it is informative.

As Mr. Lighter points out in a succinct, eminently useful introduction, slang
tends to flourish in subcultures that may employ a particular vocabulary as a
sign of status, solidarity or inclusion: among, for instance, students, cowboys,
drug users, athletes, musicians and ethnic groups. Black English and jazz slang,
says Mr. Lighter, spread with the great northward migration of black Southerners
during the 1930's, and military slang proliferated in the wake of the two world
wars. In the last several decades, the dissemination of slang has accelerated
rapidly along with the communications explosion. Indeed, many of the more recent
entries in this volume seem to have originated with television shows, movies and
commercials.

There's "beam up" from "Star Trek," of course, and "bippy" from "Rowan &
Martin's Laugh-In." "Babelicious" (meaning "a tasty babe") was coined in a
Wayne's World skit on "Saturday Night Live"; "Club Fed" (meaning a Federal
prison) seems to have had its debut on "Miami Vice." "Where's the beef?"
originated with a Wendy's hamburger ad and was popularized by Walter Mondale
during the 1984 Presidential campaign. "Deep throat," of course, comes from the
1973 pornography film of the same name.

The war in Vietnam popularized words like "grunt," "zap" and "waste" (meaning to
kill), while the counterculture gave us "acid test" (coined by Ken Kesey's Merry
Pranksters around 1965), "bummer" (circa 1966) and "freak out" (circa 1966). The
San Francisco columnist Herb Caen, Mr. Lighter tells us, created the word
"beatnik" in 1958 by substituting "beat" (from Beat Generation) in the name of
the Russian spaceship "Sputnik."

Other words and phrases that sound thoroughly contemporary actually date back
many years. While "bimbette" first surfaced on television in the mid-1980's,
"bimbo" (meaning "a stupid, inconsequential or contemptible fellow") was used as
far back as 1918. "Easy rider" predates both motorcycles and Dennis Hopper; in
1914, it meant "a man who is supported by a woman, especially a prostitute."
"Drugstore cowboy" dates to 1923, when it meant "an idle young man who lounges
at or near a drugstore soda fountain, especially for the purpose of socializing
with young women." "Groovy" was first used in 1937 to mean "in the groove;
splendid; delightfully exciting." And "bad," meaning good or "formidably
skilled," can be traced to the 1850's.

Indeed, slang often works by giving standard English words eccentric new
meanings or spin, as in musicians' use of the word "cat" to mean a "performer or
avid devotee of jazz or swing music." Other familiar words with new and in some
cases obscene slang meanings include "air-condition," "alfalfa," "apple,"
"banana," "biscuit," "chimes" and "enchilada."

Some words, as this volume demonstrates, seem especially conducive to variation
and extrapolation. You can "blow a fuse," "blow your lid," "blow your mind,"
"blow the whistle," "blow off steam" or simply have a "blow out." You can visit
the "Big Apple" or the "Big Ditch," buy some "Big Blue" stock on the "Big
Board," act like a "big cheese" or suffer the "big chill." You can also "bug
out" or get "bug-eyed" on "bug juice" and wind up in the "bughouse."

The word with the most variations by far, however, is a certain vulgarism
unprintable in these pages. It is used as a noun, verb, adjective, adverb,
interjection and intensifier, and its variations fill a full 12 pages in this
dictionary, attesting not only to the word's enduring popularity, but also to
the infinite flexibility of the English language.

The "Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang" again and again
impresses upon the reader the invigorating possibilities of language, and the
rowdy, colorful and just plain amusing virtues of slang. After all, how boring
to simply order coffee in a restaurant, when you can ask the waiter for some
"black water" or a cup of "boiler acid." How insipid to pay with a dollar bill,
when you can just as easily hand over a "dead president" or a "frogskin."
Whatever you do, though, be sure to take a gander at this book: it's one bad
volume, a real groove. In short, it's truly catbird.

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              52 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 396 words



'1969: A Year Revisited'
 Grey Art Gallery and Study Center
 33 Washington Place
 Greenwich Village
 Through July 22

The idea behind this exhibition, to create a snapshot of a single year in
American art, is a good one, and what a year 1969 was, with Woodstock, gay
liberation, the Manson killings, the walk on the moon and widespread student
protests against the war in Vietnam all careering together in a truly manic
pileup.

Yet surprisingly little of that dynamism comes across in the unfocused "1969: A
Year Revisited." The show's whole point lies in its restricted time frame, yet
much of the work included actually dates from 1967 and 1968, and many of the
specific choices are puzzling. Lee Lozano's notebook jottings, for example,
convey something of the self-conscious conceptualist whimsy of the period, but
two large paintings by this artist are too many by half, and several of the
show's better known artists are represented by distinctly minor efforts.

Fortunately there is enough interesting material to reward a visit. It's great,
for example, to see Eva Hesse's sculptural assemblage of fleshlike wax forms
displayed like day-old pastries in a glass vitrine (they recall similar work
done by her friend Paul Thek around this time). John Giorno's provocative text
pieces -- part poetry, part pornography -- anticipate much of the word-oriented
art of the last decade. There's a big, splendid abstraction by Dan Christensen,
its sprayed loops of color suggesting a flower-power link between urbane 60's
Color Field painting and streetwise 80's graffiti. And finally, Thomas
Lanigan-Schmidt's room-size installation constitutes a show, and a wonderful
one, in itself.

But even with these strong entries, the show lacks momentum, and forms no
coherent picture. In fact, the closest thing to a real capsule look at the year
in question is Eleanor Antin's "Blood of the Poet," a wooden box in which the
names of more than 100 contemporary poets, artists and friends have been
carefully filed away on numbered slips of paper. In contrast to Ms. Antin's
meticulous archiving, "1969: A Year Revisited" looks hastily assembled and
drastically underfinanced. Grey Art Gallery, which remains one of the city's
more adventurous art venues, is to be applauded for its ambition, but its reach
exceeds its grasp this time around.   HOLLAND COTTER

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              53 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 16, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Look at Vietnam Generation Now

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


To the Editor:

The two showings on television over the Independence Day weekend of Oliver
Stone's movie "Born on the Fourth of July" reminded me of something older people
should never forget and younger ones should learn more about.

Like Ron Kovic, the paralyzed Vietnam veteran whose life the movie portrayed,
the most idealistic young people of the 1960's protested the Vietnam War because
they loved America, not because they hated it. It was no accident that the most
virulent antiwar protests occurred in the best colleges and universities, where
students had the most knowledge and understanding of American history.

These young people loved America and appreciated its role in the world as a
utopian experiment in freedom and self-determination. On college faculties,
scholars of cultural and political philosophy tended to oppose the war, while
those less grounded in those areas of study did not.

Some Vietnam War protesters were old enough to experience World War II as
children. They had participated wholeheartedly in the home front. They collected
newspapers, metal and fat. They lined up at school each Monday morning to buy
war stamps and dreamed of the day their completed stamp books could be exchanged
for war bonds.

They mourned or longed for the return of fathers and brothers. Most of all they
hated the Nazis, who destroyed towns and villages and murdered the innocent.

Later, in the 60's, when these home-front veterans saw newspaper and television
reports on how American military firepower was being used to suppress a popular
uprising by burning villages and murdering women and children, they felt a shock
of recognition. What they saw on television looked too much like the photographs
they remembered from the Holocaust.

Somehow, when we weren't looking, America had changed sides and was trying to
suppress a peasant rebellion against oppression that resembled the American
Revolution we were so proud of, an essential part of our national identity.

Antiwar protesters were baffled at exhortations that they should "love America
or leave it!" This was their country and home, and they did love it. They were
trying to return it to the state they believed it had been in when they were
growing up, when America was a "city on a hill, visible from afar," a light to
guide the aspirations of oppressed people all over the world. America was
supposed to fight fascists, not join them!

We have a President and many legislators now who share these feelings. If a
foreign military intervention becomes unavoidable, they can be trusted to be on
the right side, the side that expresses the American tradition, rather than
betraying it, as the Vietnam debacle did.

This is a momentous change in American political practice, one that didn't seem
possible to many in the 60's. But it happened. All Americans are in debt to the
Vietnam antiwar movement for it.

ERNA GOLD
New York, July 6, 1994

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              55 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY, July 17, 1994;
Teaching the Art of War

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 122 words


The drawing above was done by Mg Chit, a schoolboy in the village of Kyeit Doh
in the country once called Burma and now known as Myanmar. The village has been
the scene of battles between rebels and troops of the authoritarian Myanmar
regime. Jim Robbins of Tacoma, Wash., spent his own time and money teaching art
to children of hill tribes in rebel areas. He is going back to Asia in September
with grants from the Lila Wallace/Reader's Digest Fund and the National
Endowment for the Arts. He plans to teach in Cambodia and Vietnam and in refugee
camps along the border between Thailand and Myanmar. The children, says Robbins,
see their drawings as a desperate way to get a message of their plight out to
the rest of the world.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              56 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT MEN;
Just a Walleyed Optimist

BYLINE: By James Gorman;   James Gorman is an editor of the Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


A few weeks ago, my 3-year-old son and I caught a 32-inch, 10-pound striped
bass. We were fishing, with a young friend, on a spit of land that juts out into
the Hudson River a couple of miles below the Tappan Zee Bridge. I put a
bloodworm on a hook and cast it out in the water with an ounce-and-a-half
sinker. Fifteen minutes later, we were hauling in Moby Dick. Everyone on the
pier came by to congratulate us, admire the fish, take our picture and measure
and weigh the prize.

We brought the fish home to clean and cook. Daniel, the 3-year-old, danced
around it with a stick in classic "Lord of the Flies" fashion. Filleted,
marinated briefly in soy sauce and cooked on the grill, the bass had the
delicious flavor of really fresh fish, with the added piquance of the Hudson's
PCB's. My son ate it with as much gusto as he displayed in describing the
killing that produced the banquet. "It was still alive! My daddy killed it with
his knife!" I felt like Hawkeye, La Longue Carabine, Fishslayer -- raising up a
young'un to live by his wits and a well-honed blade.

The transmission of fishing knowledge from father to son is a tradition in many
families. In its purest saltwater form, the exercise of this tradition insures
that the son learns to fish for flounder at the turn of the tide and to follow
the terns for bluefish. He learns, if his family is of the freshwater
persuasion, where trout hide in a stream and how to smoke a cigar and change
flies while standing chest deep in a cold stream with leaky waders and black
flies biting him around the eyes without ever saying more than, "Kinda buggy out
here."

In some families, this tradition is adulterated, and the pursuit of fish becomes
an inculcation in class bias. The son learns that if you don't fish with a fly
rod, preferably in cold, clear running water, you are a low-rent, no-class lout
engaging in a practice one notch above throwing dynamite into a salmon pool and
your father not only didn't go to Princeton, he probably jacklights deer for
fun.

Or, from the other end of fishing society, the boy is taught that any so-called
man who diddles a bit of feather on a prissy wire hook and then makes sure the
itty-bitty trout he catches are all right before he lets them go is a snobby,
soft-handed, overdressed Orvis clone who wouldn't know a walleye from a wahoo or
bunker from bunkum and who, if he ever had the grit to kill and clean a fish,
would probably insist on washing his hands before he ate his lunch of brie and
Black Forest ham on French bread with honey mustard.

And then there are the families that don't catch anything. There are more of
these than anyone realizes. I grew up in this tradition. I learned that things
do not always come to those who wait, that no lure is guaranteed to catch fish
and that, if at first you don't succeed, the same thing may well happen the next
time. When I was a child, my father and I went fishing every opening day of the
trout season for about 10 years. We never caught a fish. I don't mean that we
usually didn't catch a fish, or that we hooked fish and almost netted them, or
that we caught the wrong kind of fish. I mean we never caught anything.

I don't know whether it was my desire or my father's perseverance (I now know
that 5 A.M. is earlier for fathers than it is for sons) that kept us going, but
by the end it was another case of the Vietnam syndrome. We had spent too much
time, too many years, endured too much heartbreak (well, disappointment) to just
give up and admit that it had all been a horrible mistake. Eventually what
happened was that I learned to fish on my own and then taught him (this is my
version of the story, of course, but then that's the whole point of being a
writer).

I'm sure the whole experience sounds like the old joke (one of my father's
favorites) in which a child keeps asking his dad questions about the sun, moon
and stars and the nature of the universe. Each time the father replies, "I don't
know." Finally, the boy starts to ask another question but stops, saying "Never
mind." The father, indignant, insists: "Ask! Ask! How else are you going to
learn?"

Except I never said, "Never mind." I was so excited on the morning of every
opening day that I was awake hours before the appointed time. By rights I should
have learned hopelessness. But it didn't happen, at least not with fishing. As
regards life in general, I see little hope for the human race and count both
Dean Swift and Mark Twain as sentimental Pollyannas. But every time I go
fishing, I am transformed. The deep optimism that lurks in my soul emerges. I
know, every time I cast out a line, whether it has a size 14 Adams at the end of
it or a live eel on a hook, that I will catch fish. I have been known, on
fishing trips, to fish all day, from long before breakfast to long after dinner,
for days in a row. I get skunked sometimes like everyone else. But I never
learn. I'm a believer.

And that's the way I want my son to grow up. I don't much care if he rebels
against my general dyspepsia and ends up viewing the human race as the crown of
creation, but if he turns out to be a fishing pessimist I'll be devastated.

BUT YOU SEE THE PROBLEM. DAD AND boy never catch fish; boy grows up to love
fishing. Fine. Dad and boy catch fish the first time out -- huge fish. What
happens then? I have broken with tradition, deviated from a time-honored path,
and made my father look bad to boot. When I told him about the event, he said:
"Now you've ruined him. He's going to think this is what happens whenever you go
fishing. I brought you up the right way." He was kidding, of course, sort of,
just as I am when I claim that I taught him to fish.

I hope he's wrong. Danny is still an optimist. He fishes off the porch with
string. (We live on land.) At night when he goes to bed, he talks about catching
a big fish the next day. He is completely convinced that we will catch a big one
the next time we go fishing. I've been busy the past couple of weeks and the
weather hasn't been good, so we haven't gone again yet. But we will, and we will
catch a fish. I have no doubt whatsoever.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              57 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Remembering the Faces In the Civil Rights Struggle

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1961 words


FOR ANYONE WHO lived through the 1960's, photographs of the civil rights
struggle will always stir up deep feelings. That struggle disrupted and changed
the nation; those pictures helped sway the public's mind. A reality that
northern whites had acknowledged but seldom felt suddenly leaped to life on the
front pages of the papers. In the midst of postwar prosperity and a continuing
sense of national triumph, events and images presented examples of immense
courage as well as ample reason to be ashamed of America.

Week after week the news amounted to a call to action. Many responded. A quarter
of a million people marched on Washington in August of 1963 to hear Martin
Luther King Jr. say "I have a dream." Real changes were made, some of them
radical, but race issues are still tearing this country apart and images of the
60's continue to resound.

"Appeal to This Age: Photography of the Civil Rights Movement, 1954-1968,"
organized by Steven Kasher for the Howard Greenberg Gallery in SoHo, brings a
lot of that conflict flooding back (the show will be on view through July 30,
with a travel schedule still in flux). Some of these 76 photographs -- Charles
Moore's images of blacks pounded by fire hoses, for instance, or James Karales's
picture of marchers making their way from Selma to Montgomery, Ala., beneath a
baroque sky -- have achieved the status of classics without losing any of their
emotional clout. Some that are not as frequently reprinted, like Fred Ward's
picture of Gloria Richardson confronting Guardsmen and a bayonet, still have the
edgy immediacy of so much of the close-in reporting of that era. Others are as
simple and to the point as Declan Haun's photograph of a young woman holding a
sign that says "Justice."

A number are carefully composed. Gordon Parks's picture of the Black Muslim
women's corps was posed for Life, Nat Herz's overview of the march on Washington
turns the crowd into an overwhelming formal pattern, and Ernest Withers's
photograph of striking Memphis sanitation workers forges a hypnotic rhythm from
endless signs saying "I am a man."

But works like Dan Weiner's white rider alone on a bus during the 1956 bus
boycott in Montgomery, Ala., would not be so much without captions to explain
them, and a few images are unimpressive even with their captions. Yet the
subject, the events, sweep all before them. News photographs propose their own
standards of quality. Even if these were not good pictures, they would still be
immensely meaningful.

They were not the only witness to this history. Television came into its own
during the 60's and proved its power to focus public attention and shape
opinion. David J. Garrow, a historian of the civil rights movement, has written
that during the 1965 protests in Selma, Congress referred frequently to
pictures, especially newspaper photographs, but that after "Bloody Sunday," when
police swinging billy clubs waded into peacefully marching crowds, more
legislators referred to television coverage than ever had before. Probably the
best cumulative record of the movement ever made is the 1987 PBS television
series "Eyes on the Prize," which used both film and still photographs.

But as the novelist Milan Kundera reminds us, "Memory does not make films; it
makes photographs." Moving images write potent messages on the mind, but
recollection preserves only an urgent word, a telling frame here and there.
Still images compress what they have to say into a space that slots easily into
memory.

"Appeal to This Age" makes a point of including work by black photojournalists,
and emphasizes that the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)
maintained its own cadre of "movement photographers" and worked to distribute
its pictures within the movement as well as to the mainstream press (which was
almost entirely under white control). The show makes no attempt to trace this
distribution or to differentiate SNCC's point of view from other photographers'.

The movement was instrumental in shattering the myth of objectivity that had
grown up around photojournalism. Reporters with cameras prided themselves on
being neutral and uninvolved, on telling it like it was. It may be that the only
truly neutral camera is one nailed to a post and programmed to snap a picture at
regular intervals. Human beings, even with cameras in their hands, have
sympathies and biases and fears. For a long while, reporters and photographers
preferred to believe otherwise.

But they gave up that pretense in the South, at least in the early 60's. There
is no mistaking Charles Moore's outrage at seeing a black man with his trousers
torn by one police dog and menaced by another's bared fangs, or the fierce
criticism in Moore's image of a Mississippi police officer laughingly
demonstrating his billy-club swing to a group of cronies who get the joke. The
press was drawn into the cause by its evident rightness. As the writer Renata
Adler put it in 1966, "Reporters . . . have become, despite their neutrality as
observers, an integral part of the movement as they cover one of the last of the
just wars."

This crack in the news media's facade of impartiality appeared at about the time
that Tom Wolfe and Hunter Thompson claimed an advantage for subjectivity in
feature reporting and Robert Frank, Lee Friedlander and Garry Winogrand insisted
that the photographer's presence and opinions were vital aspects of their
photographs. Documentary was becoming more personal under the simultaneous
pressures of events and cultural trends.

The civil rights leaders needed reporters of any stripe. Unable to get local
coverage from people intent on keeping them locked away in the servants'
quarters, they knew they had to get national attention. Martin Luther King and
other leaders were exceptionally media-savvy. More than one confrontation was
staged or timed in the expectation that national reports would jolt the
complacent North and prod the Federal Government to act. The executive director
of SNCC later said, "There was never any more skillful manipulation of the news
media than there was in Birmingham" in 1963, when Sheriff Bull Connor loosed his
dogs and fire hoses on black children.

IT WORKED. IT WORKED SO WELL that other protest groups almost immediately began
embroidering on the lesson. The antiwar movement learned a lot from civil
rights. So did the feminists and just about every group that came after. Civil
rights proved that media coverage was a lever with which to move the world, a
lesson that loses nothing in translation. When Iran took over the American
Embassy in Teheran in 1979, crowds outside the building shouted in English for
American TV cameras, in French for the French.

One reason that images of civil rights confrontations worked so well to increase
pressure on the Government for a civil rights act and a voting act was that by
the 60's the news media were coming into their global inheritance. Those
pictures of dogs and fire hoses were published in Europe, Africa, India, Japan.
Photographs were especially powerful in countries where large parts of the
population could not read.

The Kennedy Administration was extremely worried about damage to this nation's
image abroad. Well it might have been: the Soviet Union broadcast 1,420
anti-American commentaries linked to the troubles in Birmingham in 1963. A New
York Times editorial in May of that year declared: "On the international scene
these outrages will be immensely costly to the United States. In all the
emerging countries our pretensions to stand for democracy and individual worth
are undermined by what is happening in Alabama."

Whether you think, as Mr. Kasher does in "Appeal to This Age," that "these
photographs are among the most inspiring images in America" or find many of them
hard to bear for what they say about our country may depend partly on whether
you are a half-full-glass or half-empty-glass type and partly on how you gauge
the movement's results, so stirring in some respects, so bitterly lacking in
others.

For good or ill, the photographs of the movement recorded and served a momentous
cause. The show's title comes from the last paragraph of Martin Luther King's
first book, in 1958: "Arnold Toynbee says in 'A Study of History' that it may be
the Negro who will give the spiritual dynamic to Western civilization that it
needs to survive. . . . The Negro may be God's appeal to this age -- an age
rapidly drifting to its doom."

The historical urgency of the movement was made clear to other countries that
knew little about the problem and to the American North, which had only a dim
and suppressed awareness, by on-the-spot reporting and blindingly specific
images. Injustice, racism, prejudice are terrible but basically abstract forces.
The camera and other media in the 60's made them concrete, individual and
shockingly identifiable. That is what news photographs do, and that is how they
tap so easily into our emotions, which react more immediately to flesh-and-blood
people and events than to all the concepts, principles and solemn declarations
in the world.

These images form an instant archive from which history can be resurrected time
and again. "Freedom on My Mind," a documentary film about the black drive for
voter registration in Mississippi in 1964 (which just closed at Film Forum and
will open at Angelika 57 on Friday), puts faces on more of the principal players
and gives life again to a conflict that in four years brought voting rights to
blacks who had none. In intercutting images from the 60's with recent interviews
with some of the people involved, the movie makes heavy use of old stills.
Documentary film often does, and in this case, even the old film was sometimes
shot at such slow and lingering speeds that the images are essentially static.

HISTORY IS AT THE mercy of the perceptions of succeeding generations, which
makes accurate presentations like this one all the more important. Like the
news, the historical past can be co-opted by entertainment. Docudramas and
feature films based on actual events give drama priority over fact, though they
are all too often the only accounts young viewers ever see. "Mississippi
Burning," for instance, a 1988 film about the murders of three civil rights
workers -- James Chaney, Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner -- replayed the
civil rights struggle with a big-name cast.

The problem with "Mississippi Burning" is that it was too well made. It depended
on so many actual events for authenticity that its inauthentic moments gained a
certain credibility. Right after the opening sequence of the killings of the
three civil rights volunteers, an F.B.I. agent is seen going through a file that
includes the Charles Moore photographs of fire hoses and dogs that are in
"Appeal to This Age." The photographs later reappear on a motel wall where the
agents are staying. The film makers obviously saw the same footage the "Freedom
on My Mind" producers did; people in both films say things like "If they're
dead, they asked for it."

But "Mississippi Burning" seriously distorts the F.B.I. role, making the agents
sympathetic to the cause, which they were not, and having them solve the murders
by extra-legal means. No doubt a whole generation believes it happened that way;
whoever has the most images and the widest distribution wins. Historians have
been outvoted at the box office by film and television producers, who become the
transmitters of history while owing their first allegiance to the bottom line.

When the movie "J.F.K." came out, one well-educated New York woman in her late
20's said admiringly that Oliver Stone had already taught her generation about
Vietnam and now had taught them about Kennedy. God help us.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Police using fire hoses, above, on demonstrators in Birmingham,
Ala., in 1963, photographed by Charles Moore; a demonstrator, in 1963, top
right, by Declan Haun; marching from Selma to Montgomery, in 1965, right, by
James Karales, all on view at the Howard Greenberg Gallery. (Photographs from
Howard Greenberg Gallery)(pg. 31); Ernest Withers's 1968 photograph of striking
Memphis sanitation workers assembled for a march. (Howard Greenberg Gallery)(pg.
32)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              58 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TO THE MOON: 25 Years After Apollo;
25 Years Later, Moon Race in Eclipse

BYLINE: By JOHN NOBLE WILFORD

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2317 words


Two American astronauts landed and walked on the moon 25 years ago, taking the
first human footsteps on another world. Bundled in oxygen cocoons, they hopped
in low-gravity slow motion over the lifeless surface as in a dream that had to
be seen in those grainy television images to be believed.

Their achievement was a spectacular American triumph in the cold war with the
Soviet Union, culminating an eight-year, $25 billion mobilization of technology
and talent, bringing together multitudes of scientists, engineers and
technicians.

But the wonder now evoked by the lunar landing is that the United States so
recently had the optimism to conceive such a grand undertaking and the will to
see it through in a blink of history's eye -- and then so readily abandoned the
enterprise. Perhaps that is why an air of melancholy, a dispiriting sense of
unfulfilled promise, hangs over the Apollo 11 anniversary, and why even the
space agency is doing little to celebrate its greatest moment.

Anniversaries speak in echoes of what was and what might have been.

Echoes in this case of the heavy thunder of the Saturn 5 rocket, which shook the
Florida ground for miles around and lifted Neil A. Armstrong, Col. Buzz Aldrin
and Col. Michael Collins on their way on July 16, 1969. Echoes of the
heart-stopping lunar landing by Mr. Armstrong and Colonel Aldrin, with mere
seconds of fuel remaining, on July 20. And echoes of the crackling radio link
when Mr. Armstrong first stepped on the gray powdery surface of the Sea of
Tranquillity and solemnly proclaimed, "That's one small step for man, one giant
leap for mankind."

In the euphoria of the moment, when the age-old symbol of the unattainable had
been reached, people allowed themselves to ascribe transcendental significance
to the historic event. This was sure to be the true opening of far-ranging human
space travel. The species was no longer confined to its native planet. A few
observers compared the achievement with the emergence of vertebrates from
primordial waters, establishing life on land. In centuries to come, some
historians predicted, the 20th century might be remembered for little else.

In sobering retrospect, no one can be so sure of the lasting meaning of the
first lunar landing. The moon is only three days away, 240,000 miles, but no
astronauts have made the journey in 22 years. It may be decades, or even longer,
before anyone establishes lunar bases or sets out for Mars.

'A Few Tentative Steps'

The Apollo experience reminds Dr. Carl Sagan, the Cornell University astronomer
and author, of "a toddler who takes a few tentative steps outward and then,
breathless, retreats to the safety of his mother's skirts."

This turn of events is frustrating to space scientists and engineers, especially
those from the glory days of Apollo. Back when they could not reliably get a
rocket off the ground, they were pressed by a fearful nation to spare no expense
and beat the Soviet Union. Now that they have greater expertise and more
elaborate technologies, they find themselves with little political or popular
support. No one is asking them for the moon.

Historians, political scientists and other observers of the space endeavor offer
explanations. As successful as Apollo was in meeting its immediate objective,
the lunar landing, the project's limitations as a template for future space
exploration became readily apparent. It was hugely expensive. It required
unstinting effort and a commitment not easily sustained once the goal was
achieved.

"It was a crash program, and countries can afford that only once in a while,"
said Dr. Alex Roland, a history professor at Duke University and former
historian of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. "Apollo was a
one-time event, not a pattern for some steady-state operation."

Dr. John M. Logsdon, director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington
University, said: "Apollo was a warlike mobilization undertaken in conditions of
perceived crisis. We had a clear enemy, high confidence that it was
technologically achievable and didn't have to modify human behavior. But once
the crisis went away, space exploration on such a scale was not sustainable."

Driven by the Cold War

Indeed, historians say, Apollo was the product of special circumstances not
likely to recur any time soon, if ever. It was a bold American response in 1961
to ominous Soviet military and space challenges of the cold war. It was
undertaken in the continuing flush of postwar prosperity, when American economic
power was still undisputed. American self-confidence and a sense of destiny had
yet to be shaken by assassinations, urban riots, rampant crime, the divisive
Vietnam War and the paralyzing burden of debt.

President John F. Kennedy made the decision in May 1961. Ever since the Russians
had launched the first spacecraft, Sputnik 1, in October 1957, Americans had
been uneasy about Soviet power -- a launching vehicle can also be an
intercontinental missile -- and concerned about their country's technological
and military capabilities. More Soviet "space firsts" followed, including the
flight of Yuri Gagarin, the first man to orbit Earth, on April 12, 1961. A few
days later, Kennedy and the American people were further unsettled by the
botched Bay of Pigs invasion, an effort to wrest Cuba from Fidel Castro.

That was when Kennedy asked Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson to consult with
experts and high-ranking officials to determine if there was any space program
that "promises dramatic results in which we could win."

For several years, the space agency had been developing plans for Earth-orbiting
laboratories and trips to the moon. Dr. Wernher von Braun, the rocket scientist,
wrote to Vice President Johnson: "We have a sporting chance of sending a
three-man crew around the moon ahead of the Soviets." He added that the United
States had "an excellent chance of beating the Soviets to the first landing of a
crew on the moon (including return capability, of course)."

In a famous address to Congress on May 25, President Kennedy declared, "I
believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this
decade is out, of landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to Earth."

The project had its critics, who thought the money could be better spent on
domestic needs or complained of its marginal scientific and military benefits.
But Apollo was about politics and the cold war. It was to be a demonstration of
American power and resolve. More than that, it was an expression of faith that
people could still go forth and claim the future.

Steady Goals, but Changing Times

By the time Apollo 11 landed, however, the spirit of 1961 was unrecognizable.
The country had changed in eight years, drained of self-confidence in the
Vietnam jungles and burning city streets. Six more missions followed Apollo 11,
and five of them landed on the moon. The last of the 12 men to walk on the moon
were the Apollo 17 astronauts, in December 1972. Three subsequent missions were
canceled.

Looking beyond Apollo soon after the first lunar landing, a White House panel
endorsed much of NASA's wish list when it proposed an ambitious program of bases
on the moon, space stations circling it and even larger Earth-orbiting
laboratories capable of supporting 50 to 100 people. The ringing encore would be
a human expedition to Mars in the 1980's, at the earliest, or no later than the
end of this century.

"That was NASA at its worst," said John E. Pike, a space policy analyst for the
Federation of American Scientists in Washington. "It was all 'how' and no 'why.'
"

But to most people, Apollo 11 had been an ending, not a beginning; the moon race
was over, and there would be no more blank checks for space. All the proposals
were quietly shelved, except for one to develop a reusable spacecraft, which
President Richard M. Nixon approved in early 1972. But the space shuttles
eventually developed were not fully reusable and have never lived up to
extravagant forecasts that they would be flying 40 or 50 missions a year by the
1990's, instead of the current rate of seven or eight.

"People always talk about the 'Kennedy effect,' " said Dr. Walter A. McDougall,
a University of Pennsylvania historian and author of the acclaimed political
history of the space age, "The Heavens and the Earth" (Basic Books, 1986)."But
once the moon race was won, people lost interest, and even a Kennedy probably
could not have maintained a brighter post-Apollo program. Perhaps it's not
unreasonable that the human race, once it had first mastered the art of rocket
flight, would engage in a great burst of exploration, followed by a long pause
to regroup and rethink the economics of space and then proceed in a more
pragmatic fashion."

NASA Lowers Its Sights

In any event, lower budgets, a lack of clearly defined goals and dwindling
political support left the space agency adrift. Although President Ronald Reagan
finally gave his approval in 1984, the space station program has taken two years
more than it took to put the first Apollo on the moon, and the station is still
not off the ground.

On the 20th anniversary of Apollo 11, President George Bush pledged that Mars
would be the country's new space goal, with humans landing there by the year
2019, the golden anniversary of the first lunar landing. Nothing more was heard
of this because Congress refused to finance it.

It is little wonder that sadness and a sense of betrayal creep into the
recollections of Apollo participants. Dr. Robert C. Seamans Jr., NASA's deputy
administrator during some of the Apollo years, recalled conversations he had
with James E. Webb, the politically skilled leader of NASA in the 1960's, not
long before Mr. Webb's death in 1992.

"We thought we were laying a foundation for future space exploration," Dr.
Seamans said. "We thought after Apollo we wouldn't need to go back to the
drawing board for whole new sets of vehicles. But that's what happened when they
disbanded the whole Saturn-Apollo operation and hardware and chose to start all
over again with the shuttle."

Mr. Pike of the Federation of American Scientists said, "The problem over the
last 25 years was that we were not able to develop a compelling geopolitical
rationale for any space program since Apollo that lasted long enough to get
anything done."

New Role for Space Station

A major civilian space program has now been identified with an important foreign
policy objective, Mr. Pike noted, and the paradox is that this time it involves
cooperation with the Russians, not confrontation. President Clinton won
substantial support for the space station this year by bringing in the Russians,
thus trying through cooperation in space to help insure the success of Russian
democracy.

Dr. McDougall counseled patience. After all, he noted, it was 50 years after
Magellan made the first crossing of the Pacific before the Spanish finally
managed to go back in 1571 and establish a permanent base on the other side, at
Manila. If the costs of rocket technology are substantially reduced, Dr.
McDougall said, there could be a new rush to go to space, although the leader
might not be the United States, but Japan.

Daniel S. Goldin, the current NASA Administrator, acknowledged that he had
discouraged official Apollo retrospectives. "We can spend so much time reviewing
history that we're not writing any more history," he said.

Another anniversary echo from the time of the lunar landing brings back the
oft-repeated question, "If we can send men to the moon, why can't we . . ." cure
cancer, rebuild the cities, or whatever. At first, the question was asked in
earnest, an expression of impatience and hope. Now, if it is asked at all, the
tone is one of despair and self-reproach. Apollo may have been a success, Dr.
Logsdon of George Washington University said, but not as a model for attacking
other concerns, not unless the goal can be as clearly defined, as amenable to a
straightforward technological solution and as strongly supported.

In years to come, people may look back on Apollo as a historical anomaly -- a
small step -- or as the inspired beginning of space travel and human life on
other worlds -- truly a giant leap for mankind. Those who experienced the thrill
of that beginning will never know the ultimate outcome.

Mystery of Absent 'A'

Everyone expected Neil A. Armstrong to say something memorable at the moment of
his first footstep on the moon, and he obliged. But something about the one
small step/one giant leap quotation seemed to be missing.

The words heard and recorded at Mission Control in Houston were, "That's one
small step for man, one giant leap for mankind." But Mr. Armstrong said after
the flight that he had intended to say, "small step for a man." The space agency
left the impression that the missing article had been lost because of the radio
static.

In an interview in 1971, the journalist Robert Sherrod asked Mr. Armstrong if
the "a" had been lost in transmission or simply forgotten.

"We'll never know," the Apollo 11 commander replied, leaving one more enigma
lingering about this very private astronaut.

Faded Spirit of Apollo

Will there ever be another Apollo? In a catalog for a Library of Congress
exhibit a decade after the first landing, the answer given is: probably not.

"We have changed as a people," the catalog noted in 1979. "No longer possessing
the headiness and naivete of past times, we are spared the disappointments of
risky ventures. Yet we also forgo the exuberance and elation of bold attempts.
While still a vital people, we have been thrown off balance by a series of
foreign and domestic disasters and disappointments, which, in the short run,
have made us somewhat wary."

It added, "The face we present to the world appears indecisive."


LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: When Buzz Aldrin walked on the moon, the mission was hailed as
spectacular. But the afterglow faded quickly in the United States. (NASA) (pg.
1); In 1961, President John F. Kennedy called for a moon landing by the end of
the decade. Listening were Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson, center, and Speaker
Sam Rayburn. (pg. 20)

Chronology/Diagrams/Photos: "To The Moon and Beyond: 50 Years in Space"

From man's first step into space with Sputnik 1 to Apollo 11's landing on the
moon, space exploration was largely fueled during its first 12 years by the
competition of the cold war. With shrinking budgets for space programs, the
success of the Space Station Freedom and other future projects will depend on
international cooperation.

Time-line tracks developments in space exploration from 1957 through 2007. (pgs.
20-21)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              59 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

12 M.I.A. Advocates Arrested at Protest

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 18;   Column 6;   National Desk

LENGTH: 218 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 16


A dozen people were arrested yesterday outside the White House in a
demonstration designed to focus attention on Americans missing in the wars in
Vietnam and Korea.

Organizers acknowledged that they had not sought the required permit for the
demonstration. They announced in advance that demonstrators would chain
themselves to the White House fence and invite arrest to focus attention on more
than 2,000 Americans unaccounted for in Indochina since the Vietnam War ended in
1975 and more than 8,000 missing in the 1950-53 Korean conflict.

"I will return again and again and again," said Jane Duke Gaylor, 74, of El
Dorado, Kan., one of those who was arrested. She has tried for 24 years to learn
the fate of her son, Charles Duke Jr., a flight technician who disappeared in
Vietnam in 1970. Ms. Gaylor, who has emphysema and uses a wheelchair, accused
the Government of withholding for a decade information indicating that her son
could be alive.

About 50 people marched outside the White House fence, carrying signs with
messages like "No More Dead Bones, Give Us Live POWs." Another group
demonstrated in Lafayette Square, across Pennsylvania Avenue.

All those arrested were freed after being cited by the National Park Police for
demonstrating without a permit, which carries a $50 fine.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              60 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MANHATTAN MINUTE

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 6;  Column 6;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 290 words


SHAPING THE FLATIRON: What, exactly, is the Flatiron district? Wedged in between
Chelsea, Union Square, Gramercy and Murray Hill, it can get lost in the shuffle.
Now some 40 local businesses have announced the formation of the Flatiron
District Business Association to put Flatiron on the map. They define the
district as from 14th to 23d Streets and from Seventh Avenue to Park Avenue
South, much of which is rebounding. "Flatiron has its own special
uptown-downtown character and history," says Claudia Strauss, president. . . .
AND FARTHER NORTH: Jane R. Crotty, loser of two cliffhanger City Council
elections, becomes the director of the 23d Street Association. A top priority:
sprucing up Madison Square Park. . . . ART'S SAKE: Look soon for a new Maya Lin
sculpture in the ceiling of the Long Island Rail Road main concourse at Penn
Station. It is an abstract moving timepiece. Ms. Lin designed the Viet Nam
memorial in Washington. . . . NEW FACE: After ousting Superintendent William A.
Ubinas in a battle that left blood all over Lower East Side politics, School
Board 1 plans to name a replacement: Dori Collazo-Baker, principal of P.S. 127
in the Bronx. The official vote: Wednesday night, 7 P.M., P.S. 142. . . .
MADONNA CHEERS: Despite Body Worship's pledge to alter its window display on
East Seventh Street, the slave-master mannequin display remained its sexually
graphic self, at least through Friday morning. . . . GETTING THERE: Upgrading
will shut the Roosevelt Island tram until around Aug. 23. Special buses are
running from 59th and Second Avenue and 546 Main Street and Motorgate. . . . A
NEW HOME: The YIVO Institute for Jewish Research finds a permanent site at 15
West 16th Street. Moving date: Two years.


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              61 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

California School Becomes Notorious For Epidemic of TB

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1512 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., July 15


Once known for academic and athletic excellence, La Quinta High School has
gained a troubling distinction: it has experienced what state officials say is
the worst outbreak of drug-resistant tuberculosis in a high school ever reported
in the United States.

Two-hundred-ninety-two of La Quinta's students, or 23 percent, tested positive
for TB in September 1993.  Another 84 students, who had not previously been
tested or had had negative results the first time, tested positive last month.

Twelve of those students are being treated for active cases of drug-resistant
TB, and more than 70 other students who were exposed to drug-resistant strains
of the disease are receiving similar treatments. One student with an active case
has lost part of her lung.

The other students who tested positive are being monitored through X-rays and
clinical examinations for two years. State health officials say these strategies
are standard in most outbreaks because patients are at greatest risk of
developing active cases during the first two years of infection.

The outbreak here in this middle-class, heavily Southeast Asian suburb in Orange
County, 25 miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles, could have been prevented if
doctors had correctly diagnosed a 16-year-old girl's persistent cough, national
tuberculosis experts say. La Quinta's experience, they say, is a textbook
example of what may befall a community if even one case of TB is mishandled or
ignored.

The tuberculosis bacterium can be spread through coughing, sneezing or singing,
and it can lie dormant in a patient for years with only about 10 percent of
patients ever developing active, contagious infections, usually in the lungs.
The disease is usually most virulent among those with weakened immune systems.
But county health officials said that for reasons they did not completely
understand teen-agers, if exposed, are more prone to developing active cases of
TB than healthy adults. TB can be fatal, even in a previously healthy person,
but deaths are still rare.

Disease Gets Second Wind

For decades, scientists thought that the disease had been nearly wiped out in
the United States, but the number of new cases rose from 1985, when there were
22,201 cases, until in 1992, when there were 26,673 cases. The number dipped in
1993 to 25,313.

"The vast majority of taxpayers have always seen tuberculosis as the disease of
the impoverished, the immigrant and the homeless," said Dr. Richard Jackson,
chief of the state's Division of Communicable Disease Control. "But La Quinta
points out that tuberculosis has come home to roost with a vengeance, and not
only among the poor or those with immune deficiencies, but among those in places
that have always been considered safe havens, such as sunny, open air California
high schools."

The 16-year-old girl whose case started the outbreak is a Vietnamese immigrant
who contracted the disease in her native country, officials said. But they
stressed that spread of the disease could have easily been prevented.

"The point that should be made is that regardless of the ethnicity of the source
case, the problem originated largely as a result of a delay in diagnosis of
treatment and not as a result of this source case being an immigrant," said Jody
Meador, the county's tuberculosis control officer. "TB does not discriminate. It
is everybody's problem."

A report released in April by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in
Atlanta noted that the ventilation system at the high school was not circulating
enough fresh air and had contributed to the spread of the cases. "Examination of
the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system revealed that the poor air
change rate was due to a mechanical malfunction of fresh air intake in the
ventilation system, which has since been repaired," the report said.

Dr. Jackson also noted that high schools, in general, were not as abnormal a
setting for the spread of TB as might be thought. "High school kids are face to
face much more often than other groups," he said. "They sing in choir and shout
in class. There is much more talking than in other office-like environments."

Local health officials said the girl, who has not been identified, developed a
cough in January 1991. Her doctors failed to diagnose it as TB until 13 months
later, officials said, and then the doctors neither monitored her treatment nor
reported the case to the county health department.

The authorities were alerted to the case sometime after the girl's doctors
ordered a sputum test from a local laboratory, which reported its result, but
the doctors did not answer 25 requests for information, state health officials
said.

Hard Case to Treat

By the time the local health department took over the girl's case, about a year
after the laboratory alerted officials and two years after the girl first
complained about her cough, she had developed a drug-resistant strain, possibly
because she had not taken her medication regularly.

Then in June 1993, after officials began testing the students in the school,
they saw that they had a widespread outbreak of TB. The girl had infected 11
other students with active cases of the disease.

The names of the doctors have not been disclosed, in part because state health
officials are contemplating possible disciplinary action.

The student who lost part of her lung, 18-year-old Debi French, developed an
extremely resistant strain that was passed onto at least 18 other students and 2
teachers. County health officials say they have discovered five other active
cases that they believe are unrelated to the outbreak case; the sources of those
cases are not known.

Ms. French's doctors said there was no guarantee that she would be free of her
infection, which is resistant to the five most effective anti-tubercular drugs.
About 4 percent of all tuberculosis cases are as intractable as that of Ms.
French.

"We're not out of the woods yet," said Dr. Michael D. Iseman, chief of the
clinical mycobacterial service at the National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine in Denver, who has been monitoring Ms. French's condition.

Once known as the well-manicured home of the Fighting Aztecs and for a student
body that excelled academically, La Quinta is now recognized for its on-campus
tuberculosis dispensary and for the fact that many local restaurants and shops
require proof from students that they are free of the disease before hiring
them. People no longer talk about the school's state baseball championship or of
its five valedictorians; they talk about last year's senior trip to Disneyland,
where children from other schools rolled up their bus windows as the Aztecs rode
by.

"This is a good community and these are still the same great kids that they
always were," said Mitchell Thomas, the principal. "But there is a real stigma
attached to us now."

Amber Jones, a 15-year-old La Quinta sophomore who shows no sign of TB, said:
"We've had football games where people came wearing surgical masks. My best
friend's dad won't even stand next to me. We're the TB school."

How TB Once Declined

Mycobacterium tuberculosis was the leading cause of death in the United States
until the 1950's, after a combination of improved sanitation and new antibiotics
began to reduce the death rate sharply. For a few decades the national
tuberculosis caseload dwindled and many screening programs were shut down,
including many in schools. The disease had become so rare by 1980 that the
American Thoracic Society declared there was no longer any need for routine skin
testing.

But then the number of infections began to grow in 1985. Experts attribute the
increase to AIDS-related infections, misdiagnosis, which can allow infection to
spread, and patients who do not finish their medication, who can lead to the
development and transmission of drug-resistant strains.

Drug-resistant TB, once so uncommon that the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention stopped testing for it about a decade ago, is also on the rise,
numbering 19 percent of all cases in New York City and 14 percent nationwide,
experts say.

California, with approximately 12 percent of the United States' population,
accounted for 20 percent of the nation's tuberculosis caseload in 1992. It has
seen a 54 percent increase in tuberculosis cases since 1985, much of it tied to
an increase in immigration, AIDS and poverty.

Only 1 percent of these cases are drug resistant. But the state estimated that
in 1991 alone 11 percent of all tuberculosis patients did not complete their
treatment.

California health officials, worried that drug resistance would rapidly
increase, have begun a $17 million, five-year plan for tuberculosis control and
elimination. It calls for increased detection, monitoring and treatment
programs, particularly in high-risk areas like prisons, homeless shelters and
now schools.

In September, Orange County will begin tuberculosis testing of all students
entering kindergarten, sixth and ninth grades.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Debi French, 18, a day before a part of her lung was removed in
May. She had contracted drug-resistant tuberculosis in high school in
Westminster, Calif., (Nadia Borowski/The Orange County Register)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              62 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Moon Landing: 25 Years After Apollo 11;
Wistful Pride and Cynicism Color Americans' Memories of Apollo 11

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, July 17


Twenty-five years after the United States put a man on the moon, Americans still
take great pride in that stirring, epochal achievement. But it is a tempered
pride.

Conversations with dozens of Americans find a pensive, even melancholy longing
for the heady days of July 1969, when the nation, despite crippling divisions
over issues like the Vietnam War and racial equality, somehow still managed to
pull together and collectively focus on and attain an awesome goal.

Today, many Americans say, that special measure of togetherness has been lost
while the divisions remain.

Like millions of people in the United States and around the world, Diana
Birchall, a 48-year-old script analyst for a Los Angeles studio, remembers
spending July 20, 1969, in front of her television set, filled with pride for
mankind and America and transfixed by the scratchy sounds and images coming back
from the moon.

Moment Lacked Momentum

"Sadly, it turns out that what everybody thought would be a new epoch after the
moon walk didn't last much longer than the moon walk itself," Ms. Birchall now
laments. "I have always been shocked by how little that moment carried forward.
It's as though it was a big hoax shot on the back lot of a Hollywood studio."

Many people repeated a phrase that has become almost a cliche since the Apollo
11 mission, asking why a nation that put a man on the moon cannot seem to
achieve earthly goals like ridding itself of racism, finding food, shelter and
jobs for the poor and extending health care to everyone.

"It was this great unifying moment, a kind of new frontier," Barbara George, a
bookstore manager in Palo Alto, Calif., recalled of the moon walk. "But we have
the same problems today as we had back then -- poverty, wars, racism."

Don Oldham, a homeless 70-year-old elevator operator in Seattle, offered a
starker reflection. Sitting outside a shelter and watching other homeless people
shuffle into line for a hot meal, he said, "Moon walk didn't change my life --
and didn't change their life."

But there is still huge national pride in what was achieved when Neil A.
Armstrong, the commander of the Apollo 11 mission, first stepped on the moon's
dusty surface and proclaimed, "That's one small step for man, one giant leap for
mankind."

At that time, said Kevin Fogarty, a 56-year-old Boston bus driver, "the U.S. was
supreme."

Yet the random conversations, as well as national polls, indicate that there is
no real national yearning for another multibillion-dollar manned thrust into
space toward more distant moons, planets and stars.

To the contrary, there are some second thoughts about whether the Apollo project
should ever have been attempted, even if it did take man farther than he had
ever been before.

Many people now see the project as mainly a costly mano a mano competition with
the Soviet Union. They say, a bit uncomfortably, that they cannot cite a single
specific example of how the science and technology used to put a man on the moon
has benefited man here on earth.

A Bit of Imperialism

To Rick Parfitt, a 41-year-old speech researcher from San Francisco, the moon
mission produced "great things like the hand-held calculator and the integrated
circuit." But he, too, views the mission as a costly product of a cold war
mentality -- and also as a bit of colonial imperialism by the United States.

"I thought it should have been the United Nations flag," Mr. Parfitt said,
recalling that the Apollo astronauts left an American flag on the moon's
surface. "The political part of the flag business disturbed me."

Mary Flood, 41, is a lawyer who hails from Houston, the site of Mission Control
for the space flights and thus, in a sense, Apollo's hometown. But Ms. Flood
also has mixed feelings about the moon mission and where the United States
should head next with its space program.

"I remember being proud of my country and disappointed with my country," she
said, recalling July 20, 1969, when Mr. Armstrong and his fellow moon walker,
Col. Edwin E. (Buzz) Aldrin of the Air Force, took their first tentative steps
on the lunar surface. "We were capable of doing so much out there and incapable
of doing that here. We're in the same place today."

What about another manned space mission toward the moon or even farther out?

"I love the space program and I'm fascinated by the universe," Ms. Flood
replied. "But there are problems that need to be solved in our own backyard.
It's like buying a new car when your kids are hungry."

A Fiscal Impossibility

Doug Lynch, a systems analyst in Boston, was only 5 years old when the moon walk
took place. But like almost every other American, he has seen numerous
television reruns of the historic event and has given some thought to future
space exploration.

His conclusion? The Apollo project was "the last large-scale project we could
successfully complete in this country," because "everything is too expensive at
the moment to do anything of that scale." There are many people, of course, who
still favor manned space missions. But, in contrast to 25 years ago, they now
seem to be a minority.

One of them is Ellen Dugan, a 37-year-old art curator in Atlanta.

She says American astronauts should go back into deep space, beyond the low
orbits of today's space shuttle, but she also says the exploration should be
carried out only in the interest of pure science, not for the purpose of flying
the Stars and Stripes on some distant planet.

And, given the state of the American economy in the 1990's, Ms. Dugan tempers
her expectations about further space missions, comparing Federal financing of
the space program with Federal financing for the arts. "Both are now seen by a
lot of people as being peripheral to daily life," she said.

To W. Herbert George 3d, a 27-year-old bar manager in Richmond, going back into
deep space, whatever the cost, is a "moral imperative" because if human beings
do not explore and press outward, they will stagnate. He also believes that
vexing social problems will always be around and should not be an excuse for
withdrawal from outer space.

"We do have other problems," Mr. George said. "But to wait is to limit
ourselves."

More than most other Americans, Roger Christensen, 54, worries about the nation
putting limits on itself in space exploration.

Mr. Christensen is an aerospace worker, and helped build the Apollo 11 command
capsule at the North American Rockwell plant in Downey, Calif., where he still
works, now mainly on space shuttle projects.

The Best of Times

The Apollo days were the headiest of his life, he said, month after month of
100-hour weeks, seeing the capsule take form right before his eyes, even under
the guidance of his own hands. But these days, he often feels like a Vietnam
veteran or an old high school football hero.

"You tell people that you're a space worker and helped put together Apollo and
now work on the shuttle," he said, with hurt in his voice, "and they say, 'So,
what?'

"Well, the goal of man is to continue -- on anything. And that's what we need to
do with space exploration."

And if we don't?

"Well," Mr. Christensen replied, "I can always say that while I didn't get to
help build the pyramids in this life, I got to work on Apollo and the moon shot.
I was part of history."


                             --------------------


Armstrosng at Air Show

NEW KNOXVILLE, Ohio, July 17 (AP) -- Mr. Armstrong, who left the first
footprints on the moon, returned to his boyhood home today for a celebration of
the 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 mission.

The 63-year-old former astronaut shook hands, signed autographs and spoke
briefly to reporters at an air show at the Neil Armstrong Airport in this
western Ohio community, about 80 miles from his farm in Lebanon.

"The Earth was sinking away from us at a fairly prodigious rate," he recalled of
the lunar mission. "That was a special time, because you know you're committed.
We felt we had everybody behind us.

"The final descent and landing were far and away the most difficult part of the
flight."

Mr. Armstrong has granted no interviews with news organizations in the United
States for the lunar landing anniversary and did not attend commemorative
ceremonies at Cape Canaveral, Fla., the launching site.

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "You tell people that you're a space worker and helped put
together Apollo and now work on the shuttle, and they say, 'So, what?' " said
Roger Christensen, right. He works with, from left, Jerry Sokolik, Denis Calvert
and John Daley at the Rockwell plant in Downey, Calif. (Ed Carreon for The New
York Times); In 1969, Americans engrossed by the Apollo mission envisioned an
exciting era of space exploration, but 25 years later, much of the enthusiasm
has dissipated. A family posed in front of the Apollo 11 rocket before it was
launched from what was then Cape Kennedy, Fla. (Lee Romero/The New York Times);
"Moon walk didn't change my life," said Don Oldham, an elevator operator in
Seattle. (Therese Frare for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              63 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

North Korea Said to Dip Into Rice Reserves to Bar Unrest

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, July 17


Reports are circulating here that North Korea's Government, fearing unrest, is
dipping into military rice reserves to relieve the hunger of people who have
flocked to the capital to mourn the nation's late leader, Kim Il Sung.

Like many reports from the secretive Communist country, this one is difficult to
verify. But it reflects what analysts say will be the reality facing Kim Il
Sung's son and expected successor, Kim Jong Il: The way to his people's hearts
will not be through his father's revolutionary slogans but through their
stomachs.

Saving North Korea's plummeting economy will be the biggest challenge
confronting Kim Jong Il. If he fails, some analysts say, the 52-year-old "Dear
Leader" will probably be stripped of office, and the country might collapse,
forcing a hasty and disruptive reunification with the richer South.

"He has no choice but to open the economy," said Dr. Park Jin, associate fellow
at the Center for North Korean Economic Studies, which is affiliated with the
South Korean Government.

Kim Jong Il, he said, lacks the ability his father had to hold the country
together through charisma and credentials as a nationalist hero. "The only way
out for him is to feed people more and make them warmer," Dr. Park said.

Output Has Been Shrinking

North Korea's economic output has been shrinking about 5 percent a year for four
consecutive years, according to analysts in South Korea. People are said to be
eating only two meals a day, electricity supply is spotty, and factories are
shut for long periods for lack of work or fuel.

Saving the economy carries its own risks. Many experts say Mr. Kim will have to
open the virtually sealed country to more foreign investment and trade.

But economic liberalization is often accompanied by political liberalization.
Increasing contact with the outside world might lead North Koreans to realize
how poor and repressed they are, increasing discontent.

North Korea might also have to give up its efforts to develop nuclear weapons to
benefit from aid that the United States and other advanced nations would then
offer.

Mr. Kim is expected to try to avoid simultaneous economic and political
liberalization, which helped bring down Communist governments in the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe. He is expected instead to attempt what China has been
trying to do, with mixed success -- free up the economy while keeping strict
political control. Indeed, China itself has been urging such a course for North
Korea.

Information Is Scarce

Like everything about North Korea, information on its economy is scarce and
somewhat untrustworthy. Economic figures are based on estimates by South Korea.
First-hand accounts come from a few visitors, who are shown only what the North
Korean authorities want them to see, or from North Korean defectors, who say
what the South Korean authorities want them to say.

In May, a family of five defectors arrived in Seoul telling of starvation that
was so severe that elderly people were going off to the fields to die to relieve
the burden on their families. But analysts here say that while there appears to
be enough food for only two meals a day, it is unlikely that people are starving
to death because the food is rationed.

Thursdays are said to be no-electricity days in Pyongyang, the capital, while
rural areas are without power several days a week. In December, in a highly
unusual move, the Government acknowledged that the economy was faltering.

The gross national product of North Korea is estimated to be about $20.5
billion, only one-sixteenth the level of South Korea. Per capita output of about
$900 a year is one-eighth of that of South Korea.

Hurt by Soviet Collapse

The biggest factor in the economic decline, analysts say, is that with the
collapse of the Soviet Union, North Korea lost its economic lifeline --
subsidized Soviet oil. China is now North Korea's largest supplier of oil and
food, but Beijing has normalized relations with South Korea and is becoming less
interested in supporting the North's ailing economy indefinitely.

Other problems abound. Cold weather last year contributed to a very poor
harvest. Centralized planning is as inefficient here as it was in Eastern
Europe, and the country has the burden of supporting a 1.1 million-member
military.

Foreign trade is very limited, amounting to only 13 percent of North Korea's
gross national product, compared with about 50 percent for South Korea.

There are only two industries in North Korea that seem at all competitive. One
is weaponry, for which North Korea has found markets in what Washington
considers rogue nations of the Middle East. The other is apparel manufacturing,
for which North Korea's low wages are a big factor. Some discount shops in
Tokyo, for instance, now sell cheap suits made in North Korea.

Analysts here differ over how swiftly Mr. Kim will move on economic reform and
what path he will take. Some say that since his claim to office is that he is
Kim Il Sung's son, he will be forced to follow his father's philosophy of
"juche," or self-reliance, and will liberalize only slowly.

But Yu Suk Ryul, a professor at the Government-affiliated Institute of Foreign
Affairs and National Security in Seoul, said that the younger Mr. Kim had been
behind the ever-so-slight economic liberalization that has taken place in the
last decade, and that he surrounds himself with reform-minded technocrats.

In a step toward liberalization, North Korea has set up a free trade zone to
attract foreign companies near the city of Najin in the northeast.

But the Government is said to be taking steps to keep the region isolated to
prevent North Koreans from being "contaminated" by foreign influences. And North
Korea still lacks the transportation and communications needed by businesses.

Dr. Park of the Center for North Korean Economic Studies said North Korea might
also have trouble attracting foreign companies because its wages, while low, are
not as low as those in China and Vietnam.

For South Korean companies, however, the absence of a language barrier
compensates for any difference in wages between North Korea and other Asian
nations. A few years ago, South Korean conglomerates, which are losing
competitiveness in labor-intensive industries because of rising wages, began
avidly exploring possible business ventures in North Korea.

But such moves ground to a halt after Pyongyang announced last year that it
would pull out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. Since then, the Seoul
Government has been withholding the approvals South Korean companies need to
engage in business in the North.

The desire for low-wage labor is not the only reason South Korean companies are
interested in investing in the North.

South Korea wants to avoid a collapse of the North Korean economy, which could
lead to flood of poor refugees to the South and a possible shotgun
reunification, which would severely strain South Korea's resources and perhaps
end its economic miracle. Studies have estimated that it will cost South Korea
as much as $1 trillion to absorb its neighbor.

"On the one hand, the absolute majority wants to see reunification," said Kil
Jeong Woo, director of policy studies at South Korea's Research Institute for
National Unification. "That's the emotional side. On the economic side, after
witnessing the German experience, we should be more realistic."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of North Korea showing location of Pyongyang.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              64 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 18, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
When Shea Offered a Reason to Believe

BYLINE: By Claire Smith

SECTION: Section C;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


ONE wonders what inspired Charles Dickens to write about the best of times and
the worst of times.

Could it have been a day like the one that unfolded at Shea Stadium yesterday,
when the 1969 Mets and their miracle collided with the harsh modern-day
realities of the current fraternity in Flushing?

The workers of miracles showed up, almost to a man, for an old-timers game that
was to highlight a summerlong celebration of the '69 team's silver anniversary
season. But the absence of Tom Seaver, as well as anything resembling a
substantial crowd, was a reminder that 1969 was then and this is now for the
Mets.

The franchise and its players are long removed from a more innocent time, when a
city and a club held a summerlong love-in to rival the one that was thrown
farther north on the thruway in Woodstock.

Seaver, who had scheduled a golfing event in Seattle today, did not cram a side
trip to Shea yesterday. He wanted to be here, said his former teammate Tommie
Agee, "but he's got some problems with the Mets."

For an abundance of reasons, so do many of the team's fans, who no longer turn
out, as indicated by the team's home attendance -- 818,753, the lowest total in
the National League going into yesterday's games.

They have not come out for a team that is playing relatively better than a year
ago. They did not even come out yesterday to relive one of the franchise's
greatest moments, when the '69 team ended six years of comic relief by winning
the game's most improbable world championship.

The Mets won the World Series that year because of pitchers named Seaver and
Koosman and McGraw. Because of players like Agee and Kranepool and Jones.
Because of a manager named Hodges. And maybe, just maybe, because a miracle was
long overdue. Not just for a sports team but for a weary country that was in the
throes of long overdue. Not just for a sports team but for a weary country that
was in the throes of social upheaval.

"This country had a lot of problems in 1969," said Ken Boswell, a second baseman
with the '69 team. "There was the war in Vietnam, riots in the cities, protests
on college campuses. Plus, the city of New York was close to bankruptcy. When
the 1969 Mets came along, people were looking for something they could believe
in."

Even from a team that had finished only one game out of the cellar the year
before. But if it was a miracle they needed, it was a miracle they got, as the
Mets rode through that summer capturing New York's imagination.

Those Mets won 38 of their final 49 games. Their division rivals, the Chicago
Cubs, lost 10 of 11 in early September. Four years before the Mets' Tug McGraw
coined his phrase and told the world, "Ya gotta believe!" a whole nation already
did.

"Our team wasn't filled with million-dollar free agents, like you have today,"
Boswell said.

The '69 Mets, mainly the products of the farm system, came of age together. And
they did it at Shea, in front of fans willing to live with the growing pains
because they knew they would be the recipients of rewards, if any were to come.

"Fans felt close to us because they felt we belonged to them," Boswell said.

If the '69 Mets belonged to the city, who do the '94 Mets belong to, these
unproven kids and sprinkling of multimillion dollar veterans? What will be
memorable about their time spent here, about their era?

One of the 24,855 fans walking into Shea yesterday summed up the disparate
feelings and the two eras that seem more than just a quarter-century apart.
Clutching a commemorative photo of the Mets' greats of '69, the fan was
overheard saying to his daughter, "These are the guys that Daddy used to love
when Daddy was your age."

Love was not the operative feeling by the time the '94 version took the field.
By the time the Mets' starter, Pete Smith, escaped the first inning, San Diego
had a four-run lead. Smith, a 4-8 disappointment entering the game and 4-9 after
the Mets' embarrassing 10-1 loss to the Padres, was booed lustily.

Smith, as much as any Met this year, serves as a vivid reminder that the current
class has little glory to cling to. This team's main occupation is not winning
championships but attempting to escape mediocrity. And that struggle continues
with no hint of relief, making it highly unlikely that a team of the 90's will
soon join the circle of division, league and world champions that includes not
only Mets from 1969 but 1973, 1986 and 1988.

For that reason, it is easy to understand why those who bother to come to Shea
Stadium are not true believers any more. McGraw could not whip up a frenzy here.
Why things have changed so much, not only with the Mets, but with a city that's
grown up and old and refuses to believe in miracles any more, the antithesis of
the summer of '69.

"We were a product of the late 60's," Art Shamsky said. "Even though the country
was going through changes and controversies, it was a very special year. We put
a man on the moon in the summer of 1969. And the Mets won a World Series. It
seemed like anything was possible."

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tug McGraw, a Mets hero in 1969, delivering during the
Old-Timers Day game yesterday. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              65 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TO THE MOON;
Earthly Worries Supplant Euphoria of Moon Shots

BYLINE: JOHN TIERNEY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1979 words


Twenty-five years ago today, much of humanity listened to Neil Armstrong's first
words on the moon and pondered the implications of his "giant leap for mankind."
It was a day for taking stock and looking ahead, for prophesying the
technological marvels and perils of the next quarter-century, and as usual it
turns out that the prophets erred.

Their two biggest mistakes were failing to foresee two things:

As of 1994, the Moon still is not habitable for humans.

As of 1994, the Earth still is.

From today's perspective the moon landing looks like a spectacular achievement
with few immediate practical consequences, but 25 years ago it inspired happy
predictions of nuclear-powered space colonies as well as apocalyptic laments
that technology was destroying Spaceship Earth. Like so much else in the late
1960's, the moon walk was a polarizing event, greeted by street celebrations of
Yankee ingenuity and by protest demonstrations against American wastefulness.

The ambivalence was reflected in The New York Times's coverage, which featured
its largest headline ever, photographs of enraptured crowds watching television
screens in Central Park and Trafalgar Square and an editorial hailing "a new era
leading to realms beyond comprehension." But the paper also quoted some
remarkably gloomy intellectuals and warned in the editorial, "As man gains
another world -- with the prospect of adding another and still another,
literally ad infinitum -- he stands in imminent danger of losing his own."

The most unusual news judgment of the day was exercised by Communist
journalists. The moon landing was the fifth story on the Soviet Union's nightly
news program -- well behind the lead items saluting Soviet metal workers and
Polish Liberation Day. The official Chinese media preferred to ignore it
altogether. A headline in Hong Kong's Communist newspaper ran "The American
People Pray: God, Give Me a Piece of Bread, Don't Give Me the Moon."

But just about everywhere else on Earth people followed the Apollo 11 mission.
They listened to transistor radios around fires in Zambian villages and in the
courtyards of Buddhist temples in Bangkok. They shouted "formidable" at the
Science Museum in Paris and sang a new hymn in Greek churches. Holidays were
proclaimed around the world. Babies were named Apollo and Luna.

From the Vatican observatory Pope Paul VI offered greetings to the "conquerors
of the moon, pale lamp of our nights and our dreams." The director of Britain's
Jodrell Bank Observatory, Sir Bernard Lovell, said the landing "opens the most
enormous opportunities for future exploration of the universe."

President Richard M. Nixon told the astronauts that it was the proudest day of
every American's life. Later, upon their return to Earth, he would call it "the
greatest week in the history of the world since the Creation." Former President
Lyndon B. Johnson said the landing proved America "can do anything that needs to
be done."

A future President, Ronald Reagan, was one of thousands who joined the waiting
list that summer for the first commercial flight to the moon. It was scheduled
for the year 2000, which today looks a little early technologically and a little
late commercially, since the reservations were being taken by the now-defunct
Pan American World Airways.

But 2000 seemed a conservative schedule to some experts in July of 1969. Thomas
Paine, the administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
was quoted in Time magazine predicting a $5,000 lunar vacation by 1990: "There
is no question that we can reduce the cost of travel to the moon to the cost of
traveling through the air today." The magazine went on to describe the
low-gravity appeal of the diving board at a domed lunar resort.

Mars and Beyond

Isaac Asimov wrote that the moon's rocks might contain clues to the evolution of
life and thereby lead to a cure for cancer. Another science writer, D. S. Halacy
Jr., predicted that by 1994 there would be teen-agers who had been born and bred
in of Lunar City. Plans for lunar laboratories, mines, and factories were
common.

"By the year 2000," the rocket scientist Dr. Wernher von Braun forecast, "we
will undoubtedly have a sizable operation on the moon, we will have achieved a
manned Mars landing and it's entirely possible we will have flown with men to
the outer planets."

That sense of optimism was shared by some of the prominent figures who
contributed statements to The Times the day of the moon landing. The Dalai Lama
envisioned space travel imbuing human knowledge with "a new dimension of
infinite scope, development and dynamism." The architect R. Buckminster Fuller
advocated further space exploration and called the moon landing "the dead-center
of evolutionary events." The poet Rod McKuen urged people to love the
astronauts.

But others were not impressed. "It means nothing to me," Picasso said. Some were
downright hostile. The novelist Arthur Koestler lamented humanity's
"unprecedented spiritual vacuum" and declared: "Prometheus is reaching out for
the stars with an empty grin on his face."

Lewis Mumford, the historian and urbanologist, called the moon landing "a
symbolic act of war" by a "megatechnic power system, in the lethal grip of the
'myth of the machine.' " He predicted that the "very triumphs of technology"
would soon turn the planet into either a lunatic asylum or a crematorium.

Rene Dubos, the microbiologist, called the "incredibly efficient technology"
controlling the astronauts a "dreaded portent of what could happen to our
lives," and he hoped the moon missions would lead ecologists to create "a
theology of the earth." The psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton said the moon landing
was a "painful reminder of the terrible gap between technology and imagination."

There was so much angst that the psychologist Kenneth B. Clark, after bemoaning
the social needs neglected during the moon mission, added a reminder to
everyone: "But our triumph on the moon need not be an occasion for despair." And
Eugene Ionesco, the playwright, complained that writers and intellectuals were
showing "an astonishing lack of good will" toward "an extraordinary event of
incalculable significance."

The lack of good will was partly a reflection of the era. The Vietnam War
engendered hostility to the government, and urban riots made social problems
seem more pressing than ever. Ecologists had published best sellers predicting
catastrophic cancer epidemics, planetwide famines and resource shortages; those
doomsday forecasts, along with photographs of Spaceship Earth taken from the
moon, helped launch the environmental movement on Earth Day, the spring after
Apollo 11.

The lack of good will also reflected a traditional suspicion of new technology.
Tom Wolfe, who chronicled the early space program in "The Right Stuff," explains
the hostility to NASA by citing Thorstein Veblen's "Theory of the Leisure
Class."

"Veblen's great insight was that anything that is useful does not indicate high
status," Mr. Wolfe said recently in an interview. "That's why intellectuals
don't like science, and why engineering particularly has been considered low
rent. The moon landing was an astonishing accomplishment -- it was staggering
that we happened to be alive at the moment -- and it should have gladdened even
the heart of an intellectual. But that's a project almost as difficult as
getting to the moon."

According to Veblen's theory, the Apollo program's status should have improved
since 1969, because the moon landing is not looking very useful from today's
perspective. The collapse of Soviet Communism has eliminated one of the
rationales for the space program, and in retrospect it is debatable whether the
manned missions made much practical difference in the cold war beyond serving as
sensational propaganda.

The Apollo program did yield scientific findings and technical innovations, but
most of them could have been obtained more cheaply through unmanned missions,
which have become an increasingly attractive alternative, thanks to advances in
computers, robotics, and communication equipment. And the once-popular idea that
a giant bureaucracy like the Apollo program could be a model for technological
problem solving has lost favor now that corporate and government engineers --
even at NASA -- are stressing small, decentralized operations.

Mining on the moon seems even less economical now that most earthly mineral
prices are lower than they were a quarter-century ago, and the $5,000 lunar
vacation gets more remote every time the space shuttle has another delay and
cost overrun. Some enthusiasts support expensive new missions for the sheer
adventure and glory of exploration. But they haven't had much luck persuading
politicians and the public ever since 1972, when Eugene A. Cernan got into the
Apollo 17 lunar module and muttered just before liftoff the last words on the
moon: "Let's get this mother out of here."

"People lost interest once the Apollo landings became routine," said Joseph
Corn, a historian at Stanford University who has analyzed past technological
predictions in several books, including "Imagining Tomorrow: History,
Technology, and the American Future." He said the reaction to the moon landing
25 years ago resembled the overenthusiastic reaction to the first airplane
flights, when some predicted a plane in every garage. But at least the plane
enthusiasts had something tangible to help sustain interest.

'Never a Necessary Technology'

"The barnstormers would visit every tiny community and take someone up for a
ride, and everyone could imagine exactly what purpose a plane served," Dr. Corn
said. "But nothing really came of the Apollo program. It was never a necessary
technology -- like the need to pump out a coal mine that led to the steam engine
-- and they never offered the vacations or anything that was meaningful to
people in economic or social terms. Its only purpose seemed to be philosophical
or religious."

It's possible, of course, that today's lack of enthusiasm for manned space
exploration will seem terribly shortsighted 25 years from now. New technology
might somehow make lunar settlements practical. But that is not the prediction
of Dr. John Maddox, a prophet with the distinction of having a decent track
record going back a quarter-century.

Rebutting the Catastrophists

Mr. Maddox, now the editor of the British science journal Nature, was busy
during the Apollo program debunking the technological enthusiasts as well as the
pessimists. He not only criticized manned moon missions as an extravagance that
would lead nowhere, he went on to publish a book, "The Doomsday Syndrome," in
1972, rebutting the catastrophists of the 1960's. He argued that Spaceship Earth
had a lot more carrying capacity and ecological resilience than any spaceship
envisioned by the doomsayers.

Dr. Maddox is sticking with those predictions for the 50th anniversary of the
moon landing. On this planet, he expects a continuation of the technological
changes that have been gradually increasing the food supply, income and life
expectancy of the average human. And away from this planet, he doesn't expect
much of anything for the average human.

"This business of carting people around the solar system is going to remain
enormously difficult," he said, "and for the foreseeable future there's no
worthwhile purpose for it." He can imagine humans someday scanning for dangerous
earthbound asteroids from an observatory on the moon, or perhaps a satellite of
Jupiter, but not until much better spaceships are available -- which he does not
expect soon.

"I hope this won't make me sound too crusty," he said, "but my guess is that
this sort of space travel is 250 years down the road." He did not venture to
guess whether Pan Am would be back in business by then.


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Apollo 11 astronauts emerged from behind the moon after
entering lunar orbit and saw this view of Earth rising over the eastern horizon
240,000 miles away. (NASA); Buzz Aldrin photographed by Neil A. Armstrong on the
moon. Photographer and lunar module were reflected on astronaut's face plate.
(NASA); Alan L. Bean in Mission Control on July 20, 1969, as the Apollo 11
astronauts landed. He was preparing for the Apollo 12 mission. (Associated
Press); President Richard M. Nixon talking with Apollo 11 astronauts on the
surface of the moon, shown on NBC-TV; A moon rock at the American Museum of
Natural History. (Jack Manning/The New York Times); In 1969, Chicago greeted
Buzz Aldrin, left, Neil A. Armstrong, center, and Michael Collins, partly
hidden. (United Press International) (pg. A15)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              66 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 959 words



International A2-6

ITALIAN LEADER BACKS DOWN
The Prime Minister of Italy rescinded a decree that would have allowed the
release of some people in preventive detention and that had been denounced as
subverting the effort to stamp out corruption.  A1

SERBS INCH CLOSER ON PEACE
Bosnia Serbs gave a highly conditional indication that they are ready to work
with the international peace plan for Bosnia, bringing the possibility of peace
closer.  A1


NEW RWANDAN GOVERNMENT
The victorious Rwandan rebels, most from the minority Tutsi tribe, installed a
Government with leaders from the majority Hutu, but refugees continued to stream
into neighboring countries.  A6

FAREWELL TO KOREAN LEADER
The funeral procession for Kim Il Sung, the North Korean leader, wound through
the capital, and it appeared that his son was in control and ready to take
power.  A5

TRADE GAP WIDENS FURTHER
The United States trade deficit soared again, as the economy drew more products
from abroad while the weak dollar did little to spur buying of American
products.  D1

ISRAEL-SYRIA OBSTACLES REMAIN
Secretary of State Christopher acknowledged that despite his optimistic
predictions, there are still major barriers to peace between Israel and Syria.
A2

Jordan said it might work with Israel, even before peace.  A2

Muslim militants killed an Israeli Army officer.  A2

MEXICO TALKS ON HOLD
The Mexican Government seems to have abandoned hope of reaching a settlement
with rebels soon, and the Government's negotiator is largely dealing with
unrelated issues.  A3

The number of Haitians fleeing in boats is decreasing.  A3

Many are still missing after an explosion in Argentina.  A3

Honda will increase North American car production.  D1

Warsaw Journal: The splintering Solidarity.  A4

National A8-16

CLINTON SIGNALS COMPROMISE
Softening his call for health coverage for all Americans, President Clinton said
yesterday that coverage for 95 percent might do.  A1

STRONG BACKING FOR HEALTH PLAN
The public is still strong committed to having a health plan passed and
continues to favor universal coverage, the latest New York Time/CBS News poll
showed yesterday.  A1

A PROPHECY UNFULFILLED
Predictions of continued technological glories followed the moon landing, but it
now looks to have been a spectacular achievement with few practical
consequences.  A1

JUPITER TAKES MORE HITS
More fragments of a comet smashed into Jupiter, leaving dents the size of Earth,
but scientists do not know how serious the damage is.  A13

BIRTHS TO UNWED MOTHERS RISE
As the nation debates how to reduce welfare rolls and focuses on births to unwed
mothers, the Census Bureau said such births increased by 70 percent from 1983 to
1993.  A1

A DESPERATE FARMER
With his pigs dying of hunger and his farm under a lien, a 70-year-old Nebraskan
sold livestock in violation of his trust agreement with a bank. Now he is in
Federal prison for denying those actions when he sought bankruptcy protection.
A1

DEMOCRATS RETURN TO CHICAGO
Trying to overcome the ghosts of 1968, the Democratic Party has chosen to hold
its 1996 national convention in the Illinois city where those ghosts were born.
A8

GRAND CANYON LOVE AFFAIR
A German who said that his countrymen were more reserved than Americans finds
himself rhapsodizing about the American West.  A8

A judge refused to obey a California law on sentencing.  A10

Oliver North tied for the lead in a Virginia Senate poll.  A16

Education Page B7

In North Carolina classrooms, high technology works, but at a price.

Six U.S. teen-agers are perfect in an international math competition.

Metro Digest B1

LEGIONNAIRES' CASES
After three cases of Legionnaires' disease were reported in former passengers,
the cruise ship Horizon was evacuated in Bermuda while its water system was
disinfected.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-9

A region's tastes commingle
in Israel.  C1
Eating Well: The goal is living to 150. But is it living?  C1
At lunch with Richard Hughes: An actor prepares; Vietnam interrupts.  C1
Metropolitan Diary C2
Off the Menu C2
For Manhattan fliers, commuting tales of a different kind.  C3
Plain and Simple C4
Food Notes C4
Wine Talk C7
Fashion: Slim silhouette at Chanel, vintage flair from Ungaro.  C9

Health Page C10

Personal Health: Dealing with motion sickness.
The Army turns to food to bolster soldiers' performance.

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

New Music Seminar.  C11
Film: "The Client." C11
"Latcho Drom," about Gypsies.  C18
"The Wedding Gift." C18
Books: Book Notes C11 Scott Joplin and his era.  C16
TV: Tom Snyder returns.  C18
Abused women who kill.  C18

Sports B8-14

Baseball: Bonilla talks about Yankees and Bronx.  B9
Mets beat Dodgers.  B9
Column: Berkow on Albert Belle.  B9
Football: How Mark Jackson returned to Giants.  B13
The Jets and Tony Meola.B13
Hockey: Rangers file suit in Keenan case.  B9

Obituaries B20

Rudolf Firkusny, pianist.
Julian Schwinger, theoretical physicist who won a Nobel Prize in 1965.
Henry W. Maier, former Mayor of Milwaukee.
Amos Melamede, headed the Acoustiguide Corporation of Manhattan.
Nathan Susskind, authority on Yiddish.

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Two million refugees.
Lunar legacy.
The incorrect Mr. Kraft.
Topics: Broadway bridal.

Letters

Bob Herbert: The monkey wrench.
Anna Quindlen: Justice for Nina.
Abba Eban: Hussein, king of realpolitik.

Chronicle A20

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              67 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Pick Chicago for Convention

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, July 19


Hoping to erase the stain of the violent 1968 convention from the image of the
Democratic Party and the city of Chicago, party officials said today that they
had selected this proud Midwestern city as host for their 1996 Presidential
nominating convention.

Mayor Richard M. Daley is clearly eager to burnish the image of the Daley family
and the city itself. His father, the late Mayor Richard J. Daley, was seen on
national television during the 1968 convention cutting off irate delegates and
defending the brute force used against Vietnam War protesters by his police
officers.

Indeed, the Mayor, who said he had not received word of the party's decision,
became somewhat defensive about 1968 in an interview today. "It could have been
any place in the country," he said. "It was the right place but the wrong time,
1968, with Vietnam, the Kennedy assassination, the King assassination."

Asked whether Chicago could erase the negative image from 26 years ago by acting
as host to the convention, Mayor Daley snapped, "Take New York. You have your
images. I don't know if you've erased your images."

No Convention Since 1968

Beginning with the Republican convention that nominated Abraham Lincoln in 1860,
Chicago has been the site of 24 major party conventions, more than any other
city. But the parties have stayed clear of it since 1968, when Hubert H.
Humphrey won the Democratic Presidential nomination here. That convention was
thrust into turmoil when the police attacked thousands of Vietnam War protesters
who had come to Chicago from around the country.

Now, Democratic officials say, it is time for the party to come back. Although
they have not yet completed a contract with the city, several senior officials
from the party and the White House, speaking on the condition of anonymity,
described that as a technicality because President Clinton had signed off on the
choice.

The Democrats have tentatively scheduled an announcement for late next week by
the party chairman, David Wilhelm, a former Chicagoan who has made clear that
this city is his sentimental favorite.

"There's nothing here that's deal threatening," said one official, who refused
to be identified. "It's just nailing down the fine print." The officials
cautioned that the timing of the announcement could be put off as final details
were worked out.

While not confirming the choice, Gordon Giffin, an Atlanta lawyer who heads the
Democrats' site selection committee, acknowledged that the talks with Chicago
had progressed far beyond those with other cities. Chicago's bid, Mr. Griffin
said, was "probably the most comprehensive response of any city."

$32 Million Bid

The officials said Chicago's offer of $32 million in the form of facilities and
services was more generous than the bids of the other contenders -- New Orleans,
New York and San Antonio. Chicago was also compelling for political reasons: Mr.
Clinton carried Illinois in 1992 and desperately needs to win it again to retain
his base in the Rust Belt. A convention here would highlight the importance of
Middle America to the Democratic Party.

Other advantages for Chicago are that Hillary Rodham Clinton was reared in the
area, and the President owes political debts both to Mayor Daley and his
brother, William, a lawyer who coordinated last year's White House drive for
passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement.

Besides the $100 million economic boon that city officials estimate a national
convention would bring, this city's political and business leaders view it as an
opportunity to redeem Chicago's reputation.

"New York got it. Why shouldn't we get it?" Mayor Daley asked in the interview.
"We're centrally located; we got the hotels; we got the new stadium, things like
that."

A Gala TV Show

William Daley also dismissed the talk of 1968. "It's not something that people
in Chicago think about," he said. "Most people who will come for the convention
weren't even born then."

But conventions these days are nothing more than gala television shows, and the
risk for the Democrats is that the images in '96 would undoubtedly be juxtaposed
throughout the weeklong event with film of the beatings by police outside the
Conrad Hilton Hotel in 1968.

The hotel is a 10-minute cab ride from the United Center, where the 1996
gathering will be held. It is a 25,000-seat complex adjacent to housing projects
in poor neighborhoods on the city's West Side, across the street from the old
Chicago Stadium. Construction workers today were putting the final touches on
the sidewalks around the gray and beige center, which is scheduled to open by
September.

Some Democrats are also fearful that a Democratic convention here would be
marred by stories about Representative Dan Rostenkowski, a Democratic titan on
Capitol Hill -- and in this city -- who was indicted on May 31 on 17 felony
counts.

"What are they going there for? To exorcise old demons?" asked Martin P.
Wattenberg, a political science professor at the University of California at
Irvine, who said the choice of Chicago was a political mistake. "The first
President of the Woodstock generation goes back to Chicago to say, 'We're all
together now.' "

Chicago has also bid for the Republican convention, but that party is not
expected to select a host city until next January. The Democrats have insisted
on an exclusivity clause prohibiting Chicago from also acting as host to the
Republicans in 1996. Mr. Daley said today that while he had hoped the city would
be the site of both conventions, he would agree to the clause.

Longtime Favorite

Some civic and political leaders have said they would prefer that Chicago host
the Republicans instead because there would be fewer comparisons to 1968 and
because, by some estimates, the Republican delegates would spend more. The
Democratic convention is scheduled for the last full week in August; the
Republican convention would end a week earlier.

Chicago had been the Democrats' favorite all along, followed by New Orleans and
San Antonio. New York was out of favor since it had the 1992 convention;
officials also said the city was not as appealing politically because Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani is a Republican.

Donald R. Sweitzer, political director for the Democratic National Committee,
emphasized that there was never a flawless convention city. "Any city or region
you pick, there will be problems," Mr. Sweitzer said. "But there's a lot of
enthusiasm in our party to go to Chicago, a great Democratic city."


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mayor Richard M. Daley of Chicago talking about the Democratic
convention in his city in 1996. (Cynthia Howe for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              68 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TO THE MOON;
After Brief Moon Visits, Lifetimes of Measuring the Experience

BYLINE: By MARIA NEWMAN with ASHLEY DUNN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1687 words


Only 12 men have walked the still and dusty surface of the moon.

They were launched into space over three years amid the turmoil of the Vietnam
War on a journey that had captured mankind's imagination for eons.

Although none spent more than 22 hours exploring the lunar landscape, most came
back indelibly marked by the experience.

For some, reaching the moon was a moment of great scientific accomplishment, but
did little to change their lives. Others on the same journey said the vision of
the Earth rising on the horizon or the vast sea of stars in blackness of space
forever altered their vision of the world.

A quarter century later, many of them still pause at the sight of a full moon to
embrace their memories of the strange gunpowder smell of lunar soil, the views
of the blackest sky they have ever seen, the time-worn silver landscape that has
no comparison on earth.

The astronauts of the Apollo program have long since dispersed across the
country, following paths that veered far away from each other once their common
goal of reaching the moon was accomplished.

They all thought that one day, their experience of exploring the moon would be
shared by many others. So far, they remain the only oracles.

Here are some of their stories:

Alan L. Bean
Apollo 12

With every brush stroke to his canvas, Alan L. Bean thinks about what it means
to have gone to the moon.

"Every artist has the earth or their imaginations to inspire their paintings,"
he said from his home in suburban Houston. "I've got the earth and my
imagination, and I'm the first to have the moon too."

Mr. Bean, an engineer and a pilot by training, began painting as a hobby in
1962. Twelve years after he returned from his trip to the moon, his memories and
the insights he gained in space inspired him to devote himself full time to art.

All he paints are pictures of the moon. Like a man possessed with a need to tell
a story, Mr. Bean, now 62, has set himself a goal of producing 200 paintings of
the lunar missions.

"I've had to think about which things are worth recording from my trip," he
said. "When I'm finished with all this in 10 or 15 years, I wonder, will I have
left enough paintings and will I have told the story?"

When he was on his moon mission, gamboling about the dusty lunar surface, a man
on a scientific mission, he said he did not allow himself to ruminate about what
it all meant. It is only now in front of the easel that he has time to reflect.

"When we make dreams come true or they come true accidentally," he said, "you've
got more courage to do other things because you're not still trying to get that
other dream accomplished."

He added: "Certainly riding a rocket to the moon is the biggest kick you can
have, but when I paint I get the same feeling that I got when I flew in space
well. Certainly the view isn't as good, but the best part of life is internal."

Charles Conrad Jr.
Apollo 12

Charles (Pete) Conrad insists that his walk on the moon had little consequence
to the rest of his life, even though he says no one believes him.

"I don't think it did change my life," he said. "I'm also not the type to look
back."

Mr. Conrad, who walked on the moon in November of 1969 on the Apollo 12 mission,
said he is more proud of his work to rescue the Skylab station in 1973.

He and a fellow crew member, Joe Kerwin, had to work in the heat of the sun to
free a stuck solar wing on Skylab. It was for this mission that Congress awarded
him the Space Medal of Honor.

"It's not something you think about everyday," he said.

Today, Mr. Conrad is a staff vice president at the McDonnell Douglas Corporation
in Huntington Beach, Calif.

Until he became too busy with his business a few years ago, Mr. Conrad spoke
frequently to school children and college groups about the space program.

Instead of talking about his recollections of his moon walk, Mr. Conrad, 64,
would rather talk about what a mistake the United States made in curtailing its
commitment to space exploration. "I ate, slept and breathed it for seven years
and I went and I did it," he said. "It was a great accomplishment but it was cut
off at the knees."

Edgar D. Mitchell
Apollo 14

Edgar D. Mitchell said he has been an explorer all of his life.

He went to the moon in 1971 as a scientist and an adventurer, but the trip also
launched him into a journey of exploration of the mind and consciousness.

During the trip, Dr. Mitchell tried to make contact with others on earth through
telepathy, and afterward he sought the counsel of psychics.

"What it did for me is really force me to get out of the trees and look at the
forest," he said, "to get a picture of the universe from a totally different
perspective and then start to question our conventional ways of looking at
ourselves, our place in the universe, our place in life, what it's all about."

He was exhilarated and humbled by the connection between mankind and the cosmos.
"For me it was the beginning of unitary thinking," said Dr. Mitchell, who now
lives in Boca Raton, Fla. "To think that the molecules of my body were
manufactured in the same furnace as those stars in those galaxies billions of
years ago."

A year after after his return, he left NASA and later founded the Institute of
Noetic Sciences, an organization in Northern California devoted to the study of
consciousness, and of how we fit into the universe.

Today, Dr. Mitchell, a freelance management consultant, spends much of his time
lecturing and participating in conferences of his 40,000-member strong
institute.

"We went there as space technicians, and we came back humanitarians," said Dr.
Mitchell, 63. "Looking at earth is an instant global consciousness."

Alan B. Shepard Jr.
Apollo 14

Alan Shepard was the first American in space and the first, and only, to play
golf on the moon.

"It was a one-handed six iron because it was very clumsy with our suits," he
said, explaining his couple of golf shots. "The first one I shanked. The ball
came off the handle and it rolled into a crater 40 yards away. The next one I
hit pretty flush. Here it would have gone 30 yards, but because there's no
atmosphere there, it went about 200 yard."

For some people, Mr. Shepard's tee-off on the moon on his 1971 mission came to
represent the exorbitant expense of the moon program at a time of pressing needs
back home. But for others, the golf shot symbolized the sense of exploration,
discovery and curiosity that launched the moon program in the first place.

Mr. Shepard, an avid golfer, is unapologetic about his extracurricular shots on
the moon. He would never have done it had he and his crewmates experienced any
problems on the mission.

The oldest of the moon walkers, Mr. Shepard now 70, heads Seven Fourteen
Enterprises, a Houston investment company. He is one of the more financially
successful of the Apollo astronauts.

When he looks up at the moon, he said, he thinks not only of his journey there,
but the view of the planet Earth from space. "I remember being struck by the
fact that it looks so peaceful from that distance, but remembering on the other
hand all the confrontation going on all over that planet, and feeling a little
sad that people on planet earth couldn't see that same sight because obviously
all the military and political differences become so insignificant seeing it
from that distance."

Charles M. Duke Jr.
Apollo 16

Four hundred feet up the slope of Stone Mountain, Charles Duke gazed across the
brilliant silver expanse of the Cayley Plains.

"We could see all the way across the valley to the horizon and it was
breathtaking," he said. "I looked out on this valley that was unspoiled,
pristine, quiet, immense, and I felt a part of it. It was majestic and we were
the only two people who had ever seen it."

At the time, he said, "I didn't rub my chin and ponder the origins of man. It
was yahoo, here we are!".

It was only on his return to Earth that Mr. Duke, a test pilot who grew up in a
small town in South Carolina, began to wrestle with comprehending the strange
beauty of the moon and the significance of his experience.

"It's like being at the top of the mountain," he said. "Here we are. Man is
great. Now what are you going to do with the rest of your life? I think a lot of
people had to deal with that."

After being in a variety of businesses after leaving NASA, Mr. Duke said he
drifted in search of finding something that could match the fulfillment of going
to the moon until he rediscovered his faith in God in 1978. He now devotes much
of his time traveling the country speaking to church groups.

"I knew I couldn't live my life on a three-day trip to the moon," said Mr. Duke,
58, who lives in New Braunfels, Tex. "It stayed with me until I got this peace
with the Lord. Now, I don't think about that."

Eugene A. Cernan
Apollo 17

Before he stepped into the lunar module, the last man to have gone to the moon,
Eugene A. Cernan uttered these words:

"And as we leave the moon at Taurus-Littrow, we leave as we came, and, God
willing, as we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind. Godspeed the
crew of Apollo 17."

Little did he know that 22 years later, the footsteps he left on the moon Dec.
15, 1972, would still be the last of a human there.

"What I said sort of came off the top of my head," Mr. Cernan said recently.
"And I still think we'll return and still think we'll go to Mars. What I cannot
do now is tell you when."

Mr. Cernan, 60, is an aerospace consultant with his own firm, the Cernan
Corporation, in Houston, Tex. Mr. Cernan said he is disappointed that no other
Americans have explored other planets, but he said he has confidence that it
will happen eventually.

"When it's all over, the difference in time between when I went and the next
group goes, it will be but a blip in history, a blip in time," he said.

He delights in recounting what he saw when he was on the moon, especially when
he talks about it with his two-year-old granddaughter.

"She knows it's poppy's moon," he said, "and that makes it all worthwhile."


LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Neil A. Armstrong. (United Press International); Buzz Aldrin.
(NASA); Charles Conrad Jr. (NASA); Alan L. Bean. (NASA); Alan B. Shepard Jr.
(NASA); Edgar D. Mitchell. (Associated Press); David R. Scott. (NASA); James M.
Irwin. (NASA); John W. Young. (NASA); Charles M. Duke Jr. (NASA); Eugene A.
Cernan. (NASA); Harrison H. Schmitt. (NASA)

Chart: "A LOOK BACK: The Apollo Lunar Landing Missions"

The dates are for launch to splashdown.

APOLLO 11
July 16 to July 24, 1969

Neil A. Armstrong - moon walk
Buzz Aldrin - moon walk
Michael Collins

APOLLO 12
Nov. 14 to Nov. 24, 1969

Charles Conrad Jr. - moon walk
Alan L. Bean - moon walk
Richard F. Gordon Jr.

APOLLO 14
Jan. 31 to Feb. 9, 1971

Alan B. Shepard Jr. - moon walk
Edgar D. Mitchell - moon walk
Stuart A. Roosa

APOLLO 15
July 26 to Aug. 7, 1971

David R. Scott - moon walk
James B. Irwin (deceased) - moon walk
Alfred M. Worden

APOLLO 16
April 16 to April 27, 1972

John W. Young - moon walk
Charles M. Duke Jr. - moon walk
Thomas K. Mattingly

APOLLO 17
Dec. 7 to Dec. 19, 1972

Eugene A. Cernan - moon walk
Harrison H. Schmitt - moon walk
Ronald E. Evans (deceased)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              69 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Perfect Score for Americans in World Math Tourney

BYLINE: By SAM DILLON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 719 words


Six American high school students astonished judges at a world mathematics
competition in Hong Kong, achieving perfect scores on a nine-hour examination
for the first time in the tourney's 35-year history, officials said yesterday.

The youths' flawless performance on the test of algebra, geometry and numbers
theory swept them to victory over 360 other students from 68 countries, bringing
the United States its first triumph at the International Mathematical Olympiad
since an American team tied the Soviet Union in 1986. China and Russia have
dominated the competition in recent years.

"These are students of exceptional ability who were helped to develop by good
public schools and who enjoyed lots of parental support," Walter E. Mientka, the
professor of mathematics at the University of Nebraska who coached the team,
said in a telephone interview from Hong Kong. "They're a tremendous model for
how our country can achieve excellence."

The six winners were Jeremy Bem of Ithaca High School, Ithaca, N.Y.; Aleksandr
L. Khazanov of Stuyvesant High School, New York; Jacob A. Lurie of Montgomery
Blair High School, Silver Spring, Md.; Noam M. Shazeer of Swamp-scott High
School, Swampscott, Mass.; Stephen S. Wang of Illinois Mathematics and Science
Academy, Aurora, Ill., and Jonathan Weinstein of Lexington High School,
Lexington, Mass.

Qualified on Tests

The six students qualified to represent the United States by scoring higher than
350,000 other teen-agers on the American High School Math Exam in February, as
well as on a series of follow-up tests, Professor Mientka said. They attended a
one-month mathematics seminar at the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis,
Md., before departing for Hong Kong on July 8. The Army and Navy helped pay for
training and travel.

The test, which was administered at a university campus in Hong Kong on
Wednesday and Thursday, consisted of six questions, each worth seven points, so
that a perfect individual score was 42. The Americans' perfect team score was
252.

China placed second with 229, Russia third with 224, Bulgaria fourth with 223,
Hungary fifth with 221 and Vietnam sixth with 207, Professor Mientka said.

The Chinese team, whose members live together to train year-round, fell behind
on this year's competition, Professor Mientka said, because three of the team's
six teen-agers scored zero on the question:

"Show that there exists a set A of positive integers with the following
property: For any infinite set S of primes there exist two positive integers m
in A and n not in A, each of which is a product of k distinct elements of S for
some k greater than 1."

'A Phenomenal Experience'

Professor Mientka said he was on the 30th floor of a hotel helping a panel of
international judges score the tests when he first realized that the American
teen-agers had scored perfectly.

"It was a phenomenal experience," he said.

The American team celebrated its victory with a quiet game of bridge, Professor
Mientka said.

The six teen-agers' families were in varying stages of joyous uproar over the
triumph yesterday.

"We're ecstatic," Miriam Shazeer, Noam's mother, said by phone from Swampscott.
Her son taught himself to do arithmetic calculations when he was 3 years old,
using a rubber puzzle formed in concentric circles that could be divided into
various fractions, Mrs. Shazeer said.

An Early Gift

Sandra L. Bem, a professor at Cornell University, said she had also noticed her
son Jeremy's gift for mathematics at an early age, when she was still reading
aloud to him before bed.

"He was more interested in the page numbers than in the story," Professor Bem
said. "He liked abstract symbol systems."

No American team at the competition has ever included any girls, although
teen-age girls are common on other country's teams, Professor Mientka said, and
two achieved perfect scores on this year's test: Theresa Eisenkoibel of Austria
and Catriona Maclean of the United Kingdom.

"America is just behind other teams in getting girls to perform at the top
level," Professor Bem, who teaches women's studies, said.

Norma Bailey Lurie, a tax lawyer, said her son Jacob began asking her questions
about infinity when he was 3 years old.

"He wanted to know what is the largest number," Ms. Lurie said.

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The American math team in Washington last month after winning
the national competition. Members are, clockwise from top, Jeremy Bem, Stephen
Wang, Aleksandr Khazanov, Noam Shazeer, alternates Jacob Rasmussen and
Christopher Chang, Jonathan Weinstein and Jacob Lurie.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              70 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AT LUNCH WITH: Richard Hughes;
An Actor Prepares; Vietnam Interrupts

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


RICHARD HUGHES, fabled as the last American to leave Saigon in the 1970's, is
finding that Vietnam still refuses to let go of him. And vice versa.

In fact, he believes Vietnam has a way of following him around. So Mr. Hughes
was hardly surprised when, rehearsing for an Off Off Broadway production of "The
Seagull" in 1992, he stepped off the A train at Canal Street and came face to
face with the big green sign of the Kinh Do Vietnamese Restaurant.

As an omen, not to mention an eating place, it was hard to pass up.  So Mr.
Hughes, a 51-year-old Pittsburgh-born actor who looks like Clint Eastwood in his
less craggy days, surrendered to the lure of a bowl of pho in the same way he
had given himself to Vietnam and the cause of the homeless urchins he sheltered
in his Shoeshine Boys hostels in wartime Saigon a quarter century ago.

That's where I first met him, and as a correspondent for The Times in Saigon, I
wrote the first piece about the Shoeshine Boys.

Since he first discovered Kinh Do ("Big City"), Mr. Hughes has come back to the
restaurant at 19 Avenue of the Americas for pho, a hearty rice-noodle soup with
beef, and for the crispy pork and shrimp rolls called cha gio. In fact, he chose
Kinh Do as the place to have lunch recently and talk about how Vietnam derailed
the budding acting career that he is now trying to get back on track.

He also recounted his campaign to gain freedom for two former Vietnamese
colleagues jailed in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon) in 1990 for what the
Government called "anti-socialist activities," a costly cause that has drained
him financially, leaving him more than $35,000 in debt.

"I made a couple of copies," he began, turning up at the table in a blue work
shirt and sliding his rangy six-foot form into a seat.

A couple of copies? His briefcase bulged with dogeared correspondence with Tom
Cruise, Paul Newman, Robert De Niro and others who have helped his cause;
newspaper clippings and fund-raising appeals; briefing papers, and manifestoes
focused on the cases of Doan Than Liem, a lawyer who is reported close to
release, cutting short his 12-year term, and Do Ngoc Long, an economist who was
freed last year and is awaiting asylum in the United States.

Exuberantly boyish, with blue eyes and salt and pepper hair, Mr. Hughes seems to
know he can be a pain but leavens his passion with good humor. "I'm committed,"
he said. "Not obsessive."

He remembered enough Vietnamese to banter with the restaurateur, Tu Van Nguyen,
a former South Vietnamese Army major who spent 10 years in Communist
re-education camps and jails.

Mr. Hughes would have been satisfied with a bowl of pho, but Mr. Tu would not
hear of it. Nothing but the house special would do. Mr. Tu scurried off to see
to it.

He soon emerged with a compromise. A double order of cha gio to start, along
with a plate of lettuce leaves and mint sprigs to wrap around them and a dipping
bowl of nuoc mam, the fermented fish sauce.

Over the crunchy rolls and iced glasses of sweet lemonade the menu charmingly
calls so da, Mr. Hughes recalled his early acting career, all but hijacked by
the Vietnam War.

After graduating in 1965 from Carnegie Tech and two years later from the Boston
University Graduate School of Drama, where his classmate was Paul Michael
Glaser, who later starred in the hit television series "Starsky and Hutch," he
started off at the Theater Company of Boston. There, he acted in "The Local
Stigmatic" by Heathcote Williams and was Jon Voight's understudy in "The Dwarfs"
by Harold Pinter.

In 1968, as a conscientious objector, he refused the Vietnam draft, only to
borrow $1,500 and travel on his own to Saigon, where he helped found the
Dispatch News Service -- later it distributed Seymour Hersh's exclusive on the
My Lai massacre -- and opened a shelter for street children called the Shoeshine
Boys Project.

The low-key charity, so named because the children commonly subsisted by shining
shoes, was lionized in news articles. Richard Avedon took pictures, and Mr.
Hughes was even flown back to the States in 1974 for a surprise family reunion
with his parents and six siblings on "This Is Your Life," which included a
tribute by the United States representative at the United Nations, George Bush.

By the mid-70's, Mr. Long and Mr. Liem were taking more responsibility for the
charity, which expanded to eight group homes -- six in Saigon and two in Danang
-- before they were phased out and Mr. Hughes was told to pick up his exit visa.
That was in 1976, three years after the last G.I.'s left Vietnam and more than a
year after the Communist victory reunified North and South Vietnam. The charity
aided some 1,500 youngsters, mainly boys but also some girls.

After waiters cleared the table, Mr. Tu re-emerged proudly with platters of
crispy fried flounder, peppered salt jumbo shrimp nesting in tomatoes and
onions, soft-shell crabs fried in butter, and sweet and sour sauteed lobster.

Mr. Hughes snapped off pieces of flounder, placed them in his cup of white rice
and used his chopsticks Vietnamese-style to shovel the dish into his mouth. Mr.
Tu shelled him chunks of lobster tail.

In 1976, when he got back from Vietnam, Mr. Hughes continued, he tried to
restart his acting career, landing some parts in regional theaters and then a
prime supporting role as Bernardo in Kevin Kline's "Hamlet" at the Public
Theater in 1986.  The same year, he appeared as a Pentagon bomb sleuth in
Marshall Brickman's film "The Manhattan Project," and in 1987 he portrayed Ross
in a Shakespeare in the Park production of "Richard II."

In 1992, he played Shamrayev, the estate owner in Chekhov's "Seagull," at the
Muse Theater, and last year he appeared as the train engineer in the Disney film
"Iron Will," about a dog-sled race.

But Vietnam was claiming his life again. In 1990, Mr. Long and Mr. Liem were
arrested, along with a former American colleague, Michael Morrow, a development
consultant, over their meetings with a freelance writer who had angered the
authorities by visiting a group of former Vietcong guerrillas critical of the
Government.

Bang! Gesturing, Mr. Hughes knocked over his lemonade. Calmly, he swept the ice
shards into his palm and onto a napkin.

Mr. Morrow was released after three weeks, Mr. Hughes said, but the two
Vietnamese were more harshly treated, in large part, Mr. Hughes is convinced,
because of their alliance with him two decades earlier. They were a very close
threesome, he said. "You can't get any closer than taking care of a kid who
dies."

A week ago, Mr. Hughes learned in a call from Mr. Liem's family in California
that he, too, was about to be released.

The worst part of the story, Mr. Hughes continued, was having to be defensive
for taking his loyalty to his friends to such lengths.

"I had to explain who these people are and why I'm doing what I'm doing," he
said. "I felt there was almost something wrong here because I cared. It's been
an uphill battle. People are usually not that loyal for so long."

But now, he said, "I got to the point I'm no longer apologizing for the natural
thing to do."

Meanwhile, he said, he passed up other acting roles to devote time to the
campaign. To earn money, he worked all night long at law firms, proofreading
legal briefs.

His finances have taken a beating, he said. Faxes alone have cost at least
$3,500 so far, not to mention the time he has spent running around the corner to
send them.

His companion, Sherry Hall, a public-school teacher, is the financial mainstay,
supporting the family in an apartment in Inwood, in upper Manhattan. Their
daughter, Tara, almost 10, attends the Manhattan Country School with some
financial aid.

Having reached the point that he addresses Mr. De Niro and Mr. Newman as "Dear
Bob" and "Dear Paul" in his letters, Mr. Hughes is seeking their help to wipe
away the $35,000 debt.

He has made so many contacts with celebrities and former Vietnam hands, he said,
that when he ran into Arthur Miller on the street one day, he thought he was
talking to David Halberstam.

Mr. Tu brought infusions of strong French coffee with sweetened condensed milk
that he poured into smoking glasses of ice.

Mr. Hughes said he longed to revisit Vietnam. One of his brothers recently
traveled there and found the old Shoeshine Boys home on Pham Ngu Lau Street was
crowded by hippie bikers and stalls selling novelties.

When lunch was over, Mr. Hughes headed uptown to pick up his daughter from
school. He had just had lunch, he told her, with someone he knew from Vietnam.

"Oh, no," Tara said with a groan, "not another long story."


NAME: Richard Hughes

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Richard Hughes: A sense of loyalty. (Dith Pran/The New York
Times) (pg. C1); Richard Hughes in Saigon in 1968 with Minh, one of 1,500 street
children his project helped. (Paul Stephanus) (pg. C4)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              71 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

China Sends Warships to Vietnam Oil Site

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 543 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, July 20


China has deployed two warships in the South China Sea to blockade a Vietnamese
oil rig built at a site claimed by both China and Vietnam, diplomats and oil
industry analysts said today.

The Chinese ships have already turned back at least one Vietnamese vessel that
was ferrying supplies to the rig, in a dramatic increase in a long-simmering
dispute between the two countries over oil rights in the South China Sea.

Diplomats and industry analysts warned that the blockade could quickly
deteriorate into another fire fight between the two countries. In March 1988,
Chinese and Vietnamese warships opened fire on each other in a similar dispute
in the South China Sea, a battle that lasted several hours and ended with the
sinking of three Vietnamese ships and the deaths of at least 70 sailors.

In a statement today, the Chinese Foreign Ministry said, "Vietnam's drilling
activities in this area have gravely encroached upon China's sovereignty and
maritime interests."

"The Chinese Government has demanded that the Vietnamese side stop the drilling
activities immediately," it added. "The Vietnamese side shall be held
responsible for the ensuing consequences."

A spokesman for the Vietnamese Embassy in Beijing, Nguyen Hong Hai, said embassy
officials were "very concerned" about reports of the blockade, although he said
he could not confirm that a Vietnamese vessel had been turned back by Chinese
ships.

Oil analysts said Vietnam established the small oil rig this year in an area of
the South China Sea that it calls the Wanan Bei block, about 280 miles off
southern Vietnam.

The Vietnamese claim, which China had earlier described as illegal, is being
developed by a consortium of foreign oil companies led by Mobil.

China, which claims sovereignty over almost the entire South China Sea even
though the sea extends nearly 1,500 miles from the Chinese mainland, awarded
drilling rights in the same area off the Vietnamese coast to a small American
oil company, the Crestone Energy Corporation of Denver. China said last year
that it would protect the company's activities by force if necessary.

A spokesman for the China National Offshore Oil Corporation, Crestone's
state-owned Chinese partner, said in an interview today that the two companies
"intended to go ahead soon with seismic surveys" in the region even though the
Vietnamese are planning to drill nearby.

Diplomats and industry analysts said it was unclear whether the Chinese warships
had used an explicit threat of force in turning around the Vietnamese vessel
that was taking supplies to the oil rig. The Chinese ships were reported to be
frigates, sent to the area late last month.

Vietnam and China, which resumed diplomatic relations in 1991 after nearly two
decades of conflict that included a brief border war in 1979, are only the
largest of the countries with competing claims to the waters of the South China
Sea.

The most important dispute in the region centers on the Spratly Islands, a tiny
chain of atolls and reefs in the South China Sea that are claimed, in part or in
full, by China, Vietnam and four other countries: Malaysia, the Philippines,
Taiwan and Brunei. Seismic studies suggest that the seabed around the islands
could be rich in oil.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of South China Sea

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              72 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 21, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The Gump From Hope

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


If a Presidential election were held today, the likely winner would be Forrest
Gump.

I say this only half-facetiously. Forrest Gump, a man with an I.Q. of 75 and a
child's open smile, is a fictional character played by Tom Hanks in a Hollywood
movie. But "Forrest Gump" -- the movie and the character -- is rapidly becoming
the cultural equivalent of a bandwagon candidate, as word of mouth, rather than
its mixed reviews, spreads its popularity.

Though even successful movies drop as much as 20 percent at the box office by
their second weekend, "Forrest Gump" didn't. It took in more money than "The
Lion King" last weekend and even started breathing down Arnold Schwarzenegger's
neck.

None of this would be astounding if "Forrest Gump" were typical summer escapist
fare. But it is a rather long movie whose story touches on grave matters, from
the carnage of war to AIDS. Its appeal cannot be appreciated by counting its
ticket sales but must be witnessed at your local movie house, where you are
likely to find a packed audience of almost reverential adult viewers, many of
whom are in tears by the final credits.

"Forrest Gump" is one of those movies, like "The Graduate" or "Rocky," that taps
into a deeper public mood than anyone imagined, its creators no doubt included.
In the audience's rapt response -- which I confess to sharing -- you just may
hear the yearnings of a large part of the electorate as Bill Clinton slides
toward midterm.

For viewers in their 30's or 40's, "Forrest Gump" pushes almost every
historical, cultural and sociological button. Through the high-tech miracle of
cinematic trompe l'oeil, its hero, an innocent drifting like Woody Allen's Zelig
or Kurt Vonnegut's Billy Pilgrim through post-World War II America, meets three
Presidents and John Lennon. He inadvertently plays a front-line role in the
court-ordered desegregation of the University of Alabama, both the Vietnam War
and the antiwar movement, and the capture of the Watergate burglars.

The woman Gump loves unrequitedly, meanwhile, marches on a parallel path through
almost every domestic ailment of her time: parental abuse, spouse abuse,
alcoholism and drug addiction. And always to the beat of a soundtrack -- already
climbing the charts -- that makes its own journey from "Hound Dog" through Tommy
James and the Shondells, "Mrs. Robinson," "The Age of Aquarius," Aretha, Mama
Cass, "Turn! Turn! Turn!" and the Doors.

"Forrest Gump" would not exert so strong a grip, however, if it were merely a
nostalgic tour of headlines, fads and golden oldies. It's the audience's
identification with the title character -- a man so blank we can project our own
dreams onto him -- that turns a clever, manipulative entertainment into
something more.

Who is Gump, exactly? He's a white Southerner raised by a salty but loving
single mother after the disappearance of his father. He instinctively believes
in racial and social justice. As a young man, he shakes hands with John Kennedy.
He feels everybody's pain.

One doesn't want to be too literal about these parallels, which may well be
unintentional. And no one would accuse Bill Clinton of being a slow-witted
cipher or a sexual naif like Gump. Yet what is likable about this fictional hero
(and magnified further by the irresistible Mr. Hanks) harks back to what many
saw, or thought they saw, in the boyish Mr. Clinton as he, like "Forrest Gump,"
caught fire with an American public hungry for inspiration two years ago.

Gump, after all, is a man who has lived through much of what his peers have
lived through. His America is shaped by assassins' bullets from Oswald's to
Squeaky's to Hinckley's -- all of which the movie duly notes -- and his personal
history reflects the often equally violent fallout of his era's proliferating
dysfunctional homes. But by the end he is neither bitter nor cynical but a
healing figure, eager to put his and the country's past behind him to embrace
idealism and hope.

Isn't that what many Clinton voters felt on election night 1992? It says much
about the reality that has set in since, as the White House blurs policies
stretching from health care to Haiti, that a Hollywood fantasy like "Forrest
Gump" is more successful than the President at arousing those powerful longings
in 1994.

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              73 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 23, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Navy Nominee Has Right Job Credentials

SECTION: Section 1;    Page 18;    Column 3;    Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 197 words


To the Editor:

"Political Correctness Infects the Pentagon" (Op-Ed, July 11) by James Webb,
former Secretary of the Navy, inaccurately describes the qualifications of Vice
Adm. Richard C. Macke, who has been nominated as Commander in Chief Pacific.

Dick Macke is a warrior, who served as an attack pilot in the Vietnam War. He is
a test pilot and a nuclear-trained engineer. He has had extensive commands at
sea and was one of the first junior officers to assume command of a carrier
aviation squadron.

Most recently, he served as director of the Joint Staff and as the Director of
Command, Control and Communications for the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Based upon
more than a decade and a half of experience as a Naval Reserve officer, I can
attest to Admiral Macke's abilities as a leader; he is brilliant, decisive and
disciplined.

There was nothing underhanded in the nomination process. The White House had
Admiral Macke's "package" because he was in line to succeed Adm. Stanley R.
Arthur as Vice Chief of Naval Operations. Like most public servants, Admiral
Macke did not earn his position by political connections.
LAWRENCE B. BRENNAN
New York, July 13, 1994

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              74 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 23, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Senator Hugh Scott, 93, Dies; Former Leader of Republicans

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 27;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, July 22


Hugh Scott, a moderate Republican from Pennsylvania who served in Congress for
34 years, the last 7 of them as Senate minority leader, died Thursday in a
retirement home in suburban Falls Church, Va. He was 93.

The cause of death was cardiac arrest, said his secretary, Janet Horgan.

The most trying episode of Mr. Scott's tenure as minority leader was the
Watergate scandal and the ensuing resignation of President Richard M. Nixon,
whom he supported almost until the end.

In December 1973, for instance, as the White House coverup of the break-in at
Democratic headquarters in the Watergate apartment complex the year before began
to unravel, Mr. Scott urged Mr. Nixon to make public extensive audiotapes of
Oval Office conversations, convinced that the tapes would clear the President of
wrongdoing. Mr. Nixon resisted, however, and the tapes' subsequent disclosure,
by court order, confirmed a coverup.

Finally, on Aug. 7, 1974, with Mr. Nixon's impeachment at hand and his
conviction in the Senate all but certain, Mr. Scott, along with Senator Barry
Goldwater and Representative John Rhodes, the House Republican leader, went to
the White House to tell the President that his Administration could not be
saved. Mr. Nixon announced his resignation the next day.

Breakthrough for Moderates

Mr. Scott was elected minority leader in September 1969 in a tight three-way
race, the first moderate Republican to achieve the party's Senate leadership
since World War II. He maintained good relations with Republican conservatives
throughout his tenure, saying at one point, "I will continue to deny that I am a
liberal."

Nevertheless, he opposed President Nixon's Supreme Court nomination of Judge
Clement F. Haynsworth Jr. and the Administration's efforts to modify the Voting
Rights Act.

And, having supported the American military engagement in Vietnam during the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, he became markedly dovish under Mr. Nixon.
At one point, he even advocated a unilateral American cease-fire in Vietnam, a
position he later moderated.

Hugh Doggett Scott Jr. was born on Nov. 11, 1900, in Fredericksburg, Va., on an
estate that had belonged to George Washington. A great-grandfather had fought in
the Confederate Army with a daring squadron under John Hunt Morgan known as the
Morgan Raiders, a fact that Mr. Scott would employ to endear himself with
conservative Southerners once he went to Congress.

After receiving a bachelor's degree from Randolph Macon College and a law degree
from the University of Virginia, Mr. Scott moved to Philadelphia, where in 1926
he became an assistant district attorney.

In 1940, he was elected to Congress from Reading, Pa., and, with an interruption
for wartime duty as a lieutenant in the Navy, served eight terms in the House.
He also served briefly, in 1948-49, as Republican national chairman, a reward
from Thomas E. Dewey for having helped Mr. Dewey wrap up the party's 1948
Presidential nomination.

Mr. Scott won election to the Senate in 1958 and remained there until his
retirement in 1977. In 1976, as his career neared an end, the Senate undertook
an ethics inquiry into accusations that he had received payment from lobbyists
for the Gulf Oil Corporation. He acknowledged having received $45,000 but said
that the money had been legal campaign contributions and that he had not kept it
for personal use. The Senate Select Committee on Standards and Conduct voted 5
to 1 not to take action against him.

For years Mr. Scott collected Chinese art objects from the Tang dynasty, and in
1967 he published a book, "The Golden Age of Chinese Art." A confirmed smoker,
he boasted a collection of 500 pipes. Bespectacled, portly, with slicked-back
hair and a mustache, he was easy to pick out in a crowd of legislators.

Mr. Scott's wife of 63 years, the former Marian Huntington Chase, died in 1987.
A daughter, Marian Scott Concannon, survives.

NAME: Hugh Scott

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hugh Scott (Associated Press, 1974)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              76 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Method And Madness;
TRIALS AND ERRORS

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words


Science and the law are two systems of inquiry that diligently seek truth. It's
distressing enough when they arrive at discordant answers. But in a number of
recent cases, courts have endorsed legal theories of causation that merit
credence only where the earth is flat.

The latest is that of silicone breast implants. Several manufacturers have
agreed in principle to pay $4.2 billion to women who believe they have been
harmed by the devices. You might suppose the courts had found, by a
preponderance of evidence, that breast implants are iniquitously harmful.

But there was no such evidence. Epidemiological studies are only now being
completed. And the first three to be reported find no clear sign of a link
between silicone breast implants and disease. It's true such studies should have
been done years ago by the companies and plastic surgeons who profited from the
devices; that lapse -- not proof of harm -- is why in 1992 the Food and Drug
Administration required cosmetic use of the implants to cease. Nor does the
present round of studies carry the statistical weight to rule out the
possibility that some rare disorders could be made worse by leaking silicone.

But a $4 billion settlement in advance of any proof of harm makes the courts
look a little hasty, a trifle contemptuous of ascertainable scientific fact. And
that's not free money the tort lawyers have extorted: the insurance companies
certainly plan to recover their share in stiffer premiums, which in turn will
mean higher prices or lost jobs.

So how did courts ever come to stray so far from the truth, at least as it is
understood by scientists? The fact is, science and law have such entirely
different touchstones for truth, it's surprising they're not at loggerheads more
often.

LAWYERS BELIEVE TRUTH EMERGES FROM THE contest between tenacious advocates and
their credibility to a jury, and that the best guarantee against spurious
scientific evidence is the cross-examination of witnesses and careful
instruction by the judge as to the burden of proof. But the way scientists see
it, some truths cannot be determined inside a courtroom. A single case is the
equivalent of a mere anecdote, utterly useless in deciding cause and effect. The
truth does not lie in men's minds but must be sought by cross-examining nature
through rigorously objective trials.

Consider an egregious example of this cultural clash, in which a Federal judge
in Atlanta, sitting without a jury, ruled in 1986 that a contraceptive
spermicide made by Ortho Pharmaceutical was the cause of a baby's birth defects.
In awarding some $5 million in damages, the judge ignored the many clinical
trials and the scientific community's clearly expressed consensus that
spermicidal foams do not cause birth defects; what mattered to him was attitude.
"The Court paid close attention to each expert's demeanor and tone," United
States District Court Judge Marvin Shoob wrote in his decision. The companies'
experts being deficient in the demeanor department, he found for the plaintiffs.
Trial by ordeal worked sometimes, too.

For giving the Government a hard time over Iraqgate, Judge Shoob has been
likened by my colleague William Safire to a latter-day John Sirica, the
Watergate judge. But on the humbler matter of spermicides Judge Shoob led the
whole Federal judiciary into a swamp of error; a Court of Appeals agreed that he
had "found sufficient evidence of causation in a legal sense," and the Supreme
Court refused to review the case.

The litigation over Agent Orange opened another eerie chasm between legal and
scientific notions of causation. Vietnam veterans sued for damages, alleging ill
health from dioxin, minuscule amounts of which contaminated the defoliant used
during the war. Yet pilots who flew spraying missions and were drenched with
Agent Orange every day have shown no pattern of unusual illness. Ground troops
were exposed to far less.

Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the United States District Court in Brooklyn told the
veterans' attorneys they had not proved causation, but that was just to get them
to settle. Then he convinced the Agent Orange manufacturers that payment of a
mere $180 million would let them walk away from an avalanche of litigation.
Creative justice, maybe; so was Robin Hood's.

Bendectin, a drug to relieve morning sickness, provided another instance of the
courts' failure to let truth suffice as a defense. Birth defects occur naturally
in 2 to 3 percent of births, and inevitably the mothers of some of these
children have taken Bendectin. Numerous scientific studies show Bendectin does
not cause birth defects, but many women sued anyway. The manufacturer won most
of the cases against it but quit making the drug: the costs of litigation were
insupportable.

IN EACH OF THESE THREE CASES -- spermicides, Agent Orange and Bendectin -- a
scientific consensus built on many careful studies held that no harm had
occurred, but courts punished the manufacturers almost as severely as if it had.
What has gone wrong? Why don't the courts seem to respect the way scientists
ascertain truth?

Part of the problem, of course, lies with scientists and doctors. There is no
shortage of hired-gun experts who will depose as required. The scientific
community does not excommunicate these hacks, as they deserve, nor does it make
its own consensus-forming processes very clear to outsiders.

Understandably enough, the courts have come to regard scientific and medical
experts as mere advocates, whose defects and biases can be brought out by
cross-examination. And courts have to make a decision: they can't enter the
scientists' favorite verdict; more research is needed.

A year ago, in a Bendectin case known as Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals,
the United States Supreme Court decided that Federal judges should act as
gatekeepers of proffered scientific testimony and determine, through tests much
the same as those used by scientists, whether the evidence's "underlying
reasoning or methodology is scientifically valid."

Under the Daubert rule, judges have started to exclude evidence not generally
accepted by the scientific community, like Bendectin birth defect claims,
polygraphs and certain psychiatric testimony. That's a giant leap toward closing
the gap between the two cultures in their mutual search for truth. Too bad the
breast implant settlement seems to have escaped the new harrow of reason, but
maybe it's the last weed in the field.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              77 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

July 17-23: Whole World May Watch;
Democrats Choose Chicago For 1996 Convention

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Week In Review Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


The Vietnam War is long over. There's a new Richard Daley in the Chicago Mayor's
office. The city even has a gleaming new Comiskey Park.

But the question still lingers: Is Chicago -- and the Democratic Party -- still
haunted by the violence that ruined the party's convention in 1968 and marred
the city's reputation?

The answer may be yes. But Democratic officials said last week they will not be
deterred and that the party will hold its 1996 national convention in Chicago.
If the gathering goes smoothly, the city may reclaim its reputation as the hub
of major party conventions.

When Americans think of Chicago, many recall the images of policemen attacking
anti-war protesters. And the press is certain to replay those images when the
Democrats meet.

Still, Democrats think the distractions will not outweigh the advantages in a
state that is critical to President Clinton's re-election -- and where he owes
political debts to Mayor Richard M. Daley and his brother, William, a lawyer who
helped coordinate the drive last year for the passage of the North American Free
Trade Agreement.

"Chicago's a great choice only because it's in a make-or-break state for the
President," said Brian Lunde, a Democratic strategist with ties to the city.
RICHARD L. BERKE

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Daley.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              78 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Asian Group Is Willing to Include Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, July 23


Six Southeast Asian countries agreed today to take a more forceful role on
security and economic cooperation and said they were ready to accept Vietnam as
a member of their association.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations -- which is known as Asean and
consists of Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines, Singapore and Brunei
-- ended two days of annual ministerial talks with a message that their booming
economies could be a joint force for regional peace and stability.

A step toward that goal is an inaugural 18-nation meeting on Monday of the
so-called Asean Regional Forum, which brings together Asean and big powers like
the United States and China. It will focus on security issues.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              79 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MAKING IT WORK;
Listening to the Numbers

BYLINE: By RANDY KENNEDY

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 3;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words


ROUGHLY every five years now for the last quarter of a century, a small band of
social scientists has quietly fanned out across the New York area on an unusual
detective mission: Tracking down the same 668 black men and women from central
Harlem, now in their 30's and 40's, to find out how their lives -- and
particularly their health -- have fared.

Sometimes, tracing these lives that began in one of New York's sickest, and most
medically underserved, neighborhoods, the interviewers' findings have been grim.
And always the results have been sifted through Dr. Ann F. Brunswick, who has,
in turn, created statistical portraits from these lives and shared them with the
world.

"Sometimes, in looking through the responses, you can sort of hear that
interview going on, hear the person talking," said Dr. Brunswick, the project's
director, who sometimes still refers to the now middle-aged subjects as her
"kids."

Dr. Brunswick, a senior research scientist at the School of Public Health at
Columbia University, recalled a remark by one young man in his first interview
that he wanted to be "a veterinarian or a psychiatrist." Years later, Dr.
Brunswick said, she saw the responses to the latest round of questions (which
are tabulated using only identification numbers to preserve anonymity) for a man
she believed to be the same person.

"I saw then that he appeared to be having problems with his family and he had
dropped out of school," she said. Several years later, researchers found that he
had been killed -- as have 15 others in the group. In all, 68 are dead; the
most, 17, from AIDS.

For others, life's challenges have proved more surmountable. One participant
said at age 13 that his major problem was being overweight, and that "he wanted
to be skinny." At the very least, she knows, he grew up to be a lawyer. Others
have become doctors, business owners and entertainers.

With its fifth revisit completed early this year, the study has now become "one
of the most significant pieces that has been done in public health in this
city," particularly for its emphasis on a traditionally elusive population, said
Dr. Robert Fullilove, an associate dean at the School of Public Health. Through
Dr. Brunswick's writings, it has also become nationally noted; last fall, the
discovery that 8.4 percent of tested participants were infected with H.I.V. (and
that most did not know it) garnered attention for its first-time documentation
of infection rates in a minority neighborhood.

"To the degree that she's had remarkable success tracking folks for 25 years,
it's a textbook case" of a long-term study, said Dr. Fullilove, who is in the
midst of his own study of 1,000 Harlem residents' health patterns. "The biggest
thing we worry about in New York City is the rapidity with which change occurs."

Long-term studies like this one, he said, "allow us to have some fixed point
around which we can make comparisons." Ultimately, he said, this and similar,
though shorter-term studies, can help mold more effective health-care plans.

The participants were selected in 1967-68 through samplings of 12- to
17-year-olds in central Harlem for what was meant to be a one-time study of
black adolescent health problems -- a new concern then. The 351 young men and
317 women were given physical exams and asked detailed health questions, framed
with the help of advisers familiar with the Harlem community. The ensuing years
brought many successes, but also drug use, street violence (and later AIDS), and
by the 1970's, there was a recognition that the initial data could provide a
rich basis for plotting the impact of these epidemics. In 1975, often relying on
little more than old telephone numbers, addresses, welfare and military records
to find the 668, the study began anew.

From 1987 through 1993, the study got more than $3.5 million from the National
Institute on Drug Abuse; it is to receive $1.4 million more through 1996, the
agency says.

Through the years in her cramped, cluttered office, Dr. Brunswick, 68, who lives
in Riverdale, has herself become a fixed point for the study's participants,
though very few have met her. Being part of the study, she said, "gives a lot of
people who have felt shut out of the power structure all their lives a real part
in helping do something important for their community."

But she tells of her surprise when one participant, using the survey letterhead,
tracked her down at Columbia. ("Finding my office without being told how is
quite a feat.") He was moving to New Jersey and wanted to know if the
interviewers would be able to find him. Another, now in prison, wrote to thank
her for letting him be a part of "where we've been and possibly where we're
heading."

Warmed though she is by the exchanges, she does not encourage them. "As a social
scientist," she said, "my basic orientation is to say, 'What does this mean?' "
Familiarity is "just not part of the role."

Dr. Brunswick had just received her Ph.D. from Columbia when she joined up with
the study's creator, Dr. Eric Josephson, whose interest had been sparked by a
perception that many young black men were being rejected from service in
Vietnam. He left after the first data collection, but she remained to see those
findings used, among other things, to help plan a youth health-care unit at
Harlem Hospital. Since then she has published some 50 papers on aspects of the
findings, among them adolescent health-care attitudes, drug and alcohol abuse,
high blood pressure, smoking and mental health.

"Those who had been born earlier in the 50's had in some ways poorer life
outcomes," she observed, adding that "social changes that improved lives" after
the 60's, like legalized abortion and easier access to City College, "had more
of an impact on the women than the men" in the study.

To maintain consistency, she explained, only those still living within 60 miles
of the city are kept in the study. Those who move back are urged to take part
again.

She speaks in "waves" -- Wave 1 being the first survey of 668; Wave 2, the
1975-76 interviews of 536; Wave 3, 1983-84, with 426 interviews; Wave 4,
1989-90, 364 visits, and Wave 5, 1993-94, when 347 took part. She will begin
publishing those results this summer.

Looking back at what has become her self-defined life's work, Dr. Brunswick does
express some less-than-scientific feelings.

"It keeps me a much more aware and sensitive person," she said. Then, back in
character, she added: "We're looking for social phenomena that impact on
people's lives. There's been nothing that's better to look at."

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: For 25 years, Dr. Ann F. Brunswick has statistically followed
the health and lives of a groups of black men and women from central Harlem.
(Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times)

Chart: "PLOTTING THE COURSE OF 668 LIVES: Facts From the Young Adult Health
Project"

WHEN FIRST EXAMINED as teen-agers, participants had eight health problems for
every one they reported.

PROBLEMS WITH TEETH and gums have ranked as the No. 1 health affliction for men
and women; weight control is next.

RELIGION WAS HELPFUL in deterring drug abuse, particularly for men who had
strong exposure as adolescents.

68 HAVE DIED: 17 from AIDS, 16 from homicide, 12 from drug- or alcohol-related
causes.

EDUCATION: Of 364 studied in 1989, most had high school degrees.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              80 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MIDTOWN;
Station's Sculpture: Time, Always Running, Running

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 6;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


With tens of thousand of commuters herding through every day, Pennsylvania
Station is a challenging site for a piece of sculpture. The potential audience
is enormous, but it dashes by with scant time for art appreciation.

Enter Maya Lin, the designer of the Vietnam war memorial in Washington. The
Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Arts for Transit program chose her to
create a piece for the newly renovated Long Island Rail Road terminal.

Ms. Lin confronted its temporal preoccupation by designing a timepiece.

"The parameters were to do a piece that wouldn't get in the way or obstruct
anyone, that people couldn't touch or sit on," Ms. Lin said. "I still wanted to
engage people, even without physical contact, which led me to the use of light
for a visual connection."

"Eclipsed Time" is the title, and she has described it as an indoor sundial. Its
parts were fabricated in Long Island City, Queens, and since May 2 workers have
been installing them in a ceiling recess near the railroad's ticket windows. The
finished piece will be unveiled in a couple of weeks. The total cost is
$224,000, which covered revisions required by changes in the station's
renovation.

The sculpture has three layers. Uppermost is a dark ceiling panel with hundreds
of fiber-optic pinpoints of light arrayed in a starry backfield. The lower layer
is a 14-foot-wide flat disk of frosted plate glass.

Sandwiched between is a flat aluminum disk. It slides slowly back and forth, its
shadow moving across the glass disk, suggesting lunar phases. The shadow also
moves across notches in the glass marking 15-minute intervals, with the hours
numbered. The shadow completes the course every 24 hours.

Ms. Lin says she hopes that commuters will glance up at "Eclipsed Time" for a
mental pause from their urban rush to gain a different sense of their place in
time and the universe. "It's very conceptual," she said. "Maybe it will let
people slow down a little and not worry so much."

For traditionalists, the railroad's adjacent new 34th Street entrance displays
an old-fashioned four-sided clock with Roman numerals, recovered from the
original Pennsylvania Station.   BRUCE LAMBERT

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maya Lin, the sculptor, above right and atop scaffolding, above
left, overseeing the installation of "Eclipsed Time."; Maya Lin examining the
unassembled sculpture in a workshop in Long Island City. (Photographs by Jill
Krementz )

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              81 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TAKING THE CHILDREN;
A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul

BYLINE: By KENNETH C. DAVIS

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 236 words



Forrest Gump
Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Sally Field
Directed by Robert Zemeckis
PG-13 142 minutes

In a film with echoes of both "Candide" and "Zelig," Forrest Gump (Mr. Hanks) is
a good-hearted naif who witnesses the major events in America since the 1960's.
During his extraordinary life, the gentle, simple-minded Gump becomes a football
star, a Vietnam hero, a "Ping-Pong ambassador" to China, a running guru and a
shrimp-fishing millionaire, all by accident. A sweeping view of recent America,
the film shows three Presidents and such events as George Wallace's challenging
school desegregation and Watergate, all filtered through the world according to
Gump.

VIOLENCE Both large-scale (realistic Vietnam battle scenes) and small-scale,
though never gruesome or gratuitous.

SEX Sprinkled heavily throughout, but usually out of view. Even a significant
love scene stays under the sheets.

PROFANITY It occasionally comes in large doses (a boot-camp drill instructor
elevates it to an art form). Still, the language is never jarringly coarse.
For Which Children?

AGES 3-7 No.

AGES 8-10 Too ambitious, except for the most sophisticated preadolescents.

AGES 11 and up Historical references (Elvis, hippies, assassinations) may need
explanation, but Gump's humor and the film's special effects should strike a
chord with younger teen-agers.
   KENNETH C. DAVIS

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              82 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TAKING THE CHILDREN;
A Tough Client, An Angelic Host And a Simple Soul

BYLINE: By PATRICIA S. McCORMICK

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 25;  Column 4;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 225 words



Woodstock
Joan Baez, Joe Cocker, Jefferson Airplane, many others
Directed by Michael Wadleigh
R 240 minutes

Taking your teen-ager to see the 25th-anniversary re-release of the original,
with new material added, may help explain those old pictures of you and your
spouse wearing love beads and hip huggers. This four-hour granddaddy of music
videos offers historic rock clips and captures the naivete and idealism of the
era. If your children see this film, they will realize that both Generation X
and the Woodstock Generation dig flowing skirts, long hair and Jimi Hendrix;
then they will probably ask to borrow your old Janis Joplin records.

VIOLENCE None.

SEX Some bare breasts, skinny-dipping and sexual situations.

PROFANITY Plenty.

FOOTNOTE The film romanticizes drug use, especially marijuana, but it doesn't
overlook the hazards. (Be prepared to reveal whether you inhaled.) The film also
offers some priceless period vignettes. The most poignant portrait is of the
Port-o-San man who arrives to proudly ply his trade, noting that he has one son
at the concert and one in Vietnam.

For Which Children?
AGES 12 and up Teen-agers (but note the R rating) will see people now their
parents' age eschewing materialism and doing acid instead of upholding
capitalism and doing antacid.   P. S. McC.

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              83 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Stars at High School Reunion

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: HOT SPRINGS, Ark., July 24


Even when polls are sagging and problems are multiplying, being President has
some virtues.

Consider its advantages at a high-school reunion, that wallflower's revenge and
balding man's nightmare. As he ventured here on Saturday night among faces from
his long-ago past, Bill Clinton (Hot Springs High's class of 1964) could at
least count on not being asked once what he was doing these days.

Thirty years after his graduation, the boy who sometimes thought of himself as
"the fat kid in the band" returned here as a man who has certainly succeeded. He
not only has a job and most of his hair, but the girls who knew him way back
when say he is also probably sleeker and certainly better looking.

Hot Springs High School is closed now, the red brick building abandoned. But
over cold roast beef and corn chips, as a disk jockey played dance music in the
hotel ballroom where they had attended two proms, Mr. Clinton and more than 200
former classmates had a chance to look back on the days before they became
middle-aged baby boomers.

Old Friends

At the reunion was Carolyn Staley, a close friend of Mr. Clinton who was his
next-door neighbor and who beat him in an election for senior class secretary.
There were David Leopoulos and Joe Newman, his other two best pals, with whom he
bowled and played jazz saxophone; they have remained close for years. There was
even Mary Jo Rodgers, his senior prom date, who manages the gift shop at the
historic Arlington Hotel, where the reunion was held. She says she was so
confident then about Mr. Clinton's future that she wrote, "See you in the White
House," in his high school yearbook.

Mr. Clinton, who wore a sleek dark suit and star-spangled tie to the gathering,
acknowledged to reporters here that he had not been a "jock" in high school. As
a math whiz, leading Latin scholar and all-state saxophone player, he said, he
might even have been considered "a nerd." But that did not stop him from being
the one everyone else wanted to see at the party, even if it meant passing
through metal detectors. His wife, Hillary, who has been making appearances
around the country campaigning for his health plan, did not attend.

Mr. Clinton boasted that he had been back every five years since graduation for
his reunions, and he stayed at the party until 2:30 this morning to laugh and
talk with every last one of his classmates. But while one friend who dates back
to elementary school, Mauria Aspell of Hot Springs, described Mr. Clinton as
sometimes seeming pensive, it was plain from the moment he arrived at the
airport here that he found this homecoming particularly welcome.

"I get very homesick," he told a local reporter after he arrived, "homesick for
my friends and for the place and also for the ability to communicate directly
with people."

Mr. Clinton has returned to Arkansas 10 times since he took office 18 months
ago, but many trips have been made in sadness. He returned three times to watch
over and then bury his father-in-law, then again to bury a friend and aide,
Vincent W. Foster Jr., who committed suicide a year ago. In January, he came
home to Hot Springs to bury his mother, Virginia Kelley, then returned several
weeks later to help her widowed husband sort her possessions.

Of Mr. Clinton's 325 classmates, 18 are now dead. Four were killed in Vietnam,
and the President attended a service for them here on Saturday morning.

'A Great Reunion'

Even with headaches over health care, Haiti, Rwanda and Whitewater hanging over
Mr. Clinton's weekend, this visit had something of the carefree spirit that
homecomings are supposed to have. At one private midday gathering Saturday, Mr.
Clinton was even said to have donned a Clinton mask and joined in the
karaoke-style singing of vintage songs like "Stand by Me" and "Runaround Sue."

He and his friends headed next for a heaping summer-afternoon feast at McLard's
Bar-B-Que, a long-favored joint owned by the father of yet another classmate,
Brenda Thompson. Before the full-scale reunion, he joined another small group at
a reception of his own; afterward, he stayed up until 4 A.M. playing hearts with
more friends in his suite.

"It was a great reunion," he said today before departing for Washington to
prepare for a meeting between the leaders of Jordan and Israel.

The reunion was closed to reporters, but those who were there said Mr. Clinton,
who has spent so many evenings lately at the head tables of political fund
raisers, seemed perfectly content to be among the throng.

But even those who closed their eyes and listened to the small talk would have
found it impossible not to notice just how different was one of the
soon-to-be-48-year-olds in their midst. "I was afraid when we arranged to have
the meeting between King Hussein and Prime Minister Rabin on Monday that I
wouldn't be able to come," Mr. Clinton was saying at one point on Saturday, "but
I worked it out."

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the Hot Springs, Ark., airport, President Clinton greeted
Michael Whitacre, the 4-year-old son of a former aide, Susie Whitacre of Little
Rock. The President was in town to attend his 30th high school reunion.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              84 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

What's The Uproar About?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker;   Tom Wicker, a former New York Times columnist, has
completed a book on race relations in America.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words

DATELINE: ROCHESTER, Vt.


Democratic leaders on Capitol Hill will gingerly dip their toes into Whitewater
tomorrow when the House Banking Committee opens hearings on President Clinton's
involvement in that decades-old real estate collapse in Arkansas and its ties,
if any, to the savings and loan scandal.

The press has been pounding on the Whitewater story for months. Republican
politicians and the fundamentalist right wing, meanwhile, have been tirelessly
accusing the President, usually without evidence, of everything from infidelity
to financial shenanigans and murder. Some of these charges, too, have found
their way into print and broadcast news.

So it's on the press -- already ranked with Congress at the bottom of the
national popularity scale -- that many Clinton defenders have focused their ire.
Give the President a chance, they cry. Get off his back. Stop crippling his
Administration. There's no evidence of wrongdoing in Whitewater, so why the
fuss?

These plaintive cries echo the complaints of Republicans 20 years ago, when
President Richard M. Nixon was taking press, public and Congressional heat for
the Watergate break-ins, which led to his resignation.

Watergate and Mr. Nixon's departure, of course, were among the major events that
have deeply influenced the press's sense of itself and profoundly affected the
public's once adulatory view of Presidents.

Another such event was the war in Vietnam, causing Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson
and Nixon to be widely seen as devious and unresponsive. Mr. Nixon's cover-up of
Watergate illegalities, Mr. Johnson's so-called credibility gap and the
persistence of both Presidents in waging an unpopular, losing war, formed the
genesis of today's public distrust of and disdain for politicians, including
Presidents.

That public attitude alone might explain press concentration on Mr. Clinton's
supposed derelictions. If fewer Americans believe that Presidents should have
immunity from criticism of any but their official conduct, more are likely to
relish, even believe, stories calling into question the personal probity of the
most closely watched person -- the biggest celebrity -- in the land.

The lowering of the Presidency, however, was only one of many developments that
greatly changed press and public attitudes. Only a few weeks before John F.
Kennedy was murdered in 1963, the networks began the 30-minute nightly newscasts
that are now the "front page" from which most Americans get their news.

Newspapers and news magazines, too, have contributed to the transformation of
the American press since the 1960's. It was newspaper coverage that exposed Gary
Hart's sexual adventures and ended his Presidential hopes in 1988 -- a long step
into private regions that the press, until then, had left mostly unexplored.

The astonishing growth of television into something like a national nervous
system was far more significant. TV, after all, has the unmatched ability to
transfix the entire nation, whether for the Kennedy assassination, the moon
landing or O. J. Simpson's preliminary hearing on murder charges.

TV news in 1963 and for many years thereafter was a sort of "loss leader,"
primarily a public service expected to earn the networks prestige rather than
profits. That has changed significantly. After more conventional business
interests took control -- General Electric at NBC, the real estate magnate
Laurence Tisch at CBS, Cap Cities at ABC -- news programs were also expected to
make money, which demanded higher viewer ratings.

The end of high-quality, low-rated documentaries followed, as well as the rise
of news broadcasts focused on crime, sex, scandal and celebrities willing to
bare their private lives. All the better, some news executives seemed to think,
if the latter could be linked to any of the former. The values of privacy --
even a President's -- quickly fell victim to public appetites and TV's
willingness to satisfy them.

The same years brought the astonishing development of communications technology
-- TV satellites, for instance, that brought to viewers the Persian Gulf war, a
coup put down in Moscow, a revolt in Tiananmen Square, as they happened.

Cable TV, the VCR and the satellite dish gave Americans almost limitless viewing
options, putting even greater pressures on broadcasters to present entertaining
programs -- even if trivial or salacious -- that would attract viewers away from
other choices.

Meanwhile, politicians, including Presidents, became adept at using the vast
audience and impact of TV to promote themselves and their policies. Almost any
public event, significant or not -- a hearing on a Supreme Court nominee, a
President throwing up at a dinner table in Japan, Yasir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin
shaking hands, Bill and Hillary Rodham Clinton rebutting charges that he
philandered -- could be seen by millions. Predictably, viewers now demand to see
everything. Networks, syndicates and cable eagerly respond, competing to put on
programs that viewers are thought to want -- particularly those dealing with
sex, scandal and crime.

Amy Fisher, Joey Buttafuoco, the Menendez brothers have become household names.
Otherwise bona fide news programs all too often have been forced by ratings
pressures down the same slippery slope. Every twist and turn of the forthcoming
O. J. Simpson trial will be broadcast on every medium, by popular demand.

Newspapers, even if they wanted to, can hardly ignore stories on which TV
lavishes so much time and technology. But newspapers and magazines, having for
many years fought a mostly losing battle for supremacy in the news field, are as
eager for readers as TV is for viewers. To sustain readership and appeal to
advertisers, many publications have followed TV into more explicit concentration
on sex and sensation.

The more marked aggression of today's press results from wider fields of
investigation and reporting, combined with journalists' changed perceptions.
Watergate not only made Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein famous, it taught less
well-known reporters that even a President can be a wrongdoer and that no such
possibility is too small to investigate. It also left a bad taste in the mouths
of journalists who believed the press generally had not dug into Watergate with
sufficient vigor.

Later, reporters and editors became ruefully aware of their failures to push
investigation of what became the Iran-contra scandal, first exposed in a foreign
publication. Many, if not most, are convinced that Presidents Ronald Reagan and
George Bush escaped just retribution only by mounting a "stonewall" defense that
the press failed to penetrate.

Similarly, perhaps worse, widespread savings and loan lootings went mostly
unnoticed in the years when press exposure might have prevented the worst
outrages.

Many journalists are therefore determined not to ignore or slight again what
most deeply believe: that they have a constitutional responsibility to inform
the public about the kind of corruption and deceit that might be involved in the
Whitewater case.

Paradoxically, even such worthy determination can lead reporters into what would
have been considered excess before private behavior became a target of inquiry
accepted by many journalists and much of the public.

The new aggressiveness of the press is not a problem for President Clinton
alone. Overwrought press coverage conceivably could lead to such extremes as the
dismissal of charges against O. J. Simpson. Worthy people shrink or withdraw
from public life, for fear of losing their privacy. Significant news may be
buried among sensational stories, to the detriment of public policy and
democratic choice.

Deplorably, some of that has happened already, arousing familiar cries for
censorship or other restraints on the press. But the pertinent questions are too
seldom asked. Do Americans prefer the kind of press that used to assume
Presidents to be too powerful or too virtuous, or both, to be investigated and
held responsible? Or do they want a press that pursues Whitewater and other
controversies where they may lead -- perhaps at a severe cost to privacy?

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              85 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
World Without Power

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


Rwanda is many things: a human catastrophe, a testament to the danger of ethnic
hatred, a devastating symbol of man's inhumanity to man. But beyond all that it
is a sign of the New World Disorder: a world in which no great power takes
responsibility for preventing a descent into chaos.

When an organized group of militant Hutus began slaughtering Rwanda's Tutsi
minority in April, no outside power was prepared to intervene. Pleas by the
Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, got no response.

In the end the human tragedy was so great that the United States Government has
felt compelled to mount an enormous relief effort. It will cost many times what
earlier intervention might have, not to mention the cost in Rwandan lives.

There were reasons for the Clinton Administration's disinclination to intervene
in April or May. Rwanda is remote from American military bases and outside
traditional areas of American interest. Separating the parties in so savage a
civil conflict would have been difficult.

But there was plainly another element in the American decision to stay out. That
was the now ingrained reluctance to use the armed forces of the United States in
any situation where they may suffer casualties.

Edward N. Luttwak, a conservative analyst at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies in Washington, discusses the new military shyness in the
current issue of Foreign Affairs. His article, brief and pungent, is essential
reading for both liberals and conservatives.

In Somalia, Mr. Luttwak notes, the death of 18 professional soldiers -- who
presumably went into the military knowing that they might have to risk their
lives -- forced a total change in U.S. policy. In Haiti, a handful of thugs on
the docks frightened off an American vessel; the impression of U.S. weakness
bedevils the Haitian problem to this day.

What we are seeing, Mr. Luttwak argues, is a "refusal to tolerate combat
casualties." And the phenomenon is not confined to the United States or other
democracies where television images may drive public opinion. The old,
totalitarian Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan but then acted with extraordinary
timidity -- for fear of public reaction against casualties.

The two recent cases where significant powers risked sizable casualties were the
Falklands war and the Persian Gulf war. In the first, Margaret Thatcher's
leadership took Britain into a romanticized echo of empire. In the gulf there
were real interests, and President Bush effectively mobilized opinion behind the
war.

But the gulf war story suggests that we are now willing to risk casualties only
for a large and dramatized cause. And that, Mr. Luttwak says, "rules out the
most efficient use of force -- early and on a small scale to prevent
escalation." He might have been writing, presciently, about Rwanda.

What is the reason for the new sensitivity about possible casualties? Mr.
Luttwak's theory is that it reflects the smaller size of families in the
developed world. In earlier centuries people had many children, some of whom
were expected to die young anyway, so death in battle was more acceptable.

That may be a psychological explanation. But there is a more immediate political
one in this country: Vietnam. We fought a war that more and more Americans came
to regard as a mistake, costing thousands of lives even after we decided to get
out.

Since Vietnam the Pentagon has been hypersensitive about public opinion. Under
Gen. Colin Powell as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, it adopted a doctrine that
allows the use of American forces in only extremely narrow circumstances.
Military leaders have become the biggest resisters to the use of force.

Those of us who came to oppose the Vietnam war naturally applaud the
cautiousness of military leaders. But like any doctrine, this one can be
overdone. Right now, for example, Zairean officers are demanding payments to let
relief planes for Rwandan refugees land. The United States should use its muscle
without hesitation to stop such a practice by the corrupt forces of President
Mobutu Sese Seko.

The United States is the one remaining superpower. If it cannot use force to
prevent disasters, then the world is truly condemned to chaos. And Americans,
Edward Luttwak writes, will have to learn how to be blind -- "to passively
ignore avoidable tragedies and horrific atrocities."

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              86 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Unicef Tending to the Children Who Survived War in Rwanda

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, July 25


An estimated 250,000 children have been killed and more than 150,000 have been
separated from their parents in the massacres and the renewal of the civil war
in Rwanda, the United Nations Children's Fund said today.

The United Nations agency is working with other aid organizations to reunite
families and help children without relatives find alternative homes, said Marie
de la Soudiere, a child specialist with the agency, known as Unicef.

She emphasized that the figures were rough estimates. She said the agency
estimated that 500,000 people had been killed in Rwanda and that half of these
were under 16, but precise figures are impossible to determine.

Emotional Healing

She spent five weeks in Rwanda and in refugee camps in neighboring countries.
She left Rwanda two weeks ago, before the exodus of more than one million
Rwandans, most of them members of the majority Hutu ethnic group, to Zaire.

Another Unicef priority is to help the surviving children overcome the trauma of
the bloodshed, she said.

"It is not just that these children are separated from their parents," she said.
"These children have gone through horrible, horrible experiences and this is
compounded by the fact they are not basically being taken care of on an
emotional level."

The Unicef child specialist, who has worked with traumatized children in Bosnia,
Cambodia and Vietnam, said the primary concern was to restore a semblance of
normality to the children's lives.

"They need a routine, a predictability of life in which they can begin to
recover," she said. She said the United Nations planned to set up schools both
in Rwanda and in refugee camps as part of this healing process.

Building New Families

Some 14,000 unaccompanied children are being cared for in makeshift child
centers in Rwanda or in refugee camps outside the country, Unicef estimates. The
majority of the estimated 150,000 children who were separated from their parents
are being cared for by relatives or by other families.

Relief organizations discourage Western families from adopting orphans,
believing they are best cared for in their own environment.

The agencies hope to help set up small family units of up to 10 children of
different ages with people who would act as parents to take care of them.


LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              87 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Grocery Art Fans Anger Against Illegal Aliens

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: SAN RAFAEL, Calif., July 23


Earlier this month, checkers at an upscale supermarket here started packing
shoppers' organic vegetables and free-range chickens into paper grocery bags
that carried the pictures and life stories of four children from the area.

But the effort of the supermarket, United Market, to distribute public art put
it right in the middle of California's stormy debate over illegal immigration.
Many shoppers objected to the poignant tale of an unidentified fourth grader
from El Salvador. They were angered by his account of how he had come to the
United States -- illegally.

United Market has stopped using the controversial bags. Late on Friday, Bill
Daniels, co-owner of the market, said he had decided to offer the bags to the
customers who supported the art, to schools and to local food banks.

The immigration debate is in the air here, as it is throughout this state and
some others. Gov. Pete Wilson is suing the Federal Government to recoup the
money spent by California on services for illegal aliens. Mr. Wilson, a
Republican, is running for re-election, and his opponent, State Treasurer
Kathleen Brown, a Democrat, is criticizing him for his move against illegal
aliens. Florida and Arizona have filed similar lawsuits.

The paper bags were the result of an art project by a local couple, Larry and
Kelly Sultan, who were paid $7,500 by Public Art Works, a nonprofit group. The
Sultans put the photographs and stories of four children on the grocery bags.
"We wanted to give a face to these kids," Mr. Sultan said, "many of them
children of color, to let them tell their own stories."

The stories were of children who had struggled and survived. A 12-year-old girl
told of living with her crack-addicted mother. Another girl, a fifth grader,
wrote of immigrating from Vietnam. A high school boy told how his family had
fled from Eritrea.

The story of the illegal alien came from Bahia Vista Elementary School in the
Canal District, an area that has been mostly white and working class until
recent years. The head of the Canal Community Alliance, Tom Wilson, said most
people there now were "immigrants and people of color."

The Salvadoran boy is pictured with his hand covering his face to hide his
identity. He recounted how he had been smuggled across the border at night so he
could rejoin his mother.

Mr. Daniels, the co-owner of United Market, said he had been surprised by the
volatile response of many customers to the bags. He said some customers had
accused him of supporting illegal immigration.

Among the angry objectors was Rick Oltman, a San Rafael resident who is the
leader of the Save Our State campaign, a statewide initiative to limit
educational and health benefits for children who are illegal residents. Mr.
Oltman said members of his local group "thought it was just one more example of
the condoning of illegal immigrants."

The shoppers who complained threatened to picket and boycott the store unless
Mr. Daniels stopped distributing the bags. He first tried to use the bags
depicting the Salvadoran boy at his second store in nearby San Anselmo, but he
got the same reaction.

"I couldn't believe it," he said. "To me, the bags had nothing to do with
illegal immigration. It was a little boy's story." He added, "That kid was a
kind of little hero."

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              88 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

New Kangaroo Species Is Reported

BYLINE: By TIM HILCHEY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Science Desk;  The Environment Page

LENGTH: 654 words


A PRIMITIVE black and white tree kangaroo previously unknown to scientists has
been discovered by Australian and Indonesian researchers in a remote mountainous
region of Indonesia, the researchers have announced.

The newest member of the marsupial family has bold, pandalike patterns in its
thick fur and is about as large as a medium-sized dog, said Dr. Tim Flannery, a
senior research scientist at the Australian Museum in Sydney who led the team
that discovered the animal. Researchers from a zoological museum in Bogor,
Indonesia, also participated.

While the scientists have announced their work, it has not yet been submitted to
a scientific journal.

Dr. Flannery, an expert on the fauna of Melanesia, said: "The first thing that
we knew about this animal was a photograph that was sent to me several years ago
of a hunter with a little baby tree kangaroo only about as big as a half-grown
cat in his hands. I looked at it and thought, 'That's something odd. It's just
not a standard tree kangaroo.' But the area where the photo was taken is very
remote, and it was one of those things that I thought I'd never really get to
the bottom of."

But late in 1993, Dr. Flannery received a letter from P. T. Freeport Indonesia,
a mining concern based in New Orleans, asking him to survey the animals of the
region. He set out last May.

Dr. Flannery said the tree kangaroo appeared to live in a narrow band of dense,
mossy pine forest about 10,000 to 11,000 feet up the southern slopes of the
Mauke Mountain Range in central Irian Jaya, the Indonesian province on the
island of New Guinea. Tree kangaroos had never before been reported in this
region, he said.

Striking Patterns

The newly discovered kangaroo has a unique color pattern, Dr. Flannery said. He
explained, "It's got very, very long black fur over most of the back and the
head, the front of it is white and it has two white blazes across its black
muzzle and a white star in the middle of the forehead."

Although the creature appears to be adapted for life among the branches, it
apparently spends most of its time on the ground. It also descends from trees
like a human, hind legs first. At about 20 inches in length, its tail is the
shortest of any kangaroo, relative to its body size. A large adult male might
stand about 30 inches tall and weigh some 30 pounds, Dr. Flannery said.

Among ground kangaroos, tail length usually equals body length. Tree kangaroos
often have tails that exceed their body length and help to counterbalance them
in the trees.

The Moni tribe of hunter-gatherers who inhabit part of the kangaroo's range call
the animal "bondegezou," which is roughly translated as "man of the forest," Dr.
Flannery said.

"It's got an unusual threat response," he said. "It raises its arms up above its
head, exposing this big area of white belly while letting out a whistle. The
Moni people believe that this is the animal recognizing them and see it as a
sign of their kinship with the animal, so they don't hunt it." That tribal taboo
may have helped the timid creature to survive.

He said the first physical evidence of the animal was provided by items
purchased from the another local tribe, the Dani, who have no restriction
against hunting the kangaroo. "The fur is often made into hats, and people wear
claws and tail tips on necklaces," Dr. Flannery explained.

In questioning the Dani, the researchers learned that the animal did not leap
from trees and that it was not an agile tree climber, like other tree kangaroos.
Dani hunters led the scientists to the animal, but they were unable to capture a
live specimen. In mid-June, Dr. Flannery returned to Sydney with remnants of
five tree kangaroos and has been studying them ever since.

The tree kangaroo is the second new species of mammal discovered this year. A
muntjac, or barking deer, was found in the Vu Quang Preserve in Nghe Tinh
Province, Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: July 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Body of new species of tree kangaroo, carried by Dani tribesman.
(The Australian Museum, Sydney)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              89 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's Phone Plan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, July 26


Vietnam plans to spend at least $1 billion by the end of the decade to upgrade
telecommunications in Ho Chi Minh City, the nation's biggest city and commercial
capital. An influx of foreign investors and rising incomes in the city, formerly
called Saigon, have increased the demand for regular and mobile telephones and
fax service, the state-run Vietnam News reported on Monday. Ho Chi Minh City now
has about 150,000 telephones for its population of more than four million. The
Post and Telecommunications Department plans to increase the number of regular
telephones next year to 240,000, mobile phones to 14,000 and electronic pagers
to 200,000, The News reported.

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              90 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AT LUNCH WITH: Gary Sinise;
A Takeoff Fueled By Passion

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1398 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, July 26


Gary Sinise steps onto the patio of a restaurant near Beverly Hills and stops at
one table to shake hands with an old friend. Then at another table. And finally
a third.

He's wearing jeans, a white T-shirt, a sports jacket and small granny glasses
with purple lenses. Other people on the patio glance up quizzically and seem to
be whispering, 'Who is this familiar-looking guy?' Mr. Sinise removes his
glasses, sets them on the table and smiles faintly.

"Has my life changed since 'Forrest Gump?' " he says. "Sure, sure. I could
barely get into this place. This time, they knew I was coming."

Not really. But "Forrest Gump" has changed things for him. The sweet-natured
film spanning 30 years that stars Tom Hanks as a slow-witted innocent is one of
the year's major successes, grossing more than $100 million in just 18 days. It
opened to largely favorable reviews and has been embraced by audiences for its
greatest-hits soundtrack and unashamed sentiment.

Mr. Sinise plays Lieutenant Dan, Forrest's commander in Vietnam who loses his
legs in battle. His life and Forrest's continue to intersect as the film
unfolds, and in contrast to the stoic Forrest, the big-hearted, slightly crazy
Army officer goes through a series of intense emotions -- rage, despair,
bitterness, resignation. For Mr. Sinise, the movie has fast-forwarded an already
formidable acting career, in theaters in Chicago and New York as well as in
number of movies that have been more acclaimed than seen.

On stage or on screen he exudes restlessness, unpredictability and a ferocious
intensity, but off stage he's very measured and barely raises his voice, which
is tinged with a Midwestern twang.

Here at Orso's, he seems nakedly open when he talks about himself as an actor.
Articulate, but just a bit distant, he says that he blames himself for his
haphazard education; he wishes now he'd applied himself in high school and
learned history, literature and especially great drama. "I regret that," he
says, brushing his fingers through his faintly thinning and graying light brown
hair.

Mr. Sinise never even contemplated going to college. Once he found acting, he
channeled himself completely into stage and film. Now, if he's not quite a
Hollywood-style celebrity, the 39-year-old actor-director is on the edge of a
breakthrough.

"I've never done anything that anyone has seen before," he says, sipping some
iced tea. "I always made very selective choices. Worthwhile, I hope. These are
all emotional investments. I try to have control over what I do. I have never
seen it as just a job. Yet."

His voice grows tense. "There are times," he says, "when I just love acting so
much. It's almost spiritual. A visceral adrenaline thing that's kind of
addicting." He sits back. "There's something really insecure inside me," he
adds. "I never lose that insecure actor thing. I've always had that. Even when
things are working. There's something I have to keep proving to myself I can do
it."

He squints in the sun, puts on his glasses and orders a pizza.

Mr. Sinise views Lieutenant Dan as symbolic of the crippling impact of Vietnam
on the country. "Things change for Dan in Vietnam," he says. "Heroism and
strength was his destiny. Not the one he ends up with."

One of the more astonishing technical effects of the film, directed by Robert
Zemeckis, is the presentation of Mr. Sinise as a man without legs. Before the
injury, he is shown as an able-bodied officer. After, he is shown in a
wheelchair, with both legs gone from the knee.

The erasing of Mr. Sinise's legs on film was accomplished by editing, computer
technology and a specially designed wheelchair with a slanting seat that allowed
Mr. Sinise to fold his legs under him. It was designed by Ricky Jay, the New
York magician and special-effects wizard.

Mr. Sinise is now co-starring with Mr. Hanks as an astronaut in Ron Howard's
forthcoming movie "Apollo 13," to be released next year. Mr. Hanks plays Jim
Lovell, the commander of the endangered space mission, while Mr. Sinise is Ken
Mattingly, who was bumped because he was exposed to measles but who took command
of it from the ground. After this film, Mr. Sinise has other plans, which
include directing Mr. Hanks in a new film.

For the moment, there is no more time to act at the critically acclaimed
Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago, which he founded as a teen-ager and ran through
the 1980's. He remains deeply immersed in the theater's operations, often flying
to Chicago.

But since moving to Los Angeles, in 1987, Mr. Sinise has focused increasingly on
films, as an actor and director. He's been married since 1981 to Moira Harris,
an actress whom he met in the Steppenwolf troupe. They live in Pasadena, Calif.,
and have two daughters, Sophie, 5; Ella, 22 months, and a son, McCanna, 3.

"I'm comfortable here now," he says. "Over the last year I've accepted the fact
that I'm going to work here and live here for a while. It's been a good time for
me."

He grew up outside Chicago, mostly in Highland Park, Ill., where his father,
Craig, was a film editor. As a boy, Mr. Sinise says, he was restless,
troublesome and had no interest in school.

"I was a horrible student," he says, "one of those kids who was rebelling all
the time. I only paid attention to rock-and-roll. I wanted to be Mick Jagger. I
had a terrible time until I found the theater department."

In his sophomore year, he tried out for a high-school production of "West Side
Story." It changed his life. "I met all these people," he says. "Suddenly, I
couldn't get enough of it -- not just acting, but everything, building sets,
working backstage."

His mentor and drama teacher, Barbara Patterson, who is now retired from
teaching and is acting in Minnesota, took her students to the Guthrie Theater in
Minneapolis. "I saw 'Of Mice and Men,' " Mr. Sinise recalls. "I mean, I had no
idea. I knew nothing about John Steinbeck. At the end I stood up to applaud and
scream, but all I could do was cry. I cried and cried. I knew this is what I
wanted to do. I had to do it. Anything that elicited people's emotions like that
gave me the sense of power that I could have as an actor."

With high school friends, he founded the Steppenwolf Theater Company in a church
basement in Highland Park in 1974. The troupe -- known for its on-the-edge,
physical acting style -- has since grown into one of the most formidable of the
regional theaters. Its members include Laurie Metcalf and John Malkovich.

At Steppenwolf, Mr. Sinise's acting credits included Tom Joad in "The Grapes of
Wrath," for which he was nominated for a Tony Award during its Broadway run, as
well as "True West" (which he also directed), "Of Mice and Men," "Balm in
Gilead" and "Streamers." He has directed more than a half-dozen plays.

He directed two films, "Miles from Home," a drama about the plight of farmers,
starring Richard Gere, Kevin Anderson and Mr. Malkovich, and "Of Mice and Men,"
based on the Steinbeck classic, in which he co-starred with Mr. Malkovich. Both
films received strong reviews but died at the box office.

Hollywood directors have often found it difficult to categorize Mr. Sinise. He
has appeared in several other movies, including "A Midnight Clear," a drama
about men at war, and recently played a starring role in Stephen King's "Stand,"
the highly rated ABC mini-series.

In the restaurant, Mr. Sinise has been so consumed talking about acting that his
pizza has sat before him untouched for 10 minutes. A waiter comes over and asks
if he should reheat the food. Mr. Sinise nods.

"For years I kept getting offered certain kinds of parts," he says. "Farmers.
Rural stories. Pioneer stories. Men of the Plains. I think that's changing now."

The pizza returns. He lifts a slice and then puts it down. "I'm really kind of
lucky," he says. "I remember in high school my history teacher passed me on the
final exam, which you had to pass to graduate, even though I didn't know
anything. I looked at the test -- I had been up all night building sets, and I
didn't know a thing about history -- and finally told the teacher: 'No point in
me staying. Do what you got to do.'

"And the teacher, a wonderful woman, passed me. She gave me a break. She knew I
loved the theater. She knew it was my life.

"I've been working at it for 20 years. All of a sudden I'm doing things people
are actually seeing."


NAME: Gary Sinise

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gary Sinise: more visible all the time. (Steve Goldstein for
The New York Times) (pg. C1); Gary Sinise, left, with Tom Hanks in "Forrest
Gump." (Phillip Caruso/Paramount Pictures) (pg. C7)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              91 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
The Wrong Battles

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


United States troops finally started trickling into Goma, Zaire, last week, well
after the wrenching images and stories of Rwandan refugees had saturated the
American conscience. But they were hardly the most conspicuous representatives
of our armed forces to make the news over the weekend.

In Saturday's paper alone, you could read about Sgt. 1st Class Ervin M. Graves
of Fort Bragg, N.C., who had just received a life sentence for the murder and
attempted rape of Lisa Bryant, a 21-year-old second lieutenant whose promising
resume included an honors degree from Princeton. Or about the Citadel, the
state-supported military academy in Charleston, S.C., which had just been
ordered in another courtroom to admit a woman, Shannon Faulkner, to its Corps of
Cadets, and in the process was berated by a Federal judge for squandering public
funds in its doomed defense of sexual discrimination.

Or about John H. Dalton, Secretary of the Navy. As reported by Jeff Gerth of The
Times, Mr. Dalton had only recently and tardily settled a bad debt on a
defaulted condo loan.  Mr. Dalton also turned out to have been an executive at
two failed Texas S.&L.'s bailed out by taxpayers; the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation had accused the Navy Secretary of "gross negligence" in his
management of one of them.

Why had Mr. Dalton's checkered financial past gone unmentioned during his
rubber-stamp confirmation hearings last year? Perhaps because he's a major
Democratic fund-raiser.  Certainly because Senator Sam Nunn, the chairman of the
Armed Services Committee, who bullies President Clinton about all matters
military, aired the awkward facts only in a closed-door session, lest they "bog
down the process."

And these were only last weekend's headlines. Recent weeks have brought the
latest twists in the cases of Sgt. Zenaida Martinez (who accuses the Air Force
of punishing her for pursuing a sexual harassment case) and Navy Lieut. (j.g.)
Tracy Thorne (who faces expulsion for revealing his homosexuality on "Nightline"
and may soon challenge the preposterous Nunn-Clinton "don't ask, don't tell"
policy in court).

Like many Americans raised on Vietnam, I am unclear on the role of an American
military in the post-cold-war world. Unfortunately, so is Bill Clinton, who,
unlike me, was elected Commander in Chief. But even if he plans to procrastinate
indefinitely rather than arrive at coherent policies on Haiti and Bosnia, surely
the military can serve as more than a fount of bad news for women, homosexuals
and taxpayers of all genders.

That's why I harbored hopes that the President, though having kept a
characteristic distance from the genocidal Rwandan civil war, might at least
have deployed American forces with prompt efficiency in response to the ensuing
humanitarian tragedy. But Mr. Clinton acted only after he saw the same pictures
of the dead and dying that the rest of us did -- following, rather than leading
-- and even then the initial result of his military's engagement was of dubious
benefit.

Ignoring the requests of the United Nations and others already involved in
on-the-scene relief for logistical help, manpower and trucks, the Americans
insisted on airdropping food, and somewhat chaotically at that. (Only 8 of 24
car-sized parcels reached the ground, rarely intact.) A U.S. military aircraft
also flew in from Stuttgart -- containing not only one forklift but 18
journalists given a round-trip ride to hype the American largess.

"This is a total public-relations operation," said Alison Campbell of CARE, who
accused the Americans of wasting the precious time and desperately straitened
resources of the relief effort as trucks were diverted to retrieve the scattered
airdrops.

The public-relations operation proved as disastrous as the rest of the
military's recent p.r. -- but it was mercifully short-lived. By this Tuesday
American television viewers could finally spot a growing number of their
soldiers hard at humanitarian work in Goma, building a water-purification system
to battle the raging cholera epidemic. If you can forget the horrific images of
the weeks before, this rare bit of good news about the Clinton-era military may
not seem too little, too late.

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              92 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Plans Oil Approvals

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;   Page 9;   Column 6;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 110 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, July 28


Vietnam plans to grant exploration licenses in two oil blocks off its southeast
coast after recent finds by Japanese and Malaysian companies, the head of the
state oil company said today.

Vietnam has received many proposals from foreign concerns wanting to develop the
blocks, the chairman of PetroVietnam, Ho Si Thoang, said at an oil industry
conference."Practically all of blocks 16 and 9 will be open for new
concessions," he said.

Blocks 16 and 9, southeast of Ho Chi Minh City, are close to two existing
oilfields, Bach Ho (White Tiger) and Rong (Dragon), in an area controlled by the
VietSovPetro joint venture between Vietnam and Russia.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              93 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Files Detail Years of Spying on Bernstein

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 2;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1884 words


For more than three decades starting in the 1940's, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation obsessively documented the activities of Leonard Bernstein,
especially his associations with groups listed as subversive or communist, and,
in the 1960's, his support for the civil rights and antiwar movements, newly
released files show.

The F.B.I. never established that Mr. Bernstein, who died in 1990, was a member
of the Communist Party. Indeed, he vehemently denied it under oath in 1953, and
soon after that, the bureau acknowledged finding no communist ties.

But Mr. Bernstein remained an enthusiastic, if sometime indiscriminate,
supporter of what he considered to be good causes, and the F.B.I. continued to
accumulate reports on his travel and performances and his efforts against the
Vietnam War and on behalf of civil rights and, in one well-known episode, the
radical Black Panther Party.

The file shows that on one occasion, after Mr. Bernstein held a controversial
fund raiser for the Black Panthers at his Park Avenue apartment in 1970, the
F.B.I. went beyond intelligence-gathering and schemed to undermine him with
damaging news leaks.

The F.B.I. documents, 666 pages of reports on Mr. Bernstein, were made available
yesterday in Los Angeles by the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern
California, which had obtained them from the bureau under the Freedom of
Information Act. Portions of the reports have been blacked out or deleted by the
Government, and the civil liberties group says it will sue to get the deleted
material as well as the files that were not released.

With the reports' earnest citations of "red fronters" and other derisive terms
for suspected subversives, they recall a time of blacklisting and redbaiting,
when cold war fears drove political passions.

"It's funny until you remember that the F.B.I. took that kind of thing seriously
and that that kind of F.B.I. skulduggery ruined so many lives," said Allan
Parachini, public affairs director for the regional civil liberties group. Mr.
Parachini requested the file nearly four years ago, when he was a news reporter
for the Los Angeles Times.

"It is a reminder of the most unacceptable and reprehensible behavior on the
part of the F.B.I. that went on for so long," he said. Because the F.B.I.
censored the file and took more than three years to provide the part it turned
over, he said, "I think it's fair to question, is it really over yet?"

FBI: No Comment

Asked to respond to issues raised in the file, the F.B.I. in Washington issued a
short statement. "These materials have been released and can now be evaluated by
the public," said Mike Kortan, a bureau spokesman. "It is the F.B.I.'s
longstanding policy not to comment on this kind of historical information."

When a daughter of Mr. Bernstein, Jamie Bernstein Thomas, was told in New York
yesterday of the release of the papers, she said the extent of the file did not
come as a big surprise.

"My father knew that the F.B.I. was tailing him and keeping an eye on him very
early," she said, "because when he tried to get a passport to go to Europe in
the late 1940's, he was denied one, and he had to go to the State Department in
order to straighten it out."

She added: "Whenever any liberal cause asked my father to be on their steering
committee, or in the list of names on their letterhead, he said, 'Sure,' without
doing any investigation into the organization. If it sounded like a nice liberal
cause, he would lend his name to it, and the F.B.I. found that alarming."

Long after the uproar over the Bernsteins' fund-raising party for the Black
Panthers, she recalled, the family learned from F.B.I. files that emerged during
a court case that some protesters outside their apartment, who identified
themselves as being from the Jewish Defense League, were actually F.B.I. agents.

In 1980, Mr. Bernstein said, "I have substantial evidence, now available to all,
that the F.B.I. conspired to foment hatred and violent dissension among blacks,
among Jews and between blacks and Jews."

The F.B.I. files revealed yesterday range widely over Mr. Bernstein's causes and
career as conductor and composer but make no mention of one aspect of his life
that biographers have dealt with extensively and that was unlikely to have
escaped F.B.I. scrutiny: his bisexuality and homosexual relationships. Mr.
Parachini of the civil liberties group said he suspected that such material had
been withheld.

The documents show that the F.B.I. had been collecting information on Mr.
Bernstein since at least 1943, when, in the jargon of the bureau, "a
confidential informant of known reliability" reported that Mr. Bernstein, then
the young assistant director of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, "had sent
greetings" to the American Youth for Democracy, one of 13 organizations cited by
the Attorney General as communist. The F.B.I. documents said Mr. Bernstein was
"connected" with the group, which later honored him with awards and receptions.

In 1944, Mr. Bernstein was listed as a sponsor of a dinner for a cartoonist for
the Morning Freiheit. The Attorney General called the newspaper "a Communist
Yiddish daily," the F.B.I. said.

In 1945, the file said, he signed an advertisement in The New York Times for the
Veterans of the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, an anti-Fascist group and another
organization considered subversive. The F.B.I. also found it suspicious that he
had agreed to dedicate a musical number to a "free Spain." Moreover, he was
listed in The Daily Worker, the Community Party newspaper, as a member of the
"Music Division of the First Conference on American-Soviet Cultural
Cooperation." He was also listed as a judge for musical auditions sponsored by
the National Negro Congress.

The most direct piece of information linking Mr. Bernstein to communism comes in
a 1951 file reporting that "a confidential informant of known reliability" said
in 1950 that, in 1945, Benjamin J. Davis and another official of the American
Communist Party "described Leonard Bernstein as an adherent of the Communist
Party." He was also said to have "agreed to submit to Communist discipline."

Bits and Pieces

Strange tidbits found their way into the file. In 1949 someone found a phone
book on the "D" train that contained the names of purported communists and a
program from a performance that bore Mr. Bernstein's name. In 1952, Mr.
Bernstein was taking a ship home from Europe when he talked with someone about a
film, and an informer reported the conversation to the F.B.I. The New York
Police Department, working with the F.B.I., found that Mr. Bernstein's wife,
Felicia, had leased her apartment to someone reported years earlier to have been
in the Communist Party.

Agents duly noted that in 1959, when Mr. Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic
performed in the Soviet Union, "Bernstein and the group received a warm
reception from the Russians."

Although Mr. Bernstein was unaware of the extent of the F.B.I.'s dossier, he
knew by the early 1950's that his name had been linked to groups called
subversive. He responded in 1953 in a sworn affidavit with his application to
obtain a passport. "Although I have never, to my knowledge, been accused of
being a member of the Communist Party," he began, "I wish to take advantage of
this opportunity to affirm under oath that I am not now or at any time ever been
a member of the Communist Party or the Communist Political Association."

But in a revealing admission that he may have been used by groups with hidden
agendas, he said that in some cases, "my name became linked through a charitable
and well-intended impulse and obviously without the probing deliberation
required."

He said "the name and real purpose" of some of these groups "are hardly more
than a blur in my memory" and a link more on paper than personal. "Besides my
ignorance of their underlying purposes," he added, "I have no recollection or
knowledge of ever having joined any of them which had a membership roll in the
true sense."

Mr. Bernstein's account was supported by Margaret Carson, who had known him
since 1942 and was his personal representative for virtually his entire career.
"I would say his political involvement was for all humanity," she said
yesterday. "He loved the world and wanted the best for it. His closest political
self-definition was that he was a socialist. He said as much. But he never
joined the Communist Party."

In 1954, another memo conceded that the F.B.I. had turned up little. But it said
"reports are to be submitted even though no information has been developed
reflecting Communist Party or Communist Party front activity on the part of the
subject."

And they were, through the administrations of Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower,
John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard M. Nixon.

A 1961 memo tracked the New York Philharmonic's tour to Japan. And the F.B.I.
director advised the Kennedy White House of its long investigation of Mr.
Bernstein. In 1968, the Johnson White House was notified by the F.B.I. that
"information has also been developed that Mr. Bernstein has been active in the
civil rights movement." Harry Belafonte had enlisted him to march in Selma, Ala.


Birth of 'Radical Chic'

In 1970, Mr. Bernstein and his wife opened their Park Avenue duplex to a
fund-raising party for the Black Panthers, setting off a furor in the press that
fueled intense F.B.I. interest and action. The affair was covered by Charlotte
Curtis of The New York Times, who depicted an avid Mr. Bernstein listening to
militants urging a takeover of capitalist America. "I dig absolutely," the
maestro was quoted as responding.

He later contended that his position had been distorted. But several months
later, Tom Wolfe immortalized the encounter in New York magazine and gave it a
name -- "radical chic" -- in an article that became a book, and a dismayed Mr.
Bernstein was stuck with the image.

Worse followed. When one of the Black Panthers for whom Mr. Bernstein and his
guests had raised $10,000, Donald Lee Cox, was sought on a murder charge, the
F.B.I. schemed to capitalize on the issue, according to a document in the file.

In a memo on May 18, 1970, to one of Mr. Hoover's top deputies, W. C. Sullivan,
another F.B.I. official, G. C. Moore, makes note of the events and suggests
leaking an account "to a cooperative news media source on a confidential basis."

The proposed item was to note that Mr. Cox had been one of those "with whom
these elite socialites were rubbing shoulders." It added this editorial
question: "Prior to Bernstein and their misguided friends contributing
additional funds for the alleged protection of the constitutional rights of such
a group, shouldn't there first be given consideration to the establishment of a
fund to aid the surviving members of the victim's family?"

The file did not make it clear whether the item had ever been successfully
planted in a news report.

The following year, the F.B.I. grappled with a "reported plot" by Mr. Bernstein
to embarrass President Nixon with a performance of the composer's "Mass" at the
dedication of the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington. Mr.
Nixon said he did not want to intrude on a Kennedy family moment and skipped the
opening.


NAME: Leonard Bernstein

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A 1958 F.B.I. document on an informer's report attempting to
link Leonard Bernstein to communism. (pg. A1); Leonard Bernstein, his wife,
Felicia, and their guest, Donald Lee Cox, a Black Panther, in 1970. When Mr. Cox
was later sought for murder, the F.B.I. tried to publicize the meeting to
embarrass Mr. Bernstein. (Salmieri) (pg. A20)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              94 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;   Page 16;   Column 3;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


Coming releases reflect an interesting cross between present and future in home
video. On the futuristic side, for example, is "For All Mankind," Al Reinert's
acclaimed 1989 documentary about the Apollo moon missions, to be released by
Voyager this fall on CD-ROM. Available for both Macintosh and Windows platforms,
the disk includes the film with 16-bit stereo sound, an original soundtrack by
Brian Eno and many extras, among them biographies and other writings by Andrew
Chaikin, the author of the new book "A Man on the Moon: The Voyages of the
Apollo Astronauts" (Viking).

The disk will cost $39.95 and be available from Voyager and in bookstores,
museums and software outlets. (Information: 800-446-2001.) Although it isn't a
video-store item per se, the documentary offers a taste of the computer-based
"edutainment" programming the home video industry might provide in its own
stores if and when typical video CD-ROM's make major moves beyond games.

Compact disks, however, are just beginning to make their entrance in a business
ruled by the VCR, which is now in almost 80 million households and continues to
spread steadily. Despite a barrage of hype about video on demand and the
information superhighway, the videocassette is expected to remain the star
performer for some years to come. That being the case, distributors are
attending to business as usual.

The Family Bandwagon

When it comes to renting and selling tapes, nothing much changes. This month,
for instance, MGM/UA announced still another family entertainment promotion,
introducing an altered company logo with lion cubs gathered around Leo, and
reissuing old movies like "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" and "All Dogs Go to Heaven."

Last July, too, MGM/UA was promoting "quality entertainment for the whole
family" with titles like "Huckleberry Finn" and "Namu, the Killer Whale." In the
year since then, every studio has promoted so many family movies that all the
releases and promotions have blended into one megacategory that seemingly takes
in about everything milder than "Reservoir Dogs."

From Tape to Disk

When not renting new movies, distributors stir old pots, always sifting for any
last morsel that might be served up in another promotion. For example, next
month Orion will release a four-hour, $79.98 edition of "Dances With Wolves," a
movie that already has been offered at various lengths and prices down to a
$7.99 special at McDonald's.

To date, about every sales promotion appears to have succeeded. A study issued
on Monday by Veronis, Suhler & Associates, an investment banking concern that
specializes in communications companies, indicates that the public collects
videotapes as it does books and predicts that sales, as well as rentals, will
increase in the next five years.

The study concludes that video on demand will not have a material impact in that
time. By 1998, though, personal computers equipped with CD-ROM drives capable of
playing titles like "For All Mankind" will be numerous enough to make disks an
important factor in the video market.

Last year, the study says, 31.3 million American households had computers, 5.2
million of them with CD-ROM drives. By 1998, the study says, those figures will
be 48 million and 28 million, respectively.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Heaven and Earth
1993. Warner. $96.83. Laser disk, $39.98. 142 minutes. Closed-captioned. R.
Release date: Wednesday.

Having dramatized the Vietnam War from the soldier's viewpoint ("Platoon" and
"Born on the Fourth of July"), the director Oliver Stone turns to the plight of
a Vietnamese civilian. Le Ly Hayslip (Hiep Thi Le) grew up in a village overrun
by the Vietcong. After working as a prostitute for American soldiers, she
marries one (Tommy Lee Jones), who then dumps her in an alien American world. In
his accustomed muscular style, Mr. Stone "tells this tale vigorously, but he has
the wrong cinematic vocabulary for his heroine's essentially passive
experience," Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times.

What's Eating Gilbert Grape
1993. Paramount. $95.92. Laser disk, $39.95. 118 minutes. Closed-captioned.
PG-13.

In another portrayal of a quirky outsider, Johnny Depp ("Edward Scissorhands")
is Gilbert, a bemused youth from Endora, Iowa. At home is his 500-pound Momma
(Darlene Cates), and out climbing the town water tower is his retarded younger
brother (Leonard DiCaprio). Gilbert delivers groceries, but there's little to
focus on until the arrival of a lively outsider (Juliette Lewis). With a rueful
style, the Swedish director Lasse Hallstrom ("My Life as a Dog") delivers a
story strong on texture and character with a "sweet, weirdly idyllic tone"
(Maslin).

Wrestling Ernest Hemingway
1993. Warner. $96.83. Laser disk, $39.98. 123 minutes. Closed-captioned. PG-13.
 As a swaggering sea captain in the 1930's, Frank (Richard Harris) once wrestled
Ernest Hemingway. Now he's an alcoholic, four-times-divorced retiree battling
isolation in Sweetwater, Fla. For companionship there is Walter (Robert Duvall),
an old Cuban hairdresser as lonely as himself. Although Randa Haines's film
daringly enters an unglamorous world, it spends too much time congratulating
itself for having done so. In fact, time itself is a problem. Not without its
genuine and generous scenes, the film runs too long, obscuring a "finer movie
hidden inside the scenery chewing and predictability" (Caryn James).

Jamon Jamon (Ham Ham)
1993. Academy. $92.95. 90 minutes. Spanish with English subtitles. No rating.

Bigas Luna's film satirizes the Spanish inclination to relate food and sex, but
since the director hasn't the absurdist powers of a Pedro Almodovar, say, the
attempt falls flat. Carmen (Anna Galiena) is a warm bordello queen with a large
brood of children, the youngest of whom (Penelope Cruz) has become pregnant by
the son of a local factory owner. To discourage their marriage, a young stud is
hired to romance the young woman. From there the complications multiply into a
kind of surreal anthropological study crossed with farce, but "Mr. Luna's hand
is heavy" (Vincent Canby).

KEEP IN MIND

Rather Few and Far Between:
Movies on the Best-Seller List

This week, four Johnny Carson tapes, four "Little Rascals" volumes, nine Playboy
and Penthouse tapes, and seven feature films were among the top 40 titles on
Billboard's best-seller list. Here are the movies by rank.

ACE VENTURA: PET DETECTIVE (No. 1). The story of an animal fanatic's search for
the Miami Dolphins' kidnapped mascot tops every title in every category. 1994.
Warner. $24.96. 87 minutes. Closed-captioned. PG-13.

MRS. DOUBTFIRE (No. 3). The Robin Williams film is sandwiched between the
animated adventure "The Return of Jafar" (No. 2) and the music tape "Yanni: Live
at the Acropolis" (No. 4). 1993. Fox. $19.98. 111 minutes. Closed-captioned.
PG-13.

THE FUGITIVE (No. 7). The Harrison Ford film finished ahead of "Ginger Lynn
Allen's Lingerie Gallery" (No. 8). 1993. Warner. $24.96. 128 minutes.
Closed-captioned. PG-13.

RISING SUN (No. 27). After "The Fugitive," it's a 19-title drop to the next
movie on the list, Philip Kaufman's glitzy adaptation of Michael Crichton's
novel about a Japanese-dominated Los Angeles. 1993. Fox. $19.98. 129 minutes.
Closed-captioned. R.

THE SANDLOT (No. 29). David Mickey Evans's coming-of-age comedy set in Salt Lake
City, circa 1962 (No. 28). 1993. Fox. $19.98. 101 minutes. Closed-captioned. PG.

A STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE (No. 33). Elia Kazan's classic is just below
"Penthouse: Letters Vol. 2" (No. 32). 1955. Warner. $39.99. 122 minutes. No
rating.

PINKY (No. 34). Another Kazan film (No. 35).  1949. Fox. $19.98. 102 minutes.

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A 1989 documentary about the Apollo moon missions, "For All
Mankind," is to be released by Voyager this fall on CD-ROM.; Joan Chen in
"Heaven and Earth," a new video release. (Roland Neveu/Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              95 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ugo Carusi, 92, Immigrants' Son Who Helped Wartime Refugees

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 27;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 447 words


Ugo Carusi, an immigrants' son who became the United States immigration
commissioner in World War II and then helped to resettle hundreds of thousands
of European refugees during the Truman and Eisenhower Administrations, died on
July 21 at his home in Washington. He was 92.

The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Mr. Carusi, who was trained as a lawyer, spent more than four decades in
full-time Government service. He served as an executive assistant to six
successive United States Attorneys General, starting in March 1925. He retired
at the end of 1963 from the staff of Senator George D. Aiken of Vermont, but he
went on one more mission in 1967, to South Vietnam to study the plight of
refugees there.

His parents emigrated from Italy, moving to Barre, Vt., before his birth. He was
born while his parents were visiting the town of their birth, Carrara, Italy,
and they took him to the United States when he was 4 months old.

He graduated as the class valedictorian in 1931 from National University Law
School, now George Washington University Law School, where he later taught a
graduate course on constitutional law and was a professor of administrative law.
He entered public service in 1922 as secretary to the Attorney General of
Vermont.

Three years later, Mr. Carusi returned to Washington to become the private
secretary and assistant to the Attorney General. He held that and equivalent
positions until January 1945, when he was appointed United States Commissioner
of Immigration and Naturalization.

A Flood of Refugees

In 1948, postwar Europe was flooded with people without a home or country to
call their own, so President Harry S. Truman asked him to survey the situation.
Because of that, the President established a Displaced Persons Commission,
appointed him its chairman and allowed some 400,000 refugees to seek a new life
in the United States.

In the early 1950's, Mr. Carusi headed the Washington branch of the office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. After that he served in
President Dwight D. Eisenhower's refugee program and on the President's
Committee for Hungarian Refugee Relief in 1956. He joined Senator Aiken's staff
two years later.

He was in a group from various voluntary relief organizations that went to South
Vietnam on a study mission in 1967 and reported to President Lyndon B. Johnson
on the "tragic and massive" plight of the children left homeless in that nation.

Mr. Carusi is survived by a sister, Iole, of Barre. His first wife, Edith Warner
Carusi, and their dayold son died in 1935. His second wife, Anita Shaeffer
Carusi, whom he married in 1941, died in 1984.

NAME: Ugo Carusi

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ugo Carusi (The New York Times, 1948)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              96 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Heal the 'Bad Paper' Veterans

BYLINE: By Maxine Waters and Jonathan Shay;   Maxine Waters, Democrat of
California, is to sponsor a bill in the House to upgrade discharges for combat
veterans. Jonathan Shay, a psychiatrist, is author of "Achilles in Vietnam."

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 19;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


American involvement in Vietnam ended two decades ago, and the wounds suffered
during the conflict are finally healing. The nation has built memorials to our
men and women who fought and died in the war. American companies are
establishing business relationships in Hanoi. Hollywood continues to reinterpret
how the war touched our national psyche. There is, however, unfinished business.

More than 560,000 Vietnam-era veterans received less-than-honorable discharges
for such offenses as being absent without leave, using or selling drugs or
assaulting their superiors. A great number were in combat. Because of their "bad
paper," these veterans are not eligible for health and other benefits available
to veterans with honorable discharges.

Many bad-paper veterans are among the 250,000 ex-combat soldiers who suffer from
post-traumatic stress disorder. They have a higher incidence of unemployment,
violent behavior, alcohol and drug abuse, family problems and homelessness than
other veterans. Yet we won't give them the treatment that could help them heal.
They served their country and deserve treatment for their war wounds, physical
and mental.

Most soldiers discharged less than honorably committed their offenses after
their combat duty; many did so because of psychological injuries suffered in
battle.

Some were also victims of racism: the rod of military justice did not fall with
equal force on all offenders in Vietnam. A Defense Department task force
reported in 1972 that African-Americans received much harsher punishments than
white offenders who committed offenses of comparable seriousness. A 1971
N.A.A.C.P. study found that 45 percent of all less-than-honorable discharges
went to black soldiers.

Whatever the circumstances surrounding combat veterans' bad-paper discharges, it
is self-defeating to deny them benefits. We don't save money by shutting them
out; it costs taxpayers much more in unemployment compensation and support for
prisons, homeless shelters, substance abuse treatment and emergency health care
programs.

These ex-soldiers fill prisons and homeless shelters in disproportionate numbers
around the country. The New England Shelter for Homeless Veterans, a 225-bed
treatment center in Boston, is typical: 25 percent of the those who use it are
bad-paper combat veterans.

Under the current system, veterans can upgrade their discharges only after a
complicated, expensive case-by-case process during which the Department of
Veterans' Affairs and Military Review Board re-evaluate infractions that
occurred more than 20 years ago. It can take years to reach a result. But a
prompt upgrade can mean the difference between addiction and employment, a life
marked by despair and a future with hope.

Legislation is being prepared in consultation with veterans' groups that will
establish a procedure for combat veterans to automatically upgrade their
bad-paper discharges. When it is introduced in the House next month, it will be
a major step toward insuring that those who risked their lives in battle are not
abandoned to the streets, prisons and margins of our society.

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              97 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 30, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam War Protesters Had Selfish Motives

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


To the Editor:

Re "Look at Vietnam Generation Now" (letter, July 16): Erna Gold states that
"the most virulent antiwar protests occurred in the best colleges and
universities, where students had the most knowledge and understanding of
American history."

This elitist pretension is absurd. More likely these students were out raged
that their orderly progression to the upscale gravy train would be interrupted
by mandatory military service, either after graduation when their student
deferment ended, or later if they had a low draft number.

And their hysteria was fueled by the prospect of getting shot in battle. Those
of us who chose to serve our country faced those risks despite that fear.

GREGG M. TAYLOR
Mundelein, Ill., July 20, 1994

LOAD-DATE: July 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              98 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: July 31, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 863 words



An error occurred in the processing of a table at this point in the document.
Please refer to the table in the online document.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 16, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              99 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The President's Past

BYLINE: By Michael Kelly;   Michael Kelly is the staff writer of The New York
Times Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 12609 words


A good place to begin thinking about how Bill Clinton became who he is today is
the Arkansas town of Springdale, where a short, red-faced man known as Mr.
Chicken sits in a room modeled after the Oval Office of the President of the
United States (although not precisely; the White House's Oval Office does not
have doorknobs shaped like hen's eggs) and tells a story about the political
education of a bright young fellow.

It may seem an act of considerable vanity for a chicken farmer to build himself
a copy of the President's office. But Don Tyson is a realist to his thick
fingertips, as befits a man who presides over the largest abattoir the world has
ever seen -- every week, Tyson Foods reduces 25 million chickens to plucked and
gutted shadows of their former selves -- and he sees politics as a series of
unsentimental transactions between those who need votes and those who have
money. His office decor is an accurate, not immodest statement about where, in a
world where every quid has its quo, power lives.

Money men like Tyson are strong in politics everywhere, but the realities of
Arkansas favor them particularly. Power in Arkansas rests upon two enduring
conditions complicated by an enduring contradiction. The first condition is that
most people in Arkansas have very little money while a few people have a great
deal. The second condition is that Arkansas is not really a democracy. It has
been ruled for almost all of its existence, and is largely ruled still, by a
thin upper crust of Democratic Party officials and Democratic legislative
leaders and important landholders and businessmen. This elite, bound together
not by party or even ideology but by mutually advantageous relationships, holds
sway over a small and politically disorganized middle class and a large but
well-beaten population of the poor. The contradiction is that Arkansas voters,
in a class-based reaction against this condition, perpetually favor politicians
who are "common" in touch, populist in theology and reformist in policies.

What results is a system in which voters consistently reward candidates who
promise change, but in which men like Tyson consistently reward those who
preserve the pro-business status quo. Because each candidate must, in the
absence of real party politics, build his own organization, and because the
money men are the only dependable sources of the heavy financing that this
requires, Arkansas's wealthy corporatists possess far greater clout than they
would in a state with a strong party system, large professional class or
powerful unions. They are the equivalent of Broadway's "angels," determining who
appears on the big stage and who does not. There are a few Republicans among the
angels, and perhaps one or two mild ideologues, but most of the heavenly host
fit the description Don Tyson applies to himself: "businessman's Democrat,"
which means they support Democrats who support them.

"The Arkansas system had always been to find some good young people and
encourage them to work on the local level," Tyson ruminates by speakerphone from
his oval office. "The system kind of weeds them out, and out of that comes a
United States Senator or a governor. . . . It's like a horse race. You back
three or four, so you always got a winner."

The Tyson family has been backing winners in Arkansas politics since 1954, when
John Tyson, Don's father and the founder of the family business, bet on a
promising young man named Orval Faubus. "Orval was my dad's first political
deal," Tyson recalls, speaking of the six-term Governor with the nostalgic
affection of an old horseplayer remembering a 5-to-1 shot that paid off. "Orval
was a little newspaper editor 25 miles east of here in Huntsville. He got over
here one day and had a lunch with a bunch of Springdale people here in a
restaurant. He said, 'I want to run for Governor and I need $1,500 and don't
have it.' Dad was one of the three people who gave him $500 apiece so he could
pay his filing fee."

The generation that entered Arkansas politics in the 1970's was exceptionally
rich in talent, but even so, Bill Clinton caught Tyson's eye. "He was young and
he was impressive," Tyson recalls. "I don't believe we ever talked about his
politics; hell, he was a Democrat." Tyson put a modest sum of money on Clinton
in his yearling race, a Congressional run in 1974. Although Clinton lost that
election, he showed excellent form, and Tyson backed him again in his successful
1976 run for State Attorney General; and again in 1978, when the 32-year-old ran
as the overwhelming favorite for Governor.

But before Tyson made his gubernatorial choice for 1978, he posed a question. In
the relentless drive of expansion and acquisition that would make Tyson Foods
the largest poultry processing company in the world, Tyson faced a serious
obstacle. In recent years, most other states had raised their legal truck weight
limits from about 73,000 to 80,000 pounds. Arkansas, though, still stuck to the
old limit, which put the state's poultry and trucking companies at a
disadvantage with their out-of-state competitors and cost them millions of
dollars. Would a Governor Clinton take care of that problem? Candidate Clinton,
recalls Tyson, said he would be happy to.

"Bill promised a bunch of us that he'd raise the weight limit on trucks," Tyson
remembers. "Damn right he did. He promised me, personally, in my car driving to
the airport three or four months before the election. He said that if he was
elected, he'd do it. He said he'd take care of it. Now, there's a bunch of
chicken folks in this state, and we all had a big interest in this weight thing,
so we supported Clinton."

It was, by Tyson's account, several months after this private talk that a great
windfall came into the lives of a young and relatively poor couple named Bill
Clinton and Hillary Rodham. The windfall fell from the hand of the Clintons'
close friend James Blair, an important Arkansas Democrat of the back-room genre
and a Springdale lawyer whose most important client was Don Tyson and Tyson
Foods.

Blair was a man who greatly desired to be rich. In 1977, he began plunging deep
into a string of commodities speculations that he expected would make him so.
Trading in cattle futures through the Springdale branch of the Ray E. Friedman
and Company (Refco) chain run by Robert (Red) Bone, a commodities broker (and
former Tyson executive) of dubious reputation, Blair had already made several
hundred thousand dollars by October 1978, and expected to make millions more.
With Clinton up 30 points in the polls less than a month before Election Day,
Blair approached Hillary Rodham to urge her to invest in his sure-thing scheme,
telling her that "it was one of those rare chances to put aside some money," and
that "she wouldn't have to be the expert. I'd give her advice."

Mrs. Clinton put up $1,000, and on her first day made a post-commission profit
of $5,300, trading on 10 cattle futures contracts. She continued to invest with
Blair and Bone for nine months, during which time her husband was elected and
sworn in as Governor. Although Mrs. Clinton was a small, inexperienced and
cash-poor customer, Bone's Refco office accorded her privileged treatment
generally reserved only for investors with deep pockets or proven records. The
Blair-Clinton investments ended in July 1979, having netted $99,537, a nearly
10,000 percent return.

On April 22, 1994, Hillary Rodham Clinton, soft-edged in a warm pink sweater and
smiling sweetly at the badgering White House reporters, acknowledged that she
had opened her account at Blair's "very strong recommendation," that Blair had
always guided her about which trades to make and that "often" he had simply
placed the trades for her. Her role, as she described it, was largely limited to
approving Blair's suggestions. But, Mrs. Clinton insisted, Blair had done this
large favor only because he and his wife were "among our very best friends."
Scorn crisping the edges of her voice, Mrs. Clinton dismissed the idea that
Blair might have meant to guarantee good will towards Tyson Foods with his
$100,000 boon to the Governor and his wife. "I found it a little bit surprising
that anyone would suggest that," Mrs. Clinton said, "because, in 1980, right
during the time that this was all going on, when my husband ran for re-election,
Tyson supported his opponent."

Mrs. Clinton's artful explanation notwithstanding, the records show that she had
concluded her commodities trading with Blair by July 1979 -- more than a year
before the next gubernatorial campaign. For his part, Tyson says today that he
never knew about the financial arrangements between his attorney and the
Clintons until he read about them in The New York Times earlier this year. But
Tyson also says the reason he didn't support Bill Clinton in 1980 is not because
he couldn't buy Clinton's favors in 1978. It was because Tyson thought he had
indeed obtained a favor -- the promised truck weight increase. But Clinton had
failed to deliver his part of the bargain. "He didn't raise the limit," Tyson
says.

The fact is, even if he had wanted to, Governor Clinton could probably not have
pushed the higher truck weight through the Legislature. The opposition of the
powerful Arkansas Highway Commission -- on the grounds that heavier trucks would
damage the state's highways -- was just too strong. But Tyson blamed the young
Governor for not even making the fight. "He never even tried to get it through,"
Tyson says.

And so, when Clinton ran again for Governor in 1980, against a little-known
Republican businessman named Frank White, Tyson took revenge: "I said, 'Hell,
I'll support Frank White.' "

Clinton lost the 1980 election, a defeat that threatened to end his political
career. But in 1982, after a brutal campaign against White, he won back the
Governor's seat. Tyson, who had backed White a second time, watched with
interest to see what the resurrected Governor would do about the truck weight
limit, which remained unchanged despite White's support of an increase. Almost
immediately after taking office again in 1983, Clinton maneuvered the
80,000-pound limit through the Legislature by linking it to a special tax on the
heavier trucks, to pay for potential road damage. And when Clinton ran for
re-election in 1984, Tyson supported him, as he has in every election since. He
is refreshingly candid about why. "He started running the state better and
learned a few lessons," Tyson says, "And, hell, my trucks were running full,
80,000 pounds."

HE 42D PRESIDENT IS AN IMPRESSIVE THINKER, a talented political performer and
something of a visionary. Indeed, although Bill Clinton has been largely
successful (for better and worse) in presenting himself as a moderate, he is, in
a true and unpejorative sense of the word, a radical, committed to a level of
change far more ambitious than that of most Presidents. Through his ability to
speak with both uncommon intelligence and a common touch, he has advanced issues
that had been frozen for years in a left-right stalemate, most notably health
care, welfare and crime. The expanded earned-income tax credit program he won
from Congress last year was a historic measure, the Government's first real
attempt to guarantee that no one who works full time and has a family to support
would fall below the poverty line. The health care reform he is trying to get
through Congress this year would be the most significant expansion of
entitlements since the creation of Social Security and among the most ambitious
efforts at social engineering in the nation's history. The Clinton
Administration is the first to openly (if at times gingerly) embrace the idea of
according protected minority status to homosexuals. The Clinton welfare-reform
bill may not entirely meet the grand campaign promise of "ending welfare as we
know it," but it nevertheless represents a genuine attempt to impose the
toughest work requirements ever attached to welfare, the first serious effort by
any President, Democrat or Republican, to stop the disastrous generational cycle
of America's dole society. Because Clinton is President, it has become harder
now for criminals and lunatics to arm themselves, and easier for parents to take
time off work without losing their jobs.

So why doesn't all of this seem to matter more? Why doesn't Bill Clinton get
more credit for his successes, and less vilification for his failures, which
seem to loom so large? Why does the President get so little respect? The problem
is not just criticism from the right, where many passionately loathe Clinton.
That is to be expected; conservatives understand, if liberals do not, how
serious the President is about dramatic change. What threatens this President
seems to be much larger than mere partisanship. There is a level of mistrust and
even dislike of him that is almost visceral in its intensity. In Washington,
where power is generally treated with genuflecting reverence, it is no longer
surprising to hear the President spoken of with open and dismissive contempt. In
mainstream journalism and even more so in popular entertainment, President
Clinton is routinely depicted in the most unflattering terms: a liar, a fraud, a
chronically indecisive man who cannot be trusted to stand for anything -- or
with anyone.

Bob Woodward, in his book "The Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House,"
describes the President as a lost leader, berating himself and his aides for
selling out the populist promise of his campaign to satisfy Wall Street, being
berated in turn by his own Vice President to "get with the goddamn program." At
a television town-hall gathering in North Carolina, a woman confronted the
President: "Many of us Americans are having a hard time with your credibility.
How can you earn back our trust?" At another public event, a newspaper editor
informed the President that his explanations on Whitewater reminded him of his
young daughter's excuses for undone homework. The political columnist Joe Klein,
once one of Clinton's great fans, writes that the President's idea of character
is "adolescent, unformed, half-baked," and that "with the Clintons, the story is
always subject to further revision," as "trust is squandered in dribs and
drabs."

Much of this is unfair, some of it is irrational and some of it has more to do
with the savagery of an angry and fearful time than it does with Clinton
personally. It is true as well that Clinton suffers from a fundamental handicap;
in the unusual three-way race of 1992, he was elected with only 43 percent of
the vote, putting him in office with one of the weakest bases of support any
President has ever had. But there is a fundamental reason for Clinton's plight.
Bill Clinton is the first President since Richard Nixon to be threatened with
the awful intimacy of rejection not simply as a leader or as a politician but as
a person. As was also true with Nixon, this threat flows from a deep source, an
abiding public doubt about the ethical content of the President's character.
Such doubt is quite different from the criticisms of job performance that plague
every President. It is an assessment of the man as a whole, of what is bred in
the bone, one of those national gut decisions that happen in politics, something
that solidifies after the accumulation of evidence passes some unseen tipping
point: Lincoln is honest, Carter is weak, Reagan is decent but doddering, Bush
is a wimp. Only Richard Nixon and now Bill Clinton have been tagged with
nicknames that reflected a popular suspicion that the President of the United
States could not be fully trusted: Tricky Dick and Slick Willie.

What plagued Nixon, and now Clinton, is that this sort of judgment is extremely
difficult to overcome; it is almost entirely impervious to the machinations of
speech writers and political consultants, and even to substantive achievements
of office. Bill Clinton ran for President promising to revive the economy and
bring about universal health care. Less than halfway through his term, the
economy is in strong shape and health care reform in some form is almost
assured. Most Americans acknowledge these achievements. According to a New York
Times-CBS poll in mid-July, 53 percent of Americans view the economy as healthy,
compared with only 23 percent when Clinton took office. Seventy-nine percent
think universal health care is "very important." Yet the public is strongly
disinclined to give Clinton credit. The Times-CBS poll found that 63 percent of
Americans think Clinton has made no progress in improving the economy. Even more
startling, 60 percent say Clinton has made no progress in advancing health care
insurance. The President's overall approval, which has never risen more than
about 10 points beyond the 43 percent mark, has dropped precipitously in the
past six months; 47 percent of the public disapprove of the way Clinton is doing
his job and only 42 percent approve.

Nixon's problems were rooted in the record of his life, and Clinton's are, too,
in the things he has said and done to get where he is today. Clinton's life
trails him like a peculiarly single-minded mugger, popping out from the shadows
every time it seems the President is for a moment safe -- to whack the
staggering victim anew. The past has slugged Clinton so often, so publicly and
so brutally, that its attacks have become known, in the pop-culture shorthand
that signifies universal acquaintanceship, by their tabloid handles: Gennifer,
the Draft, I Didn't Inhale, Whitewater, Troopergate, Hillary's Commodities,
Paula Jones. Each episode has moved the national assessment closer to the
tipping point.

What makes this sad, even tragic, rather than merely sordid, is that Bill
Clinton's predicament owes itself directly to Bill Clinton's promise. The
President's problems did not come about because he was a cheap political hack.
They came about because he was not. For what has happened to Clinton has
happened because he wanted, more than anything in life, to get to where he is
today, and because he wanted this, at least in part, in order to do good -- and
because the great goal of doing good gave him license to indulge in the everyday
acts of minor corruption and compromise and falsity that the business of
politics demands. Bill Clinton was perceptive enough to master politics -- but
not perceptive enough to see what politics was doing to him.

CIRCUMSTANCES OF BOTH NATURE and nurture set Bill Clinton up for a life in
politics. The Hollywood version of Clinton's life, produced for his 1992
Presidential campaign, centered on his early childhood "in a place called Hope,"
a parable of small-town innocence and working-class roots. But Clinton really
grew up in the old gangster city of Hot Springs, where his mother, Virginia, had
moved when he was 6. As she describes it in her recent, posthumously published
memoirs, "Leading With My Heart," Hot Springs was "a town in which the con job
was considered an art form," and the home of the some of the most thoroughly
crooked politics in America. The city of Clinton's youth was a place where
whorehouses and illegal gambling halls thrived under police protection, where
the retired New York mobster Owney Madden was a celebrated citizen and the
town's leading madam was another, where illegal gambling and liquor sales were
routine -- a place, Virginia writes, "where gangsters were cool, and rules were
made to be bent, and money and power -- however you got them -- were the total
measure of a man."

Virginia and her second husband, Roger (Dude) Clinton, were not peripheral
citizens but successful members of the Hot Springs business and political
establishment. Virginia built what was for three decades a successful practice
as a nurse-anesthetist, and Roger was employed at his brother Raymond's thriving
Buick dealership. In her memoirs, Virginia Kelley (as she was known at the time
of her death in January) describes a family that always had a big, comfortable
home, at least one late-model Buick convertible in the garage and enough
spending money to indulge in frequent night-clubbing and gambling with a group
of "running buddies" that included many of the men who ran Hot Springs. Indeed,
the Clintons themselves were important political players: Roger's brother Roy
was a member of the State Legislature from 1951 to 1954, and his brother
Raymond, the family leader whom Clinton has described as a father figure, was a
behind-the-scenes power in town. He made his Buick dealership "a gathering place
for powerful, politically savvy men in Hot Springs," Kelley writes. "The big
wheels."

One critical point that the young Clinton could not have failed to notice was
that people who had power and connections could do things that other people
could not. Kelley's unblushing account makes it clear that Roger Clinton and his
friends had a long history of getting away with crimes and acts of drunken
violence. She writes, offhandedly, that before she met Roger, Raymond had used
his influence to get Roger out of trouble with the Hot Springs police after he
had "bashed a Puerto Rican boy in the head with a cue stick." In later years,
Kelley recounts, there was a litany of violent occasions: "the night I danced
with a man at the Tower Club and Roger Clinton beat him to a pulp"; Roger
punching and kicking her at a public dance; Roger and his drinking buddies
driving roaring drunk down the highways; nights the cops were called to the
Clinton home to protect her and her sons.

And the lesson was not merely that the right people could get away with doing
wrong. As Kelley describes her philosophy, the right people -- herself, her
family and friends -- couldn't really do wrong.

In the two years and eight months of her marriage to her first husband, Bill
Blythe, Kelley writes, he never told her of his previous three marriages or that
he had fathered at least one child besides Bill. Of her third husband, Jeff
Dwire, Kelley writes that her friends suspected him of being "a con man," and of
running a house of prostitution out of his beauty salon. Kelley says she "never
believed" those "awful rumors." In 1961 Dwire was indicted on 25 counts of stock
fraud (for which he was ultimately convicted and sentenced to nine months in
prison) for his part in a scheme in which he and a partner bilked small-time
investors of more than $32,000 by pretending they were producing a movie on the
life of the gangster Pretty Boy Floyd. As far as Kelley was concerned, "that one
mistake wasn't a reflection of the inner man."

Kelley calls her approach to life "brainwashing," and describes it in clear
terms: "Inside my head, I construct an airtight box. I keep inside what I want
to think about, and everything else stays beyond the walls. Inside is white,
outside is black . . . Inside is love and friends and optimism. Outside is
negativity, can't-doism and any criticism of me and mine."

Also outside the parameters of Kelley's construct were the past and the future;
she insisted on living in the present. "I've always felt the past is
irrelevant," she writes. "I've always maintained that whatever's in someone's
past is past, and I don't need to know about it." As for the future: "I've
trained myself not to worry about what-ifs, either. . . . And when bad things do
happen, I brainwash myself to put them out of my mind." Kelley's relentless
accentuation of the positive must have been a great help in dealing with years
of adversity, and Bill Clinton clearly owes much of his own optimism, tenacity
and resilience to his mother's inspiration. Clinton also may owe to Kelley the
character trait that was perhaps the essential determinant of his political
success -- an unusually large need for adulation, a hunger for afffirmation from
others so intense that approval is seen almost as an entitlement. "I think Bill
and Roger and I are all alike in that way," Kelley writes. "When we walk into a
room, we want to win that room over. Some would even say we need to win that
room over, and maybe that's true. Roger says the three of us, if there are 100
in a room and 99 of them love us and one doesn't, we'll spend all night trying
to figure out why that one hasn't been enlightened."

This powerful need doubtless had a great deal to do with turning Clinton into
the remarkable political performer he is, a campaigner driven to treat each
encounter with a prospective voter as an occasion for seduction, an opportunity
to win another's love. But this need also made him peculiarly vulnerable to the
universal temptation of political life -- to tell people what they want to hear.
Kelley's philosophy could only have encouraged this behavior. Her world view
taught, ultimately, that people are not to be judged by their actions, but are
endlessly free to reinvent themselves, to be whatever the moment demands. Since
"what ifs" do not exist, one needn't worry that the promise of the moment cannot
be met in the future, or that the action of the moment might have a harmful
consequence. Since the "irrelevant" past does not really exist either, the
actions of the moment cease to exist once the moment becomes the past, and
cannot be held against one later.

Kelley describes herself as a natural performer who craved to be the center of
admiring attention, and it is noteworthy that the early ambition of both of her
sons was to be a popular music star like Kelley's idol, Elvis Presley. Roger
Clinton never advanced beyond that adolescent dream; Bill Clinton, recognizing
his true talents, put aside his saxophone and turned to politics.

Clinton's career began while he still a student at Hot Springs High School,
where he was president of his junior class, the Beta Club (for academic
achievers) and the Kiwanis Key Club. By his late teens, Clinton was already a
semi-professional politician, so greatly in demand as a civics club speaker and
leader of charitable fund drives that his high-school principal had to limit his
engagements in order to protect his schooling.

It was clear early on that Clinton possessed great political gifts. He was
intelligent, charming and driven, and he had an extraordinary gift for intimacy,
a chameleonlike quality of immense value in politics. All sorts of people,
meeting Clinton, saw someone much like themselves. Like his hero, John F.
Kennedy, he was at home on stage or in front of a camera.

Moreover, Clinton was precisely the kind of budding politician to appeal to the
Arkansas powers. In an age of radicalism, he was an instinctive
establishmentarian. He was a joiner: the calculus club, the advanced math club
Mu Alpha Theta, DeMolay (an organization of "future leaders"), the Junior
Classical League, the Bio-Chem-Phy Club, the marching band, concert band, stage
band and pep band. He was the right kind of achiever: a National Merit
Scholarship semifinalist, winner of the Hot Springs High School Civitan Junior
Businessman Award and the Elks Youth Leadership Award for Arkansas, accepted at
Georgetown, Oxford and Yale. He was not a bomb-thrower or even a boat-rocker. He
ran for his first college office, the 1964 freshman class presidency of
Georgetown University, on a platform of solid, modest reform. After his victory,
he informed the college newspaper that "the freshman year is not the time for
crusading, but for building a strong unit for the future. You must know the
rules before you can change them."

A young man of such obvious promise would have been encouraged in any state, but
in a poor, chronically put-upon state like Arkansas, he was particularly prized.
As A. J. Liebling once noted, the states of the old Confederacy are always
searching for those exceptional "national" political talents, the bright young
men who will go to Washington and make those damn Yankees stop their endless
sneering. But neither Clinton's inarguable appeal nor his inarguable talent for
wooing support explain why so many people were willing, and would always be
willing, to do so much to further his ambitions. The real explanation lies in
the conviction, held by Clinton's elders and friends, as well as by Clinton
himself, that he was ambitious for the right reasons -- because he wanted power
in order to do good.

"We all believed, at that time, that the most noble direction we could take was
to serve in elective or appointive office," recalled David Mixner, a longtime
Clinton friend and liberal political activist, in an interview with the Clinton
biographer Robert E. Levin. "He really deeply believed that Government could
feed people, that we could end war, that poverty did not have to be a permanent
condition, that we could make our country great and prosperous and that our
generation would be the one to do it."

The danger in this admirable thought was that it led, almost inevitably, to a
logical successor: that the advance of a generational idealist like Bill Clinton
was a moral imperative -- one that justified any means necessary. The acceptance
of this rationalization was the signal event in the development of Clinton's
character -- the ur-compromise from which all later compromises would flow. It
occurred when Clinton was only 23, in response to the first great crisis in his
life, the Vietnam War.

For Clinton, as for so many men of his generation, Vietnam would be the
crucible, the testing ground that would shape their characters forever.
Clinton's successful multiyear effort to avoid the Vietnam draft reached its
apex in April 1969, when he was a Rhodes scholar at Oxford and received an
induction notice from the Hot Springs draft board. At his request, the induction
was postponed for two months so that he could finish his term. That summer, he
returned to Arkansas and won a deferment on the strength of his pledge to enroll
in the Reserved Officers Training Corps program at the University of Arkansas,
whose law school he said he planned to attend once he'd finished at Oxford. It
was a move of desperation. The R.O.T.C. deferment could protect him for four
more years, but would at the same time commit him to two undesirable courses of
action: attending the University of Arkansas Law School instead of the far more
prestigious one at Yale and serving a lengthy stint in the Army reserves after
graduation. The deferment was granted on Aug. 7, 1969, and was put into effect
immediately, protecting Clinton from the draft for two crucial months in which
the Hot Springs draft board inducted two younger men.

On Oct. 30, Clinton was reclassified 1-A. He has said that this was his idea,
and that he took this step because he had come to feel, after several years of
maneuvering to avoid the draft, a moral obligation to take his chances along
with the other young men of his community. But Clinton's timing suggests
otherwise; he changed his draft status only after President Nixon had announced
that inductions would be sharply decreased and that graduate students, like
Clinton, would be allowed to finish the school year even if drafted, thus
guaranteeing protection through the late spring of 1970. Moreover, Nixon had
begun winding the war down; 25,000 troops had already been withdrawn, and the
Administration was reportedly considering withdrawing all troops by the end of
1970. On Nov. 26, Congress enacted the new draft lottery system, and on Dec. 1,
Clinton's birth date was assigned the number 311, high enough that he knew he
would never be called. On Dec. 2, in violation of his promise to enroll in the
R.O.T.C. program at the University of Arkansas, Clinton applied to Yale Law
School. On Dec. 3, he sent a letter explaining his actions (and seeking the
approval he craved even from someone he had deceived) to Col. Eugene Holmes, the
Army R.O.T.C. commander at the University of Arkansas.

The now-famous Holmes letter, made public during the 1992 campaign, captures the
young Clinton at a crossroads. On one hand, the writer of this letter is
obviously and passionately concerned with doing, and being, good. But the letter
also captures, with shattering clarity, a young man learning to rationalize acts
of deception and compromise as necessary in the pursuit of that good -- which
Clinton now regarded as inseparable from his own political advancement.

In his carefully crafted explanation of his thinking, Clinton made clear that he
regarded the draft as 'illegitimate," and the Vietnam War as immoral. He
described two close friends who had openly resisted the draft as heroes, and
portrayed the path of the conscientious objector as the honorable one for anyone
opposed to the war. But in the end, Clinton wrote, he decided to put the moral
imperative of his political success above his principles:

"I decided to accept the draft in spite of my beliefs for one reason: to
maintain my political viability within the system. For years, I have worked to
prepare myself for a political life characterized by both practical political
ability and concern for rapid social progress. It is a life I still feel
compelled to try to lead."

Here, astonishing in its hubris, is the idea at last expressed in its
all-excusing force. Other young men of Clinton's generation might justify their
actions regarding Vietnam on the grounds of simple self-interest: they did not
want to lose their lives to a stupid war. Clinton decided that his self-interest
was the same as his country's. He was acting for the sake of the nation's
future.

The Arkansas that Bill Clinton came home to in the summer of 1973 after getting
his law degree at Yale was in middle of the most significant generational reform
movements since the late 1940's. Clinton plunged immediately into it, with a
1974 challenge to the popular Republican Representative John Paul Hammerschmidt
of the Third Congressional District, which covered most of northwestern
Arkansas. That included Fayetteville, where Clinton had accepted a teaching
position at the University of Arkansas Law School. Although Clinton was unlikely
to win against Hammerschmidt, he nevertheless attracted strong backing,
beginning with his family connections and expanding quickly throughout the
Democratic establishment.

In the Democratic primary and in the general election, both the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
and the Arkansas Education Association supported Clinton, as did consumer
groups, the United Mine Workers and some of the angels of Arkansas politics,
most notably Don Tyson. According to Meredith Oakley, the author of "On the
Make: The Rise of Bill Clinton," Clinton was able to outspend Hammerschmidt by
$20,000. In his campaign, Clinton was much aided by his de facto campaign
manager and wife-to-be, a young woman whose reformist zeal surpassed even his.
By running hard on an anti-big-business platform and by unfairly tarring
Hammerschmidt with Watergate, the young candidate nearly pulled off what would
have been a tremendous upset, winning nearly 49 percent of the vote.

Falling back on his teaching job, Clinton immediately began planning his next
race, a run for Attorney General that he won as expected in 1976. The new
Attorney General was a populist reformer in the classic Arkansas style:
anti-utilities, anti-big-business, pro-environment, pro-working class. Every
week, he and his young staff attacked the utility companies over rate hikes and
other issues, pushed environmental issues and energy conservation and sued local
dairy farms and General Motors. He worked all the time, and kept his name before
increasingly impressed voters through frequent photo ops and media shows that
demonstrated his deepening understanding of the new performance art of
television politics. After only one two-year term as Attorney General, Clinton
won the Governor's seat, becoming, at 32, the youngest chief executive in the
nation.

Much of what the new Governor did in his first term, in 1979 and 1980, was
relatively uncontroversial. For instance, he increased spending on public
education by 40 percent and expanded legal, health and social services for the
elderly.  But a good deal of it directly challenged the moneyed interests.
Clinton did not merely alienate Don Tyson and his fellow poultry barons; he took
on the entire host of Arkansas angels: the utilities, the timber interests and
the trucking companies.

The Administration's most famous and popular battles were fought against the
Arkansas Power and Light Company, a perennial target of reform governors. The
"whiz kids" who ran Clinton's new Energy Department -- Scott Trotter, Walter
Nixon 3d, Basil Copeland and Jerry Lawson -- made headlines with a suit that
forced the utility to refund to its customers $8.5 million in overcharges, and
challenged the company over its secret plans to pass on to Arkansans up to
one-third of the cost for Grand Gulf nuclear plant, which was being built near
Port Gibson, Miss., by A.P.&L. and two other Southern utilities.

Thus, in 1980, when the first-term Governor ran for what was expected to be an
easy re-election, it wasn't just Don Tyson who was looking for revenge. Much of
the entire corporate establishment of Arkansas lined up behind Frank White, a
Little Rock investment banker and political neophyte. The timber companies and
the Stephens family, financiers who wielded immense political power, either
supported White or sat on their wallets. Both A.P.&L. and Southwestern Bell
openly endorsed White, contributing heavily. When financial disclosure reports
were filed a few weeks before Election Day, Clinton, who had expected to far
outraise his relatively unknown opponent, was shocked to learn that White had
collected an impressive $400,000.

The fat cats' backing allowed White to run an aggressive, late-campaign series
of television commercials attacking the arrogance and incompetence of the
Clinton Administration. White won the election, and Clinton became the youngest
ex-governor in the nation. White's first official act as Governor was a gift to
A.P.&L.: he abolished the Energy Department and fired the whiz kids.

Clinton brooded about his first real political setback, potentially fatal to his
long-term ambitions. Publicly, he blamed himself for losing touch with the
people. In private conversations with friends, he attributed his failure at
least equally to losing touch with the moneyed interests.

"During his lame-duck period, I went to his office to visit him," recalls
Trotter. "He was in this real funk, and he told me that after the news got out
about Grand Gulf, A.P.&L. went out and raised a lot of money for Frank White,
and that this money had enabled White to run the negative TV ads late in the
campaign that Clinton figured cost him the race. The message was: If we hadn't
done this thing, he'd still be Governor."

Clinton's traumatic defeat took its place alongside the Vietnam draft as a
watershed in his development. His first term as Governor had been a grand
experiment in reform, motivated both by ideals and by political instincts that
told him change was what the voters wanted. Where had all this got him? The
voters had paid little attention to his successes, and had held his failures
greatly against him. The angels, on the other hand, had paid close attention to
what Clinton had done, and had punished him for it.

The lesson was clear: to be successful, a politician had to appear hugely
concerned with bettering the lives of ordinary citizens but had to be careful to
avoid acting on those concerns so aggressively that they threatened the
interests of the business elite. Exiled to an office in the Little Rock law firm
of Wright, Lindsey & Jennings, Clinton pondered how he could win votes as a
populist reformer and still raise money as a businessman's Democrat. Arkansas
political observers credit two people, Jim Blair and a tough political operative
from Texas named Betsey Wright, with teaching the defeated Governor how to walk
the line between the two competing demands. "It was Betsey who taught him --
hammered it into his head, really -- the idea that perception was reality,"
recalls Brownie Ledbetter, president of the reformist Arkansas Fairness Council.
"That became the battle cry of the new Clinton approach."

Bill Clinton had never been much good at the old style of populism, the
bellowing, wisecracking, denunciatory style practiced by Arkansas candidates
since the days of Jeff Davis. But his own natural style -- his intuitive desire
to please, his chameleonesque habit of becoming whoever he was with, his talent
for losing himself in the moment -- was ideally suited to the new style of
perception-based populism, primarily defined by television. The small screen did
something perverse. It diminished and distorted the traditional thunderers of
politics, translating their grand oratorical sweeps and outsize physical
gestures into cartoons. Clinton realized that the new medium permitted a much
more sophisticated level of communication with voters, by playing intimate
scenes before the camera as if the camera weren't there. He understood that the
camera rewarded the evocation of a different kind of sincerity in politics. It
transmitted more than words; it transmitted performances, and the performances
it transmitted most effectively were all about seduction.

The right words and the right nonverbal signals -- the way in which a politician
stood, sat, listened, laughed, smiled, frowned -- combined to create a message
that overrode the content of the words alone. If a politician was good at this,
he could create not only a political reality out of perception, but also several
conflicting realities at the same time, subtly manipulating the nuances of
language, voice, expression and body posture so that each member of his audience
saw and heard what he wanted to see and hear. It was possible to speak even on a
subject that aroused sharp division -- abortion or affirmative action or welfare
-- and have people on opposing sides perceive the speaker to be one of them.

Bill Clinton was beyond good at this new political performance art. When he
spoke, perception was not only reality. It was a reality that changed,
quicksilver-quick, from eye to eye and ear to ear. "You and Clinton might
disagree totally on a subject and you'll never know it unless you listen closely
to every word," marveled Robert S. McCord, executive editor of The Arkansas
Democrat, in 1978. "Most people don't. They rely on tone of voice and facial
expressions, which from Clinton, will never be harsh or unpleasant . . .
Liberals and conservatives alike go away from him thinking he's one bright
fellow."

In the 1982 campaign to regain the Statehouse, Clinton appeared to run hard as a
populist. He accused White of being the tool of the moneyed interests, telling a
Democratic Women's Club audience: "He's got half a million dollars because the
people who wanted decisions from the Governor's office paid for them." Diane
Blair, an Arkansas political scientist (and the wife of Jim Blair) later wrote
that Clinton's ads "portrayed White as an untrustworthy, interest-dominated
plutocrat who might run with the good-old-boy hounds by day but slept with the
utility foxes at night, while Clinton was just a caring and concerned, down-home
Baptist family man who wanted nothing more than another chance to fight the fat
cats on behalf of the little guys."

Publicly and frequently, Clinton embraced his former energy whiz kids Trotter
and Nixon, who were themselves campaigning for a 1982 ballot referendum to
reform the state's regulation of the utilities. "Clinton made a big media deal
out of signing our petition to put the reform on the ballot, and during the
primary season, he exploited the hell out of the issue," Trotter says now. "We
had a flat commitment from him that he would enact our reforms if he got back
in."

But offstage, Clinton took pains to establish a cordial and lucrative
relationship with the big-money interests against whom he was railing. To that
end, he appointed as his finance chairman a small-town banker named W. Maurice
Smith, a second-generation political heavyweight and formidable fund raiser.
"Smith's wealthy friends were numerous," the Arkansas columnist Oakley has
written. "His selection as finance chair in the 1982 campaign -- and all
subsequent Clinton re-election campaigns -- was one of the smartest decisions
Clinton made." With Smith's help, Clinton raised more than $1 million, then a
record. When Clinton regained office, Smith came along as the resurrected
Governor's executive assistant.

From 1983 until he resigned halfway through his fifth term to seek the
Presidency, Governor Clinton achieved a number of moderate reforms. He opened up
high-level government jobs to blacks and women. He helped win passage of the
first ethics law for elected officials in Arkansas's history. He greatly
increased spending on social services. He developed tax-credit and bond-issuing
programs to create thousands of new jobs, although most of them were low-paying.
He and his wife, who had established herself as a powerful figure in Arkansas
political and legal circles, worked to fashion a settlement that ended a
long-running lawsuit over Little Rock schools, which had resegregated along
residential lines. He established some regulatory controls on Arkansas's largest
pollution problem, animal wastes. His showpiece act, the 1983 education reform,
primarily designed and sold by Mrs. Clinton, won large increases in
tax-generated financing for state schools and established a mandatory competency
test for public-school teachers and standarized testing of students. He
sponsored improvements in the prison system, the child-welfare system and the
administration of juvenile justice.

But he would never again take on the angels with anything like the vigor of his
first term. "A big intersection of interests -- timber, farms, A.P.&L., the
Stephenses -- was aligned against Clinton when he took office again in the early
80's, and I think there was basically a conscious decision not to antagonize any
of these guys anymore," says Ernest Dumas, a veteran Little Rock political
writer and editor. "Clinton, in essence, said, 'Fellas, I'm going to concentrate
all my energies on education reform.' Well, that was fine with the interests.
They were for education reform. It would be nice to be able to hire people who
could read and write, and it didn't hurt them any."

And Clinton's other reforms -- many of which came about as a result of Federal
court decisions forced by class-action and interest-group litigation -- often
turned out to be much grander in the selling than in their real effects.
Clinton's 1983 education reform was a classic case in point. With the promise
that teacher testing would rid the schools of incompetent educators, Governor
Clinton had won broad public support for a tax increase to finance his education
program. What was actually delivered struck many in Arkansas as a cynical
exercise: a test that could be passed by teachers possessing only
eighth-grade-level skills in language and math. Teachers were coached in special
workshops, and those who failed were allowed to retake the test.

Perhaps the most striking example of the discrepancy between what Clinton the
populist Governor promised and what Clinton the businessman's Democrat Governor
delivered came in his handling of issues involving Arkansas Power and Light.

Two of the original energy whiz kids, Scott Trotter and Walter Nixon, maintain
that Clinton won re-election in 1982, at least partly, on the strength of his
opposition to the utilities. "But when he was re-elected, we did not go back to
work," Nixon recalls. "He did not recreate the Energy Department, did not
re-engage on the energy issues which he believed had helped get him defeated in
1980, never followed through again with any fervor on energy reform."

Publicly, Clinton remained committed to the fight. In his first month back in
office, the Governor introduced eight utility reform bills that encompassed many
of his campaign promises. But only three of the weakest bills passed, and the
four that were the centerpieces of his reforms were killed. Trotter charges that
Clinton, while officially urging passage of the bills, never really fought for
them. "We pushed and pulled and poked, but he was completely dilatory," Trotter
said. "He and I argued about it in his office before I quit, and he just said
that he didn't need the utility issue anymore. He was going into education."

Clinton's handling of Don Tyson evolved similarly. During the 1980's, Tyson
Foods grew at an explosive rate, climbing to $4.2 billion in sales in 1993. It
became the largest chicken processor in the world, controlling more than 20
percent of the American market and churning out more than 80 million pounds of
chicken products every week. Critics among Arkansas's environmental and labor
groups found much to object to in the way Tyson did business. One growing
complaint was that the huge volume of animal waste -- especially the
euphemistically named "litter" from chicken houses, much of it generated by
Tyson's ever-expanding empire -- was seriously polluting Arkansas's crystalline
rivers and streams. In one famous incident that took place shortly after Clinton
was restored to office in 1983, the sewage system in the town of Green Forest,
which had been for years overloaded by Tyson-produced animal waste, dumped so
much raw sewage into Dry Creek that a giant sinkhole formed, sending largely
untreated sewage into the aquifer that supplied much of the local drinking water
at a rate of one million gallons a day.

Clinton's response to the pollution issue was typical of his new style.
Seventeen months after the Green Forest crisis, he declared a state of "disaster
emergency." That same year, the state environmental agency, which had been given
enforcement powers for the first time by Clinton, began enforcing long-ignored
directives to Tyson to pretreat waste from its Green Forest processing plant.
But the state failed to levy any fines against the company or to sue it for
damages. That was left to a group of outraged citizens, who eventually prevailed
in a 1989 judgment that found Tyson Foods guilty of 43 violations of the Clean
Water Act.

On the question of how poultry wastes should be handled in general, Clinton
waited until 1990. He appointed a commission, the Animal Waste Task Force, which
deliberated until November 1992 and then issued guidelines that called for
state-enforced regulation of the liquid animal wastes produced by cattle and hog
farmers, while allowing the poultry industry to comply with the guidelines
voluntarily. "Thousands of Arkansas poultry producers should be pleased,"
declared Poultry Times, the industry newspaper.

Certainly, the people at Tyson Foods noticed a difference in the Governor. "I
think the defeat of 1980 was a watershed in his poltical career," says Archie
Schaffer, a Tyson public relations official. "He came back in '82 with a
different attitude, much less confrontational with the business community and
others in the so-called establishment, much more conciliatory. . . . After he
was reelected, he pushed some mildly controversial, progressive things, but I
don't remember him ever again pushing any big controversial thing that he was
willing to die for."

Clinton and his supporters have long argued that these sorts of compromises were
necessary in a chronically poor state like Arkansas, where the urgencies of
economic growth necessitate concessions to business. The point is, to a degree,
valid. But it is also true that early in his career Clinton began to garner a
reputation in Arkansas that now besets him nationally, a reputation for
slipperiness and waffling in excess of even the norm of politics. The nickname
Slick Willie, originally made popular by the Arkansas columnist Paul Greenberg
in 1982, passed into common usage among the Governor's critics on the right and
the left and soon stuck with the public. Jokes about Clinton's honesty, about
his predilection for saying whatever his listener of the moment wanted to hear,
about his willingness to reverse himself, were common midway through his second
term and grew steadily through his five terms as Governor.

One Clinton characteristic that attracted increasing critical attention was his
readiness to do favors for current or potential financial supporters. There were
two paradigmatic cases, both involving revenue bonds issued by the Arkansas
Housing Development Agency and its 1985 successor, the Arkansas Development
Finance Authority.

In 1989, the nation's largest nursing home company, Beverly Enterprises, was in
deep financial trouble. The company, with more than 1,000 nursing homes in 40
states, had suffered crippling losses in 1988 and 1989, and had agreed to a
restructuring requiring it to sell off some facilities to pay off its debt by
1991. The fate of Beverly was of intense interest to the Stephens family, whose
brokerage house, Stephens Inc., held all of the company's preferred stock, worth
approximately $100 million. Three Stephens appointees sat on Beverly's
eight-member board, and the Stephenses also served as Beverly's well-paid
financial advisers.

Beverly, guided by the Stephenses and the Rose Law Firm in Little Rock, where
Hillary Rodham Clinton had become a partner, put together a $149 million plan to
sell off all of Beverly's nursing homes in four states. A Rose lawyer, William
H. Kennedy 3d, served as counsel to Beverly in the matter. (Kennedy, who had
joined Mrs. Clinton, Vincent Foster and Webster Hubbell to form a powerful
clique at the firm, is currently serving as an associate White House counsel.)
The deal worked out by Beverly, with advice from Stephens and the Rose firm, was
precisely the sort of arrangement the future First Lady would have called a
health care rip-off. It was designed to take advantage of a loophole in the 1986
Tax Reform Act by using government-issued bonds to finance the sale of Beverly's
nursing homes to nonprofit "shell" companies that were, in fact, fronting for
for-profit companies.

The first sale was completed in August 1989, when Beverly sold 45 nursing homes
to a Texas investor named Bruce Whitehead. The deal, essentially a tax-exempt,
leveraged buyout, was structured around a series of transactions that ended with
Whitehead holding most of the homes in a nonprofit shell company called Care
Initiatives. Whitehead put up no money in the deal; the creation of Care
Initiatives (then Mercy Health Initiatives) was capitalized almost entirely
through the issuance and sale of $86 million in tax-exempt bonds from the Iowa
Finance Authority. Iowa courts later ruled that the entire transaction had been
designed to generate "millions of dollars of excessive profits" for the
principals in the transaction -- at the expense of Iowa taxpayers. All told, the
courts found, the businessmen, lawyers and underwriters involved made in excess
of $20 million, a profit that District Court Judge Gene L. Needles called
"unconscionable."

The second deal put together by Beverly, the Stephenses and the Rose firm was a
replication of the first, involving the same parties and structure. The only
difference was that it was set up in Arkansas. Pride House Care Corporation of
Dallas, another Whitehead concoction, would buy Beverly's 32 nursing homes or
leases. The sale was to be financed by $81 million in revenue bonds issued by
the Arkansas Development Finance Authority.

The Finance Authority's preliminary limited-offering memorandum describing the
proposed bond issue made it embarrassingly clear that the state agency knew
Whitehead's companies were nothing but shells. As the offering put it,
Whitehead's Pride House Care "has no assets and has not acquired any facilities,
nor does it operate any" and has "no current operations and therefore has no
employees." The state justified the sale on the grounds that Arkansas could not
afford to see Beverly collapse and that the large institutional investors who
would finance the deal through their bond purchases would, in any case, bear all
the risks. As was the case in Iowa, the proposed deal would greatly enrich those
who fashioned it. Whitehead was to make an immediate $1.9 million profit, and
lawyers and underwriters would make off with $6.4 million. The Finance
Authority, presided over by its Clinton-appointed president, Robert Nash, had
already tentatively approved the transaction when news reports began to raise
serious questions.

Clinton, who, as Governor, had the power to stop the Finance Authority bond
issue, remained silent through weeks of mounting public outrage. It was not
until the Arkansas Attorney General, Steve Clark, announced that "a
Beverly-Stephens Inc. representative" had offered him $100,000 in campaign
contributions if he would end his opposition to the deal that Clinton urged the
agency under his control to kill the bond issue. (The lobbyist maintained that
his offer did not constitute a bribe, and Stephens denied any connection with
the incident.)

Afterward, Clinton claimed he had opposed the deal from the beginning. Writing
in his Arkansas Gazette column, John Brummett declared: "The Governor's
assertion that he was against this proposal all along is false. The fact is that
Clinton sat by as Nash and the board approved this deal Sept. 21 -- back when it
contained those personal profits for Bruce Whitehead that the Governor now says
are so obscene."

The second controversial Finance Authority-related affair centered on a
well-known Little Rock figure named Dan Lasater. A flashy young millionaire --
at the age of 22, he had founded the Ponderosa Steakhouse chain -- Lasater, in
1980, opened a bond house that, within a year, was selling $1 billion worth of
bonds a month. In the tradition of Witt Stephens, Lasater quickly made himself a
prominent figure in local politics and society, contributing heavily to the
campaigns of Governor Clinton and other politicians. In three consecutive
Clinton gubernatorial campaigns, Lasater contributed thousands of dollars
personally, and hosted fund-raising events that netted many thousands more. But
the services did not stop there. Lasater provided Clinton use of his private jet
and hired the Governor's famously unemployable brother, Roger, as his driver and
stable hand. Once he even lent the Governor's brother $8,000 to pay off Roger's
debt to his cocaine wholesalers.

In 1982, after strongly supporting the campaign that reseated Clinton in the
Governor's office, Lasater and his partners asked to be included in Arkansas
state bond issues. Clinton agreed. "They wanted to do some business, and I said
I thought they ought to be able to compete for it," Clinton told U.S. News &
World Report in 1982. The name of Lasater and Company first appeared as an
underwriter of an Arkansas Housing Development Agency bond issue in 1983, after
Clinton was sworn in for his second term.

Over the next three years, until Lasater was convicted of distributing cocaine
in the fall of 1986 and served six months in prison, the company won assignments
to co-manage 13 bond issues from the Arkansas Development Finance Authority,
handling a total of $664 million worth of bonds, and received brokerage fees of
$1.6 million.

As in the case of Beverly nursing homes, what is telling about the Lasater
affair is Clinton's evident willingness to risk the reputation of his state and
his Administration in order to benefit a powerful financial supporter. Dan
Lasater was, to put it mildly, a known quantity in Little Rock. In the 80's, he
was the king of the city's "bond daddies," hustlers who used high-pressure,
dishonest sales tactics to peddle wildly overpriced and risky bond deals on the
telephone, and who became so famous that they gave Little Rock a new nickname in
financial circles: "Slam City," a term derived from the daddies' word for a
successful hustle -- "slamming."

Lasater and Company was one of the most prominent of the bond daddy firms, with
a downtown office where 72 salesmen worked the telephones from desks arranged in
tiers around a central pit. There, Lasater hosted after-hours, high-rolling
parties where cocaine was passed around on silver trays. "They were crooks pure
and simple," said Vernon Giss, a longtime adviser to Witt Stephens at Stephens
Inc. "They would sell bonds that had been defaulted, absolutely crooked stuff."

Warren Stephens, the president of Stephens Inc., is among the many in Little
Rock who say Bill Clinton had full knowledge of Lasater's character but allowed
him to win state business anyway. "You didn't even open the door to these
places, 'cause of all the snakes down there," Stephens says. "These guys, these
firms, smelled to high heaven."

Asked if he believes Lasater's campaign support and his helping Roger Clinton
had anything to do with the Governor's failure to oppose Lasater, Stephens says
dryly, "I would think they played a role in it, I would."

The criticism Governor Clinton faced over the Beverly and Lasater affairs were
part of a larger pattern. One of the great paradoxes of Clinton's career is that
during the years he was winning a national reputation as a courageous
truth-teller -- particularly about the problems of Democratic politics and
policies -- he was winning a reputation at home as someone who, as John Brummett
writes in his forthcoming biography of Clinton, "Highwire," "seems to have an
almost pathological inability to tell the whole truth."

Politics, in its own strange fashion, is an honest business. The rules of the
game allow small lies of omission, waffling, fudging and any amount of hedging.
But flat-out lying and acts of direct betrayal are much rarer than cynics
believe, and greatly frowned upon. The survival of the system demands this.
Every relationship in politics -- whether between voter and candidate or between
lobbyist and elected official -- is based on the assumption that a bold
statement of fact or an unhedged promise can be taken as true. And almost every
statement or promise, from the back-room deal to the campaign pledge, is
unwritten and therefore vulnerable. A politician who blatantly goes back on his
word threatens the entire fragile structure, and is likely to be punished
harshly. Consider the example of George Bush and his "read my lips" promise.
Long-term successful politicians typically measure the consequences of their
words, carefully couching the language of every pledge they make and deal they
cut in the knowledge that no one ever forgets, and almost no one forgives,
anything.

What became increasingly clear in Arkansas was that Clinton was different,
blithely and flatly promising what he couldn't deliver, reversing himself on a
position to which he had been, only moments before, firmly committed. It
sometimes seemed he would say anything to win support, or even to get through a
conversation without conflict, ignoring the consequences.

One famous evening in 1985, for example, the Governor vetoed a bill providing a
tax credit for private contributions to Arkansas colleges and universities.
After the bill, stamped "Disapproved," had been slipped under the door of the
legislative clerk's office, Clinton called the state's university presidents to
explain his decision. When they protested vehemently, the Governor sent a state
trooper to retrieve the bill. With a coat hanger, the trooper fished the bill
out from under the door and returned it to Clinton, who crossed out the prefix
"Dis" and had the trooper return the bill to the clerk's office, now "approved."
Later, after the bill caused the state unacceptable financial losses, as the
Governor's advisers had warned, Clinton was forced to call a special session of
the Legislature to amend it.

Of all the bonds of politics, the handshake deal made to insure the passage of
legislation matters the most. As Governor, Bill Clinton quickly earned a
reputation as someone who didn't understand that these agreements between
professionals were inviolate. During the legislative battles to pass the 1983
education reform, J. Bill Becker, president of the Arkansas A.F.L.-C.I.O., and
Brownie Ledbetter of the Arkansas Fairness Council, led a successful effort in
the Arkansas House to block the 1-cent sales tax increase Clinton needed to
finance his program, complaining it would hurt the poor and working class. The
Governor then proposed a deal in which he asked that Becker and Ledbetter agree
to drop their opposition in exchange for his support of an amendment offering a
rebate to poor people for the sales tax they paid on groceries. "Bill called
Becker and me in," recalls Ledbetter. "And he said, 'If you let me get this
through the House with the low-income rebate on it, I'll help you in the Senate
so the tax bill will come out in the end with the rebate attached.' So we did,
and he shafted us. When it came to the Senate, the Governor's man on the bill
made no effort at all." Clinton, speaking to reporters, explained that his
promise to Becker and Ledbetter had been nothing more than "a 24-hour
commitment." (In retrospect, Ledbetter says, it is clear that Clinton never had
the power to effect Senate passage of the amendment but should not have made a
commitment he couldn't meet.)

In 1983, Clinton said that the tax increase he was seeking for education reform
would be earmarked entirely for primary and secondary schools. But after
personal lobbying by Jim Blair, then chairman of the University of Arkansas
board of trustees, Clinton peeled off a third of the allocation for higher
education.

In 1987, Clinton promised several journalistic organizations that he would kill
a bill that had been proposed to deny public access to previously available tax
records, including those of the state's corporations. He then turned around and
supported passage of the measure. Carol Griffee, an Arkansas reporter who was
then regional director of the Society of Professional Journalists' Freedom of
Information Committee, spoke openly of the "betrayal by the Governor."

By 1990, when Clinton ran for his fifth and final term as governor, his honesty
had become an open issue. It was in this race that the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president
Becker memorably described Bill Clinton as a man "who will pat you on the back"
and micturate down your leg.

The candidate found himself dogged by a well-founded suspicion that he would not
serve out his four-year term if re-elected Governor, but would instead use the
job as a platform from which to run for President in 1992 -- a move he had
publicly considered in 1988 and for which he had been busy positioning himself
with his work on the Democratic Leadership Council. In a televised debate, Craig
Cannon, a reporter, asked Clinton a simple but encompassing question: "Will you
guarantee to us that, if re-elected, there is absolutely, positively no way that
you'll run for any other political office and that you'll serve out your term in
full?"

This was exactly the sort of question that most politicians would have answered
with an un-Shermanesque hedge: "I have no intentions of running for President. .
. . I certainly am not planning to run for President."

But Clinton responded with a stunning lack of equivocation. "You bet," he said.
"I told you when I announced for Governor I intended to run, and that's what I'm
gonna do. I'm gonna serve four years. I made that decision when I decided to
run. I'm being considered as a candidate for Governor. That's the job I want.
That's the job I'll do for the next four years."

When a year later Bill Clinton announced his candidacy for President, not many
in his home state were surprised. "He has always wanted to be President -- that
was his whole idea in life, and Hillary's whole idea was to be Mrs. First Lady,"
says the veteran Little Rock liberal activist Edwin Dunaway. "He talked a good
game and he had big ideas, but he never followed through. I fell out with Bill
because he never followed through on anything. His word is no good."

The Newsweek writer Joe Klein recently quoted the President on the subject of
character: "Character is a journey, not a destination." No, Klein responded,
life is a journey; character is a destination reached by the actions of a life.
What you are, by the time you are the President's age, is the cumulative result
of all that you have done, all the thousands of decisions that build an adult.
Bill Clinton's problem isn't merely that his past haunts him. It is that his
past has made him what he is today.

But Clinton's definition of character reveals an essential truth about him. The
President does still seem to be on a journey to maturity; he is a brilliant
young man who has not quite arrived at a clear understanding of himself. It is
as if, in the hard, ambivalent business of getting to where he is, he has
somehow put off the business of who he is, of what he stands for and of what he
will not stand for.

A line of consequence runs from The Draft to 'I Didn't Inhale' to Whitewater to
Hillary's Commodities to Dan Lasater to Lani Guinier to Somalia to Bosnia to
Haiti: the episodes of rationalization and compromise from Clinton's Arkansas
past are the progenitors of the indecision and betrayal that have done so much
damage to the White House present. Bill Clinton is today, as he was 20 years
ago, clearly concerned with doing the right thing, and his Presidency still
holds some of the promise that stirred so many Americans to such hope in 1992.
But there is a hollowness to the Clinton Presidency, a sense that it lacks a
center because the man at its center lacks one of his own.

No one is surprised any more when the President reverses himself on a matter of
policy, or breaks a promise, or axes an old friend. In both houses of Congress,
controlled by Clinton's own party, there is a nearly collective assumption that
the President's stated intention on a policy or a piece of legislation is not to
be taken as his final word; the legislators all remember how the White House
whipped Democratic House members into line to vote for the unpopular B.T.U.
energy tax in 1993, and then dropped it when it encountered strong resistance in
the Senate Finance Committee. After the Administration's flip-flops on Haiti,
Bosnia, Somalia and China, the conventional diplomatic wisdom is that the
pledges of the President of the United States are to be regarded more as
well-meaning sentiments than actual commitments.

The President is a ubiquitous electronic presence, always on the go and on the
tube, in some vivid new tableau that is a masterwork of the campaigner's art.
But the scenes that Clinton so brilliantly conjures seem more and more
disconnected from the realities of his actions. The President evokes the
memories of World War II to warn against the dangers of appeasement,
isolationism and cowardice while his Administration declines to call the
slaughter in Rwanda "genocide," for fear such honesty would force America to do
something to stop it. The President denounces the influence of big-money special
interests in politics while the Democratic National Committee, under his de
facto control, raises $40 million in "soft money" contributions from the rich,
corporations and unions.

Two contrasting events from the Clinton Presidency perfectly capture the
disunity of the man's character:

On Nov. 13, the President delivered a passionate and, in part, extemporaneous
address to a group of black ministers in Memphis. He asked them to imagine
Martin Luther King Jr. suddenly appearing by his side on stage, to issue a
report card on the progress of black America over the last 25 years.

King would tell the ministers, Clinton said, that they had done a good job in
creating a large black middle class: "But he would say: 'I did not live and die
to see the American family destroyed. I did not live and die to see 13-year-old
boys get automatic weapons and gun down 9-year-olds just for the kick of it. I
did not live and die to see young people destroy their own lives with drugs and
then build fortunes destroying the lives of others. That is not what I came here
to do. . . . I fought for people to have the right to work, but not to have
whole communities and people abandoned. This is not what I lived and died for.'
"

Seven months later, Bill Clinton walked on Omaha Beach, in Normandy, with three
veterans of the bloody D-Day battle that had been fought there. The walk had
been planned by the President's media advisers as part of an overall attempt to
reshape the President's image as Commander in Chief, a mantle that had never
rested comfortably on his shoulders. The event, staged as carefully as a small
movie, was duly noted in the White House press schedule of the day: "6:15 C.E.T.
President Clinton visits Omaha Beach with the American veterans of that beach.
Note: no remarks are planned during this walk."

The President and the three men who had fought on the beach walked slowly along,
talking in hushed tones among themselves, as a dozen or so photographers and
television cameramen walked backward in front of them, recording the scene.
After a few minutes, White House aides pulled the veterans off to one side, so
that the President could continue his beach walk in Kennedy-esque solitude. At a
certain point, where some beach stones had been gathered into a small pile to
form a marker, the President stopped, and the photographers took up their
positions so that he was nicely framed by the hulks of the old warships in the
sea behind him.

The President stood for a moment, staring silently out to sea. Then he knelt
down, his knees not quite touching the ground, in a pose that suggested worship.
He reached for the pile of stones in front of him and slowly began rearranging
them into the shape of a cross. A journalist who was there watching the scene
recalls "getting that sick feeling you get sometimes with him, thinking 'Oh God,
please don't do this.' "

As the cameras clicked and rolled, the President bowed his head as if to pray.
Later, White House aides said the moment of silence had been planned, but that
the cross of stones had been entirely the President's own idea.

The problem with Bill Clinton is that the same man is capable of playing both of
these scenes. He is capable of delivering, as he did to the ministers, a message
of breathtaking clarity, candor and courage. And when he does, it is impossible
to doubt that he believes utterly in what he is doing. He is equally capable of
kneeling on a beach where 2,000 American men were slaughtered and acting out an
intimate communion with God in front of a platoon of cameras. And when he does
this, it is also impossible to doubt that he believes utterly in what he is
doing.

A former friend says, bitterly, that Clinton has become "a performer of
empathy." The President's face is a screen upon which plays a loop of
expressions that have become insistently familiar: the open-mouthed grin of
joyous wonder; the scowl of righteous but controlled anger; the lip-biting,
eyes-lowered glance of pondering humility, the near-tears of a man who is not
afraid to show that he feels. In an important sense, these expressions are
entirely honest; Clinton's empathy is wholly real. But it exists only in the
moment. The President's essential character flaw isn't dishonesty so much as
a-honesty. It isn't that Clinton means to say things that are not true, or that
he cannot make true, but that everything is true for him when he says it,
because he says it. Clinton means what he says when he says it, but tomorrow he
will mean what he says when he says the opposite. He is the existential
President, living with absolute sincerity in the passing moment.

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the late 1950's, Bill Clinton wanted to be like his (and his
mother's) idol, Elvis Presley. Even then, he was always at home in front of a
camera. (PHOTOGRAPH FROM THE CLINTON FAMILY COLLECTION/SIPA PRESS)(pg. 21);
Arkansas's favorite son, with his mother, at home after his first semester at
Georgetown. (CLINTON FAMILY COLLECTION/SIPA PRESS); The band major at Hot
Springs High. (GAMMA LIAISON)(pg. 22); Clinton was anti-big-business in this
unsuccessful 1974 campaign. That stance would change after another loss in 1980.
(THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 23); The first-term Governor and Mrs. Clinton in 1979,
around the time of her commodities windfall. (THE ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE);
The high-school yearbook photo, 1963. (SIPA PRESS)(pg. 24); The Governor and the
Chicken Man in 1988. From Don Tyson, Clinton learned the cost of alienating
Arkansas's moguls. (THE ARKANSAS DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE)(pg. 25); The Clintons looked
like winners on Election Day 1984, when he was re-elected for a third term. Top:
Clinton, still only 38, in 1985. (DAVE FORNELL/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 26); Witt
and Jack Stephens, millionaire financiers, established the fundamental symbiosis
between business and politics in modern Arkansas. (THE ARKANSAS
DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE)(pg. 27); Virginia Kelley and her sons in 1990. Both inherited
their need for adulation from their mother, a natural performer. (MIKE
STEWART/SYGMA); Top: Clinton in 1992. (TOMAS MUSCIONICO/CONTACT)(pg. 28);
Clinton declared his candidacy in 1991, a year after promising Arkansas voters
that he was interested only in being Governor. (THE ARKANSAS
DEMOCRAT-GAZETTE/SIPA PRESS)(pg. 29)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              100 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Art That Turns Television Frogs Into Princes

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1531 words


ALTHOUGH ARTISTS IN THIS century have made diligent efforts to introduce the
most derelict items into the court of art, you might have thought television was
too thoroughly masscult, too yahoo, too committed to the froggy life for any
number of kisses to turn it into a prince. You would have been mistaken.

By the 60's, artists were already taking on the tube. Pop artists borrowed
images from the cathode-ray bank of imagery, which generously made interest-free
loans. Others removed content from the programs and forced the electrons to
behave like modern art.

Television had moved in in force, not only replacing life (which proved too
strenuous by comparison), but demonstrating that it was equal to nudes and
landscapes as an inspiration. While television was manipulating just about
everything from our opinions on Vietnam to our chosen brand of beer, artists
ingeniously, even desperately, manipulated television, from Tom Wesselman's
painted nude with a real television set to Robert Heinecken's altered
photographs of the screen, from Les Levine's multiple monitors to Ed Paschke's
paintings of neon-colored people divided by unsteady horizontals.

At this moment, the Whitney Museum of American Art is presenting the earliest
and the Museum of Modern Art the latest manifestation of art's interplay with
the dominant mode of communication. At the Whitney, "The Howard Wise Gallery: TV
as a Creative Medium, 1969" will be up through next Sunday, and at the Modern,
"Projects 47: Luc Courchesne" is installed through Aug. 23.

The Whitney's show, organized by John G. Hanhardt and Matthew Yokobosky, curator
and assistant curator of film and video, is a partial re-creation, filled in
with photographs and videotapes, of the first gallery exhibition exclusively
devoted to video as an art form. This was mounted by Howard Wise and had a
seminal influence on artists working in the medium. The Modern's show, organized
by Barbara London, associate curator in the department of film and video, is an
interactive video installation by a Canadian artist and professor of information
design.

In 1969, "TV as a Creative Medium" seemed positively rowdy by virtue of being
both so new and so relentlessly in flux. Art had generally prided itself on
staying the same for years, but these images bounced around in an electronic St.
Vitus's dance. What really caught the public's attention was Nam June Paik and
Charlotte Moorman's "TV Bra for Living Sculpture." For two hours a day, Moorman
(who died in 1991) played the cello in the gallery while wearing a pair of small
television sets on her breasts; the action of her bow wreaked havoc with the
baseball players and soap opera stars appearing on her bosom.

This act was relatively decorous, as two years earlier Moorman had appeared
topless in a performance of one of Mr. Paik's compositions. For the Whitney
show, he has created a sweet and not very challenging homage to Howard Wise.

If network television was not brimming over with esthetic revelations in 1969,
neither was the art that so ingeniously sabotaged its signals. Some critics were
hostile. As often happens when artists start experimenting with new technology,
the mechanics were clever but the design did not fly. Yet the exhibition was a
landmark: it established video art as a form, and though its voice was thin and
lacked authority, it was nonetheless prophetic, foretelling almost every major
development in electronic art over the next quarter century.

Some artists, like Aldo Tambellini and Thomas Tadlock, made pure abstractions
out of the transmission signals that ordinarily produced representations of
housewives, cowboys and car chases. (My set occasionally does that on its own,
but then I call the cable company.) Tadlock's "Archetron" was a device for
transforming live signals into patterns that resembled stained-glass rose
windows constantly radiating from a center.

Joe Weintraub's "AC/TV (Audio-Controlled Television)" converted music into
colored forms on a television set, fulfilling Vasily Kandinsky's dream of making
sounds produce their equivalents in color. (Not to mention updating the opening
sequence in Walt Disney's "Fantasia.") Weintraub's gizmo clipped onto a
television antenna, turning every set owner into a potential electronic
abstractionist.

Art and television actually struck up a close alliance. In fact, broadcast
television had encouraged its audience to be artists on its very first regular
show, "Radio City Matinee," in 1946, offering drawing lessons on the tube. The
teacher was so popular that he soon had his own series, "You Are an Artist,"
which ran in syndication until 1970. (Marc H. Miller dug up this bit of
information for a show called "Television's Impact on Contemporary Art," which
he organized for the Queens Museum in 1986.)

Several artists in the Howard Wise show had soaring ambitions for a medium they
had jolted out of mundanity into modernism. Nam June Paik proposed a "Silent TV
Station" -- a most original, even radical idea -- that played "mood art." "What
I am aiming at," Mr. Paik said, is a "TV version of Vivaldi . . . or electronic
Compoz, to soothe every hysteric woman through air, and to calm down the nervous
tension of every businessman through air." Eric Siegel thought artists could
turn television into a "mass healing device."

Others wanted to turn the set itself into a new objet d'art or to use live
broadcasts in alien contexts. Some put the viewers on the screen, making them at
once observer and observed. Frank Gillette and Ira Schneider's nine-screen "Wipe
Cycle" showed gallery visitors to themselves, alternating their images with
network broadcasts and with images of those same viewers taken 8 seconds or 16
seconds earlier, so that they had the confounding experience of watching
themselves in the present and the past at once.

Most prophetic of all were a couple of experiments in interaction. Mr. Paik's
"Participation TV (No. 2)" is a set with a bundle of busily oscillating,
squiggly lines on the screen. A pair of microphones in front of the set invite
the viewer to "Talk Whistle Scrape Hit!," any one of which elongates, expands or
maddens the little lines. That qualifies as participation, if an early stage of
it, and voice-activated to boot. But after all, changing channels by hand also
qualifies, and produces more startling results.

For interaction at the much vaunted new level, try "Family Portrait," Mr.
Courchesne's installation at the Modern. Here life-size, still,
head-and-shoulders images of men and women loom in the air behind four slanted
glass panels. Actually reflected from overhead monitors, they seem fully
three-dimensional but also oddly immaterial.

Before each image is a console that offers viewers a choice of questions to put
to these strangers: What do you do? What really matters to you? Would you like
to have a cup of coffee with me? With two or three questions to choose from, the
conversation can go in several directions. In response, after a pause, the image
becomes animated and answers, sometimes volubly, occasionally irritably. If you
choose a remark like "I don't believe what you said," he or she is likely to say
"We have nothing to say to each other" and stop talking altogether.

There are eight people -- when one finishes, another appears -- and they are all
friends. Courchesne calls the piece "Family Portrait," a comment on the new
kinds of "families" that are developing on networks and computer bulletin
boards. His people are high-powered talkers, remarking sometimes on the nature
of this odd transaction they actually engaged in during a taping session before
you came: "We can say that we are virtual or real, really artificial or
artificially virtual; gibberish all of it, I think. It serves no purpose. In any
case everything is real . . ."

Occasionally, if the room is not crowded, one of the people you are not talking
to pipes up from his or her position with a relevant remark, extending the
interaction. The project is amusing, curious, smart -- a sophisticated game,
more interactive than a shopping network, less so than on-line chat or video
conferences.

But in any case everything is virtual: they interact with a question, not with
you, and though you control the direction of the dialogue, the content is
someone else's. There is something a bit spooky about thinking that once
television rendered us passive and removed us from human contact we might come
to this, giving and taking with someone who does not, cannot, give and take with
us.

The Japanese are developing a "person" who can be installed in a PC to respond
to some oral questions and commands, remind us of appointments and so on.
Eventually computer owners could select a face for this new roommate: your wife,
your favorite movie star. I think I'll pass. I get the creeps from elevators
that announce that they're going up, I don't want my car to talk to me, and I
don't want Fred Astaire nagging me about paying my bills. One thing I don't need
in a machine is charm. When it comes to interaction, give me an unpredictable,
unreliable, unprogrammed, even an inartistic human being any time at all.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nam June Paik's "Virtually Wise," at the Whitney -- Sweet but
not very challenging. (Chris Gomien/Carl Solway Gallery/Whitney Museum of
American Art); Visitors at Luc Courchesne's "Family Portrait," at the Museum of
Modern Art. (Adam Fernandez for The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              101 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fat Times Are Over for Premium Ice Cream Makers

BYLINE: By DORON P. LEVIN

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1803 words


ACROSS America, there are still whole-pint gobblers. Armed with a spoon and a
craving, they polish off an entire pint of Haagen-Dazs or Ben & Jerry's ice
cream in a single sitting. Often, they have favored techniques. Some like to
grip the ice-cream container with an oven mitt to keep their holding-hand warm.
Others advocate zapping a pint for a few seconds in the microwave to quickly
soften the rich, fat-laden ice cream.

The ice-cream gourmands may be a hardy breed -- or foolhardy, health experts say
-- but their numbers are dwindling. And more and more, shoppers browsing the
freezer cases of the nation's supermarkets are likely to resist grabbing a
carton of Chunky Monkey, Triple Brownie Overload or some other flavor of
super-premium ice cream. Super-premium is the top tier of the ice cream market,
where the prices ($2.70 a pint on average), the calories (270 or more in a
four-ounce serving) and the fat content (up to 23 grams of fat) are highest.

Throughout the 1980's, the sales of super-premium ice cream in grocery stores
grew rapidly. But recently, this $277 million-a-year market has slowed sharply,
from the double-digit growth rates of a few years ago to almost no growth at
all. Today, a frozen yogurt or a cup of Starbucks coffee passes for a decadent
dessert for many of the affluent, well-educated consumers who eat the most
super-premium ice cream.

Health worries and changing cultural tastes, experts say, are behind the
slowdown. Harold Z. Friedman, 41, a cardiologist in Berkley, Mich., used to eat
rich ice cream without a second thought. But, as a surgeon who has performed
thousands of angioplasties to clear clogged arteries, he knew quite well that
consuming fatty foods like ice cream contributes to heart problems. Growing
older made him reconsider his diet.

"Suddenly I realized I was getting to the age of many of the patients I was
treating," Dr. Friedman recalled.

So a few years ago, Dr. Friedman and his wife Lynda switched to lighter ice
creams -- precisely the advice he had been dispensing to his patients.

More customers will likely be scared away as they begin to read what they are
eating. Three months ago, Federal food-labeling regulations took effect that
require all ice cream companies to print the fat, calorie and other nutritional
contents on each carton.

For years, health experts like Dr. William Castelli, director of the Framingham
Heart Study, have been warning people about the dangers of eating rich ice
cream. But perhaps more effective in dissuading consumers will be reading that a
single half-cup, 4-ounce serving of Haagen-Dazs vanilla contains 18 grams of fat
(28 percent of the recommended daily limit). Of the fat grams, 11 are saturated
(54 percent of the daily limit). The serving also has 120 milligrams of
cholesterol (40 percent of the limit).

INDUSTRY analysts say health-consciousness is only part of the reason
super-premium sales are slowing. The decade of the 1980's was more open to
excess and extravagance, they say, than the 1990's. People still enjoy
self-indulgent pleasures, but probably not as often in the more restrained
1990's.

"The state of ice cream reflects culture," said Richard Davis, an analyst for
Wessels, Arnold & Henderson in Minneapolis. "The 1980's had wild flavors and
decadent richness. But the world has changed. People are ambivalent about
gratification."

Many fans of rich ice cream have fine-tuned their habit, suggests Howard Waxman,
who publishes a newsletter about ice cream. "They eat a diet food to counteract
their Haagen-Dazs," Mr. Waxman said, "or they work out twice as hard the next
day."

Rob Michalak, a spokesman for Ben & Jerry's Homemade Inc., asserts the devoted
consumers of the company's ice cream are "still eating it, but they might be
eating from a demitasse cup instead of a salad bowl."

Yet, by all accounts, the slower growth in the super-premium market has meant
tougher competition. The key combatants in this high-end ice-cream war are
Haagen-Dazs, a subsidiary of Grand Metropolitan P.L.C., and Ben & Jerry's
Homemade in Waterbury, Vt. Together, the two account for roughly 90 percent of
super-premium sales in grocery stores.

Each has invaded the other's turf. Though both companies have scoop shops across
the nation, the main arena of competition is in store freezers, where most
super-premium ice cream is sold. The fight began two years ago when Haagen-Dazs,
long known for its "smooth" ice cream, went after Ben & Jerry's market by
introducing its own versions "chunky" ice cream, dubbed "Extraas," like Triple
Brownie Overload. Last spring Ben & Jerry's, famous for its chunky ice creams
with zany names like Cherry Garcia (cherry-and-chunk chocolate flavor named
after Jerry Garcia of The Grateful Dead rock band), retaliated with its own
smooth varieties. To promote its smooth flavors, the company is advertising on
television for the first time, featuring the anti-Vietnam activist Daniel
Berrigan, the folk-singer Pete Seeger and the filmmaker Spike Lee.

Haagen-Dazs isn't amused. David Gilman, a public relations man working on behalf
of Haagen-Dazs, declared that Ben & Jerry's introduction of chunkless flavors
"begs one question, how innovative is it to launch vanilla ice cream in 1994?"

With growth slowing in America, Haagen-Dazs has ventured across the Atlantic
with an aggressive campaign to sell its super-premium ice cream to Europeans.

The Ben & Jerry's formula for growth includes new senior management. Last month,
the company announced that Ben Cohen would step down as chief executive, though
he will remain chairman.

TO lure a promising candidate, Ben & Jerry's has said it will abandon its
commitment to pay its top executives no more than seven times its lowest-paid
workers. The chief executive search is not yet complete.

Growth may be waning, but the super-premium market is still a lucrative
business. Analysts estimate that profit margins are 50 percent higher on rich
brands like Haagen-Dazs and Ben & Jerry's than on ordinary ice cream. In fact, a
new super-premium entry, Alaska, was recently introduced in the New York
metropolitan market.

Haagen-Dazs first popularized super-premium ice cream in the early 1960's. Its
success in grocery stores attracted several regional brands. But most of the
upstarts could not compete, eventually falling by the wayside. Ben & Jerry's, of
course, was the great exception. Started in 1978, its marketing philosophy was
shaped by Mr. Cohen and his co-founder, Jerry Greenfield, a childhood friend,
who championed retro-1960's culture and 1960's-style social activism.

Even many people who found Ben & Jerry's style dated or overwrought like the
taste of the company's ice cream. From 1985 to 1991, the company's sales
increased tenfold, as it rapidly became a nationally distributed brand in
supermarkets and convenience stores. But that big geographic growth phase is
over for Ben & Jerry's. "Now there's nowhere to grow," said Seymour Greenstein,
owner of Golden Valley Dairy, a wholesale distributor in Oak Park, Mich.

For Ben & Jerry's, the public company most dependent on the super-premium
market, the lower expectations of growth are reflected in its stock price. The
company's shares closed Friday at $15.25, compared with $23.75 a share a year
ago.

The high-fat ice cream makers have had mixed results going down-market into
lower-fat desserts. In 1991, Ben & Jerry's introduced a "lite" version of its
ice cream, but the Food and Drug Administration questioned its low-fat claims.
Soon afterward, the company abandoned the effort. Ben & Jerry's then rolled out
a line of low-fat yogurts, but several flavors again failed to meet F.D.A.
guidelines for low-fat offerings, and they had to be reformulated.

Haagen-Dazs, by contrast, has introduced a lower-fat line of sorbet covered ice
cream bars, which have proved to be a success.

And traditional ice cream brands, once ignored as less-glamorous cousins of the
super-premiums, are suddenly attracting new customers. They cost less than
Haagen-Dazs or Ben & Jerry's and, with less fat, they can claim to be more
healthy. After all, says Tyler Johnston, director of marketing for Dreyers Grand
Ice Cream Inc., except for the fat content, "people have few bad things to say
about ice cream. It's one of the few rewards left in life that's O.K."



FRUSEN GLADJE'S MAKERS TRY AGAIN

THE slowdown in sales of super-premium ice cream recently has brought the demise
of several smaller brands unable to compete with Haagen-Dazs and Ben & Jerry's.

Undaunted, Richard Smith and his son, David have just introduced a new
super-premium brand, called Alaska. The Smiths are veterans of the ice cream
wars. They have founded or marketed ice cream and dessert brands including Dolly
Madison, American Glace and Yoplait Frozen Yogurt.

In 1980, they began an on-again, off-again fight in the super-premium market
against Haagen-Dazs by introducing Frusen Gladje. Haagen-Dazs waged a court
battle against Frusen Gladje. The alleged offense? Umlaut infringement.

Haagen-Dazs (a meaningless term) has an umlaut over the first "a" in its name,
while Frusen Gladje (which means "frozen delight" in Swedish) uses one over its
"a" too. The court ruled in favor of the Smiths. Frusen Gladje kept the umlaut
in its name, and its ice cream in stores. Then, in 1985, six months after the
founder of Haagen-Dazs, Reuben Mattus, sold out to Pillsbury (now a subsidiary
of Grand Metropolitan), the Smiths sold Frusen Gladje to Kraft Foods for an
undisclosed sum. The Smiths also sold a conventional brand they developed, T&W,
to Dreyer's for $26 million in 1992.

Why are the Smiths returning to the super-premium market now? The profit margins
for ice cream makers, they say, have widened considerably during the 1990's. The
cost of key ingredients has fallen, they explain, while prices charged to
distributors and supermarkets have climbed steadily.

Haagen-Dazs is doing its best to contain Alaska's assault on the local market.
In May, Haagen-Dazs sent letters to several distributors saying it reserved the
right to stop selling to them if they carried products Haagen-Dazs deemed to be
competitive. The letters pointedly mentioned Alaska.

Still, Richard Smith says he is unfazed by hardball tactics. For one thing, half
of the ice cream sold in the New York City area goes through major supermarket
chains. They have more muscle in the marketplace than suppliers like
Haagen-Dazs.

Alaska is intended for the unrepentant super-premium consumer. The Smiths are
loading up Alaska with more goodies and slightly more butterfat than Haagen-Dazs
or Ben & Jerry's. "They like it, they buy it again, real fast," Mr. Smith
explained. "And you can always make it better. Add more nuts, better chocolate."

   STEVEN FLAX

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "An Appetite Fades" percentage change from July 1992 to May 1994
and supermarket sales of super-premium ice cream. (Source: Information Resources
Inc.)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              102 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Congress May Inquire To Its Heart's Desire

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


LIKE no-hitters and new pain-relief formulas, Congressional investigations like
the Whitewater hearings that began last week in the House and Senate Banking
Committees are rare enough to be noteworthy but sufficiently commonplace that no
one is particularly surprised when another one is in the news.

As often as not over the years, the inquiries have passed like a summer shower.
Who remembers, for instance, the 1980 hearings about President Jimmy Carter's
brother, Billy, and his contacts with Libya?


But some moments of high drama have occurred. No one who watched the proceedings
can forget the House Judiciary Committee's votes 20 summers ago to impeach
Richard M. Nixon. One scene from the Army-McCarthy hearings 40 years ago is
embedded in the public consciousness, having been replayed on television time
and again. It was when Joseph Welch, the counsel for the Army, demanded of
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy: "Have you no sense of decency, sir, at long last?"

Sometimes politicians of little prominence have made lasting names for
themselves. Harry S. Truman was a relatively obscure Senator from Missouri in
1941, when he started an investigation into profiteering by military
contractors. Mr. Nixon's first step onto the national stage came in 1948 during
the House Un-American Activities Committee's investigation of Alger Hiss. Oliver
L. North's defiant testimony in the Iran-contra hearings in 1987 made him an
idol of the right wing and led to his nomination this year as the Republican
candidate for the Senate in Virginia.

Sometimes Congress has been abusive. In "The Power to Probe," his authoritative
1976 study of Congressional investigations, James Hamilton described the
investigations of Communism in American life and government, which began in 1938
and lasted well into the 1950's, as "memorable not for the number of subversives
uncovered or the laws that resulted from their disclosures but for the disregard
of individual rights and fundamental principles of fairness."

Sometimes great issues have been aired in a way that has changed the course of
history. A House Banking Committee inquiry in 1912 into the concentration of
money and credit in the country led directly to the creation of the Federal
Reserve System and to the enactment of antitrust laws. Senator J. W. Fulbright's
hearings on the Vietnam War in the late 1960's helped to generate widespread
opposition to the war at home.

Occasionally, serious crimes by high government officials have been exposed.
That was the case in the 1873 Credit Mobilier investigation, which involved
corruption in the government-subsidized construction of the Union Pacific
Railroad; in the Teapot Dome investigation in 1923 and 1924, which involved
bribes in the leases of government-owned oil fields, and, of course, in the
Senate Watergate investigation in 1973, which uncovered evidence that led to Mr.
Nixon's resignation as President and sent several of his top advisers to prison.

As matters stand now, the Whitewater case does not seem to involve the degree of
constitutional abuse or widespread corruption plumbed by some other
Congressional hearings. "On the landscape of political scandals, Whitewater may
be a bump," Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, said last week.
Nonetheless, he said, "Accountability is in order."

Congress's authority to demand accountability -- to investigate, to issue
subpoenas, to swear in witnesses -- is not stated explicitly in the
Constitution. But it has been exercised since the earliest days of the Republic,
and it has repeatedly been upheld by the Supreme Court. Investigations by the
legislature, the Court ruled in 1951, are "an established part of representative
government."

Congressional investigations have been rife with partisan politics since the
first one, in 1792, which involved the defeat of American troops commanded by
Maj. Gen. Arthur St. Clair at the hands of Indians on the Ohio frontier. A
special House committee exonerated General St. Clair. But Federalist Congressmen
prevented publication of the findings because the committee intended to blame
the Federalist Secretary of War, Henry Knox, and Treasury Secretary Alexander
Hamilton for the disaster.

The rampant partisanship on display in the House and Senate Banking Committees
last week threatens to turn the Whitewater hearings into a political sideshow.
That has often been the case before. But when evidence of wrongdoing has been
sufficiently compelling in the past, it has often outweighed the politics.
Despite their best efforts, for example, Republicans were unable to untrack the
Teapot Dome investigation.

The Whitewater investigation has broken the pattern of the past in one important
respect: Lawmakers agreed this time not to pursue any issue until the special
prosecutor, Robert B. Fiske, had completed his examination of the matter.

The issue of what should happen when Congress and a prosecutor want to
investigate a matter simultaneously never arose until the Watergate hearings.
Then and later, in the Iran-contra hearings, Congress decided that a timely
public airing of the situation was more important than criminal prosecutions.

In Watergate, the criminal cases were not compromised, because the top officials
agreed to testify without demanding immunity from prosecution.

But the lawyers for Mr. North and John M. Poindexter had learned a lesson. They
exercised their Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination and demanded
immunity before they would testify in the Iran-contra hearings. Unwilling to
delay the hearings perhaps for years, Congress granted them immunity.
Ultimately, that caused their criminal convictions to be overturned on appeal.

In the Whitewater case, no one has asked for immunity and Congress has no
intention of granting it even if requested. Nonetheless, Democrats used the
Iran-contra experience as an excuse to limit the scope of Whitewater hearings to
narrow areas in which Mr. Fiske has already concluded that no crime was
committed.

If scandal junkies find this development disappointing, they may have something
else to look forward to. Research by Congressional Quarterly shows that the most
intensive periods of Congressional investigative activity came in the last years
of Ulysses S. Grant's Administration and in the years immediately following
World War I and World War II. Each of these was a period in which one party had
just gained control of Congress after many years in the minority.

The prevailing view in political circles nowadays is that Republicans have an
excellent chance to win control of the House and Senate in the next few years.

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's charges of subversion in the State
Department were first heard in 1950 by a Congressional subcommittee headed by
Senator Millard E. Tydings, seated second from right. McCarthy is partially
visible behind him. (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              103 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

It's 'Forrest Gump' vs. Harrumph

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 810 words


"FORREST GUMP" may be the biggest hit of the year, the movie that earns a second
Oscar for Tom Hanks, the one that makes audiences laugh and makes them cry, the
one that proves you don't need sex and violence to succeed in Hollywood.
"Forrest Gump" may be all these things. But Jack Delaney, 48, who saw it in
Manhattan last week, really doesn't buy it.

His analysis? It wasn't meaningful at all. "It was about a simpleton who goes
through life, and everything works out his way," Mr. Delaney said.


Since its release this month, "Forrest Gump" has earned more than $100 million
at the box office and become the surprise of the summer movie season. Somehow it
has also been elevated to an instant metaphor for the American spirit, spurring
debates on TV, on editorial pages, over computer on-line services and among
friends about what its popularity truly means. It has also kicked up sales of
the sleepy 1986 novel on which it was based and propelled a soundtrack album up
the charts.

The movie, about a good-hearted, dim-witted man with a two-digit I.Q. who
wanders through much of late 20th-century history -- desegregation, Elvis,
Vietnam, the moon landing, Watergate, AIDS -- and finally becomes a rich,
successful hero (and father) by chance, is striking a deep chord with many
audiences, who say they are truly inspired by Forrest's simplicity, his
guilessness, his goodness.

But many critics don't see the film that way at all. To them it says dumb people
prevail because they're dumb. "Is there a message here?" wrote Ellen Goodman in
the Boston Globe. "If he's good, is it because he doesn't have the brains to be
bad or bitter?"

At a theater on Manhattan's Upper West Side last week, some moviegoers sniffled
sentimentally and others flung around superlatives. One man left the theater
repeating one of the movie's many homespun aphorisms, "Stupid is as stupid
does"; he called the movie "awesome." Another audience member, Vera Kaplan, said
it had been her second viewing. "It's about everybody's life and how to live
it," she said. "It deepened the experience I was trying to achieve when I was
practicing Zen actively."

But in every audience so taken with "Forrest Gump" that its members rise up for
a standing ovation are a few vehement dissenters. They hate the way Tom Hanks's
voice rises every time he says, "Hi, my name is Forrest Gump." They hate the
white feather that wafts portentously through the air, a symbol, no doubt, of
something deeply symbolic. They hate the way the history seems to just meander
by, and the way the movie allows somebody who essentially does nothing to
prevail.

"Forrest Gump" may well be turning into the movie equivalent of "The Bridges of
Madison County," Robert James Waller's 1992 feel-good romantic novel, which
enjoyed incredible word-of-mouth success until a small but biting backlash began
rolling around like tumbleweed. For such people the simple messages of "Bridges"
first seemed sweet and then dangerously retrograde; "Forrest Gump" is having a
similar affect.

To some critics, the movie is profoundly anti-intellectual, a celebration of
passivity and a rejection of thoughtful analysis. "I think we need to ask if our
society really is one that esteems education and hard work," wrote Susan Hunt in
an editorial in The Phoenix Gazette in which she acknowledged that her views on
the movie might seem "unpatriotic," given its popularity. "More importantly, who
in our society benefits from the glorification of ignorance and inactivity?"

While Anthony Lane, writing in The New Yorker, said that the movie was so
"insistently heartwarming that it chilled me to the marrow," much of the debate
on the Internet, where "Forrest Gump" is being debated more than any other
current film, has sought to plumb the movie's meanings. Does the white feather
symbolize the unbearable lightness of being? Forrest Gump's impaired intellect?
The randomness of experience? And why does he suddenly decide to spend three
years jogging across the country? "That," said Ed Cho, 19, who saw the movie
last week, "was a little weird."

For all the analysis, some people have concluded that the movie is just a
gossamer entertainment, light as the feather itself, that shouldn't be studied
to death as if it were "The Seventh Seal." Even Harvey Karten, a 56-year-old
high school teacher in Brooklyn who thought "Forrest Gump" was fine ("It's a lot
better than 'The Client,' " is what he actually said), confessed to feeling
perplexed at all the debate over its wider significance.

"It's not deep -- it's lighthearted and amusing," he said. "The commercial
public goes for this stuff, and everybody I know says he likes it." They like it
so much, he said, that some have returned to see it three times. "I don't see
why," he said, "they wouldn't just go ahead and see something else."

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Hanks as Forrest Gump, the dim hero of this summer's oddest
occasion for national self-examination.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              104 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 31, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

60's Heroes Keep On Keeping On

BYLINE: By PATRICIA GRANDJEAN

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words


ONLY the most tuned-out members of the baby boom generation can claim never to
have heard of Mary Travers. After all, she's part of Peter, Paul and Mary, a
trio that the Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock and Roll calls "the most
popular acoustic folk music group of the 1960's." During that decade they
produced 11 albums, 5 of which became million sellers. And they scored 12 hit
singles, including the classic children's song, "Puff, the Magic Dragon" and
"Leaving on a Jet Plane," a ballad written by John Denver.

For the past 28 years, Ms. Travers has lived in Redding, in a 250-year-old house
just down the road from her mother, Virginia. She shares the central-chimney
home with her husband, Ethan Robbins, and her 28-year-old daughter Alicia. The
house shows the influence of different generations of owners: a former master
bedroom was added around 1940, for example, while two upstairs bedrooms date to
the 1800's.

'Five Acres of Rocks'

She and Mr. Robbins, a restaurant manager, added on a spacious living room three
years ago, but took care to design it in the spirit of an 18th-century New
England home. "It's done in oak, and all post-and-beam construction," Ms.
Travers says proudly. "There's not a nail in it." She enjoys gardening, but is
frustrated by the fact that the house sits atop mountainous ground. "I have five
acres of rocks," she says. "What little flat space there is I created myself."

Several trees on her property are dedicated to family members. A Colorado blue
spruce stands for her elder daughter Erika, two apple trees for her son-in-law
Jeff and granddaughter Wylly, and a fir for Erika's other daughter, Virginia.
Alicia is represented by a gingko tree; Mr. Robbins has a magnolia and weeping
willow, while a weeping birch symbolizes his wedding to Ms. Travers. "And my
mother," she says, "has acres of trees all to herself."

Her Connecticut home is restful, but Ms. Travers is far from retired. Now 56,
and still the outspoken, energetic flaxen-haired blonde fans remember, she is in
the midst of a three-month United States summer tour with Peter Yarrow and Noel
Paul Stookey that will bring them to the Oakdale Theater in Wallingford on
Thursday.

This fall, after 34 years together, Peter, Paul and Mary will record their 17th
album, "Life Journeys," for Warner Brothers records. Phil Ramone, who worked
with the trio in the 60's, will be the producer once again, and guest artists
will be invited to join in.

Peter, Paul and Mary's career began in Greenwich Village where Ms. Travers was
raised. Though she still loves New York and maintains a part-time residence
there, she remembers the city of her youth as a much friendlier place. "You
could visit Harlem without any anxiety," she says. "You could walk any place in
the city at any time, and the only homeless people you'd see were a few drunks
on the Bowery."

Folk music was an integral part of Greenwich Village community life in the
1940's and 50's. "I was raised on Josh White, the Weavers and Pete Seeger," Ms.
Travers says. "The music was everywhere. You'd go to a party at somebody's
apartment and there would be 50 people there, singing well into the night."

She loved singing at these informal gatherings but never wanted to perform
professionally. Nevertheless, during her high school years she was one of the
Song Swappers, a group that sang back-up for Pete Seeger. And in 1957, Ms.
Travers had a brief moment of fame on Broadway after a friend persuaded her to
audition for a revue called "The Next President," starring Mort Sahl.

"I was nauseous from fear for the entire week and a half the show was open," she
says. "It was open long enough for me to get a union card, and little else."

MacDougal Street in the 50's

Shortly thereafter, she moved to a three-story walk-up on MacDougal Street,
across from a growing array of small clubs and coffee houses that were playing
host to an explosive new generation of musicians, folk singers, stand-up
comedians and other cultural heroes-to-be. Tom Paxton, Woody Allen, Marshall
Brickman, Richie Havens, Bill Cosby, Cass Elliott, Eric Weisberg and Bob Dylan
regularly appeared at places like the Kettle of Fish and the Gaslight Cafe, and
Ms. Travers became acquainted with them all.

At the invitation of Mr. Stookey, she began performing with him at the Gaslight
two to three times a week. She had an infant daughter, Erika, from a brief,
ill-fated marriage but no career aspirations. "I was a bad waitress with a
private school education, which meant that I was illiterate," Ms. Travers said.
"And I certainly couldn't type though my mother suggested I learn. I think her
quote was, 'Mary get a job. No one ever made a living singing folk songs.' It
was the only time my mother has ever been wrong."

Just how wrong became apparent once Ms. Travers and Mr. Stookey joined forces
with Peter Yarrow, a folk singer who had gone to Cornell University. On the
advice of his manager, Albert Grossman, Mr. Yarrow had decided to form a group.
While looking for band mates, he and Mr. Grossman had spotted a snapshot of Ms.
Travers on the wall of a music shop on MacDougal Street. "Peter asked Albert,
'Who's that?' and Albert said, 'That's Mary Travers. She'd be good if you could
get her to work.' And Peter's been trying to get me to work ever since," she
says with a laugh.

Debut at the Bitter End

The trio rehearsed for seven months in her MacDougal Street walk-up before
making their debut at the Bitter End in 1961. On the strength of this
performance, Peter, Paul and Mary were signed to a recording contract with
Warner Brothers. Released in May 1962, their first eponymously titled album
included their rendition of Pete Seeger's song, "If I Had a Hammer," a hit that
was the first record to bring protest music to a mainstream audience. Eighteen
months later their version of "Blowin' in the Wind" became a hit, and the first
commercially successful recording of a song written by Bob Dylan.

As their fame grew, Peter, Paul and Mary mixed music with political and social
activism. In 1963 the trio marched with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. in
Selma, Ala., and Washington, D.C. The three participated in countless
demonstrations against the war in Vietnam. And they sang at the 1969 March on
Washington, which Mr. Yarrow helped to organize. Though their activism provoked
a steady stream of death threats they were never harmed. "But for years, I used
to bite my fingernails on stage," Ms. Travers says. "There you are, looking like
the back porch light, staring out at 12,000 or 15,000 people. Any one of whom
could have had a gun."

Exhausted by nearly 10 years of nonstop touring and recording, Mr. Yarrow, Mr.
Stookey and Ms. Travers disbanded in 1970. But it proved to be only an
intermission. They reunited on a part-time basis in 1978, and now play
approximately 60 live dates together each year. Their commitment to causes
remains strong. One out of every four shows of their current tour is a benefit,
concerning issues ranging from sexual orientation discrimination to hand gun
control. "Our audience now appreciates the fact that we get involved," she says.
"They know we have substance."

Three Generations in Cuffs

Ms. Travers has played an active role with the Washington, D.C.-based Center for
the Development of International Policy, which sent her to the Soviet Union in
1983 to investigate the problems facing Russian Jews. "It was clear to me even
then that the system was coming apart," she says. And a few years ago, she was
arrested, along with her mother and her daughter Alicia, during an
anti-apartheid demonstation in Washington. "We thought three generations in
handcuffs was pretty nifty," she says.

Indeed, their early fans -- most of whom were college students in the 60's --
now take their parents and children to concerts. Sometimes Ms. Travers is
approached by high school and college students who are depressed by the current
era's lingering climate of conservatism. "They feel that they were born at the
wrong time," she says.

"Well, when I was in high school in the 50's, I read all the great writers of
the 30's union movement, like Jack London and Upton Sinclair, and in the midst
of McCarthyism and the Eisenhower era I thought, 'I missed it.' I felt cheated,"
Ms. Travers said. "But guess what happened? "So, I tell them, 'If a movement is
what you want, you have to make it.' "

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peter, Paul and Mary perform on Thursday in Wallingford. (Dan
Klores Associates)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              105 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 1, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China Human-Rights Tactic Spreads

BYLINE: By KEN BROWN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


After years of trying unsuccessfully to quiet criticism of human-rights records,
Asian nations have found powerful allies: American businesses eager to invest in
their growing markets and the Clinton Administration, with its emphasis on
economic interests in post-cold-war foreign policy.

The Clinton Administration's spring decision to continue China's favorable trade
status gave some of the largest and fastest growing countries new confidence
that their influence is now strong enough to have an effect on American policy.
And from India and Indonesia to smaller nations like Singapore, Vietnam,
Thailand and Malaysia, they are showing it.

"It seems to me the message is loud and clear: if American business gets
strongly involved in a country, human rights takes second place or even less
than that," Ashutosh Varshney, an India expert at Harvard University, said of
the China decision.

For decades India, a socialist country, closed itself to trade and foreign
investment. But now the world's second most populous country has been quick to
seize its newly liberalized and quickly growing market as the key to muting
criticism on its use of child labor and its crackdowns on unrest in Kashmir and
Punjab.

The India Interest Group, an organization of large American companies that do
business with the country, was founded last fall and is actively promoting the
promise of an economy with 850 million potential customers.

"What we have been doing is sitting down and briefing the key Administration
officials that are negotiating with the Indians and really identifying for them
what U.S. business is doing in India and what we'd like to see happen there to
improve the environment for U.S. exports and U.S. investment there," said R.
Michael Gadbaw, the vice president for international law and policy at General
Electric and a founder of the group, whose members include Ford, AT&T,
Coca-Cola, I.B.M. and Polaroid.

The members' investments vary widely. What they share is a belief that they are
looking at another China, a huge untapped market poised on the edge of a boom.
General Electric, which has been in India since 1902, recently set up joint
ventures to make home appliances and light bulbs, and opened a subsidiary of GE
Capital. The company and its affiliates now employ more than 6,300 people in
India.

Ford's investment is limited to a plant that makes radiators, yet it hopes one
day to build millions of cars for the Indian market.

The India Interest Group helped arrange Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao's
visit to the United States in May -- an unusual trip for two reasons. For the
first time, a top Indian political leader traveled to the United States with a
group of Indian business leaders, and for the first time, an Indian leader
refused to meet with human rights groups.

The India Interest Group did discuss human rights with Mr. Rao, and does support
Washington's basic objectives in promoting human rights. "But we also want to
make sure that the issues that are raised are put into the context of our
relationship with India and what's going on there and recognizing this is a very
large country," Mr. Gadbaw said.

The Administration's China decision was also closely watched by Indonesia, which
is in the middle of the latest trade case brought against it by American labor
unions. The case comes under the Guaranteed System of Preferences, which was
created to help developing countries, and will be decided by the United States
trade representative. Under the preferences program, Indonesia can export $650
million worth of goods duty free to the United States.

The A.F.L.-C.I.O. is protesting what it says is Indonesia's quashing of its
labor movement. A ruling is due this month, but there is a growing feeling in
Indonesia that the battle is already won.

Trade Group Confident

"I think the Indonesians are resting a little easier that the decision won't go
against them," said Wayne J. Forrest, the executive director of the American
Indonesian Chamber of Commerce, a group founded in 1949, whose members include
Mobil, Texaco and several other large oil and mining companies as well as some
small businesses.

A month after the Clinton Administration's May 26 decision to continue China's
most-favored-nation status with virtually no conditions, despite its spotty
record on human rights, the Indonesian Government shut three of the country's
most influential magazines and broke up a protest in Jakarta over the closings.
Amnesty International said 56 people were beaten and arrested. In mid-April,
more than 100 workers and labor campaigners were arrested after strikes and
demonstrations.

Meanwhile, human rights groups say that abuses continue in the disputed
territory of East Timor, a former Portuguese colony invaded and annexed by
Indonesia in 1976.

An Indonesian Embassy official in Washington, who insisted on anonymity, said
Indonesia had followed China's lead and enlisted American oil and mining
companies that do business in Indonesia to stress the country's economic
importance to the United States. Nearly 800 big American companies wrote to
President Clinton supporting China, a tactic crucial to China's success in the
trade decision.

Chinese Called Lax on Data

Asian nations have long emphasized their own human-rights philosophy, stressing
stability and economic growth rather than individual liberties, and the
Indonesian official said the closing of the magazines was done in the name of
"unity and national stability."

Human-rights advocates, who applauded Mr. Clinton's strong stand on their issue
during his election campaign, concede that it is impossible to connect specific
human rights cases with trade policy.

But in a report issued last week, Human Rights Watch/Asia said that since the
trade decision, China has begun trials of labor and human rights campaigners
that had been postponed for nearly a year and has started holding leading
dissidents incommunicado, in some cases not even acknowledging their arrests.
"In the absence of international pressure, China has steadily tightened the
noose on all forms of dissident activity," said the group, which opposed the
Clinton decision.

Supporters of the China decision, however, argue that the Administration's
approach will improve human rights in the long run.

Sunglasses and Culture

"Before this there was a lockout, they said it was a cultural difference, you
can't talk to us about it," said Representative Gary Ackerman, a New York
Democrat who is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia and
the Pacific. "Now people who want brand- name sunglasses for their children
don't talk about cultural differences."

Human-rights advocates see a certain irony in the United States' new trade
logic. For decades, they point out, human-rights questions were subsumed beneath
cold war tensions: a dictator who may have been nasty at least was our dictator.
Now, they say, the rationale is the need to get into an emerging market before
the Japanese or Germans do.

The latest round in the new-markets war is being fought in Vietnam, where both
human rights groups and the State Department have been sharply critical of
Vietnam's disregard of Western perspectives on human rights. The Clinton
Administration ended the United States trade embargo in Vietnam in February.

The Vietnam-American Chamber of Commerce, which was founded in 1992 and includes
dozens of American corporations, is lobbying Congress to remove the remaining
restrictions on trade. "Certainly if we can trade with China and other countries
in Asia where there are human rights problems there is no reason to single out
Vietnam," Irwin Jay Robinson, the group's president, said.

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Increasingly, American companies are pushing exports to Asian
countries despite their human-rights records, eager to beat out competition from
Japan and Germany. Above, riot troops in Indonesia in late June attacked a group
in Jakarta protesting the banning of three weekly news magazines. (Reuters)

Graph: "When Customers Overcome Criticism" shows the growing market for American
exports. (Source: Census Bureau, Department of Commerce)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              106 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 2, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Plans 2d Refinery

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;   Page 14;   Column 3;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 1


Vietnam expects demand for oil products to outstrip supply by the time its first
billion-dollar refinery is running in 1999, and it is taking bids for its second
refinery, officials said today.

Already United States companies are submitting offers, now that Washington's
economic embargo against Vietnam has been lifted.

A consortium led by the Jopec Corporation of Oklahoma has already made a
proposal, the weekly Vietnam Investment Review reported. A Houston-based
company, Plant Processing Equipment, would handle technical work, it added.

The bid was the first made public for the second refinery plan, but stiff
competition is expected.

Vietnam exports most of its crude oil to Japan and Singapore and imports refined
products. It hopes work will start next year on its first $1.2 billion refinery,
with a capacity of 130,000 barrels a day, or 6.5 million metric tons a year.

Total S.A. of France and two Taiwan partners are doing the feasibility study.
The site will probably be on a bay near the south-central resort of Nha Trang.

Northern Vietnam will most likely get the second refinery.

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              107 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 2, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

PERSONAL COMPUTERS;
Back to Woodstock: Some Electronic Routes

BYLINE: By STEPHEN MANES

SECTION: Section C;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Science Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


WOODSTOCK'S "three days of peace and music" in 1969 will soon be commemorated in
upstate New York. How to recapture the spirit and get back to where you once
belonged? How about that groovy computer?

Woodstock: 25th Anniversary CD-ROM, from Time Warner Interactive, a division of
Time Warner Inc., in versions for Macintosh and Windows, requires eight
megabytes of random access memory, roughly eight more than any flower child
possessed. Still, at a list price of $39.95, this compilation of music,
photography and video beguiles you with a goofy charm.

Eight complete musical numbers by the likes of Janis Joplin, The Who, Country
Joe McDonald and Jefferson Airplane play in sub-CD quality while photos and film
clips flash across the screen or lyrics appear. A couple of clicks away are
biographies, discographies and video selections for those performers and others,
including Arlo Guthrie, Joan Baez and the groups Mountain and Canned Heat.

The tie-dyed graphics are pleasantly loopy. You can find film of the event,
contemporary newspaper clippings and even Billboard's "Hot 100" list, with "In
the Year 2525" topping the chart.

As usual in CD-ROM entertainment, the missing items are relevant detail (who is
on screen now?), video resolution (how mushy is that bog in the window?) and
useful data (who followed The Who?). Also missing is material for which the
producers could not obtain a license, most notably Jimi Hendrix's searing
"Star-Spangled Banner." Though the Woodstock music CD's and movie offer far more
content and better sound, the CD-ROM creates its own evocative rendering of the
days of Peter Max, the Fillmore and Vietnam.

So how do you get to Woodstock or, better, Saugerties, where the coming
festivities will be held? In the 60's you went to a gas station for some free
maps. Now you mouse around with expensive software. Or at least consider it,
since even the best travel program can seem to be a solution in search of a
problem. Map 'n' Go is a new Windows CD-ROM from DeLorme Mapping for about $49.
DeLorme says that Map 'n' Go's database includes more than one million miles of
road, 100,000 destinations, 23,000 hotels and 3,000 campgrounds. What it doesn't
include is the intelligence humans use to map out routes or the detail great
guidebooks offer.

Map 'n' Go comes with either a road atlas of North and Central America keyed to
the software or a coupon that will get you a free copy by mail. Once you get the
hang of an initially confusing user interface, you can view or print maps at
various magnifications, check out the sights in the Catskills or learn the price
of a bed at the Saugerties HoJo Inn.

Since you're not likely to tote a CD-ROM drive on your journey, Map 'n' Go can
calculate routes of up to 50 stops and print out strip maps with mileage, time
and turning points. The software can't handle subtleties like the difference
between urban and rural speed limits on certain Interstate highways, so the
program's "shortest" route may be along painfully slow back roads. You can't
print out a detailed list of hotels, restaurants or sights, though with a lot of
pointing and clicking, you can "attach" them to a route map.

There are other quirks. A major bridge across the Susquehanna River has
disappeared. Ferries are mysteriously displayed in travel plans as "unnamed."
The route from point A to point B is not always the same as the route from point
B to point A.

And the route from Manhattan to the original site at Bethel? Map 'n' Go, shows
two Bethels in New York. I first picked a tiny hamlet near Poughkeepsie. Wrong.
The right one is near Monticello. Map 'n' Go sends you up the Henry Hudson
Parkway, over the George Washington Bridge, north on the Palisades Parkway and
west on U.S. Highway 6. To the Saugerties commemoration? Same start, then turn
north on the New York State Thruway.

A free map could have told me that. But could it have kept me truckin' 52 hours
and 44 minutes over 2,838 miles from Woodstock to Acapulco?

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              108 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

After 50 Years, Virginian Will Renew a Friendship Torn Apart by Soviets

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Aug. 3


Their brief relationship flared just as the wary World War II alliance between
the United States and the Soviet Union grew icy enough to be called a cold war.
The young American assistant naval attache was expelled from Stalin's Moscow on
charges of espionage; the 21-year-old Russian medical student was thrown into
prison for four months of interrogation, then sentenced to eight years in the
Gulag for her contact with him.

Nearly 50 years later, after life marked them both and the Soviet Union that
punished them had itself died, she found him again through intermediaries. He
invited her to visit him in America, taking responsibility for her tickets and
expenses. But the American Embassy rejected her request for a visa, assuming her
interest, at 68, was only to emigrate.

On the usual photocopied form, without date or signature, the Consular Section
simply checked a box saying: "You have not shown that you have sufficiently
strong family, social or economic ties to your place of residence to insure that
your projected stay in the United States will be temporary."

Attracted to Freedom

But Galina M. Spiridonova, hardened by the camps, decided to keep pushing. She
knew too much about the arbitrariness of governments, and she felt her story was
compelling.

It started in 1948. "It was a dangerous time," remembered Ms. Spiridonova. "I
knew the risks of meeting Americans." The naval officer, Robert H. Dreher, "was
a very handsome man, you can't deny it," she said, but "that wasn't the most
important thing that attracted me to him -- more important, he was the free
representative of a free country."

After her release from the camps, Ms. Spiridonova worked as a music teacher.
Tough, brassy and funny, her voice raspy with too many cigarettes in a difficult
life, she still works part-time as a cleaner in a medical laboratory to
supplement her $55-a-month pension. A proud person, she stresses that she does
lab work too, like sterilizing equipment and distilling water.

Moved by his own contacts with ordinary Soviet citizens and convinced popular
support for the regime was uncertain, Mr. Dreher joined the new Central
Intelligence Agency and helped found Radio Liberty, which beamed news and
American themes into the Soviet Union. Now 78, he spent his career with the
agency, including more than three years in Vietnam, and chooses to be vague
about his duties. But in the postwar Soviet Union, he says, he was not a spy.

As a Navy lieutenant, he came to Odessa in 1946 to clear the port, stuffed with
American ships full of United Nations aid for the Soviet Union, which was
devastated by the war. He was among the few foreigners allowed to be in Odessa
and was even allowed to get a Soviet driver's license. He explored relatively
freely, picking up hitchhikers and making friends, though remembers being
followed constantly, with those he let off again usually interrogated by the
secret police.

After his expulsion, he discovered that a student from Odessa, whom he had met
more than once or twice, had also been arrested and spent five years in Stalin's
prison camps, finally immigrating and settling in America. "After he told me
that," Mr. Dreher said, "I then wondered whatever happened to Galya." He paused,
then said, "What happened to her was as bad as I imagined."

Ms. Spiridonova was just one of a long series of friends and encounters, he
remembers, though they saw a lot of each other. He went with her to the medical
institute where she was studying to become a doctor. "We had lunch and a tour,
and I remember they were cutting up cadavers," Mr. Dreher said. "I wondered then
if she knew this was very risky and told her that. After the ax fell, I was
really quite concerned." After being told of his expulsion, he telephoned her to
warn her she might be in trouble.

An Actor in Kazakhstan

"When I first met Galina," he remembers, "she was with two other friends and
seemed a rather patriotic Soviet citizen. And when she learned I had an
engineering degree, she said: 'Oh, wonderful! Come and join us! We need
engineers.' But when I said no, we discussed why, and when I talked of freedom
and so on, I think it set her down a certain track."

In the camps, in faroff Kazakhstan, Ms. Spiridonova met an actor, Igor M. Orlov.
They married and had a son, now 42. Mr. Orlov, freed in a general amnesty in
1956, died in 1974.

But Ms. Spiridonova felt her life had been changed forever by her contact with
Mr. Dreher, and 46 years later, she tried to find him, finally getting help from
the wife of a former British Ambassador to Moscow, who contacted the American
Embassy in London.

A bachelor, Mr. Dreher lives in Arlington, Va. They exchanged letters; he
invited her to visit him. After the United States Embassy in Moscow rejected her
visa request, Ms. Spiridonova was in tears.

"They didn't say anything," she cried. "They didn't ask much. They just gave me
this paper," which she threw on the floor.

On the telephone from Virginia, Mr. Dreher was furious.

"This is ridiculous and absurd," he said. "She's lived all her life in Moscow
and has very good friends. She has a son there and all her ties. When you
contrast the porousness of our borders to illegal immigration and the
exclusivity being shown here, it incenses me." Then he said: "I'm doing this out
of a sense of justice. I'm sure it will work out. It's got to, it's right."

Asked for comment on the refusal, embassy officials said it seemed that an
inexperienced consular officer had interviewed Ms. Spiridonova. The Consul
General, Nancy H. Sambaiew, reviewed the file and decided to reinterview Ms.
Spiridonova herself.

"She was so polite, so sympathetic," Ms. Spiridonova said afterward about Mrs.
Sambaiew. "She heard the whole story, she even shed a tear." She also issued her
a visa.

Mr. Dreher and Ms. Spiridonova are planning an autumn reunion. But Mr. Dreher
takes pains to say: "I'm an elderly retired bachelor, and I'm not interested in
Galina as a woman, but as a person who suffered a great deal. I want to do what
I can to make amends and bring some happiness to what's left of her life."

'Angry at the Regime'

Ms. Spiridonova is amused by his caution. "On the telephone once, I asked him if
he had a piano at home," she said. "There was a long pause." She cackled. "He
probably thought I wanted to stay forever! Obviously he got scared. So I wrote
him a sharp letter saying, 'I'm not going to turn your life upside down.' " She
laughed again. "He's 78! He shouldn't be afraid."

Mr. Dreher said he feels some complicity for what happened, but little guilt.
"Frankly, I was so angry at the regime, I found it difficult to assume any sense
of responsibility myself for what happened," he said. "She took the initiative,
asking me more about this or that. Whether she was a trap or not I had no
problem extolling freedom."

Ms. Spiridonova is philosophical. "It wasn't his fault and I blame him for
nothing. He promised nothing. But, oh, he was so interesting. So instead of
kisses I asked him questions about the Christian Democratic Party in Italy. And
I told him one of my friends had already been arrested, and then a second one,
and I was prepared. I had a piece of soap and sugar and bread if they arrested
me. And I think if it wasn't for Dreher, I would have been arrested anyway, for
political reasons." So was it politics or love?

"You know," she said finally, "as a musician I was very impulsive. And my
impression was that he was very handsome. But had he been a handsome Communist,
there would have been nothing between us."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert H. Dreher, a former American Navy officer based in the
Soviet Union in the Stalin era, and an acquaintance, Galina M. Spiridonova, are
shown at top in 1948 photographs. Recently Mr. Dreher, who was expelled for
espionage, relaxed in his Arlington, Va., home. (Karin Anderson for The New York
Times); Ms. Spiridonova, shown above in Moscow, was imprisoned for eight years.
(Aleksei Rogov for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              109 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

W. Pat Jennings, 74; Was in U.S. House

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: MARION, Va., Aug. 3


W. Pat Jennings, who represented Virginia's Ninth District from 1954 to 1966,
died here on Tuesday after a tractor he was driving overturned and crushed him.
He was 74 and lived in Marion.

Mr. Jennings was a Democrat who after six terms lost to William C. Wampler, a
Republican. Afterward, his former colleagues elected him clerk of the House, an
administrative job that he held until 1975.

After leaving the House, he returned to his farm and his automobile dealership
in Marion, about 80 miles southwest of Roanoke. He had been clearing brush on a
slope behind the dealership when his tractor overturned.

In Congress, Mr. Jennings allied himself with Presidents John F. Kennedy and
Lyndon B. Johnson, often using his influence as a member of the House Ways and
Means Committee to win Presidential blessings for projects in his district.

"His mission was to take care of a very poor area of Virginia," said Larry
Sabato, a political scientist at the University of Virginia, "and he used the
Federal Government to make it possible."

Mr. Jennings was an admirer of Mr. Johnson and supported the nation's
involvement in the Vietnam War.

He is survived by his wife, Ann Cox Jennings; a daughter, Mary Ann Hovis of
Oakton, Va.; three sons, G. C., Pat Jr. and Dick, all of Marion; his mother,
Okie Jennings Sample of Marion; eight grandchildren and six great-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              110 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 4, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Remaking a Hotel, The Un-Miami Way

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY JACK WARD

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words

DATELINE: MIAMI BEACH


HERE in South Florida, the holiday home to Madonna, Versace and thousands of
deeply tanned and tattooed tourists, was a scene that looked like a war-room
strategy session. Behind closed doors at the Raleigh Hotel, on the northern
frontier of the South Beach Art Deco district, Ian Schrager and Philippe Starck
huddled around a conference table earlier this summer, plotting.

The team that created the Royalton and Paramount hotels in Manhattan -- Mr.
Schrager, the entrepreneur, and Mr. Starck, the French design superstar -- is
refining its next project: the transformation of the Delano Hotel on South
Beach's Collins Avenue. They want to turn the building, a 14-story, 328-room,
pink-stucco landmark built in 1947, into what Mr. Schrager hopes will be "a
self-contained destination resort."

Whether the success of this grand renovation is a matter of inventive design,
money (more than $20 million, Mr. Shrager said) or putting a new spin on popular
themes is a subject for debate. But if only half the ideas survive, the new
Delano, to open in January under an undecided name, will represent a significant
course correction for a couple of impresarios noted for giving the 1980's its
gloss of dynamic decadence.

"I think people have had it with design on steroids," Mr. Schrager said. "This
is just not a time for one-upmanship and three-legged chairs." Mr. Starck, who
designed the notorious three-legged Cafe Costes chair a decade ago, apparently
took no offense. "Here is the secret," he said. "Less to see, more to feel."

Anda Andrei, the Delano project director, described Mr. Starck's hotel concept
as "a happy monastery." The rooms will be pure white, outfitted with a spare
array of ethnic furniture and objects from around the world. The style, Mr.
Starck said, will be "the deep elegance of a poor people who have a very clean
house."

For some guests, the Delano will be a very warm house, too. Mr. Schrager, who
traveled to Havana, Rio de Janeiro, Bali and Vietnam to sleuth inspiration,
plans to explore the heretical notion of tropical living with minimal
air-conditioning.

Rejecting the local obsession for sunny, refrigerated interiors, Mr. Starck has
reconfigured the lobby floor of the hotel into a progression of "dark, foggy"
rooms through shaded gardens leading to the pool. Guests who prefer to keep the
muggy atmosphere at bay can retreat to their rooms and do what the natives do:
switch on an air-conditioner.

As a "skinny kid from New York," Mr. Schrager vacationed at the Delano with his
family, and he remembers its cozy glamour. Long favored by the family of
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the hotel was a family-oriented resort, where guests
swam, sunbathed and ate, leaving only in the late afternoon for a pre-dinner
stroll along the boulevards. "I really believe in these generational things,"
said Mr. Schrager, whose enthusiasm for things familial may stem from his
recently becoming a father. "I just think our parents had the right idea."

Bjorn Hanson, a hospitality investment banker at Kidder, Peabody & Company in
Manhattan, thinks so, too. "The resort hotel is the next logical progression,"
he said. "All of a sudden, our generation has to start taking vacations around
our children's schedules. The high-powered, two-income, no-children exotic field
trip no longer makes sense. The full-service resort, where you don't worry about
transportation, what will the kids do or finding a good restaurant, is a logical
evolution."

Mr. Starck believes he is up to the challenge of Mr. Schrager's new sobriety.
"My ego is quiet now," said Mr. Starck, the former enfant terrible who more than
once thundered into publicity events astride a Harley-Davidson motorcycle. "Now,
I can honestly do my job." Today, two years after his longtime companion and
collaborator, Brigitte Laurent, died of cancer, he seems chastened and almost
humble.

For him, the design change, more evolution than conversion, also springs from a
fundamental shift in cultural values. "Now we start a new generation, a new way
of thinking I call 'the Responsible Time,' " Mr. Starck said. "I don't speak
about ecology because everybody uses it for marketing. I prefer to speak of a
new moral way of life."

Mr. Schrager said the property was bought in 1993 from the Del Rio Investment
Corporation for $4 million by Beach Hotel Associates, a limited partnership of
which he is the general partner.

Because the hotel is part of the architecturally protected Art Deco district,
the team must make restorations without altering the exterior. That means the
vertical eagle wings at the top will stay intact. But the interior is another
matter. Mr. Starck is not an admirer of the typical South Beach look. "Miami
style, to me, is terrible," he said. "This hotel will have nothing to do with
the anecdote of Miami. You can build a real place from Miami, if we keep the
essence of the weather, the smells, the quality of the water, a place of
adventure. The Delano will have the honesty of the place, not the trend."

One day, from the Delano roof, Mr. Schrager looked beyond the bulldozers and the
rubble, grinned and spread his arms like Moses. "That," he said, gesturing
toward an architectural mock-up below, "is the pool."

It is a modern take on the multi-tiered tropical fantasy pool at Morris
Lapidus's Fontainebleau Hotel nearby. The Delano's pool is intended to be the
hotel's centerpiece -- in effect, an outdoor lobby.

Guests will be able to sit in seats sculptured into its sides or on floating
chairs accessorized with equally buoyant tables and lamps. It "will be one of
the great pools of the world," said Howard Fields, the pool and site planner who
is designing the pool. He has built more than 400 "water attractions," as he
called them, including the Frank Gehry fish-shaped building for the 1992
Olympics in Barcelona, Spain. Also planned are cabanas and lanai rooms that may
take on the status of celebrity hideaways.

Another focal point is the creation of a rooftop bathhouse exclusively for
women. To be called Agua, it is being masterminded by Kelly Klein, Leila Fazel
and Rita Norona Schrager, a former ballet dancer who is married to Mr. Schrager
and is the mother of their 3-month-old daughter, Sophia.

"It's sort of a bathhouse," Mrs. Klein said, "a sexy, sensual place for a woman
to come at the end of the day for --"

"Stress release," Mrs. Schrager said, "relaxation --"

"Gossip," Ms. Fazel said.

Mrs. Schrager said the seraglio will offer herbal baths, a juice bar,
aromatherapy, reflexology, meditation and massage.

"All people do is cruise each other," Mrs. Klein said of South Beach. "There's
something wonderful about being a woman and going to the bath with your friends,
or your mother, or alone, and not having to think that you have to look good,
and think someone is seeing you, or that you feel self-conscious."

There is something ironic in this lament from the wife of Calvin Klein, the man
who has plastered images of a scantilly clad Kate Moss on bus stops. The kicker,
of course, is that the bathhouse will be in a transparent glass structure on the
hotel's roof.

David Barton, the body builder whose artfully rippled abdomen Mrs. Schrager
compared to "a six-pack," will open a branch of his self-named gym in the Delano
and is collaborating with Mr. Starck on its design.

Brian McNally, the restaurateur, will operate food services at the resort.
Bemoaning the heat, he said: "I can barely imagine eating. The ideal meal right
now, in this weather? I think, a grapefruit. At 95 degrees, I don't exactly want
lamb stew."

Whatever the daily special may be, the most compelling factor could be Madonna,
who is negotiating to become a potential investor and a co-manager of the
restaurant, though one could hardly envision the Material Girl grilling tuna
burgers.

Mr. Schrager said that the challenge for him "is to take this new sobriety,
without taking out the intrinsic sex appeal and beauty of it." If the new
laid-back, sweaty, family monasticism doesn't bring the inn crowd to the Delano,
Mr. Schrager is betting his multimillions that his like-minded celebrity friends
will.

Leo Renaghan, an associate professor of services marketing at the Cornell
University School of Hotel Administration, is a convinced observer.

"A few years ago, if you'd told me this guy's going to put up a couple of hotels
and center them around design, making things visually exciting for people, and
you asked me would he be successful, I'd say of course not," Professor. Renaghan
said. "But that's why I'm a professor and he's making a lot of money."

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Starck's designs for fanciful poolside cabanas. (Philippe
Starck, Morgan's Hotel Group); Ian Schrager, left, and Philippe Starck, known
for hotels in New York, are venturing south to the Delano Hotel. Their motto:
hello minimal air-conditioning, goodbye trendy design. (Tony Savino for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              111 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Finalize Chicago Convention

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, Aug. 4


The Democratic Party today formally named Chicago the site of its 1996 national
convention.

The chairman of the Democratic National Committee, David Wilhelm, promised a
convention with "the capacity, the accessibility, the support and the energy to
send President Clinton back to the White House in 1996."

Mr. Wilhelm and Mayor Richard M. Daley announced a $32.1 million deal specifying
that the convention would be held at the United Center, a new arena on the West
Side.

It will be the first time Chicago has been the host of a national political
convention since 1968, when the Democratic gathering was marred by violence
between the police and protesters against the Vietnam War.

Mr. Daley, whose father was mayor during that convention, called today's
announcement good news for everyone in the city.

Minority politicians and contractors had threatened to protest if minorities did
not receive a good share of the business the convention will generate. The
contract between the city and the party calls for a special committee to assure
that 25 percent of all contracts to go to minority-owned businesses and an
additional 5 percent go to businesses owned by women.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              112 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

DNA Tests Provide Key to Cell Doors for Some Wrongly Convicted Inmates

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1639 words


In a telephone interview from prison, Edward Honaker said he was flabbergasted
when a jury convicted him of rape and sodomy 10 years ago.

But his assertions of innocence had been of no avail. He has served more than
nine years of his multiple-life-term sentence at Nottaway Prison in Virginia and
will not be eligible for parole until 2001.

Now, however, DNA testing has given Mr. Honaker, 44, some hope of being freed.
His case has been taken up by the Innocence Project, a two-year-old program run
by Barry Scheck, a law professor at the Benjamin A. Cardozo School of Law of
Yeshiva University in New York, and Peter Neufeld, a lawyer in New York. With
the help of about 18 law students, the two lawyers review the cases of people
who say they have been falsely convicted, usually of rape or murder, and arrange
for DNA tests that may support the convict.

So far the Innocence Project has assisted in the release of eight male
prisoners, including one mentally retarded man on death row in Virginia.
Project officials say they have recently obtained evidence that three other
prisoners, including Mr. Honaker, are not guilty of the crimes for which they
were convicted.

The law students are in the preliminary stages of investigating about 200 other
cases, Mr. Scheck said. The group rejects about a quarter of the cases it
considers, he added, because there is no evidence that is testable or because
tests would not make any difference in the conviction.

Cases Share Flaws

Legal experts say the Innocence Project is opening a window onto the sorts of
errors that can lead to convictions of the innocent. They say its results raise
serious questions about how and when closed cases should be reopened, how long
evidence should be preserved and how people are wrongly convicted.

Mr. Scheck said the cases the Innocence Project has pursued have several
features in common. The men were convicted based on identification by witnesses,
they were too poor to afford private lawyers, and any forensic data that were
introduced were flawed or were inadequate to establish the person's identity.

But, in every case, DNA has proved definitive because it is so objective. Each
person's DNA is unique. By testing DNA in cells from a drop of blood or a semen
stain, scientists can often tell with 100 percent certainty whether the DNA in
the sample was from someone other than the accused. Although courts sometimes
disallow DNA evidence that seems to show an accused person is guilty, all accept
exculpatory DNA evidence. The notion is that it can be a judgment call to say
that two DNA patterns match, but a mismatch is usually so obvious that there is
no questioning it. And it is genetically impossible for two sets of cells that
do not match to come from the same person.

When Mr. Honaker was accused, in the summer of 1984, DNA testing had not been
developed.

A Night 10 Years Ago

The crime took place in the middle of the night on June 25, 1984. A young
couple, lost on the Blue Ridge Parkway in rural Virginia, pulled over to the
side of the road and fell asleep in their car. They were awakened by a man who
shined a flashlight into the car, said he was a police officer and asked them to
get out of the car. When they did, he brandished a gun in his left hand, told
the man to run and drove the woman in his truck to a cabin, where he raped and
sodomized her and complained in maudlin terms of his experiences in Vietnam.

Mr. Honaker was arrested on Oct. 28, 1984. The main evidence against him was the
couple's identification of him. Both picked his picture from among six
photographs and identified him in court. In addition, a hair found on the
woman's shorts was said to be just like the hair on Mr. Honaker's head. He was
convicted on Feb. 7, 1985, and was given three life sentences for rape and
sodomy and two sentences of two years each for using a gun.

In his defense, Mr. Honaker noted that he was right-handed and had never been in
Vietnam. He said he was was sleeping in his mother's house about 80 miles away
on the night of the assault. And, he said, he had had a vasectomy in 1977 and so
could not have been the source of the sperm on the woman's clothes or in her
vagina. The prosecutor suggested at the trial that the vasectomy might have
failed.

Years later, Mr. Honaker learned of the Innocence Project and wrote asking for
the group's help. One factor that led the project to take the case was that the
Virginia police had saved the clothing of the rape victim. Now, independent
tests by two labs have shown that the semen on that clothing was not Mr.
Honaker's.

Virginia law prohibits the reopening of cases after so many years, so Mr.
Honaker's lawyers, joined by state prosecutors, have appealed to the Governor,
George F. Allen, for clemency. The Governor's press secretary, Ken Stroupe, said
the Governor is reviewing the appeal. Last year, L. Douglas Wilder, who was then
the Governor, released two other men whose cases had been taken up by the
Innocence Project. DNA evidence showed they were innocent.

Operating on a Shoestring

Mr. Scheck is optimistic, given the Innocence Project's track record. With just
a small staff and a shoestring budget, the project has won reversals of
convictions for all but the three most recent cases.

"What's really amazing to me is that we are getting results so quickly," Mr.
Scheck said. Criminal defense lawyers rarely succeed in freeing anyone who has
been convicted, Mr. Scheck said.

Most prisoners are guilty, Mr. Scheck and Mr. Neufeld said, but there are
innocent people in prison. "We saw a huge reservoir of cases out there," Mr.
Neufeld said. Mr. Neufeld and Mr. Scheck do not charge to represent prisoners
whose cases they accept for the project. The project's expenses are picked up by
the Cardozo law school.

Mr. Neufeld said he was convinced that the project could find the innocent
inmates when, two years ago, he learned that a third of the time when the F.B.I.
tests the DNA of people who have been accused of crimes, the results do not
match the DNA from the crime scene. Jennifer Spencer, a spokeswoman for the
F.B.I., confirmed that Mr. Neufeld's statistics were correct.

But DNA testing, which is expensive, is often not done, and there is no
requirement that evidence be saved once a person is convicted. Even if it is
saved, it is not always easy for lawyers to get it and have it tested after a
case is closed. Finally, even if DNA tests show conclusive evidence of a lack of
guilt, the courts may still decide not to reopen the case. Almost every state
places time limits on the introduction of new evidence. Virginia's is 30 days.

Harsh Judicial Reality

Rockne Harmon, a senior district attorney in Alameda, Calif., said he has used
DNA tests rarely, when he thought the test would be the deciding factor in
getting a conviction. And Mr. Harmon said he would not automatically provide
evidence from old cases to lawyers who wanted to test DNA after a person was
convicted.

Mr. Harmon said: "Once someone is convicted and has exhausted his appeals, it is
assumed that he is guilty. The reality is it is pretty cruel and harsh, but
that's the law."

Mr. Scheck and Mr. Neufeld said they recently learned that DNA tests had proved
that another prisoner, Brian Piszczek, was not guilty. He has been in prison for
a rape and assault that took place in 1990 in Cleveland. The victim picked Mr.
Piszczek's photograph out of a display and identified him as the rapist.  Hair
from the crime scene was said to be consistent with Mr. Piszczek's.

But Mr. Piszczek argued in court that he did not match the physical description
of the rapist given by the woman, and his former girlfriend swore that he was
with her on the night of the rape and that he had no access to a car, which he
would have needed to go the six miles to the woman's apartment. Mr. Piszczek
pleaded for DNA tests, but they were not done. Since he was indigent, he could
not pay for the $2,000 tests. Now DNA tests show that he could not have been the
rapist, said Mr. Scheck, and he is asking that Mr. Piszczek's conviction be
overturned.

Two weeks ago, Mr. Neufeld and Mr. Scheck reported that they got back DNA tests
showing that yet another man was not guilty. The man, Terry Chalmers, who has
served nine years in prison for a rape in Mount Vernon, N.Y., was convicted
after the victim picked his picture out of a police display. Now, because the
DNA of Mr. Chalmers does not match that in the semen cells recovered after the
rape, it appears that he could not have been the rapist, Mr. Neufeld said. New
York has no time limit on introducing new evidence.

Roadblocks to Reversal

Despite the success of the Innocence Project, legal experts said there are still
many roadblocks to reversing convictions, even if a lawyer has fresh DNA
evidence.

Edward Imwinkelreid, a law professor at the University of California at Davis,
said: "You can't look at it simply from the point of view of the prisoner.
Society has a very substantial interest in the finality of judgment of
convictions." Without time limits on the introduction of new evidence, he said,
"people in prisons could litigate the criminal justice system half to death."

Paul Gianelli, a law professor at Case Western Reserve University, said that to
bring in new evidence, even within the time limits on when a case can be
reopened, "you have to show you couldn't have had it before and it's got to not
just affect the verdict but you have to convince the judge that you would have
been acquitted. It's got to be that powerful."

But Mr. Neufeld sees these legal restrictions as an outrage. To deny prisoners
an opportunity to use DNA evidence that proves them innocent "just offends the
morality and decency of what we think is fair," he said.


LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edward Honaker has been in prison in Virginia for more than nine
years, convicted of rape. Now DNA test results may set him free. (Timothy Wright
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              113 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Slain Clinic Escort Saw Job as a Mission

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: PENSACOLA, Fla., Aug. 4


James H. Barrett flew in northern Africa in World War II, in Korea and in
Vietnam, and he retired as a lieutenant colonel in the Air Force after 28 years
of service. Then he took up a second career as a schoolteacher in Texas and
Maryland.

So when he finally retired for good here two years ago, he joked to his friends
in the North that he had earned the right to tee off on every single hole of
every single one of the 41 golf courses in the Pensacola area.

He never came close. He was too busy volunteering for local charities, from
walking in the March of Dimes to manning the Earth Day table at a local fair.
And after an abortion doctor, David Gunn, was shot to death last year, Mr.
Barrett became so angry that he volunteered to be an escort for Dr. Gunn's
replacement, so that it would never happen again.

Having fought in three wars on foreign soil, the 74-year-old Mr. Barrett was not
to survive a fourth, in his own country. He was killed along with the new doctor
last Friday as he drove his pickup truck into the parking lot of the Ladies
Center, an abortion clinic here. His wife, June, who is 68, was with him at the
time and shot in the arm. She was released from a hospital on Sunday. The police
have charged a 40-year-old abortion opponent with murder.

In the days since the killings, much attention has been given to the man
arrested, Paul J. Hill, and to the doctor, John B. Britton. Mr. Barrett, though,
was part of a wider group in Pensacola, one of more than five dozen people --
many of them military retirees -- willing to assume the risks of escorting women
and health-care workers into the clinics. The escorts have often had to thread
their way through throngs of protesters bearing placards and shouting, as Mr.
Hill frequently did, "Mommy, Mommy, don't kill me!"

Peace Mission

Mr. Barrett said he saw escorting as an extension of his military service.

"My dad was a military man, and there's a stereotype of the military man, that
he's all about war," his daughter, Dandy Barrett Witty, said the other evening
as relatives gathered on the back porch of the Barretts' ranch-style house here.
"But Dad taught me from the time I could understand that his primary mission was
to keep the peace. That's what his feeling was the day he died. That's what he
was doing the day he died."

Mr. Barrett himself was very direct about why he chose to serve as an escort.
"I've spent my life doing my best for the security of my country and the people
who live in it," he told a local newspaper last year. "Why should I stop now?"

Mr. Barrett was in many ways a conservative man, but the question of whether his
own thoughts on abortion underwent a transformation is complicated. Even his
widow and his children say they are not exactly sure where he stood on the
issue.

"My dad may not have been pro-abortion," said his daughter, Ms. Witty, "but he
was most assuredly pro a woman's right to choose. He felt very strongly that she
had that right, and that she should do it safely and without harassment."

There was evidence that his opinions on other issues grew more liberal over the
years. In the 1950's, for instance, when stationed at Ellington Air Force Base
in Houston, he was in charge of a review board that examined the sexuality of
service members stationed there and discharged many homosexuals.

Four years ago, on his second or third date with June -- both were widowed at
the time -- she had something to tell him.

" 'I just want you to know, Jim,' " she recalled saying, " 'I have a gay son who
is H.I.V.-positive. And I want you to meet him.' Well, he accepted that. He got
to know my son. He loved my son." The son, Arthur, died in San Francisco last
year at the age of 43. Afterward, Mr. Barrett said that he had become deeply
bothered by what he had had to do at Ellington.

Surprising the Neighbors

In public, Mr. Barrett was reticent about expressing his views. A neighbor here,
James Kane, who waved goodbye to the Barretts at 6:45 A.M. last Friday as they
went off to the airport to pick up Dr. Britton, said that any time they
discussed abortion, Mr. Barrett just nodded.

"We assumed they agreed with us," said Mr. Kane, who describes himself as "a
pro-life Catholic" who prays the rosary every day for the unborn. "We were
shocked to see they were on the other side of the fence."

Mr. Barrett had been much looking forward to a 75th birthday party in his honor,
planned for Aug. 9 at the officers club of the Pensacola Naval Air Station. "We
are going to celebrate this milestone with a party to beat all parties," read
the invitations.

Instead he was eulogized in a memorial service last weekend at the Unitarian
Universalist Fellowship here. At the service, there were tributes to his
military career, and Theresa Hunter, past president of Escambia chapter of the
National Organization for Women, said: "That man had more life in him than most
people, regardless of their age. He was just a very vital person."

But the accolade that seemed to strike closest to home came from his son, Bruce,
a Pensacola contractor.

"He was real neat guy," he said, as the congregation of 450 broke into applause.
"My dad was a neat guy."


NAME: James H. Barrett

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "My dad may not have been pro-abortion, but he was most
assuredly pro a woman's right to choose," said Dandy Barrett Witty, daughter of
James H. Barrett, the security escort who was fatally shot along with an
abortion doctor in Pensacola, Fla., last week. She embraced her stepmother,
June, who was wounded during the attack. (Alex Brandon for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              114 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 19;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 381 words



Robert Rauschenberg
 'Stoned Moon'
 Mary Ryan Gallery
 24 West 57th Street
 Manhattan
 Through Sept. 17

Twenty-five years ago last month, several artists were invited by NASA to attend
the Apollo 11 moon launch at Cape Canaveral. Robert Rauschenberg was among them,
and he quickly produced 33 lithographs and a series of collages recording his
reactions to the event.

A selection from this work at Mary Ryan shows a prodigiously inventive artist at
work, one who manages to extract something of interest even from narrowly
occasional material. The scale of the prints and their technique (a use of litho
crayon with photographic transfer) were both innovative for their time, but it
is the imagery that holds the attention.

As he often does, Mr. Rauschenberg interweaves the historical and the personal.
A map of the space-center grounds overlaps an image of his childhood heroes, the
Wright brothers; a casual snapshot of a sailor (the artist himself as a young
man?) is dwarfed by beetling space age architecture.

The combination is even more telling in the collages. Exhibited here for the
first time, they were meant to be published as a book titled, like the
lithograph, "Stoned Moon." (It never appeared.) Their typewritten texts
interspersed with cut-and-pasted images create a ruminative diary of the
artist's trip to the space center and his four-day stay there.

Topical references and subtle visual jokes abound, and even when the text grows
somewhat overheated in its enthusiasm (NASA's invitation was, after all, a bid
for some favorable publicity), the images stay cool. Although the narrative
centers on the technological triumph of the blast-off, the book's penultimate
page dramatically expands the political context with shots of dead and wounded
soldiers in Vietnam.

The euphoria surrounding the moon landing has radically dimmed over a
quarter-century, but the gallery helps to recapture it with a running tape of
the original television broadcast and a display of newspaper accounts of the
day. Among the many public figures interviewed for their reactions to the event
was Pablo Picasso, who tartly stated, "It means nothing to me." It's nice that
Mr. Rauschenberg felt differently and left this virtuosic souvenir.   HOLLAND
COTTER

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              115 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 5, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Woodstock Notion

BYLINE: By Neal Karlen;   Neal Karlen is author of the forthcoming "Babes in
Toyland: The Making and Selling of a Rock-and-Roll Band."

SECTION: Section A;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS


Exactly 10 years ago, Abbie Hoffman lectured a young reporter in the show room
of Grossinger's, the Borscht Belt hotel near Max Yasgur's farm, site of
Woodstock, the holy quagmire. "Wise up, man," he said. "Woodstock was shuck and
jive, a TV commercial about money!"

It was the 15th anniversary of the epochal 1969 rock festival, and the moribund
Catskills resort, desperate to attract a younger clientele, was putting on a
weekend celebration featuring performances by some original Woodstock musicians.

Virtually nobody under 65 showed up, and now Mr. Hoffman watched elderly good
sports trying to dance the hora as John Sebastian played the theme from "Welcome
Back, Kotter," his only hit since the summer of love. "There's more real love
and peace in this room then there was at Woodstock that whole weekend," said Mr.
Hoffman, Yippie co-founder, self-appointed political conscience of the original
concert and author of the screed "Woodstock Nation."

Things will have changed by the 25th anniversary next weekend, when at least
150,000 already ticketed pilgrims will turn up for a concert in Saugerties,
N.Y., 60 miles from the site of the original festival, at Bethel, N.Y. (Another
concert, more modest and planned for the original field, was canceled this week
after only 1,650 of 50,000 tickets were sold.)

Beyond the $135 tickets, millions more will be made via pay-per-view, corporate
sponsorships and too-expensive T-shirts -- all sold around memories of music
that rings to 90's ears more like beer ad jingles than a call to the
counterculture.

There will be much chest-thumping as baby-boom pundits, closer to minoxidil than
mutton chops, complain about how the utopian reality of the original concert has
been perverted by this crass commercialism. Lost in the gooey myth of nostalgia
for Wavy Gravy, the security chief, announcing breakfast in bed for 400,000 is
the reality of the original Woodstock -- craven in its planning, execution and
backstage shenanigans.

None of this is meant to belittle the recollections of the lucky souls who
actually made it to the mud-and-sewage-choked field that July weekend. Their
overwhelming consensus is that one couldn't hear the music, that the drugs sold
in the woods were terrible, that nobody had food -- and that the event, or the
little they remembered, was the most historic moment they had ever eyewitnessed.

What was most remarkable was the speed with which Woodstock entered the national
mythology. For starters, there is the myth of the free concert -- the myth that
the Aquarian promoters accepted financial ruin on the first day of the festival
in order to let their flower-children customers in for free.

Actually, 50,000 gate crashers were already settled in the field while
organizers tried to figure out a way short of military removal to get them back
outside to the ticket lines. The rock impresario Bill Graham, an adviser, was
caught on film telling how South Americans stopped man-eating ants by setting
fires in ditches: "I'm not saying we should put up flames, but there has to be
some way of stopping the influx of humanity."

In a recent documentary film, Wavy Gravy detailed what happened next. A promoter
asked him, "Do you want to clear the infield so we can start collecting
tickets?" He replied, "Do you want a good movie, or a bad movie?" So the
promoters "came back to us and said, 'We want to make the festival free.' "

The four promoters, led by the executive producer Michael Lang, got their good
movie. In fact, he and his colleagues cut a film deal that weekend with Warner
Brothers for a million dollars.

An equally compelling myth is that the peaceful and unpoliced concertgoers
proved that correct karma, not badges, was all that was needed to keep the
festival unbloodied.

True, the New York Police Department backed down from providing off-duty
protection when the promoters told the officers they couldn't bring their
weapons or make arrests. Still, 276 policemen, ignoring departmental orders,
made the trip to patrol the event -- for twice the agreed-upon fee. The rogue
cops were handed walkie-talkies, then disappeared into the crowds, sometimes
chasing hippie women. But, more important, one promoter had recruited eight
armed men, known to the promoters as the "black shirts," to provide what he
called "heavy security."

Next, there is the myth of the rustic, conservative Sullivan County populace,
which came to understand the power of the flower in the peaceful behavior of
their weekend city visitors. Actually, the citizens of Bethel, their yards
turned into sewers, were traumatized by the crowds and the threat of an outbreak
of dysentery.

Even Mr. Yasgur, the Republican dairy farmer who was cast as the Mister Rogers
of the counterculture, showed his moxie. Over the weekend, he crisscrossed his
land, notebook and pencil in hand, marking down every damaged blade of grass for
reimbursement. (Fifteen years after the festival, no plaque had yet been put up
on his field; one is there now.)

Finally, there were the rock stars, the torch-bearers of the new generation's
army. While the foot soldiers huddled in the muck scrounged for food, unfetid
bathrooms and shelter from the lightning, Janis Joplin, Grace Slick and the
Grateful Dead were ensconced in air-conditioned comfort in a Holiday Inn,
signing for seven-course dinners highlighted by Champagne and thick steaks.

The most profound lessons of Woodstock were learned in Madison Avenue and
Burbank boardrooms, where the symbols, slogans and iconography of the "movement"
were co-opted.

The festival wasn't a revolution but a marketing key to this new, young, mostly
white, previously unfathomable "demographic" with oodles of disposable income.
So much for nostalgic commentators who will point out how much better and less
corrupt it was back when the acid was bad.

At least members of the latest "youthquake" are less naive about their prospects
than Woodstockers who believed that chanting along with Country Joe would bring
one soldier home from Vietnam one second faster.

At last summer's Lollapalooza, a traveling rock circus for Generation X, an
18-year-old woman named Amy Stewart passed a tent at the San Francisco concert
site where the ancient LSD apostle Dr. Timothy Leary was delivering a lecture
titled "How to Operate Your Brain."

Ms. Stewart, dressed like a hippie and wearing a fresh temporary tattoo, stepped
inside. "I've never heard of Timothy Leary before," she said as he told the kids
to be like "Socrates, who'd get people together in small groups to trip out and
talk about the purpose of life." She listened, fascinated. "I want to get into
advertising," Ms. Stewart said, "so I liked when he talked about whoever
controls your eyeballs controls your brain."

Abbie Hoffman, a suicide in 1989, would have understood.

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              116 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 994 words



International 2-5

POLITICAL DIVIDE IN RURAL MEXICO

As close as Mexico's presidential race is believed to be, analysts agree that
deeply rural areas, mostly in central and southern states, will be critical.
After a violent uprising this year in southern Chiapas, the countryside is
deeply split.  1


OTHER BATTLES FOR CLINTON

News analysis: Few expect the United States to get involved in active, sustained
combat as a result of the thumb in the eye from the Serbs. The last thing
President Clinton wants is a war while he is struggling to secure Congressional
approval of a health-care program.  1

NATO ATTACKS SERBIAN TARGET

American fighter aircraft attacked a Serbian anti-tank vehicle near Sarajevo.
The air raid came hours after the Serbs tested NATO's resolve by seizing weapons
guarded by United Nations troops and by attacking a United Nations helicopter.
4

U.S. AND KOREANS RESUME TALKS

The United States and North Korea resumed high-level negotiations that were
interrupted last month by the death of President Kim Il Sung. No breakthrough
was reported on the central issue of North Korea's nuclear ambitions.  5

A LESSON IN INVESTING

Millions of Chinese have learned a nail-biting lesson about how quickly prices
can climb, collapse and then climb again on what has become one of the most
volatile stock markets in the developing world.  33

LONG HAUL FOR EXILED RWANDANS

News analysis: International relief officials at the refugee camps in Zaire have
little choice but to prepare for a long stay, given the reluctance of Rwandans
to leave the sordid camps and face possible reprisals back home.  3

A hospital in Kigali reveals a medical system near collapse.  3

COMPUTER COMPANIES HEAD SOUTH

Brazil has become the South American magnet for computer companies from around
the world; many have arrived to set up local production, with the broader Latin
American market in mind.  33

CUBANS FIGHT POLICE IN HAVANA

In a rare display of political unrest, Cuban protesters clashed with the police
and Government supporters on the Havana waterfront and in the hotel zone. The
violence apparently erupted when the police enforced security measures to stop
people from stealing boats to flee the country.  2

Haiti said it would try its deposed President for treason.  2

The Pope draws criticism for conferring an honor on Kurt Waldheim.  3

Hallan Cemi Journal: As rebels roam, archeologists dig.  4

National 6-9

WHITEWATER COUNSEL IS REPLACED

A Federal appeals panel unexpectedly replaced independent counsel Robert Fiske
with a former solicitor general and appeals court judge.  1

Man in the news: Kenneth W. Starr, the new Independent Counsel.  8

WHITEWATER HEARINGS CLOSE

As the Whitewater hearings ended, the White House counsel, Lloyd Cutler, said
the Deputy Treasury Secretary should not have consulted the White House on an
investigation.  8

MORE JOBS IN JULY

The economy continued to produce jobs at a brisk pace in July, triggering drops
in financial markets as investors feared the Fed might raise interest rates
again soon to prevent any increase in inflation.  1

ABORTION'S GROUND ZERO

The roots of violent confrontation over abortion in Pensacola, Fla., go much
deeper than the two murders of abortion doctors.  1

Under armed watch, 34 women had abortions at a Pensacola clinic.  6

GETTING ONE'S WAY ON HEALTH

Some liberal senators may adopt a strategy of defending George Mitchell's health
bill in the Senate, then try to wring more out of a conference committee later.
7

RECIPE FOR A HEALTH PLAN

The health bill that will soon go before the House is the work of the Democratic
staff of the House Ways and Means Committee.  7

DENVER DROPS BAGGAGE SYSTEM

Frustrated by delays in opening the new Denver Airport because of a flawed
baggage system, city officials adopted a low-tech solution.  6

ROSTENKOWSKI'S OPENING SALVO

Dan Rostenkowski' lawyers asked a Federal judge to throw out the indictment
against the Illinois Democrat on Constitutional grounds.  9

Maneuvering on the crime bill shows the pressure politicians feel.  9

Beliefs: A book looks at the divisions over abortion and Vietnam.  9

Metro Digest 21

IN LEGISLATIVE LIMBO

A bill requiring large cities to spend the same amount of local money on schools
as in previous years was passed by the Legislature. It should have become law.
But it sits in limbo.  1

CHANGES AT THE 30th PRECINCT

It has been 4 months since 12 officers in the 30th Precinct were arrested. Now
the station house has new paint, the officers' shoes are shined and supervision
has increased. Many say life has changed for the better.  1

Business Digest 33

Arts/Entertainment 11-16

Music: Salzburg "Giovanni." 11

Jimmy Heath at center stage.  11

TV: Watergate revisited.  11

Prince Valiant at 3,000.  13

Sports 25-29

Baseball: Moderate owners quiet as strike approaches.  27

Yanks offense does it again.  25

Saberhagen wins No. 13 for Mets.  27

Basketball: The Bulls may now be Kukoc's team.  25

Column: Rhoden on Canada and the N.B.A.  25

Football: It's Graham's turn.  27

Jets lose preseason opener.  25

Sports People 28

Obituaries 10

Luigi Z. Pollara, provost emeritus of the Stevens Institute of Technology.

Rev. Victor Salandini, research director of the United Farm Workers.

Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19

Editorials

Bosnia -- two right responses.

A more independent counsel.

End the Dominican charade.

Progress in midtown.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: The passion to keep them safe.

Russell Baker: It's a clipping penalty.

Esther Samra and Rachel Fermi: The secret town that built the bomb.

Bridge 16

Chronicle 20

Crossword 12

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              117 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 6, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Beliefs

BYLINE: By Peter Steinfels

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1046 words


In the spring, a book called "Before the Shooting Begins" took up the question
of whether democracy could survive the kind of apparently intractable
differences that divide Americans over abortion. At the time, the title seemed
alarmist. Now, a week after an abortion doctor and his 74-year-old security
escort were shot to death in Pensacola, Fla., it seems prophetic.

The author, James Davison Hunter, a sociologist at the University of Virginia,
continues what he began in "Culture Wars" (Basic Books, 1991), an examination of
the escalation of rhetoric by contending advocacy groups.

At one point in "Before the Shooting Begins" (Free Press), Professor Hunter
reports on conversations with leaders of the two movements about their use of
coat hangers and images of fetuses as symbolic rallying points.

An abortion rights advocate said the coat hanger was a "very powerful reminder"
and a "chilling visual" that "does make me feel kind of sick, but then it's
accomplishing its goal." But that advocate called images of dead fetuses
"manipulative" and inaccurate because they misrepresented the stage at which
most abortions took place.

An anti-abortion leader, on the other hand, argued that images of fetuses,
aborted or in gestation, were "very powerful tools for motivating people" and
might seem "inflammatory, but only because it's the truth." But employing the
coat hanger as a symbol, the leader said, is a "deliberate fabrication" that
inflates "some illegal abortions before Roe" into "an epidemic of deaths."

The rhetoric becomes artificially polarized, Professor Hunter contends, to suit
the the demands of political advertising, direct-mail fund raising, large-scale
rallies and television sound bites.

Paul J. Hill, the former minister charged with the Pensacola killings, won a
national platform on the "Phil Donahue Show" in spring 1993 simply because of
his extremism in defending the killing of abortion providers.

"All of a sudden, the media made him a celebrity," said Helen Alvare, a
spokeswoman for the National Conference of Catholic Bishops. She debated Mr.
Hill last December on Ted Koppel's "Nightline" program on ABC. "After the
broadcast," she recalled, "all the pro-lifers we work with day to day were
saying, 'Who was that guy? Where did he come from?' "

Professor Hunter says that the failure of people on both sides "to see in their
own rhetoric the same kinds of distortions they decry in that of their
opposition" reflects their separation into walled-off communities of moral
discourse or, more accurately, moral emotion. His book is a not very hopeful
search for ways that this isolation might be broken and common ground
discovered.

One way, which is not discussed by him, is available to Americans who are old
enough to have experienced the last episode of prolonged conflict over a
national policy that numerous citizens judged equivalent to unjustified killing,
the Vietnam War.

As liberals, many of today's abortion rights leaders were in the antiwar camp,
and they could, if so disposed, draw on that memory to understand the outlook
and emotions of abortion opponents. They could recall how easy it was for a
frustrated movement to generate incendiary and denunciatory language and to spin
off violent extremists.

Now, it is, "Baby killers!" Then, it was, "Hey, hey, LBJ, how many kids did you
kill today?" Now, it is the advocacy of deadly force by Mr. Hill and the
shootings in Pensacola. Then, it was a speaker telling 100,000 people at a 1970
rally in Boston, "If you want peace, pick up the gun!" and, among numerous acts
of violence, the bombing of a building later that year at the University of
Wisconsin, killing a young researcher and injuring four others.

Now, it is the protest of anti-abortion leaders who have repeatedly denounced
violence that the whole movement is being held responsible for the recent
killings. Then, it was the bitter complaint of mainstream opponents of the war
that politicians like Vice President Agnew were using campus disorders and the
violence of a radical hard core to tar the whole antiwar cause and justify the
war.

There is also a lesson for the anti-abortion movement in that troubled time a
quarter-century ago. Every embattled social movement faces a moment when a
militant minority would lead it into more dramatic, confrontational directions.
Moderate leadership inevitably finds itself torn between solidarity with
sympathizers willing to "put their bodies on the line" and the danger of being
drawn into doubtful positions.

When Operation Rescue emerged in the late 1980's, with dramatic blockades of
clinics and colorful leaders like Randall Terry, it and all its direct-action
derivatives quickly became the public face of the anti-abortion movement.

Mr. Terry was the movement's Abbie Hoffman, staging press conferences with dead
fetuses and calling abortion providers "bloodsucking hyenas" and "death
merchants." Reporters could hardly resist him. He confirmed, after all, an
anti-abortion stereotype that studies had shown many journalists already
entertained.

The excesses that sprang from the deadlock over Vietnam had a lasting effect on
the image of American liberalism. Similarly, Professor Hunter notes that the
anti-abortion movement is often its own worst enemy, that even those who share
many of its views are apt to consider it "unconcerned about women and the poor,
and as marked by judgmentalism, extremism and intolerance."

Most people, for example, would be surprised by a Gallup survey in 1990.  It
found that those identifying themselves as anti-abortion were more likely to say
they were "very concerned" about poverty, racial discrimination and nuclear war
than were individuals supporting abortion rights. The latter were more likely to
be "very concerned" about women's rights and population growth.

Before the shooting begins, or begins again, the challenge facing the
anti-abortion movement is not simply to denounce violence, which it has in fact
done consistently, but to prevent its simplistic, apocalyptic elements from
setting the prevailing tone.

The challenge to the abortion rights movement is to welcome such a development,
even if that means giving up an advantage in the battle for public opinion.

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              118 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 7, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 864 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    25   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     6   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 3     7   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 4     8   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5*    3   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 6     2   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics
           and murder.

 7     2   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother
           and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60
           million in a lottery.

 8     3   A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.)
           Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which
           he stumbled.

 9     2   FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San
           Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of
           the border.

 10   17   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.

 11*   2   GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother
           strives to protect her children from a stalking, unseen
           killer.

 12   11   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer
           pursues his firm's missing partner and a
           multimillion-dollar fund.

 13    2   SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.)
           While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of
           crimes.

 14    1   ENCHANTED, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A marriage
           of convenience in 12th-century Britain; the last volume of
           a trilogy.

 15    1   THE HORSE YOU CAME IN ON, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A British sleuth and a case of murder and mayhem in
           Baltimore.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    30   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    561  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3     3   O.J. SIMPSON: American Hero, American Tragedy, by Marc
           Cerasini. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) The life of the legendary
           football player who has been accused of murder.

 4    12   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           Mood-changing medications.

 5    14   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 6    11   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Business innovation.

 7*   30   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 8*   77   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 9     3   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded in the past
           and present.

 10   13   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           young woman's mental illness.

 11   10   FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The
           autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated
           in Vietnam.

 12   147  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 13*   4   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
           (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A memoir by the man who played
           Captain Kirk.

 14   18   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 15*  61   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 16*  15   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues
           affecting black Americans.

 17*  40   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     2   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial,
           $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 2    177  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 3    10   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 4    39   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 23, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              119 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
This Woodstock Won't Inhale

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words


IT WILL PROBABLY GO SOMETHING LIKE THIS: YOU ARRIVE at a parking lot somewhere
in the Hudson Valley and show a $135 ticket to a security guard. You have
already been "discouraged," as the promoters put it, from bringing young
children or any food not necessary for a special diet. Whatever you're carrying
is searched to make sure you don't have alcohol, weapons, video cameras, tent
stakes or other contraband. A shuttle bus carries you to Winston Farm in
Saugerties, N.Y., where you show your ticket again.

You are outfitted with a wristband that you must not remove and are told that if
you leave, you're out for the day. You may see a sign announcing that by your
attendance, you consent to being filmed and videotaped. Through a perimeter of
fences and campgrounds, you will find licensed souvenir vendors and corporate
caterers, there to serve all your earthly needs for a price, payable in the
festival's own scrip. (Drinking water will be free.) Welcome to Woodstock '94,
where you are not just an audience member but an extra in the pay-per-view
telecast and, for three days beginning on Friday, a captive market. Hey, party
down!

Woodstock '94 will mark the silver anniversary of a famous mess. The throng of
half a million people, the epochal traffic jam, the abandonment of ticket
taking, the overwhelmed services, the inconsiderate kamikazes perched in the
lighting scaffolds and the vast communal mud bath are all enshrined in 1960's
lore. The promoters' plans for immediate profits disappeared with the crowd and
the crashers, but the music (running hours late) played on, serenading an
audience that to everyone's amazement never turned mean.

For a few days in upstate New York, hundreds of thousands of people lived up to
the counterculture's pleas for peace, creating a symbolic alternative to the war
in Vietnam. Country Joe McDonald's unexpurgated "Gimme an F" cheer and Richie
Havens's invocation of freedom -- both performers were to have played at the
now-canceled Bethel '94 on the site of the original festival 60 miles away --
gave the concert political resonance.


 The 1969 Woodstock festival was out of control but, as a result, it came to
stand for happy anarchy -- something the promoters definitely don't want to
happen again. They'd rather have a combination of a police state and a shopping
mall. They're betting that concertgoers, now more leery of trusting or sharing
with neighbors, may be grateful for the security. Music fans are no longer
unified by a crisis like the Vietnam War or by the feeling that everyone who
chooses the same music is a kindred spirit. Peace and love just don't seem so
accessible any more.


MASS CONCERTS ARE NO
 longer the novelty they were in 1969; promoters now know how to plan and
produce them. For example, the New Orleans Jazz and Heritage Festival celebrated
its 25th consecutive year this April, with 424,000 people over two weekends.
Woodstock's magnitude marked the end, for a while, of the rock concert as a
homespun, small-scale, underground pleasure; by the late 1970's, punk had to
reinvent rock's grass roots. One thing Woodstock taught the concert business was
that rock fans will put up with nearly anything. If they would sit in the mud
for three days, hungry, then minimal amenities will seem like luxuries.

For the second Woodstock, everything is battened down -- or so the promoters
hope: no surprises, please. While talking about Woodstock, the promoters must be
thinking about Altamont, the 1969 free festival where the vibes turned bad and
one concertgoer was beaten to death by Hell's Angels who had been hired as
security. (Don't expect an anniversary show.) So they want to make sure that the
crowd is docile, amused and unarmed. They're also thinking about Lollapalooza,
the closest 1990's equivalent to the original Woodstock, a festival as a
generational statement. So following Lollapalooza, they have a Surreal Field
(electronic toys) and Eco-Village (social-action exhibits). And they're thinking
about cash flow; it's the first rock festival that plans to have automatic
teller machines on site. Of course, the people who go to Winston Farm are only
part of the market to be milked. In 1994, the promoters know, there's a giant
electronic audience out there.

The original Woodstock was naive about merchandising. The concert business in
1969 was largely a matter of theater and club shows, not arena and stadium
dates. Television was on the sidelines, with room for rock only as an occasional
variety-show appearance; images and logos were not so carefully designed or
protected. It's hard to believe, but there weren't even official souvenir
T-shirts for sale at the 1969 Woodstock. After 25 years, the concert business
has figured out many more angles and revenue streams: knickknacks, concession
stands, corporate sponsorships, tie-ins to television and video and recording.
Planning ahead, a festival brochure put out by Pepsi announces that "Woodstock
'94 . . . The Album" will be on sale Nov. 8. But no amount of advance planning
can disguise the promoters' fear of sparse attendance. With 100,000 tickets
unsold on Aug. 1, they extended the deadline to the last minute for buying
tickets and loosened rules on group sales and early arrivals.


As the business has changed, so has the audience. We're happy consumers now,
resigned to the ubiquity of corporate connections. We're less and less shocked
to hear favorite songs bent into commercials; we're inured to the beer-company
logos on concert tickets; we're titillated by the canned perfection of music
videos that look like advertisements, separated by ads that look like video
clips. The younger rock audience breaks through video-era impersonality with
moshing, one of the most tactile participatory rituals in music history. But
other concertgoers are passive, content to soak up performances by bands that
dare not change a note because they'll get out of sync with the computerized
lights.

At this year's, the bands should run on time; it's a clockwork Woodstock. For
$135 a head, concertgoers are entitled to efficiency in their entertainment, and
perhaps even a little sleep between shows. And a set at dawn, like the one the
Jefferson Airplane played at the original festival, wouldn't go over well with
the pay-per-view audience.

The Woodstock '94 lineup reflects inevitable changes after another quarter
century of rock. At the 1969 Woodstock festival, the performers were all from
the same generation as their listeners. Woodstock '94 has a few performers from
1969: Crosby, Stills and Nash, Santana, Joe Cocker and what's left of the Band.
Bob Dylan, who shunned the original festival even though it was close to his
late-1960's upstate retreat, will be on the bill this time.

But the remainder of the lineup bounces among generations and warring styles.
Where the original Woodstock was a late-1960's summit meeting, Woodstock '94 is
simply a hodgepodge. It's hard to imagine what fans of the industrial-strength
blasphemy of Nine Inch Nails will have in common with those who want the
soothing pop-soul of Traffic. Will the people who came to hear Peter Gabriel and
the Neville Brothers want to mosh to the Rollins Band and Metallica? They'd
better; they can't leave the site.

Few people ever talk about the music at the original Woodstock, and for a
reason. Most of it was terrible: good bands playing on malfunctioning,
rain-drenched equipment, their minds boggled by the size of the audience and/or
recreational drugs. It would be easy to guarantee that the performers at
Woodstock '94 will be more in tune, better dressed, less self-indulgent and more
professional than most of those at the 1969 festival.


 Unpredictability isn't prized the way it was in the psychedelic era. Looking
over the lineup of Woodstock '94, it's hard to imagine that any of the
performers would come up with the equivalent of turning "The Star-Spangled
Banner" into a barrage of feedback, much less be applauded for it as Jimi
Hendrix was. Then again, somebody might well imitate the original gesture.

The 1969 Woodstock turned out to be correctly billed as three days of peace and
music; music was secondary at best. Reminiscences that Woodstock veterans tend
to bore people with are about the people they met, the things they shared, the
surprise of seeing that yes, there were so many more hippies or pot smokers or
antiwar sympathizers or barefoot guitar players than they had ever imagined. The
sense of community may have been short-lived, even illusory, but it meant more
than any guitar solo.

Woodstock '94 needs to have hillsides full of people for the video cameras. Its
plans are for those people to consume, to spend their scrip on provisions and
souvenirs, to sit back and be entertained. But the only way the festival will be
something more than another rock concert is if the crowd, against all odds and
cynicism, unites to create its own myth.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Security men at the original Woodstock, a festival famous as a
gathering of half a million without any serious crime. (Tom Miner/The Image
Works)(pg. 24); At Woodstock 1969, the fans wouldn't get off the lighting
towers. (J. Laure/The Image Works)(pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              120 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT;
The American Audio Industry Seems to Come Full Circle

BYLINE: By HANS FANTEL

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 686 words


THE MOST STRIKING aspect of the recent Consumer Electronics Show, a traditional
showcase for new equipment, was not the hardware. Rather it was that the Chicago
event as a whole confirmed the resurgence of the American audio industry.

Domestic firms predominated among exhibitors of audio components -- a notable
change from previous years. And with steadily mounting sales, American hi-fi
companies are regaining important ground in a $21 billion market once lost to
Japanese competition.

"There's poetic justice in it," said Irving Fried, the president of Fried
Products, who exhibited his company's new line of loudspeakers. "After all, here
is where it all started."

The shift reflects global change on a wider scale. During the cold-war era,
American electronics companies found it easier to cultivate the Pentagon as a
chief customer than to joust with fierce competition in the consumer field. But
with the shrinkage of the military market and its net of subcontracts, many
smaller American companies have reverted to their roots to concentrate on
home-entertainment products.

This isn't a tidal change, but it is more than an eddy. So far the American
audio renaissance has been confined largely to the "high end": products sold in
specialized audio outlets serving serious listeners able to spend a lot of money
in the pursuit of musical veracity. In this rarefied area, American brands like
Krell, Cello, Museatex and Conrad-Johnson have gained global recognition.

In the more broadly distributed "mid-fi" bracket, familiar Japanese name brands
like Sony, Denon, Technics, Yamaha, Pioneer and JVC still predominate. Even so,
American firms like Harman-Kardon, Adcom, Parasound, Carver and NAD are making
notable inroads.

What gives these companies a competitive edge, aside from the merit of their
products, is a deliberate attempt to make products that are simple and easy to
operate. The best American designs are discreet about their inner
sophistication. They don't intimidate the knob-shy. By contrast, many Japanese
imports flaunt the kind of showy complexity that enchants technophiles but turns
off other listeners.

American-made speakers have always held up fairly well against foreign
competition. The more expensive ones, like those from Thiel, Linaeum, Magnepan,
RDL and Snell, have long been recognized as paragons in the audio industry.

In the realm of medium-priced loudspeakers, the United States is currently the
undisputed world champion, with name brands like Bose, Boston Acoustics, NHT,
JBL, Polk, Infinity and Design Acoustics.

But now other kinds of American electronic components of all kinds, including
amplifiers, tuners and CD players, are drawing new attention. Veterans of the
audio trade draw parallels with the automobile industry. Like the auto business
in its early days, modern audio started in small home workshops. After World War
II, music-minded engineers like Avery Fisher, H. H. Scott and Sidney Harman
rigged up their own gear because they couldn't find anything else they liked.

The radio giants of the day -- RCA, Emerson, Philco and Zenith -- sniffed at
these attempts to produce better sound. They were convinced that the public was
satisfied with what it got and saw no need for anything better. The giants of
the industry looked down at the innovative midgets in their basement workshops
and concluded that high-fidelity was just a hobby, not a major industry.

It didn't take long to prove otherwise. But lacking capital for expansion,
America's fledgling hi-fi firms couldn't realize the potential they had created.
So with the war in Vietnam widening, many shifted to military subcontracting.

Japan then swiftly rushed in to fill the vacuum, providing the right mixture of
technical, financial and political support. In a burst of creative engineering
they virtually cornered the world's audio market within a few years.

Now all seems to have come full circle. The rise of the yen undermines Japanese
exports, and American audio designers are able to return to their first love:
music. Opportunities once missed are knocking again.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              121 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
'I Do Solemnly Swear to, Um, Tell the Truth. . .'

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


ONE of the images lingering from the last two weeks of Congressional hearings on
the Whitewater case is that of Phil Gramm, the caustic Republican Senator from
Texas, berating Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman.

"The issue," Senator Gramm asserted shortly after the clock struck 1 o'clock
Wednesday morning, "is do we have a right to expect people who testify before
our committee to answer our questions fully and honestly?"


By law, of course, the senators do have that right. Lying to Congress is a
crime. So is failing to tell the whole truth -- "willfully and knowingly. .
.failing to answer fully and completely when asked," as the statute states.

But there was something unsettling about Senator Gramm on his moral high horse.
He is chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, and he is busy
raising money for Oliver L. North, the Republican candidate for the Senate from
Virginia.

Mr. North, of course, proudly acknowledged seven summers ago at the Iran-contra
hearings that he had lied to Congress months earlier when he denied he had
either solicited funds for the contras in Nicaragua or offered them military
advice.

"I make no excuses for what I did," he declared.

So Mr. Gramm is working hard so that someone who not only admitted to lying to
Congress but justified it as the proper course can sit beside him next year in
the United States Senate. That's politics.

The fact is, lying is a staple of politics and, by extension, of the United
States Congress. "Deception is part and parcel of many everyday decisions in
government," wrote Sissela Bok in her 1978 book, "Lying."

Sometimes there are white lies. "I yield to my good friend, the distinguished
gentleman from Kentucky," a Congressman will intone, when his colleague from
Kentucky is neither a good friend nor distinguished.

Sometimes more serious lies are told almost as routinely. Ask almost any
politician, for instance, and he or she will say that no one ever expects
anything more than the politician's ear in return for a campaign contribution.

Occasionally, political lies turn out to be cataclysmic. In his 1973 book, "The
Politics of Lying," David Wise wrote that while lying was a familiar phenomenon
in American politics, "nothing has matched in scale and quality the grand
deception in Vietnam."

Election campaigns are where dissembling is most prevalent. Mrs. Bok offered a
hypothetical example of a kind of situation that arises in campaign after
campaign: A big-city mayor is running for re-election. He has a report
recommending that he remove rent controls. He knows it is the right thing to do
and plans to do it after he is re-elected.

But he believes he will lose the election if he says that. So when he is asked
just before the election, the mayor denies knowledge of the report, lies about
his intentions and proclaims his strong support for rent control.

"Voters are at a loss to know when they can and cannot believe what a candidate
says in campaigning," Mrs. Bok wrote.

Given this backdrop, it is hardly surprising when a witness under interrogation
by a Congressional committee tells less than the whole truth.

A committee hearing room seems ever so much more a political setting than a
judicial one. As often as not, the questions posed are prefaced by partisan
diatribes.

"When senators and Congressmen are posturing the way they so often do," Mr. Wise
said in an interview last week, "then certainly the witness is going to defend
his political turf as much as he can."

This helps explain the answers Mr. Altman gave the Senate Banking Committee in
his testimony last February -- whether he shaded the truth, as many senators
contend, or simply "heard or understood the questions in a way that was not
intended by the senator asking the question," as Mr. Altman maintained in his
testimony last week.

Time and again in his February testimony, Mr. Altman said that he and his staff
had made only one "substantive" contact with anyone at the White House
concerning a Federal investigation into the failure of Madison Guaranty, an
Arkansas savings and loan institution -- an investigation in which the Clintons
had a direct interest.

Now that February testimony does not seem to have met the test of a full and
complete response. The Treasury Department's inspector general counted 40
contacts between the Treasury and White House staffs. But it is important to
keep in mind that at the session in February, Mr. Altman was in each instance
answering a question posed by a Republican senator with a sharp partisan edge.

Spilling the Beans

Still, if this explains how Mr. Altman happened to speak as he did, it does not
excuse him.

"In today's environment," said Thomas C. Green, a lawyer who has often
represented witnesses before Congressional committees, "you may have no
practical option other than to spill the beans, especially when there's a
special prosecutor and when you know, or ought to know, from the outset that
your testimony is bound to be scrutinized, if not by the special prosecutor then
certainly by the press."

Senator John F. Kerry, a Democrat from Massachusetts, said toward the end of Mr.
Altman's marathon hearing last week that he thought Mr. Altman had probably
stumbled when he tried too hard to curry favor at the White House at the same
time he was trying to meet his responsibility as an independent regulator.

If Mr. Altman had agreed with Mr. Kerry's explanation, it might have gotten him
off the hook. Instead, he gave a long-winded answer that left Mr. Kerry to
conclude, "You're not answering my question."

The secret to preparing for Congressional testimony, Mr. Green said, is to
figure out how to soften the full truth with humility, explanation and
mitigation.

"Evasion," he added, "is a prescription for disaster."

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              122 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Questions of Conflict Sting Mutual Funds

BYLINE: By DIANA B. HENRIQUES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 3504 words


For a decade, millions of Americans trying to avoid the pitfalls and predators
of the stock market have turned to mutual funds, relying on the funds'
professional managers to avoid the mistakes of an amateur investor.

Among those millions are many unsophisticated savers seeking higher returns than
they can get from banks or Government bonds, now that interest rates are lower
than they were for many years.

Those investors have helped turn the mutual fund industry into one of the
deepest oceans of cash in the world, totaling more than $2 trillion at the end
of June, up 100 percent in just three years. More money is controlled by mutual
funds than by life insurance companies or savings and loan institutions.

But even as many less-savvy investors move into mutual funds, the investments
that some of those funds make are becoming more exotic and complex.

Looking for a competitive edge in a business that has grown to about 4,900
funds, from 3,100 four years ago, some fund managers are plunging into the
riskiest corners of the securities markets. They are buying the stocks and notes
of very small companies whose prospects are much more uncertain than those of
larger, more established businesses.

And in some cases, the fund managers are making investments that are not only
risky, but are clouded by what seem to be conflicts of interest.

Research by The New York Times has found some cases in which fund managers,
operating with little oversight by regulators, are investing in companies that
employ executives, advisers or underwriters with whom they have close ties.
Often, those deals have left the funds holding securities of dubious value.

For example, at least one high-profile fund manager bought stock that enriched
one member of his family. When John J. Kaweske, who was one of the country's
top-performing managers last year, bought more than 1.6 million shares in a tiny
nutrition-supplement company for two Invesco mutual funds, the deal benefited
the small firm, partly owned by his son, which arranged the sale.

An Invesco fund controlled by the elder Mr. Kaweske also bought a large stake in
a private company whose executives included his sister.

For other fund managers, the potential conflicts involve business dealings with
financiers in whose companies their funds have invested.

For example, Paul Stephens of San Francisco, who has become something of a
celebrity in the fund industry for his leadership of the fast-growing Robertson
Stephens Contrarian Fund, has invested the fund's money in a Vietnam gold
concern formed by his company and Robert M. Friedland, a promoter affiliated
with other companies whose stocks Mr. Stephens's fund has bought.

The issue of potential conflicts of interest has dominated the mutual fund world
recently. Regulators and fund executives have focused on whether personal
investments by fund managers have conflicted with their duties to their
shareholders.

The Securities and Exchange Commission will soon release the results of a review
of the personal investments of managers at a sampling of funds. The review was
undertaken after reports last year of fund managers investing privately in deals
promoted by a broker from whom they had bought stocks for their funds.

But the situations identified by The New York Times suggest that the potential
for conflicts extends beyond what fund managers do with their own money, and
into questions of how they spend shareholders' money.

A Reputation Threatened

To be sure, conflicts of interest seem to be rare in the mutual fund industry.
But the Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade group in Washington,
has been quick to recognize the threat to the industry's reputation posed by
conflicts.

The institute has urged fund companies to adopt stiff restrictions on personal
trading by fund managers. And its leaders are blunt about the standards they
expect fund companies to maintain.

"A mutual fund manager stands in a fiduciary relationship to the investors, and
has to make all decisions solely in their best interest," said Paul Stevens, the
general counsel of the institute. "If an investment is influenced by anything
extraneous to that, it could expose the fund manager to substantial
liabilities."

"The law is very clear," he added, "and if someone is doing that sort of thing,
they're in a position where the S.E.C. could come down on them like a ton of
bricks."

Arthur Levitt Jr., chairman of the S.E.C., was equally direct. "There are
obviously opportunities for an abuse of power," he said. "I regard this as being
of the utmost gravity. Anything which creates a diminution of public confidence
in the safety and soundness of the marketplace must be eliminated."

"I'm not going to get sidetracked by legal interpretations of what constitutes a
conflict," he added. "If it appears bad, and smells bad, and looks bad, they
better attack it and eliminate it. And if they don't, we will."

The risk that fund managers would get too cozy with those whose stocks they buy
has been part of the American fund industry since its inception in the early
1920's. After the market crashed in 1929, investigators found that many publicly
traded investment trusts, an early form of mutual funds, had invested unwisely
in companies whose underwriters, owners or directors were also involved in
managing the trusts.

Thus, the reform-driven Investment Company Act of 1940 bars fund managers from
buying stocks publicly underwritten by, or formally affiliated with, their
firms.

But today, associations scarcely envisioned by those who framed the mutual fund
laws are more common.

That is especially true among funds investing in start-up companies in the
United States and loosely regulated markets abroad. As more of these hot-growth
niche funds are established, regulators say, their managers are competing more
fiercely for investors.

"And the only way you can compete is by getting above-average rates of return,"
said Wayne Klein, the securities director for the State of Idaho. "And how do
you do that? You speculate. You buy penny stocks and hope you will hit some high
flier that will give you a return that is higher than your rivals'."

Relying on Tips

But finding high fliers is difficult. Few independent Wall Street analysts
monitor the smallest of America's public companies. In markets abroad, reliable
information about small companies can be scarce.

As a result, portfolio managers are relying heavily on stock tips provided by
professional "stock boosters," aggressive brokers and company insiders -- whose
chief goals are to sell stock, collect fees or increase the value of the shares
they already own.

On the surface, these relationships seem to be symbiotic, said John Woods,
editor of the Stockwatch market news service in Vancouver, British Columbia, who
has documented a sharp increase in American mutual fund investments in that
highly speculative market.

An investment by a big mutual fund lends credibility to a company, Mr. Woods
said. The fund managers, in turn, are getting first crack at "invitation only"
deals that allow them to buy a company's stock privately at discounts that can
translate into big paper gains for their funds.

But the benefits to the funds can be illusory, because a fund that buys a big
stake in a thinly traded security usually cannot sell those shares without
driving down the price to levels that wipe out those paper profits.

Two cases identified by The Times illustrate the potential conflicts of interest
that can cloud the judgment of fund managers.

Bloodlines
Deals Are Tinged By Family Ties

John J. Kaweske's funds were among the industry's most successful. But in the
case of Crown Laboratories, a tiny company in Las Vegas, Nev., the objectivity
of this fund manager may have been compromised by his family connections with
the company's investment banker.

Crown has been trying to establish itself for more than 12 years, but has not
made a profit on its line of powdered dietary supplements. Until last spring,
the company had traded only as a low-priced, speculative "penny stock," having
registered its shares with the S.E.C. through a back-door process that
sidestepped a full-dress review of its finances and business plan by the agency.


Enormous Paper Profits

The company began trading on the small-company list at the American Stock
Exchange for $5 a share last March 30. That price translated into enormous paper
profits for anyone who had received stock in Crown for free -- a group that
included Mr. Kaweske's son, John D. Kaweske, whose New York advisory company,
First Atlantic Securities, got 200,000 shares as payment for helping Crown sell
stock privately last August.

The largest buyer in that private sale was the elder Mr. Kaweske, who bought
more than 1.6 million shares, at about $1.50 a share, for two Invesco mutual
funds that he managed until last January.

However beneficial the deal has been for the younger Mr. Kaweske's fledgling
company, it has not turned out well for the Invesco funds. Shares of Crown have
plunged steadily, closing on Friday at $1.875, unchanged.

While that price is still above what the Invesco funds paid for the stock, Barry
Kurokawa, the current manager of the funds, said it would fall even further if
Invesco tried to sell even a few thousand of its shares.

Invesco said it had dismissed Mr. Kaweske in January because he failed to notify
the company promptly about certain personal investments that were otherwise
proper.

Until his dismissal, Mr. Kaweske ran the $1 billion Invesco Strategic Health
Sciences Fund, and a cousin fund, the Global Health Sciences Fund, whose shares
trade like stock on the New York Stock Exchange.

The senior Mr. Kaweske refused to comment for this article. His lawyer, Andrew
Levander, said the funds' decision to invest in Crown had nothing to do with the
younger Mr. Kaweske's links to the company, and Invesco had negotiated only with
the son's partner, John Antretter, for the private stock purchase.

A spokesman for Invesco said the fund company had not known Mr. Kaweske's son
worked for the firm arranging the transaction, and would not have allowed the
purchase if it had known.

The younger Mr. Kaweske, who has left First Atlantic, said he had no involvement
in the Crown stock sale to his father's funds, and the shares he received were
in compensation for other services to the company.

Other Links Found

Crown is not the only stock in Mr. Kaweske's portfolios that had links to his
family. Since February 1992, the Invesco Strategic Health Sciences Fund has
bought $1.6 million of convertible notes and $503,000 of stock issued by Medical
Associates of America in Fort Lee, N.J., a developer of physician-owned
pharmacies, whose executives included Mr. Kaweske's sister, Joan Goldstone.

Mr. Levander said others at Invesco were involved with Mr. Kaweske in assessing
the company, and the purchase had nothing to do with his sister's employment
there.

With no public market for the shares, it is difficult to know the value of the
fund's 17 percent stake. In a recent amendment of its proposed S.E.C.
prospectus, Medical Associates sharply revised its original financial statements
to show a bleaker picture than it had portrayed late last year.

The Invesco spokesman said Invesco had not known that a relative of Mr.
Kaweske's worked at Medical Associates until the fund company was asked about it
for this article.

Fund industry executives say they are as much concerned about the appearance of
conflicts as about the details of a specific deal.

"There is nothing more clear than that things like investing in a company that
has hired your son, or any similar situation like that, are to be strictly
avoided," said Mr. Stevens of the Investment Company Institute.

Friendships
A Stock Promoter Becomes a Mentor

One of the hottest fund managers in the country this year is Paul Stephens of
San Francisco, whose Robertson Stephens Contrarian Fund opened in February with
$5 million, and had grown more than a hundredfold, to $630 million by last week.

His fund company was recently noted as a comer by Newsweek magazine, and, until
recently, he had turned in superlative returns, in part by moving the new fund's
money into gold-mining stocks.

One of the most controversial figures in Vancouver is Robert Friedland, a
43-year-old stock promoter, whose largest gold-mining project ended in an
environmental disaster, and whose current business associates include a Texan
who was convicted in a Federal currency-smuggling case in 1986.

Yet during the last two years, Mr. Stephens and Mr. Friedland have forged a
remarkable bond. Mr. Stephens, who is 49, has bought more than $30 million of
stock in companies associated with Mr. Friedland for the Contrarian Fund. That
has provided market liquidity and supported the price of stocks that comprise
part of Mr. Friedland's fortune, including Venezuelan Goldfields and Diamond
Fields Resources.

In some foreign markets, including Vancouver, "stock promoter" is considered to
be a formal occupation -- someone who controls a large, cheaply acquired stake
in a company, either directly or through allies, and who directs the company's
affairs to increase its stock price.

In its most professional form, stock promotion is simply an ad hoc form of
venture capitalism. But in its least savory form, stock promotion can involve
exaggerated or false claims about the prospects of a company, outright
manipulation of the stock, and a blizzard of supposedly beneficial but quite
meaningless mergers or acquisitions -- all meant to drive up stock prices so the
promoters and their allied insiders can sell their shares at an enormous profit.


'An Excellent Investor'

Mr. Stephens said he avoided the deals of some Vancouver promoters, but admired
Mr. Friedland's skills. "Robert Friedland has been a mentor of mine," Mr.
Stephens said. "He is an excellent investor, and one of the few visionaries in
the global mining business."

But there is another side to Mr. Friedland's career that might unnerve some
mutual fund managers. The Environmental Protection Agency is investigating
whether he may be liable for environmental damage at a bankrupt gold mine in
Summitville, Colo., that was developed by Galactic Resources Ltd., which he
promoted and for many years controlled before it collapsed in late 1992.

The agency has estimated the cost of cleaning up Summitville to be as much as
$100 million. If Mr. Friedland must contribute to the cleanup, he could be
forced to sell some of his stock in various companies, depressing the prices.

Mr. Friedland said: "I deeply regret the present situation at Summitville. I was
never aware of any improper activity by any employee which would compromise the
environment."

He added that, because "litigation appears probable," he could not comment
further, except to say that his role at the mining company was mainly financial
and he had relied on the engineers and management to monitor the environmental
impact.

Mr. Stephens said he did not hold Mr. Friedland responsible for the Summitville
problem. "He is simply the deep pocket they're trying to dig into," Mr. Stephens
said. "And he never sold a share of that stock, so he suffered along with
everyone else."

"He's just gotten terrible press," he added. "But as long as I know someone
isn't a crook, I don't worry about the reputation or the controversy."

But some of the people involved in Diamond Fields Resources, Mr. Friedland's
latest promotional project and a stock held by the Contrarian Fund, have records
stained by more than bad publicity.

A Smuggler's Stake

A large shareholder is Jim Bob Hodge, a Texas diamond dealer who pleaded guilty
in August 1986 to concealing a felony -- specifically, a currency-smuggling
scheme.

Federal investigators had secretly recorded Mr. Hodge and a co-defendant
explaining to an undercover agent how they could smuggle millions in cash to
Panama.

(A tax agent's affidavit shows that, in one taped discussion, Mr. Hodge said he
had used a trash compactor to compress the money, boasting that the method once
allowed him to "get a million dollars in a briefcase.")

After pleading guilty in a plea bargain, Mr. Hodge was sentenced to two years in
prison for his role.

Of course, if Mr. Hodge had bought his stake in Diamond Fields in the public
market, Mr. Friedland and Mr. Stephens would not necessarily have been aware of
his interest in the company. But Mr. Hodge acquired his stake with the company's
knowledge and permission, through a deal detailed in company records.

In essence, the deal allowed Mr. Hodge to step in at the last minute and profit
from Diamond Fields's purchase of a Namibian coastal diamond concession that
analysts say is the jewel of the company's assets.

Background 'Disclosed'

Mr. Hodge got 336,666 shares of Diamond Fields stock, which traded as high as
$10 a share within a month of the deal, in exchange for a 40 percent stake in
the coastal diamond business that he had just bought from the group that was
selling the other 60 percent to Diamond Fields.

Mr. Hodge said his background "was fully disclosed" to Canadian regulators, who
reviewed the deal. "Besides," he said, "that has absolutely nothing to do with
the deal."

Mr. Stephens said he had never heard of Mr. Hodge, and was not familiar with the
role he played in Diamond Fields.

Mr. Friedland said of Mr. Hodge: "All things considered, I'd prefer that he
would not have that background. But the real question is whether the title is
good and the exploration potential is sufficient. I don't see that his
background has any relevance."

Partnerships
Fund Buys Interest In Manager's Deal

Despite these and other controversies that surround Mr. Friedland's business
operations, Mr. Stephens said his esteem for his mentor was so high that he had
joined with Mr. Friedland in forming Indochina Goldfields, which has gold-mining
interests in Vietnam. He said the company's other founders included Ed Flood, a
geologist who works for Mr. Stephens and once worked as a consultant to Mr.
Friedland's private investment firm, Ivanhoe Capital.

The latest portfolio for the Contrarian Fund includes 350,000 shares of
Indochina Goldfields, valued at $1 a share. Mr. Stephens said Mr. Friedland was
"the venture capital founder" of Indochina Goldfields, along with Mr. Flood.

"We were one of the co-founders in the private placement; we helped put the
company together," Mr. Stephens said. "We were one of the catalysts for forming
it."

The fine print of the Contrarian Fund prospectus notes that all the funds
managed by Robertson Stephens "may co-invest" in companies in which partners,
officers or employees of Robertson Stephens have invested, or for which they
serve as directors or officers.

"We're allowed to make some private investments," Mr. Stephens said. "We have
told our investors about it, in our shareholder letter."

But that letter did not disclose the role Mr. Stephens played in the formation
of the company, only that the fund had invested in the company.

'A Stamp of Credibility'

When Mr. Stephens first volunteered the details of his dealings with Mr.
Friedland in an interview in May, he said he had "stuck my neck out on gold, and
on Robert Friedland."

"Maybe I'm going to end up being embarrassed," he added. "But I will be a stamp
of credibility for him. I am risking my personal reputation and my firm's
reputation. I don't think I am going to get burned."

Since the end of June, the prices of the four publicly traded companies in the
Contrarian Fund that are associated with Mr. Friedland have fallen 31 to 68
percent. There is no publicly traded price for Indochina Goldfields, which Mr.
Stephens said was valued at his investment cost, or $350,000. The fund's
per-share value has fallen 5 percent during the same period.

Mr. Stephens's dealings with Mr. Friedland have prompted questions from at least
one former regulator.

"There is nothing wrong with a fund manager having a high regard for someone's
expertise," said Marianne Smythe, a mutual fund lawyer who is a former top
mutual fund regulator for the S.E.C. "But questions arise if that high regard
starts to look like an actual business relationship."

"With mutual fund law, you have to listen to the music, not just the words," she
added. "To the extent that a fund manager is doing anything that is not for the
sole benefit of the investors in that fund, there may be a conflict. And
disclosure cannot make a conflict go away."

TODAY: Fund managers are buying high-risk stocks of companies employing
executives, advisers or underwriters with whom the managers have close ties.

TOMORROW: Many fund managers are investing in companies whose executives or
advisers have repeatedly run afoul of stock-market rules.

TUESDAY: Securities regulators and investors are frustrated when they try to
monitor the mutual fund industry.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: A Trust Betrayed: First of three articles.

CORRECTION-DATE: August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A chart on Aug. 7 with the continuation of a front-page article about problems
in the mutual fund industry misstated the average daily trading volume for Crown
Laboratories. For the period shown in the chart, it was 2,691 shares, not 269
shares.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Paul Stephens, manager of the Robertson Stephens Contrarian
Fund, with a temple gong bought on a trip to Myanmar with his associate Robert
M. Friedland, right, a promoter of stocks the fund has purchased. (Greg
Kinch/The Financial Post; George Olson for The New York Times); John J. Kaweske,
former Invesco fund manager, whose family connections raised questions about
investments in Crown Laboratories. (Eric Lars Bakke) (pg. 41)

Graphs show money controlled by mutual funds, life insurance and saving
institutions from '86 to '93 (Source: Investment Company Institute) (pg. 1);
"Crown Laboratories" shows its stock daily stock price from 3/94 to 8/94
(Sources: Datastream) (pg. 41)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              123 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 735 words



International   3-21

SERBIAN EMBARGO HOLDING
Serbia seemed to be enforcing its embargo on the Bosnian Serbs to pressure them
to accept a peace proposal. The West has indicated it will ease its embargo on
Serbia if it cuts ties to the Bosnian Serbs.  1
Serbs continued attacks in the area near Sarajevo.  9
CRITICISM OF ARAFAT
Yasir Arafat has taken a series of actions to restrict freedoms, leading to
growing disappointment among Palestinians since he took over the Gaza Strip and
Jericho.  1
TALE OF SAUDI ARMS RACE
A former Saudi diplomat seeking asylum in the United States says that Saudi
Arabia tried for 20 years to acquire nuclear weapons and that it conducts
nuclear research.  20
Warren Christopher began a trip to promote Mideast peace.  20
REFUGEES IN RWANDA STARVING
Thousands of refugees in the French-established safe zone in southwestern Rwanda
are desperately in need of aid, while the world's focus has been on those in
Zaire.  3
FACING AIDS IN JAPAN
Insular Japan has sheltered itself from the AIDS epidemic, but the international
conference on AIDS there this week may bring the issue out in the open.  18

Nigeria's protesters want nothing short of a new Government.  4
Despite tough statements, Mexico's antidrug war is failing.  16
Colombia's President-Elect vowed to fight the drug cartels.  16
Warsaw businesses are demanding a crackdown on organized crime.  11
France's tradition of free expression counters a language law.  6
As Communism fades, a Vietnam hospital is struggling for aid.  19
The Haiti embargo makes the country's poor dependent on aid.  16
The United States warned Cuba not to allow a flood of refugees.  17
The Khmer Rouge promised to investigate an abduction.  18
An attack in Lebanon killed Israeli soldiers.  21
Spain is easing its military draft to encourage compliance.  12

National   22-34

MUTUAL FUND CONNECTIONS
Some mutual fund managers are buying high-risk stocks of companies employing
executives, advisers or underwriters with whom the managers have close
connections.  1
HEALTH CARE'S FORGOTTEN AGENDA
In the furor over universal coverage and employer mandates, the goal of
controlling costs has receded from the political debate.  1
INQUIRY ON ETHICS AT AGRICULTURE
Federal investigators have expanded their inquiries into possible ethical
violations by Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy and two of his aides.  1
A TIME-TESTED RESPONSE TO CRIME
A California Assemblyman has introduced a bill allowing judges to punish young
graffiti vandals by sentencing them to up to 10 whacks with a hardwood paddle.
22
A TRADITION REMAINS STRONG
Long before television (and televangelists), the nation had evangelists who
gathered people in fields and parks to hear an unvarnished Gospel and pleas for
conversion.  22
IN THE WAKE OF THE HEARINGS
In the pathology of scandal, Whitewater showed itself this week to be a fever;
not fatal, but politically wasting and beyond a simple cure.  26
NEW PROSECUTOR SAYS LITTLE
The newly appointed independent counsel on Whitewater promised to be fair and
even-handed, but declined to discuss anything else about his plans for the
investigation.  27

Metro   35-40, 52

SAFE STREETS, DIFFERENT ROUTE
Four years after the Dinkins administration began a huge expansion of the police
forces with the slogan, "The beat cop is back," the hiring goals have been
largely fulfilled, but the community policing strategy has been altered.  35
DRAWN BLINDS ON LONG ISLAND
Business has plummeted near the site of the third attack by a sniper or snipers
in 12 days in Suffolk County. What residents say they fear most is the
randomness of the attacks.  35
AN UNCONVENTIONAL CANDIDATE
"I've got to get these people better prepared as human beings," says the
candidate for New York State attorney general as her outstretched hand is
ignored. It is classic Karen Burstein: brash, funny and unconventional.  35
A SUICIDE AND A GIRL'S CUSTODY
A Belarussian girl who traveled with her father to New York, and was critically
injured as he leaped to his death, was illegally taken from her mother's custody
six years ago, her mother and grandparents said.  37
Obituaries 43
Benny Ong, the reputed Godfather of Chinatown crime for 20 years.
Dr. L. Stanley James, a specialist in neonatal and perinatal medicine.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              124 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Burstein Brings an Edge to Attorney General's Race

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 35;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1673 words


Karen S. Burstein, candidate for state attorney general, stretched out her hand,
but the man in the brown suit strode by without a smile. "You know, that's
rude," Ms. Burstein said. She repeated: "It is rude."

Another potential voter emerged from the Upper West Side subway station with
three unlit cigarettes sticking from his lips. "All three you're going to
smoke?" she asked. He did not look at her.

"Would it hurt to shake a hand?" she asked in mock exasperation, smiling at yet
another man. He also walked by. "It apparently would."

"I've got to get these people better prepared as human beings," she muttered
finally after a tough half-hour of campaigning at 72d Street and Broadway. "As
Attorney General, I've got to do something about this absence of civility,"

It was classic Karen Burstein: brash, funny and unconventional, a smart
skepticism combined with an abiding belief that government can make people
better. The subway campaign stop, a mainstay of politicians, underscored
something else that applies equally to her three opponents in the Democratic
primary next month: Ms. Burstein, 52, is relatively unknown to the general
public, even after 21 years in the Legislature, as head of state and city
agencies and as a Family Court judge.

Early Advantage?

But as the four candidates compete in an expensive and potentially divisive
dance of self-definition, Ms. Burstein is staking out ground that some political
analysts say puts her at an early, though tentative, advantage. Among her
opponents, G. Oliver Koppell, appointed Attorney General in December after the
mid-term retirement of Robert Abrams, is wrapping himself in his short
incumbency and his party's blessing. Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District
Attorney, is touting his record as a prosecutor. Eliot L. Spitzer, a young
former prosecutor, is also running a law-and-order campaign with a touch of
anti-politician fervor.

But in addition to her claim that she has the widest experience, Ms. Burstein
has what some consider a biological edge this year: she is the only woman
running for a spot on a currently all-male Democratic ticket. (The Republicans
have two women running this year.) She is also Jewish and is considered the most
progressive candidate, in a primary that traditionally has a heavy Jewish vote
and usually attracts the more liberal voters in the Democratic Party.

"I would say she has got to be perceived as a very serious candidate, and I bet
Ollie Koppell doesn't sleep well at night thinking about her," said former Mayor
Edward I. Koch, who appointed Ms. Burstein as the city's Auditor General in
1987.

The race, however, has barely begun, and Ms. Burstein brings a bag of potential
weaknesses. She decided to run late, and fund-raising has admittedly been slow.
She has virtually no establishment support. A former Vietnam War protester and
civil rights marcher, she is described as impatient and intense, almost a
caricature of an upstater's image of New York City. Her slogan for her first
political campaign, during the Vietnam War, was: "I'm 28, I'm running for
Congress and I'm angrier than you."

"She comes at you with the same intensity, whether it's to ask for a cup of
coffee or to get across some passion-felt position of hers," one political
friend said, speaking on condition of anonymity. "It's like she's running on all
eight pistons at one time." Others say she has mellowed with age.

She is a lesbian, a fact she has neither advertised nor concealed, but which
hangs as an unknown element in the campaign. With little fanfare, she has asked
for support from gay groups but has not promoted her sexual orientation as a
centerpiece of her campaign.

In an interview in her campaign offices, Ms. Burstein said her qualifications
and ideas -- her vision of law as "a civilizing principle" for society -- were
more relevant than her sexuality. But she added that she believed it would be an
issue, stated or not.

"There are a couple of people for whom it will be like the excuse," she said.
"They didn't like me because I was a woman, they didn't like me because I was
Jewish, they didn't like me because I was too liberal."

She snapped her fingers, looking serious. "It's easy," she said. "You know, I'm
a lesbian."

"Frankly it's inexcusable that the state of New York hasn't elected a woman
statewide in 20 years," she said, referring to the 1974 election of Mary Anne
Krupsak as Lieutenant Governor. "But do I intend to say, 'Hey, if you elect me I
will be the first woman in 20 years, plus I will be the first openly gay
person?' No, but I don't really have much choice about it. The truth of it is,
the papers will say it."

Her Democratic challengers have all pledged not to use her sexuality
politically, but they say they do not agree with the assessment that she may be
the one to beat. Some political analysts argue that the public does not know
enough about any of the candidates and that a victory will depend on elements
that may not be Ms. Burstein's strong points: recognition, organization, money.
Mr. Koppell, who picked up the endorsement of two major labor groups last week,
appears to have the edge in organization and cash at this point.

"We all have to get our message out, and unless she is planning to write out a
large personal check, how is she going to do that?" said Lew Fidler, Mr. Hynes's
campaign manager.

His remark about a check could be a reference to Ms. Burstein's personal wealth,
which is considerable and which she has freely spent in her two unsuccessful
campaigns for Congress (though she says she does not intend to do the same for
this race). She is the daughter of Herbert Burstein, an international lawyer who
died in 1983, and Beatrice S. Burstein, the first female State Supreme Court
Justice on Long Island.

Aside from money, she and friends say she inherited much more from her parents:
a deep concern for social issues and the drive to effect change. For the last 22
years she has chosen government as the means for that change.

Oldest of 6 Children

"I'm a sort of an establishment rebel," she said. "My rebellion, or my anger, or
unhappiness, has always expressed itself within the constraints of a law-abiding
practice."

Ms. Burstein, the oldest of six children, grew up in Baldwin and Lawrence, L.I.,
and attended the Woodmere Academy, becoming the school's first female president
of the student body. A protester against the Vietnam War while John F. Kennedy
was President, she became interested in the civil rights struggle in the South,
and after graduating from Bryn Mawr College in 1964 traveled to Alabama and
other states. She met the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. in 1965.

That year, she also became the only full-time white student at Fisk University
in Nashville, and was among the first teachers in Tennessee's first integrated
public high school classes. She then took a few years off to travel and work in
film, but enrolled in Fordham Law School in 1967 and mounted her first run for
Congress on Long Island in 1970. She graduated from law school in 1971.

Evelyn Roth, who described herself as a somewhat timid young mother at the time,
met Ms. Burstein in 1970 as she campaigned at an indoor rally in Levittown. Ms.
Roth, who was wearing the button of a progressive Assembly candidate, remembers
the blur of a short, energetic woman in high-heeled boots and a black miniskirt.

"She sort of swept into the room and raced down the aisle because she was late,"
Ms. Roth said. Ms. Burstein eyed the campaign button. "She said, 'Oh, I need one
of those,' and she ripped it off my blouse and went running up to the stage."

"I said, 'What was that?' " said Ms. Roth, who soon became Ms. Burstein's deputy
and aide.

Domestic-Violence Concerns

Elected to the State Senate in 1972 after working as a legal services lawyer,
Ms. Burstein represented the wealthy, mostly white Five Towns area of Long
Island, along with a much poorer, mostly black section of southeastern Queens. A
Democrat in the Republican-controlled Senate, she helped negotiate major
legislation on domestic violence, which has been a continuing concern of hers.

In 1978, she was appointed a member of the State Public Service Commission; in
1980 she was named chairwoman of the State Consumer Protection Board; in 1983
she was named president of the New York State Civil Service Commission, and in
1987, Mayor Koch named her the city's first and only Auditor General, an
investigative position that was folded in 1990.

That year, Mayor David N. Dinkins appointed her to Brooklyn Family Court, where
she served until earlier this year.

Experience in All Branches

While at least one Democratic opponent has begun to portray her succession of
jobs as the mark of a party hack, Ms. Burstein said that she was the only
candidate with experience in the legislative, executive and judicial branches of
government, and that the attorney general must work closely with all three. She
disagreed with the view of Mr. Hynes and Mr. Spitzer that, in a time when there
is so much public concern about violence, the attorney general should become
more involved with street crime, even though it is not a traditional duty of the
office.

She said her administration, in addition to continuing to pursue environmental
and consumer issues, would expand especially into the area of domestic violence.
The office, she said, could become a sort of central coordinator on the issue
for the police, courts and governmental agencies.

More important, Ms. Burstein says she views the office as a symbol for what the
law means, how to bring different groups and interests together and as a way to
address the fundamental question: what is just?

"Who stands for the law?" she asked. "Who stands, not for law enforcement, nor
for taking care of street criminals, but who is the person in the state of New
York who stands up and says the reason we have law is that if we didn't have
rules we would have no freedom? It's the attorney general that does."


NAME: Karen S. Burstein

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Karen S. Burstein. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              125 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hospitals In Vietnam Lose Aid

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 546 words

DATELINE: VINH, Vietnam


"We are asking the Foreign Ministry to change the name of this hospital," said
Dr. Pham Van Dien, the director of the Vietnam-Poland Friendship Hospital.
"Let's just call it General Hospital of Nghe An Province."

Dr. Dien, a surgeon, spoke with bitterness stemming from an evident sense of
despair at being responsible for the main provincial hospital and lacking
virtually everything that its patients need. It is a feeling that is shared by
the health authorities throughout Vietnam.

The "brotherly" Marxist countries, once compelled by politics to provide
assistance to North Vietnam, abruptly ended such aid after the fall of Communism
in Eastern Europe.

Change of Government

"We sent a report to the Polish Embassy," Dr. Dien said. "The consul general
came to visit. He said his Government had changed, and Poland would only sell
equipment now. It no longer gives aid."

Even if Vietnam could afford to buy, Dr. Dien said, Poland no longer produces
parts for the antiquated diagnostic and treatment instruments with which it
equipped the hospital that bears its name. "After the installation and
inauguration in 1986, the experts went home to Poland," the surgeon said. "They
considered their work in Vietnam done."

A tour of the 500-bed, almost 600-patient hospital disclosed nearly empty
instrument and medicine cabinets, most equipment standing idle for lack of
parts, overcrowded and barely sanitary wards, and much suffering borne with
quiet patience.

Dr. Dien and his deputy, Dr. Hoang Dinh Huong, avoided answering directly
whether patients died because the tools of care were lacking.

"If we have better equipment, we reach a better diagnosis," Dr. Dien said. "An
inaccurate diagnosis can lead to death. Diagnosis is the most important thing in
medicine. It takes knowledge and equipment. Now we have only the knowledge."

Most Equipment Not Working

He said most of the equipment of the principal hospital in this northern
province of 2.7 million people was no longer functioning. The intensive care
unit is unusable, he said. The X-ray monitors have never worked; the essential
laboratory centrifuge is broken. So is the scanner.

Help was requested from the Government, the doctors said, but all they received
was one billion dong, less than $100,000. "Just enough for one X-ray machine,"
Dr. Huong said.

Hesitantly, the two hospital directors said it was not the former Communist
countries alone that had defaulted in support. They said American charitable
organizations, mainly of Vietnam War veterans, had promised more than they had
delivered. An $96,000 ultrasound machine and a mobile X-ray unit were sent by an
organization whose name they recalled as Horizon. Neither proved usable.

"We appreciate this assistance," Dr. Dien said, "but the machines should have
been repaired before delivery." Both stand idle.

Dr. Nguyen Tien Hoan, director of the provincial health department, said a group
of American veterans had offered to finance an operating theater for the
provincial pediatric hospital. They sent $40,000 five years ago, he said, and
promised to provide the $100,000 more that was needed.

Construction stopped halfway because the rest of the money never came, Dr. Hoan
said. The unfinished annex is used as a ward.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vinh, Vietnam

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              126 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

If You're Thinking of Living In/Peapack and Gladstone;
Fox-Hunting and High-Priced Homes

BYLINE: By JERRY CHESLOW

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 5;  Column 2;  Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1592 words


RESIDENTS of the Borough of Peapack and Gladstone in Somerset County pride
themselves on being nonchalant about the many celebrities who live in the
borough and surrounding municipalities. Mayor Mary Hamilton said famous people
were "not singled out and can remain as public or as private as they like here."

She does have a story about Aristotle Onassis, who rented a home in neighboring
Bernardsville with his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. "He was an insomniac,"
Mrs. Hamilton said, "and he would go walking in the borough at 2 in the morning
with no identification. To Mr. Onassis's embarrassment and to the embarrassment
of the police chief, he was once taken in for questioning before his habits were
known."

Peapack and Gladstone is in a rural New Jersey area of estates and horse farms
of the wealthy. The King of Morocco is one of the borough's biggest landowners,
and foxes are still hunted here.

But most of the people live less ostentatious, although well-off, lives. Nick
Villa, a broker associate with Remax Somerset Hills Realty in Bedminster, said
that the most expensive house on the market was listed for more than $9 million
and the least expensive was a two-bedroom home on a quarter of an acre listed at
$159,000.

In general, the less expensive dwellings are in the downtown areas of the
villages of Peapack and Gladstone, which make up the borough. Mr. Villa says
that less than half a dozen such houses come on the market each year, and are
snapped up.

Borough officials have zoned most of the vacant land for five-acre lots to
preserve the rural character and abundant wildlife, including deer, foxes and
pheasants. In the process, housing prices have been kept high.

MR. VILLA says the typical buyer in Peapack and Gladstone is a young,
well-established family head who commutes to his office in New York City by
train. There are New Jersey Transit stations in both villages. The typical homes
they buy are four- to five-bedroom colonials on two- to five-acre lots. Several
such homes are on the market in the Tiger Hill section off Mendham Road and the
Sheep Hill section off Mosle Road. Houses on Tiger Hill go for $450,000 to
$800,000 and those on Sheep Hill for $800,000 and up.

"There just aren't enough reasonably priced houses in the borough," Mrs.
Hamilton said. "So we are losing our young people. That disturbs me."

There are fewer than two dozen rental apartments, mainly in two-family homes.
They rarely become available, Mrs. Hamilton said, and rent for $850 to $1,100 a
month.

The one condominium building is the 14-unit Gladstone House, at Main Street and
Mendham Road in Gladstone, built in 1923 as an auto dealership. Mr. Villa says
no units are now on the market. But he estimates that one-bedroom apartments
there sell for $145,000 to $155,000, with two-bedrooms going for about $20,000
more.

The cost of housing may be responsible for the small number of school-age
children. In 1980, the Peapack-Gladstone Board of Education voted to close the
borough elementary school, which has since been converted into municipal
offices.

The borough, which does not have a high school, sends all of its 250 or so
students to schools in neighboring Bernardsville. As a result, the borough has
little influence over school budgets and policy.

Bernards Senior High School sends about 90 percent of its graduates to higher
eduction each year, according to its principal, Dr. Lynn J. Caravello. She said
that the school's technology program was a model for others throughout the
state. Not only does it have courses in computers, but in robotics, video
production and invention, among other facets of technology, as well.

A state-financed study is under way on the possible creation of a regional
school district to include Peapack and Gladstone, Bernardsville and Far Hills.

The private Gill St. Bernard's School, from kindergarten through grade 12, has
425 children on two campuses, one in Gladstone and one in Bernardsville. In the
fall of 1995, all operations are scheduled to be transferred to the 70-acre
Gladstone campus, which now houses grades 7 through 12. All of last June's
graduates are going on to higher education. Tuition is $12,000 a year.

In Peapack, on Highland Avenue, is the Matheny School and Hospital for children
with cerebral palsy and related disabilities. Most of the 99 students will
eventually earn high school diplomas there. The school, which also teaches
skills like cooking and shopping, accepts students from all over the country and
is financed by the public school system, Medicaid and private insurance.

ONE local history speculates that the name Peapack came from the Leni Lenape
Indian word "peapackton" -- "the marriage of the waters." The Raritan River and
the Peapack Brook meet at the eastern border of the borough. Gladstone is named
for the British Prime Minister William Gladstone.

In 1701, the Peapack Patent was granted to George Willocks and John Johnstone by
the 24 English proprietors of East Jersey, who received their authority from Sir
George Carteret, who in turn received his rights from the Duke of York. The
tract encompassed about 3,000 acres and included what is now Bedminster
Township, Bernards Township and Peapack and Gladstone.

By 1912, the Villages of Peapack and Gladstone found themselves in conflict with
the rest of Bedminster Township. The villages wanted electric lights, telephones
and fire hydrants and resented being forced to pay for rural roads in the
township. The villages petitioned the State Legislature for the creation of the
borough and the Legislature voted to do so on April 23, 1912.

The two villages that make up the borough were sleepy backwaters until 1890,
when the Delaware & Lackawana Railroad built an extension to Gladstone. Soon
afterward, wealthy business people, like the railroad magnate C. Ledyard Blair;
the multimillionaire Walter L. Ladd and his wife, Kate, and James Cox (Diamond
Jim) Brady built country estates.

The Ladd estate, called Natirar (Raritan spelled backward) was bought by King
Hassan II of Morocco in 1983. The king owns 383 acres of borough land. The Brady
Estate, called Hamilton Farms and once totaling about 5,000 acres, has been
reduced over the years by property sales. The Beneficial Management Corporation,
a financial services company, owns the remaining 500 acres.

The Essex Hunt Club is a fox-hunting club that evolved into two private clubs,
Essex Fox Hounds, which still hunts, and the Essex Hunt Club, a winter
recreational club on a property of more than 100 acres that uses an ice rink for
figure skating and hockey.

The Hamilton Farms estate is home to the United States equestrian team. Besides
being the training site for horses and riders that participate in Olympic
events, it is also the venue for the annual I.B.M.-U.S. Equestrian Team Festival
of Champions, a four-day extravaganza of horsemanship, including driving, show
jumping and dressage, held in the third week of June. More than 15,000
spectators viewed this year's events.

AMONG the newer residents of the borough are Steuart Ellsworth, his wife,
Pamela, and their 8-month-old daughter, Samantha. The Ellsworths, both from
nearby towns, bought the oldest house in the borough, a four-bedroom colonial
with four fireplacesin November 1992, just after they were married.

According to a local history, coins found at their house, 109 North Main Street,
suggest that the earliest section was built around 1670. The house was occupied
in 1720 by the family of a miller named Johannes Lowrance. The Peapack Brook,
which powered the Lowrance's grist mill, runs in the back yard of the two-acre
property.

"We looked for over a year," said Mr. Ellsworth, who owns a company that applies
antiglare film to windows. "Since this property is zoned for office and
residential, it was perfect for both our house and my business."

Mrs. Ellsworth runs a local travel agency in one of the fewer than two dozen
stores in the two villages. "Everyone in the stores gets to know you quickly and
you get to know them," Mr. Ellsworth said.

The Ellsworths buy small food items at the local deli, the Copper Kettle. For
their major food shopping, they travel to the supermarket in Chester, five miles
to the north. The closest mall is Bridgewater Commons in Bridgewater, 10 miles
south of the borough.

Among the best-known restaurants in the borough are Rudolfo's Ristorante
(Italian) on Lackawanna Avenue, Toscana Trattoria (Italian) on Main Street and
Chatfield's Grill and Bar (American) on Pottersville Road. On its front porch,
Chatfield's has a 19th-century full-sized model of a horse that was originally a
harness maker's dummy. Inside, the restaurant has a series of photos of the
borough dating to the turn of the century.

Mayor Hamilton says she often receives complaints from residents about the high
volume of traffic on Main Street during rush hours, as residents of nearby
municipalities travel to the two train stations. The borough posts police
officers at strategic intersections to enforce the 25-mile-an-hour limit.

Despite the abundance of open land, the borough lacks public parks. Its largest
recreation area is the grounds of the former elementary school, which includes
two baseball diamonds and a practice soccer field. The two-acre Liberty Park, at
Main Street and Park Avenue, is the only real park in the borough. It has a
picnic area and monuments to the fallen in the world wars and the Korean and
Vietnam wars. It also has a man-made pond, complete with swans.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Scene at four-day I.B.M.-U.S. Equestrian Team Festival of
Champions in June. Harness-maker's dummy on porch at Chatfield's Grill.
(Photographs by Eddie Hausner for The New York Times); On the Market --
2-bedroom, 1-bath, 100-year-old colonial at 48 Mendham Road, $159,000.
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath colonial on one acre at 9 Tiger Hill Road, $504,950.
5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath colonial on 2 acres at 14 Lincroft Drive, $825,000.

Chart: "GAZETTEER"

POPULATION: 2,111 (1990 census).

 AREA: 5.9 square miles.

 MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME: $60,075 (1990 census).

 MEDIAN PRICE OF ONE-FAMILY HOUSE: $425,000.

 TAXES ON MEDIAN HOUSE: $5,990.

 MEDIAN PRICE A YEAR AGO: $425,000.

 MEDIAN PRICE FIVE YEARS AGO: $425,000.

 MEDIAN PRICE OF 2-BEDROOM CONDOMINIUM: $165,000.

 MEDIAN PRICE A YEAR AGO: $165,000.

 MEDIAN PRICE FIVE YEARS AGO: $175,000.

MEDIAN RENT OF 2-BEDROOM APARTMENT: $850.

 PUBLIC-SCHOOL EXPENDITURE PER PUPIL: $10,212.

 DISTANCE FROM MIDTOWN MANHATTAN: 35 miles.

 RUSH-HOUR COMMUTATION TO MIDTOWN: 70 minutes on New Jersey Transit train to
Hoboken: $6.65 one-way, $56.50 weekly, $186 monthly; 10 minutes by PATH.

 GOVERNMENT: Mayor (Mary Hamilton, Republican) elected to four-year term and six
borough council members elected to three-year terms.

 CODES: ZIP, 07977, 07934: area, 908.

 MILLIONAIRE EXPRESS: When the Delaware & Lackawanna Railroad built its
extension to Gladstone in 1890, the train from Gladstone to Hoboken became known
as the "millionaire express." It included a club car with 76 annual paid
memberships. The car had wicker seats, its own porter service and primitive
air-conditioning, consisting of air blown across 300-pound blocks of ice.

Map of Peapack and Gladstone.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              127 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Real Robert Jordans

BYLINE: By Richard Gid Powers;   Richard Gid Powers is the author of "Secrecy
and Power: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover" and the forthcoming "Not Without Honor:
The History of American Anticommunism."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words



THE ODYSSEY OF THE ABRAHAM LINCOLN BRIGADE
Americans in the Spanish Civil War.
By Peter N. Carroll.
Illustrated. 440 pp. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press. Cloth, $55. Paper, $16.95.

IN July 1936, Spain's armed forces, under the leadership of Gen. Francisco
Franco, rebelled against the country's elected Republican Government. After
Hitler's Germany and Mussolini's Italy threw Franco their support, the Spanish
Civil War turned, particularly in the eyes of the left, into a test of whether
the forces of fascism could be stopped before they moved against the rest of
Europe. Soon 40,000 volunteers from 52 countries were fighting for the Spanish
Republic.

Nearly 2,800 of the volunteers, most of them Communists, were from the United
States. They were collectively known as the Abraham Lincoln Brigade, since the
first of them fought as the Lincoln Battalion of the 15th International Brigade.
Fully one-third of the American volunteers died in Spain, earning the men of the
Lincoln Brigade a hallowed place in the mythology of the American left. For the
next half-century the banner of the Lincoln Brigade would fly wherever the Old
Left gathered, and whenever it linked arms with new generations of protesters:
against containment in the 1940's and 50's, for civil rights in the 50's,
against the Vietnam War in the 60's and 70's, and against Ronald Reagan's
foreign policy in the 80's. In Peter N. Carroll's compelling "Odyssey of the
Abraham Lincoln Brigade," this legend of the left is finally incorporated into
the mainstream of American history.

The Lincoln Brigade's story is a dramatic one. Moreover, many of the Lincoln
volunteers had a genius for self-dramatization, a talent that some of them
turned to good account when they began or resumed careers as novelists,
scriptwriters, painters and poets. They intended their Spanish crusade to have
the stature of an epic, to dramatize what was happening to democracy in Spain as
the fascist dictators tried out weapons and tactics they would later unleash on
the world. Their legend also had the advantage of being romanticized by Ernest
Hemingway, whose portrait of Robert Jordan in "For Whom the Bell Tolls" provided
American popular culture with its first and most lasting image of the Lincoln
Brigade (though after the novel's publication in 1940 the brigade's veterans'
organization denounced Hemingway for veering from its party-line version of the
truth; it went on to banish Hemingway from its own 1952 anthology of writings on
the Spanish Civil War, "The Heart of Spain").

In this swift-moving collective biography of the Lincoln Brigade, Mr. Carroll,
the author of "Keeping Time: Memory, Nostalgia and the Art of History," tells
the story of these volunteers largely in their own words, keeping individual
members of the brigade in tight focus as they make their decision to go to
Spain, arrive after a tortuous and often illegal journey and are thrust into
battle with almost no training or equipment, under officers as inadequately
trained as they were.

Slightly more than half the book is set in Spain; in the United States, Mr.
Carroll's story focuses for the most part on the leaders of the Veterans of the
Abraham Lincoln Brigade, which was founded in December 1937 by the first
Communist returnees from Spain. This is something of a problem, because the
organization never represented all of the Lincoln veterans; it was, even more
than Mr. Carroll concedes, a creature of the Communist Party. It certainly did
not represent the many veterans who defected from the party over the years, some
of whom became outspoken anti-Communists. Mr. Carroll tells their stories, too,
but his narrative clearly favors the party-line veterans as the true spokesmen
for the brigade's revolutionary heritage.

After Pearl Harbor, many of the Lincoln veterans fought in the American armed
forces. Mr. Carroll tells of their struggle to have the Army make use of their
familiarity with the antifascist Communist underground in Europe. A number of
them were recruited into the Office of Strategic Services by its chief, William
Donovan, but the American military tried to keep Communists, the Lincoln
veterans included, out of sensitive positions. The stories told to Mr. Carroll
by Lincoln veterans to demonstrate their contribution to the victory over Hitler
tend to confirm the wisdom of the Government's caution: as they had in Spain,
the Lincoln volunteers felt free to obey or disobey orders based on political
considerations. After the war, according to Mr. Carroll, at least two of the
Lincoln veterans operated as agents of Soviet espionage in the United States.

INCIDENTS like these, fully described by Mr. Carroll, tend to undercut his claim
that the Lincoln veterans were harassed by the American Government simply
because they were dissidents holding unpopular political beliefs. In fact, the
history of the Lincoln Brigade cannot be separated from the history of Communism
in the United States: without the backing of the American Communist Party and
its Soviet connection, there would have been no Lincoln Brigade (as Mr. Carroll
makes clear), and without the party the veterans' organization, one of the
party's most useful tools, would not have stayed active for so long. The party
was the source of the brigade's strength, and it was, many would say, the font
of corruption that corroded the purity of the veterans' idealism.

While all the Lincoln veterans agreed about Franco, they disagreed about almost
everything else, particularly about the historic role of Communism in Spain, the
Soviet Union and the United States. In 1987 one of the dissident Lincoln
veterans said that younger leftist historians who romanticized the brigade had
failed to learn "an important object lesson on the pitfalls of blind,
unquestioning faith in any movement, no matter how worthy the objectives." But
Mr. Carroll sides with the cadre of Old Leftists and die-hard Communists who
retained control of the Lincoln's veterans' organization throughout the years;
he considers their political dogmatism to be less important than their steadfast
conviction that ordinary people have a duty to fight for their beliefs. One
veteran said, near the end of his life, that "struggle is the elixir of life,
the tonic of life. I mean, if you're not struggling, you are dead."

Even readers who have strong reservations about the morality of the Lincoln
Brigade veterans' fellow traveling after the Spanish Civil War will still be
swept along by Mr. Carroll's richly detailed story of men and women who threw
themselves into the great events of their times, holding nothing back -- neither
their hearts nor, sometimes tragically, their minds.

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Nelson, right, political leader of the Lincoln Brigade,
heading for the Brunete front in July 1937. (FROM "THE ODYSSEY OF THE ABRAHAM
LINCOLN BRIGADE")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              128 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
A Journal Is Sprouting From Seeds of the 60's

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 654 words


Last week, Woodstock was declared a bust by the Woodstock generation. Or, at
least, one of the two reunion concerts planned for the 25th anniversary of the
event was called off when only 1,650 of 50,000 tickets had been sold by a cutoff
date.

But don't tell that to Warren Hinckle.

Editor of Ramparts magazine in the 1960's, co-editor of Scanlan's Monthly in the
1970's and a defining member of the Woodstock generation, the 54-year-old Mr.
Hinckle is at it again.

Working out of a Victorian building in an old Irish neighborhood in San
Francisco, Mr. Hinckle and a small nonpaid staff are publishing Argonaut, a
year-old journal devoted to, in its own words, "muckraking, left politics and
the willingness to promote new writing and celebrate popular culture."

Well-Known Contributors

With its third issue just out, Argonaut's contributors have included Studs
Terkel, Sidney Zion, Allen Ginsberg, Ishmael Reed, Paul O'Dwyer, Andrew Kopkind
and the indestructible Hunter S. Thompson, whose contribution to the current
issue is a series of rambling late-night faxes sent on deadline to Mr. Hinckle
and other editors.

The quarterly journal is dedicated to Ambrose Bierce, a muckraking journalist
and writer who founded the original Argonaut in 1877. The new Argonaut, a
handsome publication with more than 300 pages, resembles an elegant literary
quarterly. It was designed by Roger Black, an old friend of Mr. Hinckle's from
the 70's who has designed dozens of magazines, including Esquire, Newsweek,
Premiere, Town & Country and Harper's Bazaar.

But any similarity to mainstream publications ends there. Argonaut is being
published on a shoestring -- some parts barter, some parts pro bono -- with very
little advertising. With a circulation of about 6,000 in the United States and
another 1,500 abroad, it is distributed in independent bookstores.

"There is need for tremendous capital for newsstand or subscription-based
publications," Mr. Hinckle said, "but the last place you can really start a
publication that has financial independence is in the independent bookstores."

With a cover price of $11.95, each copy costs about $1.50 to produce and
distribute. Mr. Hinckle said he would try to raise $300,000 for a direct-mail
campaign to the 60's generation.

Left-Wing Shibboleths

Since the demise of Scanlan's in the early 70's, Mr. Hinckle has lived in San
Francisco, written several books, written columns for both The Chronicle and The
Examiner and, his antiwar passions still aflame, published a newspaper, War
News, during the Persian Gulf war.

Many of the old left-wing shibboleths from Ramparts and Scanlan's are evident in
Argonaut. To wit: "Nixon was far and away the most miserable, miserly, scheming
political miscreant ever to sup and slurp at the public trough while injustly
enriching himself through the petty, brackish alliances the second rate
invariably tend to forge in the crucibles of political power," Mr. Hinckle
writes in his Prattle column in the current issue.

He is still best remembered for Ramparts, an antiwar, anti-establishment
magazine that became a cult publication under his editorship. Favorite subjects
included the Black Panthers, the Vietnam War, Government infiltration into
political campaigns and Government misuse of tax returns for political purposes.

The current issue of Argonaut includes three articles about Gerry Adams, the
president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army, and a
piece of fiction by him; a piece by Louise Armstrong about the incarceration of
teen-agers in psychiatric centers by "fearful, misguided, or duped, or sometimes
vengeful, parents," and a collection of photographs taken at Elaine's
restaurant, at Second Avenue and 88th Street, still a 60's hangout, with many
photos of Elaine Kaufman, the owner, with her famous customers. Elaine's is one
of the few advertisers in the issue.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Warren Hinckle is the editor of Argonaut, a new quarterly
journal devoted to, in its own words, "muckraking, left politics and the
willingness to promote new writing and celebrate popular culture." (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              129 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Forced to Flee -- A special report.;
U.N. Faces Refugee Crisis That Never Ends

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3130 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


The exodus of two million refugees from Rwanda was not an aberration but part of
a trend in which increasing millions of people worldwide are being put to flight
by war and famine.

The number of refugees has mushroomed during the last two decades, from 2.4
million in 1974 to 10.5 million by 1984 to close to 23 million today.

When added to an estimated 26 million "internally displaced" people -- those who
have abandoned their home areas but have not crossed an international boundary
-- it reaches the staggering level of 49 million.

That means, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, that
one of every 114 people in the world has been uprooted by conflict and forced to
move somewhere else to search for security or sustenance.

For the United Nations agency supposed to deal with the problem, the numbers add
up to an unending crisis. The office of the High Commissioner was founded at the
outset of the cold war with a mandate to enshrine the principle of political
asylum for the few who managed to slip through the Iron Curtain, not to provide
truckloads of food and water for camps as large as American cities.

"We can't cope," said Sylvana Foa, spokeswoman for the refugee agency. "We used
to be a bunch of lawyers working on protection. Our function was legalistic. Now
it's emergency response. We're a SWAT team and we're working against the odds."

What has also grown is the realization that the problem of forced flight, which
for decades had been viewed as a byproduct of the cold war, is not diminishing
now that the cold war is over.

Indeed, aside from the settlement of some regional conflicts that has led to the
repatriation of refugees to places like Cambodia and Mozambique, the problem has
gotten almost immeasurably worse.

The high-water mark for repatriation was 1992, when some 2.4 million refugees
returned home. But that number has been dwarfed by the number of new refugees.

And even the occasional success story turned sour. In Afghanistan, where some
1.5 million people came back in 1992 alone, after more than a decade of exile in
Pakistan and Iran, renewed fighting broke out among the Muslim factions who
ousted the Soviet troops. This has devastated Kabul, the capital, which survived
intact the "holy war" against the Soviets, and led to a new flight of hundreds
of thousands. But because Pakistan has closed its border, most of them are stuck
in miserably hot tent camps on the outskirts of the provincial capital of
Jalalabad. And there are more than 3 million Afghan refugees who are still in
Pakistan and Iran.

Ethnic Conflicts Proliferating

Old wars have continued, often with a frightening savagery. New wars have broken
out, many with an ugly ethnic dimension in which entire groups are targeted for
ouster or liquidation.

In addition to Rwanda, ethnic conflicts in Africa have occurred in Liberia,
Sierra Leone, Sudan, Angola and Somalia. Elsewhere, they have broken out in the
volatile republics that once belonged to the Soviet Union -- Georgia,
Tajikistan, Armenia and Azerbaijan -- and in a range of countries from Iraq to
Sri Lanka and Burma. Palestinians, the group with the longest history of
displacement, have been continually uprooted by regional wars since the creation
of Israel in 1948. They are assisted by a separate United Nations agency, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

"Right after the cold war we thought all the problems would be solved," noted
Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "We didn't
realize that the cold war had another aspect to it -- that the superpowers
provided order or pressed order on their respective zones of influence. And so
ethnic or religious or national conflicts, whether within the Communist bloc or
the Western bloc, had little chance of exploding.

"So now, post-cold war, we are seeing the explosion of much more traditional,
dormant, maybe pre-World War I kinds of ethnic conflict."

A New Breed of Conflicts

The new conflicts that occur inside countries rather than between countries have
several distinct aspects:

*Since the conflict is often ethnic or religious, the killing tends to be
widespread and aimed at a specific civilian population. The realization of this
alone is enough to cause mass panic and flight.

*In some of the conflicts, as a United Nations report issued last year put it,
"displacement of people is not the byproduct of war but one of its primary
purposes." This is seen, for example, in the "ethnic cleansing" campaign by
Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

*In others, like those in Bosnia, Somalia and Afghanistan, the state has
virtually withered away, leaving the field to warlords who plunder the
countryside with medieval abandon, chasing out large groups of people.

*The weaponry involved, some of it pumped in by the superpowers during years of
proxy warfare, is highly destructive, consisting of multiple-rocket launchers,
missiles, artillery, mortars and -- most pernicious from the point of view of
repatriation -- land mines. The indiscriminate carnage speeds the exodus.

*The combatants do not shrink from using food as a weapon, either by blocking
relief convoys or engaging in "slash and burn" techniques of warfare. In places
like the Horn of Africa, the combination of drought and war has so savaged the
land that it can no longer provide a livelihood. Whether the hundreds of
thousands who leave are fleeing starvation or war is academic.

*If the state itself is a party to the conflict it may use the media to fan the
flames. In Rwanda, Government-controlled radio whipped up hatred in April to
bring about the Hutu massacres of Tutsi and afterward sowed fears among the Hutu
that they would be killed in retaliation.

Another characteristic of the new conflicts is that they can rise up quickly or
suddenly ignite after simmering for long periods, catching international rescue
agencies and the United Nations off guard.

The Crisis
Strife Simmers For Decades

The Rwanda crisis has its roots in 1959, when about half a million refugees,
largely from the minority Tutsi tribe, fled to escape the Hutu-led "social
revolution" before independence in 1962. Clustered mostly in Uganda, they
constituted one of the oldest refugee populations on the continent and were a
constant source of unrest, culminating in 1990 when many of them invaded their
homeland under the guise of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the Tutsi-dominated
rebel force.

Despite various international attempts to mediate the conflict and come up with
a plan for power-sharing between the two groups, it flared again in April. Most
African experts were not really surprised. Rwanda, which is the most
over-populated country in Africa, has long been a powder keg, especially since
it lies next to Burundi, where Hutu-Tutsi violence has been endemic for years.

The trigger was the still-unsolved shooting-down of a plane that carried the
Hutu President, Juvenal Habyarimana, which set off apparently planned massacres
of Tutsi by Hutu militias. Though refugees started flowing out right away and
many people expected their numbers would grow, the speed and size of the flood,
when it finally reached its peak, surpassed any prediction.

By the end of the third week in June, roughly five million of Rwanda's eight
million people had abandoned their homes. The country seemed to turn itself
inside out overnight, emptying 10,000 people an hour across the border into
Zaire. The catastrophe, which President Clinton called the "worst humanitarian
crisis in a generation," came from the sheer volume of people crowded together
without safe drinking water or sanitation facilities to check the spread of
cholera.

From Asylum to Mass Relief

The office of the High Commissioner, while it has been forced to develop a level
of expertise in supplying large numbers of destitute people, was not created to
do so. It was established in 1951, at the time of the Convention Relating to the
Status of Refugees, and its original purpose was to uphold the sanctity of the
concept of international protection for people who fled their countries from a
"well-founded fear of persecution."

As such, it became primarily an instrument of the cold war, aiding people who
escaped from Communist countries to resettle in the West. Over the years, with
mass flights from Cambodia, Vietnam and elsewhere, that mission broadened: the
agency -- with the help of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Doctors
Without Borders, Save the Children and other organizations -- provided
assistance in the form of food and shelter to huge encampments of people who had
fled with no belongings.

Throughout, the agency was handicapped by a contradiction. It stemmed from the
fact that it was supposed to help only refugees, who were by definition people
who managed to escape into another country. This restriction ignored the many
millions uprooted by a conflict who moved to a different region within the same
country and whose needs were every bit as desperate.

Over time the restriction was side-stepped. With a request from the United
Nations Secretary General, the agency can now set up and supply camps for
internally displaced people, as it is doing in Bosnia, where they now number 2.7
million. But when it does so, it finds itself at cross-purposes: setting up a
camp inside a country usually means de-emphasizing the right of the displaced to
cross a border into another country. This goes against the agency's original
reason for existing, which was to defend the principle that asylum is an
international right that supersedes checkpoints and boundaries.

In Afghanistan, for example, factional fighting broke out with a new ferocity in
Kabul on Jan. 1 this year. Twelve days later Pakistan closed its border, the
preferred escape route, so that a new wave of refugees could not cross into
Peshawar, where camps have existed since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in
1979.

Instead, the office of the High Commissioner has set up camps on the outskirts
of Jalalabad in southern Afghanistan to receive the many thousands flowing out
of the capital. The main camp, with 118,000 people, is located on a desolate,
scorching-hot plateau filled with rocks and scorpions and devoid of water. Days
are spent in listless waiting for distribution of food.

Although the United Nations is unlikely to acknowledge it publicly, the
establishment of the camp has reduced pressure on Pakistan to accept the
displaced as refugees. While condemning Pakistan's decision to close the border,
the agency has in effect acquiesced to it.

The Agency
End of Cold War Alters Mission

Because it was founded as a temporary agency at the time of the cold war, (its
life span in 1951 was supposed to be three years, and it has been renewed in
five-year intervals), the High Commissioner's office evolved an arcane method of
financing. Its budget -- $1.3 billion for 1993 -- is raised by making appeals
for specific causes to donor governments, usually the United States, the
European Union and Japan.

Contributions can be earmarked for particular countries. As a result, donations
for a cause such as repatriation in Cambodia, where the suffering under the Pol
Pot regime touched a sympathetic chord around the world, ends up being
over-subscribed. And repatriation in Mozambique, where a long-fought war is
winding down in obscurity, does not raise enough money.

The system of financing also means that the agency is a hostage to publicity. It
needs extensive coverage of a catastrophe by the international media in order to
exert pressure on governments to contribute. The problem is that the coverage is
usually effective only after the catastrophe is out of hand and television
screens are filled with footage of ragged, starving children. And by then, of
course, it is too late.

International aid officials also point out that they are often left to deal with
diplomatic failures when ethnic conflicts arise and the world stands by unable
or unwilling to intervene militarily. The reluctance of the United States to
become involved in Rwanda, for example, stemmed in part from the debacle of its
intervention in Somalia, where American troops, deployed to fight famine,
eventually withdrew ignominiously with the image of hostile interlopers.

Aid officials say privately that in the case of Rwanda, one problem in meeting
Secretary General Boutrous Boutrous-Ghali's appeal for $400 million in emergency
assistance was that news broadcasts in the United States were preoccupied with
the situation in Haiti and the tribulations of O. J. Simpson.

When donations finally came, many were inappropriate. What was needed urgently
in Rwanda was not money nor bulk foodstuffs but drinking water and latrines. The
profusion of irrelevant aid sometimes got in the way.

The agency has an emergency budget of $25 million and in some trouble spots
around the world has stocks of food and medicines to prepare for emergencies.
But the disaster in Rwanda was so great that such precautions were pitifully
inadequate.

The method of financing also leads to a sense that the emergencies are competing
with one another and, since there is almost always a shortfall, perhaps
exaggerating the sum the sponsors say is required. The greatest fear of all is
what Mrs. Ogata calls "donor fatigue," although she says that she is satisfied
with the results so far. "We were fully funded last year," she said.

Supporters of the policy of working inside countries like Afghanistan and Bosnia
assert that it is an effective way of trying to deal with the problem of
dislocated people closer to the source, before they become a full-scale
international burden. But critics charge that the internal camps do not allow
the people to integrate easily into a local economy, that they are often less
provided for and that the people are not always out of harm's way.

It is a way of accommodating the world's unwillingness to accept more refugees,
they say.

"The move to assist internally displaced is an attempt to reduce these huge
refugee flows and I think it's failed," said Mark Duffield, a senior lecturer in
the School of Public Policy at the University of Birmingham, England. "Look at
Bosnia. Up to 50 percent of Bosnians are internally displaced now but the U.N.
has been unable to protect them."

Warfare for Resources

Mr. Duffield said that the tide of refugees is caused by what he terms "resource
wars," a scramble for dwindling assets as the gulf between rich and poor
countries widens.

"Resource wars often have a heightened ethnic character," he said. "There is
frequently a cold logic at work. What appears at a distance to be inexplicable
barbaric acts is the systematic purging of one group by another to rob them of
their assets. There are winners and there are losers."

In some parts of the third world, like the southern Sudan, he sees what calls a
"permanent emergency," meaning "an area with end-to-end emergencies where the
government has learned to survive from the situation and even to thrive" because
of the vast amounts of assistance pouring in.

How best to distribute the assistance is another bone of contention. Some
critics, like Barbara Harrell-Bond, director of the Refugees Studies Program at
Oxford, says that camps are dehumanizing, foster dependency and make a normal
life virtually impossible. "The camp approach is for the convenience of donors,
to help them contribute and distribute aid," she said. "I think aid should
follow the refugees rather than vice versa."

The Alternatives
Keeping Refugees Close to Home

While many experts agree that it is better to integrate refugees into a
surrounding society than to stick them all together in an isolated area, the
host countries often insist upon camps for the same reason -- out of the
conviction that it will make it easier for the refugees to return en masse to
their own country someday. That way they will not compete for jobs or become a
burden on the local economy, they say.

Another problem with the camp structure is that it seems to work better for
peasants or farmers but it seems doubly harsh for displaced urban professionals,
who seem to make up an ever-growing proportion of the displaced. Lawyers and
taxi drivers are not adept at expanding makeshift structures to make them more
homey or at planting vegetables to supplement their families' diet.

"They want us to all grow food," said Manuel Almeida, a well-known former soccer
player in Angola, as he presided over a food distribution center in the war-torn
town of Huambo. "I'm a petroleum engineer and my wife's a doctor. What do you
want me to do? I'm no farmer."

A logical extension of building camps inside countries of conflict is to
establish so-called "safe havens." In Somalia, beginning in January 1993, the
United Nations set up "preventive zones" to give assistance inside the country
in an effort to stem the outflow of people.

One danger in the concept is illustrated by Bosnia, where the safe havens set up
to protect Muslims are viewed as partisan enclaves and thus legitimate targets
by the Serbs. And if they function properly, and are truly "safe," they serve as
magnets and actually assist in "ethnic cleansing" by drawing in people from less
secure areas.

Safe havens involve an intrusion upon the sovereignty of the country in
conflict, something that most experts feel is necessary if concerted
international action is to be undertaken to nip the refugee-producing conflicts
in the bud.

The most outstanding example to date was the creation of a vast safety zone in
northern Iraq in 1991 to prevent the Government of Saddam Hussein from exacting
reprisals from the Kurdish population after the Persian Gulf war. That move was
possible because the military machine to back it up was already in place once
the Western alliance defeated Iraq.

All of the fears of aid officials -- that the numbers of refugees and displaced
will keep rising, that new and more adventuresome techniques to cope may
backfire and that someday people in donor countries will simply throw up their
hands and turn their backs -- come from a conviction that the developed world is
getting tired of the problem.

Ever since the recession of the early 1970's, when immigration to Europe was cut
back, economic migrants have have exploited political asylum as a means to enter
a country of opportunity. Partly as a reaction to this, and partly out of a
rising tide of xenophobia, European countries are raising barriers to newcomers.
Though aimed at people who want to enter to better their lives economically, the
tighter restrictions have made entry harder for people fleeing from real danger.


LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rwandans waiting for water recently at the Kibumba camp in
Zaire. The water has to be purified and trucked in from Lake Kivu. (Reuters)(pg.
A6); KABUL -- In the capital of Afghanistan, civil war has destroyed commerce,
notably the important bazaar at Jadai Maiwand. (Agence France-Presse); ANGOLA --
In Cubal, a refugee and her emaciated child wait at a clinic. Rival armies sweep
back and forth through central Angola. (Keith Bernstein/Gamma Liaison); SARAJEVO
-- Bosnians who have been penned in their capital for two years, like Naila
Satrovic, try to grow food anywhere, including city parks. (Associated
Press)(pg. A1)

Map/Graph: "OVERVIEW: Assessing the Refugee Problem" shows the number of
refugees worldwide from 1976 to 1992 and countries with the highest number of
refugees outside their borders. (Source: United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              130 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 8, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Notes Issue By Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 187 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 7


Seeking huge injections of foreign capital for economic development, Vietnam
will make its first foray into the international money markets late this year or
early in 1995 with a $50 million issue of Euro floating-rate notes, a senior
banker said on Friday.

The Bank for Foreign Trade, or Vietcombank, the country's largest state-owned
commercial bank, will make the offering, the bank's deputy executive director,
Vu Viet Ngoan, said.

The bank has selected the Standard Chartered Merchant Bank of Britain as broker
for the issue and expects the notes will be issued on Asian and European markets
and in New York, he said.

The issue, denominated in United States dollars, will be Vietnam's first attempt
to raise money in international markets as part of a drive to attract $25
billion of international money -- mainly through direct investment and
government aid -- by the year 2000. It intends to raise a similar sum
domestically.

The Finance Ministry said a month ago that it was planning to issue Government
bonds internationally and hoped to raise $2 billion to $3 billion by the turn of
the century.

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              131 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 9, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

With French Exit Near, Rwandans Fear the Day

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: GIKONGORO, Rwanda, Aug. 8


The commander of a French marine unit here, Lieut. Col. Erik de Stabenrath,
traces his military heritage to a general in Napoleon's army. His paternal
grandfather was an officer in World War II. His own father was an officer killed
in combat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, the battle that ended French colonial rule
in Vietnam.

But as he prepares to leave in the next few days, this 42-year-old career
military man, hardened by duty in Beirut and Bosnia, will not carry with him
scars from battles. What will remain with him, he says, is the knowledge of what
happened to Rwanda's Tutsi in the weeks before the French arrived.

"It was the greatest massacre in world history," he said. "Not in terms of
numbers, but in the manner in which it was carried out -- 500,000 people killed
in a few weeks."

They Want the French to Stay

Although the number of dead has never been reliably computed, there is general
agreement that it is hundreds of thousands. The French arrived in June, too late
to prevent the worst of the massacres, Colonel de Stabenrath said, but he
pointed out that they came when no one else would and probably prevented further
slaughter.

Nobody will ask the people of this corner of Rwanda whether or not the 2,200
French troops should leave. But if they were asked, the answer would almost
certainly be a resounding no. "If they leave, we shall die," said a 34-year-old
peasant woman, Marie Nyirahabiyaremye.

The Canadian commander of the United Nations military observers in the French
zone, Maj. Luc-Andre Racine, said in an interview here that some French troops
should remain, particularly around the city of Cyangugu, which is west of here
along the border with Zaire. Former Rwandan Government soldiers and militiamen
who fled into Zaire when the Government fell last month find it easy to cross
back and have engaged in sporadic looting.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has asked the French to
postpone the withdrawal, which is supposed to be completed by Aug. 22. There are
an estimated two million people in the French zone, most of them Hutu, and
relief workers are deeply concerned that if the French pull out there will be a
mass exodus.

A few weeks ago, about 300,000 fled across the border into Bukavu at the same
time that more than a million refugees swamped Goma, to the north. They fled in
fear of the Rwandan Patriotic Front, the victorious rebel army, made up largely
of the rival Tutsi tribe whose members were annihilated by Hutu militias after
the start of the most recent figiting in April.

"The wish of the great majority is for the French to remain," said 34-year-old
Samuel Harelimana, who has a university degree in rural development and has been
working for the Rwandan Red Cross and international relief agencies for the last
several months. "We have no confidence in Unamir," he said, referring to the
United Nations mission In Rwanda.

Views Widely Held

His views about the United Nations troops appear to be widely held among the
people here. They note that the United Nations troops who were in the country in
April did little to stop the massacres and that the bulk of the United Nations
forces pulled out after several Belgians were killed.

White United Nations vehicles have begun appearing in this region, but relief
workers say that the United Nations troops lack the professionalism of the
French soldiers.

Major Racine acknowledged that the population's attitude toward the United
Nations forces was negative. "But if they do something concrete, the attitudes
will change," he said.

It was most important, he said, for food to be brought into the area, where
there are an estimated half a million refugees and there is a drought. "If you
feed the people, they will stay in place," he said.

But security is of equal if not greater concern among the people here.

The precise motives for the French intervention have never been clear. Paris has
always said that it was to protect the population from further massacres. But
there were suspicions that France hoped to save the Hutu Government from defeat.
It had long supported the Government, with arms and training, and French troops
had twice arrived to save the Government from defeat at the hands of the Rwandan
Patriotic Front.

And French officers, when speaking on condition of anonymity in the last month,
have said that a close relationship between members of President Francois
Mitterrand's family and members of the Hutu Government also contributed to the
French decision to intervene.

A Measure of Stability

Whatever the motivations, the French have protected Hutu and Tutsi and brought a
level of peace and stability to the French zone. The Patriotic Front has been
kept out, the former Government soldiers have been chased out, and above all the
Hutu militias have been disarmed.

"They were very courageous when they were killing people who could not defend
themselves," Colonel de Stabenrath said of the militias. But they did not put up
any fight against the French troops.

"I have thrown a lot of munitions into Lake Kivu," he said. Then in an aside, he
said, "Don't tell Greenpeace."

Much Service in Africa

When he arrived, Colonel de Stabenrath said, he searched and found some
intellectuals, Hutu refugees, "who could help me to understand the population."
He has done more than just learn from this group. He arranged for them to meet
with commanders of the rebel front. These meetings are critical if there is to
be any functioning local government when the French leave.

For the colonel, the major breakthrough in reaching officers of the local
Tutsi-led forces came when he learned that he had attended the United States
Army Command and Staff College in Leavenworth, Kan., with one of their
commanders.

The officer was Paul Kagame, who had indeed left the school at Leavenworth, in
October 1990, to lead the Rwandan Patriotic Front. General Kagame is now
Minister of Defense and Vice President.

As for the future in the French safety zone, Colonel de Stabenrath said it
depended on the mandate the United Nations forces have. The French troops have
been authorized to use force to protect civilians. But the United Nations troops
will be allowed to use their weapons only in self-defense.

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Rwanda showing location of Gikongoro.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              132 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Woodstock '94: Peace, Dreams and Money

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1243 words


Dr. Robert Katten missed the original Woodstock festival. But he is attending
the second one, in a rented R.V. He's keeping an eye on his investment --
$10,000 in the company with the pizza concession. The break-even point: 60,000
pies.

Dolores O'Riordan had never heard of Woodstock. Then someone asked her to sing
at the 25th-anniversary concert this weekend in Saugerties, N.Y. She decided to
go, figuring that with so many people in one place, "it'll be a great vibe."

Country Joe McDonald was there. But he was not invited to Saugerties. He's 52
now, playing places like the zoo in Seattle. As he sees it, trying to recapture
Woodstock is laughable, like chasing the wind.

So what does it mean, this much-ballyhooed marking of another pop-cultural
milestone, served up as a celebration but condemned as a sell-out, a
counterculture theme park with too many rules?

"I don't think there is any single answer," said the poet Allen Ginsberg. "It
could be both a continuation of the spirit of Woodstock and a co-optation or a
commercialization or a commodification of that spirit."

Then again, it could be just one very long concert.

The official festival, Woodstock '94, begins tomorrow on an 840-acre compound
equipped with 900 food booths, 1,100 phone booths, nearly 3,000 portable
toilets, its own health-care system, monetary system and a heavily-sneered-at
code of rules banning everything from tent stakes to children.

At last count, 163,559 of the 250,000 tickets had been sold, at $135 each; sales
will continue through today.

Dr. Katten is among the more senior Woodstock pilgrims. He is 57, a dentist from
Cherry Hill, N.J. His musical tastes run more toward Ella Fitzgerald than Nine
Inch Nails. But when a friend's brother got the Woodstock pizza contract and
went looking for backers, Dr. Katten figured, "Why not?"

Twenty-five years ago, he was an engineer with a defense-contracting job that
kept him far removed from Vietnam and what he calls "the shenanigans of the
era." Driving to Vermont one August weekend, he got stuck in traffic on the New
York State Thruway -- his brush with Woodstock, he later learned.

This time around, he will be spending the weekend with thousands of people
mostly younger than his own children, supervising pizzeria workers bused in from
South Jersey, sleeping in a rented recreational vehicle with the other pizza
investors and half-listening to bands with names like Porno for Pyros.

"I'm not much into the rock," Dr. Katten confessed.

'I Know Jimi Hendrix'

Ms. O'Riordan is, though she was born three years after Woodstock and her major
musical influence, as a child in Ireland, was Gregorian chant. Growing up in
Ballybricken, near Limerick, she played the church organ. Her band, the
Cranberries, made its first album one year ago.

"I know Jimi Hendrix," she offered genially, when asked about the original
Woodstock bands. "To me, it's like all music from before my day. It's not a new
revelation, as if a bunch of new young people were discovering something. It's
been done. I'm not really that much into reliving the past."

She does like the idea of the "big love-peace-human vibe" that she now
understands the original Woodstock to have been. And she would not pass up a
chance to play before such a huge crowd. Back in Ireland, Ms. O'Riordan said,
the Pope is the biggest draw -- "bigger than rock-and-roll."

For some Woodstock veterans, this weekend serves as a less-than-exhilarating
reminder of the passage of time and the evolution of their world. The roster of
dead musicians from the first festival is chilling. David Crosby, who turns 53
this weekend, is one who made it -- for which, he said, he is not ungrateful.

Mr. Crosby spent quite a few of the years since the first festival addicted to
heroin and cocaine, spending $1,000 a day on drugs at the height of his habit.
He served a prison term for cocaine and gun possession, during which he managed
to quit drugs. But he got out of prison owing $1 million in back taxes.

Now he is working again, touring and making records with Stephen Stills and
Graham Nash. They agreed to a return engagement at Woodstock, Mr. Crosby said,
in part because they have an album coming out this weekend and are in the middle
of what he said had been a successful 50-city tour.

Happy to Be Playing

"I'm really incredibly happy to be playing music at this point and having it
work," said Mr. Crosby, who said he had been straight for eight and a half years
and was getting comfortable with it. "If I'd known I was going to live this
long, I would have taken better care of me."

Artie Kornfeld has been through a hegira of his own. One of the four in original
members of Woodstock Ventures, organizers of the 1969 festival, he sold out his
share and was not included when his former partners joined with Polygram
Diversified Entertainment to do Woodstock '94.

As Mr. Kornfeld tells it, he "became consumed by drugs" after Woodstock. After
16 years of heavy use, he stopped in 1983. His wife of 14 years had died of an
aneurysm, he said. Then, two months after Mr. Kornfeld gave up drugs, his only
child died of a drug overdose at age 16.

Now he lives modestly with his third wife in a town house in suburban Los
Angeles, managing and promoting musicians. "I'm back to the public golf course,"
he said. He kept expecting his old partners to turn to him to help out with the
anniversary. It didn't happen.

So earlier this week, Mr. Kornfeld sat alone in a Manhattan hotel room, fighting
the urge to go home. (Too afraid to fly since his daughter's death, he had
traveled cross-country by train.) Barely able to afford the visit, he asked one
of his former partners, couldn't they put him to work?

He said he was told to call back later.

Mr. McDonald has his own plans for this weekend. He will be playing Saturday at
a performance barn in the town of Woodstock, along with the Fugs, a folk satire
band from the 1960's, and Mr. Ginsberg, who will be performing some of the
poetry of William Blake that he has put to music.

Then on Sunday, Mr. McDonald intends to return to the Bethel farm where the 1969
festival was held. An anniversary concert planned for the site was canceled. But
Mr. McDonald said: "I don't care. If there's a P.A. system, if there's not a
P.A. system, I will go and perform."

Conscientious Objectors

The alternative celebrations are thick with conscientious objectors complaining
about the commercialism of the main event. But those criticisms don't ring true
to Danny Goldberg, who, at age 19, was dispatched by Billboard magazine to cover
the original festival.

As Mr. Goldberg tells it, he rode up in a limousine with the press agent,
wandered around backstage, slept in a hotel, didn't get muddy and "wrote a very
starry-eyed, breathless account of what I really believed was one of the very
important, spiritual moments for the culture."

"It's inevitable that anything of consequence becomes commercialized," said Mr.
Goldberg, who at 44 is now president of Atlantic Records. "The key is to know
the difference between things that have a purity to them and things that are
commercial."

"Lincoln freed the slaves and saved the union -- and he's pre-eminently known
now as being an occasion on which sheets and towels are sold at a discount," he
continued. "I don't think that reduces his importance. It was just a long time
ago and 100 years changes some things. So does 25."

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers along the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway uncovering signs
near Exit 20 in Saugerties, where traffic restrictions are to take effect today
in anticipation of Woodstock '94. (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times) (pg. B6)


Map of New York highlighting site of Woodstock concert and nearby parking areas
(pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              133 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA;
Miscellany

BYLINE: By STUART ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 107 words



* Ketchum Public Relations Worldwide, New York, opened an office in London.
Jerry Olszewski, managing director for Europe in Ketchum's office in Munich,
Germany, was named to the additional responsibility of heading the office.

* Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, New York, formed an affiliation with
Vietnam Investment Review, Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, in cooperation with the
Vietnam State Committee for Cooperation and Investment.


* Leonard Saffir, a former executive vice president at Porter/Novelli, New York,
opened PR/E, Boca Raton, Fla., a public relations company specializing in the
entertainment industry.

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              134 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 11, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Woodstock Changed My Life Forever

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


To the Editor:

Re "The Woodstock Notion" by Neal Karlen (Op-Ed, Aug. 5):

Even journalists cannot write away what half a million people have in their
hearts. It was a time and a place called Woodstock -- a glimpse into the Garden
of Eden that those who weren't there can never know. Mr. Karlen's images of
promoters plotting to clear the hippie gate crashers from Max Yasgur's field, of
Sullivan County residents horrified by the threat of an impending dysentery
outbreak, seem detached from the event that was Woodstock.

Mr. Karlen cannot taint the view of those of us who were there.

He states that the people there did not effect change, that chanting "One, two,
three, four, what are we fighting for?" with Country Joe McDonald didn't
accomplish anything. In time that demonstration and others like it did bring us
back from the Vietnam disaster. Because all of those who chanted could look
around and see that they were not alone. There were 500,000 people doing the
same.

That message was disseminated by Woodstock disciples across the country. It
embodied a growing force of Americans who would not only have their say but
would eventually have their way.

"Three days of peace and music" sounded cool. Four of us piled into a Volkswagen
bug and headed for White Lake, N.Y. Something happened there that changed my
life. I was a college athlete. Pretty much I walked the straight and narrow.

The rain was an unmerciful punishment by the cosmos to test our strength, but we
were Americans. Our forefathers had endured frozen Valley Forge.

I didn't do drugs or accept the Maharishi into my heart. I did see things in a
new way. I saw that people without police control could live in peace. I helped
people, and people helped me as we settled in for a three-day sail across the
sea of humanity.

There was a feeling there I took back to my sophomore year in college, something
that made me change my major to English. Something that made me grow my hair
longer and discuss literature, music and politics with new-found fervor.

JAY CURTIS
Pacific Palisades, Calif., Aug. 6, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              135 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Radisson and SAS Form Hotel Pact

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 476 words


Hoping to create a larger global presence, Radisson Hotels International
announced yesterday that it has formed an alliance with SAS International
Hotels, a subsidiary of Scandinavian Airlines System.

The agreement includes 30 SAS hotels in nine European countries, as well as in
Kuwait and China. And it gives SAS the right to develop additional Radisson
hotels in Europe. SAS will manage and operate the hotels, which will soon bear
the Radisson/ SAS Hotels Worldwide logo, while Radisson will market them around
the world and link the hotels to its existing reservations system.

Officials of both companies said their goal was to add 60 hotels by 2000. They
also said the agreement did not involve a change of ownership or equity
interests in either organization.


A Promise

"Ten years ago we had only 21 hotels and were only known in the Midwest," said
Juergen Bartels, the president of the Carlson Hospitality Group Inc., a division
of the Carlson Companies, which owns the Radisson hotels. "Now we're America's
fastest-growing upscale hotel company, and I promised Curt we'll add an average
of one hotel every 5.5 days until the year 2000."

Curt is Curt Carlson, founder of the Carlson Companies, a privately owned,
Minneapolis-based concern that had revenues of $10.7 billion last year. It also
owns the Colony Hotels and Resorts, TGI Friday's and Country Kitchen hotels and
restaurants. Most of Radisson's hotels are owned by others, usually local
owners, but managed or marketed by Radisson for a fee. Two-thirds of Radisson's
300 hotels are in the United States, and the remainder are scattered throughout
32 other countries. Many of the SAS hotels also involve joint ventures,
long-term leases and similar arrangements.

Carlson Companies also includes the Carlson Marketing Group, whose European arm
handles the frequent-flier program for SAS Airlines, the fourth-largest airline
in Europe, with revenue last year of $5 billion. The Carlson Travel Network,
another subsidiary of the Carlson Companies that consists of some 1,200 travel
agencies, recently joined with Wagons-Lit Travel of Paris to form the world's
biggest travel management company.


Hotel in Hanoi

Despite its worldwide hotel network, Radisson has only 25 properties in Europe
and only one in the Scandinavian countries. By contrast, SAS, which opened its
first hotel in Copenhagen in 1960, has six hotels in Denmark, seven in Norway
and eight in Sweden, as well as a smattering of hotels in Finland, Austria,
Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and Britain. A hotel under construction in
Hanoi, Vietnam, scheduled to open in 1996, is also expected to be a Radisson/SAS
property.

"The future of the travel industry lies in the ability to attract and service
customers on a global basis," said Kurt Ritter, president of SAS International
Hotels.

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              136 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Rwandans Face Daunting Task: Reviving Trust

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: KIGALI, Rwanda, Aug. 5


The Prime Minister of Rwanda, Faustin Twagiramungu, faces the formidable task of
reuniting his country and persuading more than a million refugees that it is
safe to return home. But first he must sell the notion to his teen-age daughter.

Fearing for her life, he said, his 14-year-old daughter has vowed to remain with
her mother and two younger brothers in Brussels, where they fled when the
killing erupted in April.

"I made a call to my daughter just two days ago and she said, 'I don't think I
am going to come back to Rwanda,' " Mr. Twagiramungu said late one evening as he
slumped on a sagging couch in the cramped hotel sitting room that for now serves
as his office. "I said, 'Why? You must.' And she said, 'They are bad people.
People there are just killing each other and what we have seen is enough.' "

For the moment, Mr. Twagiramungu cannot find the words to bring his daughter
home or muster whatever it would take to order her return.

'Not Having a Future'

"I am personally fed up," he said. "I am sincerely fed up for not having a
future for my children, for the people from my generation or for the people of
the generations to come."

Then, thinking of his youngest son, he said: "A child who is 7 years old now can
live maybe 60 years. When they are 67 years old, they will still remember what
has happened in this country. Just imagine a whole generation that for about a
half century is going to remember this. What do we do for people to forget? I
think that we can only start by teaching children that we are one people."

In several interviews over three days, Mr. Twagiramungu spoke not only of the
challenges facing Rwanda, but of his personal travails and his hopes for his
country.

"I was the first on the list to be killed," Mr. Twagiramungu said.

That he was not among the first to die was pure chance.

Killers Went to Wrong Address

"I was saved because these killers mistook my address. They believed that I was
living in some other area of Kigali," Mr. Twagiramungu said. "So the delay in
arriving at my house was what saved me.

"When they reached my house they destroyed it. They shot the ceiling. They were
so angry that they started screaming."

Mr. Twagiramungu's wife and children were away from home and already in hiding
when soldiers arrived with orders to execute the family.

For scores of others the name Twagiramungu still became an automatic death
warrant.

"My brothers were killed; nieces, nephews were killed, my stepmother, my
friends," he said. "All the gentlemen that were with me and started the other
political parties were killed. Any person related to me was killed.

"There may be one or two of my kin here or there, but as far as I know they were
all killed except for my immediate family."

Before the killings started, Mr. Twagiramungu, a Western-educated economist, was
one of Rwanda's leading businessmen, a member of the majority Hutu ethnic group
and the leader of the Democratic Forces for Change, the main opposition to the
government of President Juvenal Habyarimana, an army general who took power in a
bloodless coup in 1973.

Rocket Attack on Plane

After Mr. Habyarimana and the president of neighboring Burundi, Cyprien
Ntaryamira, were killed in a rocket attack on their airplane on April 6, the
mass killings began.

Mr. Twagiramungu said he was convinced that the massacres were planned and death
lists drawn up as long ago as a year by Hutu extremists within the Habyarimana
government, a view shared by some diplomats and United Nations officials.

So far, troops and militiamen have been blamed for up to 500,000 killings.

It was Mr. Twagiramungu's moderate political views and outspokenness in support
of a Government that included members of the minority Tutsi and the rebel Rwanda
Patriotic Front that put him in danger.

"I am not a violent person," said the 59-year-old Mr. Twagiramungu, who as a
student at McGill University in Montreal in the 1960's helped organize protests
against the Vietnam War and the apartheid system in South Africa. "But I was the
first person to have stood up and challenged Habyarimana in public. I was the
first person to say, 'This man is a dictator and we must fight against him.' "

"People thought that I was foolish," he said. "But in my mind, if I was
protesting against apartheid and against Nixon and the war in Vietnam, then in
my own country why can't I protest. Why?"

Mr. Twagiramungu said he hid out in the Kigali home of an American relief
official for the first few days.

"I was sitting in a small room, waiting for people to come and kill me," he
said.

No Help From U.S. Embassy

Mr. Twagiramungu said that when his protector called a consulate officer at the
United States Embassy to ask for help, he got this response: "Tell that Hutu to
get out of your house. You are going to be killed if they find him in your
house. So it is better that you tell him to get out."

The French were even more curt, Mr. Twagiramungu recalled.

"I said, 'Could you ask the United Nations peacekeepers to send soldiers?' " he
said. "So, the United Nations sent an armored personnel carrier with 10
Bangladesh troops to pick me up."

The United Nations peacekeepers gave Mr. Twagiramungu haven for two weeks until
they smuggled him out to Nairobi, where at the orders of President Daniel arap
Moi's government, he was held incommunicado at a tourist hotel in Nairobi.

From Zaire, the Rwandan Patriotic Front arranged for the Prime Minister's family
to go to Brussels.

Mr. Twagiramungu returned from exile on July 14, the day the victorious
Patriotic Front leaders declared him prime minister. He now leads a country that
was one of the world's poorest, even before the war, and he fear that many of
his countryman have abandoned Rwanda and its problems forever.

"We can solve problems by changing the minds of people, not by killing," the
Prime Minister said. "People must change the way they have been taught and get a
new way of thinking."


LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Faustin Twagiramungu. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              137 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 12, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News: Abner Joseph Mikva;
Judge on a Return Mission to Politics

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1129 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 11


In installing Abner J. Mikva, a prominent former lawmaker who is now a Federal
judge, as his new White House counsel, President Clinton has turned once again
to a pillar of official Washington -- a man who said recently that he was "too
old, too white, too male and too liberal" ever to be named to the Supreme Court.

Judge Mikva, a ruddy-faced 68-year-old Chicagoan, will return to the political
wars through the unusual step of surrendering a lifetime appointment on the
bench -- he is chief judge of the Federal Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia -- to enter service in the executive branch at an age when many men
have already retired.

By the end of next month, he will have been Judge Mikva for 15 years, long
enough to guarantee a pension at full judicial salary. But he now knows that he
will never be Justice Mikva, and associates say it was that knowledge, plus a
yearning to return to the political rough and tumble that he never completely
abandoned emotionally, that made him willing, effective Oct. 1, to succeed Lloyd
N. Cutler as top lawyer and eminence grise on a generally youthful White House
staff.

This is the third time in six weeks that Mr. Clinton, who is struggling to
surmount a welter of political and legal problems, has chosen a former member of
the House of Representatives for a top post. The appointments are part of a
redoubled effort to reinforce the upper ranks of a White House operation that
has been given low marks for political savvy.

Now those upper ranks include Judge Mikva as well as Leon E. Panetta, the
56-year-old new chief of staff, and Tony L. Coelho, the 51-year-old legislator
turned investment banker who was installed this week as de facto manager of the
Democratic Party. Indeed, there are some who say that Mr. Clinton, who once
promised that his Administration would look more like America, is instead making
it look more like the United States Congress.

Warm Presidential Welcome

But standing this afternoon in the Rose Garden of the White House, Mr. Clinton
looked positively gleeful as he introduced the newest addition to his team. The
choice of Judge Mikva as White House counsel, he said, was "a measure of the
seriousness with which we regard the office."

Before being named by President Jimmy Carter in 1979 to what is widely viewed as
the country's second most powerful court, Judge Mikva represented the South Side
and then the North Shore of Chicago in Congress for 10 years, when he was a
darling of American liberals. And even in trading his sport jackets for robes,
he has remained in temperament, interests and associations just as much
politician as jurist.

He still lives on Capitol Hill, just across the street from the Democratic Club,
once his favorite watering hole. Until recently, he began most days with a
workout in the House gym, where his paddleball partners over the years have
included Representative Don Edwards of California and others, most of whom are
either dead or retired.

Writing on Favorite Subject

Together with Eric Lane, a professor at the Hofstra Law School, he has just
completed work on a new law school textbook whose title reflects his favorite
subject: "The Legislative Process." Among his earlier writings is a 1976 op-ed
article in The Washington Post that 24 times referred to a sweeping piece of
anti-crime legislation by its arcane shorthand title: S.1.

Judge Mikva has watched as three of his appeals court colleagues -- Antonin
Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- have been elevated to the
Supreme Court. But though he has long been regarded as a possible candidate for
the High Court himself, he achieved perhaps his own greatest notoriety from the
bench in the mid-1980's by leading a membership drive that he portrayed as "a
battle for the soul of the American Bar Association."

Judge Mikva was in fact trying to attract new dues-paying members to the
association's Individual Rights and Responsibilities section, which he then
headed and which was a strong advocate of civil rights legislation. He was
accused of misconduct by a conservative legal group, which said he had violated
a general prohibition on judges soliciting funds. Under an arrangement reached
without investigation or reprimand in 1986, he agreed to stop taking part in the
recruitment.

Abner Joseph Mikva was born in Milwaukee on Jan. 21, 1926. He attended public
schools there before enlisting in the Army Air Corps, where he served as a
navigator in the final year of World War II. He attended the University of
Wisconsin at Milwaukee, graduated from Washington University in St. Louis in
1948, and married Zorita Wise the same year. He received his law degree from the
University of Chicago Law School in 1951.

By the time he was 30, after serving as law clerk to Supreme Court Justice
Sherman Minton and as a young associate in Arthur Goldberg's Chicago law firm,
Mr. Mikva had won election to the Illinois House. He remained there for 10 years
and won a reputation as a tireless proponent of abortion rights and a foe of the
death penalty.

After one unsuccessful try, he was elected to the United States Congress in 1968
to represent Chicago's South Side. In the House, he was an early advocate of gun
control and a fierce opponent of the Vietnam War.

In 1972, he was swept from office by a combination of redistricting and Richard
M. Nixon's landslide victory. But he came back to win a new seat in 1974, and
though he won re-election by the narrowest of margins in his staunchly
Republican district on the affluent North Shore, he won national prominence as a
left-leaning politician about whom The Washington Post wrote in 1976, "Common
Cause members all but gush when his name is mentioned."

Battle Over Confirmation

By the time President Carter nominated him to the appellate court in 1979, Mr.
Mikva had made enough enemies that the National Rifle Association spent six
months and $1 million trying unsuccessfully to block his confirmation by the
Senate. From the bench, Judge Mikva has remained an advocate of liberal causes;
he ordered the reinstatement of a gay student to the United States Naval Academy
last year, ruling that the armed forces may not discriminate against people
because of their sexual orientation.

Even in his chambers, Judge Mikva has generally shunned his computer-equipped
desk to work at a lectern with a view of the Capitol he left more than a decade
ago. But while most matters concerning his move to the White House are settled
-- he will collect his judicial pension of about $140,000 a year, not the
counsel's salary of $125,000 -- associates say one remains unsettled: whether
the judge is ready to adjust to a political world that has become faster paced
and less forgiving.


NAME: Abner Joseph Mikva

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abner J. Mikva, right, who will succeed Lloyd N. Cutler, left,
on Oct. 1. as the White House counsel. They were at a news conference yesterday
in the White House Rose Garden with President Clinton. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              138 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pataki Releases Records Of Finances for 14 Years

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 27;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


On a campaign day marked by tit-for-tat attacks over personal finances, George
E. Pataki, the Republican gubernatorial candidate, released voluminous records
yesterday that depicted the part-time legislator, lawyer and farmer as land-rich
and cash-poor.

Perhaps the most interesting disclosure in the nearly 600 pages of documents was
that Mr. Pataki and his wife, Elizabeth, paid no Federal income taxes for 1986,
a year when they had a profit of $401,666 on the sale of a piece of investment
property in Putnam County.

Mr. Pataki's accountant, Mark C. Avrutine, said that the Patakis were allowed to
defer paying capital gains taxes on that sale because they then bought a more
expensive investment property in Putnam County.

Known in tax law as a 1031 exchange, after the pertinent section of the Internal
Revenue Code, the provision enables sellers to defer paying taxes as long as
they promptly buy a similar kind of property, Mr. Avrutine said. He said the
Patakis would not have to pay taxes until they had sold the second tract.

Home as an Investment

While the first property was a vacant piece of land, the second tract was an
estate overlooking the Hudson River in Garrison, including a sprawling Victorian
house that the Patakis first rented out and now use as their home.

The Patakis and two partners bought the first property in 1978 for $245,000 and
sold it for $1.45 million in 1986. Their share of the proceeds was $483,333. On
the same day as the sale, the Patakis bought their current home for $700,000.

For nearly a month, Mr. Pataki's failure to disclose his tax returns has been a
major campaign theme of his two rivals, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, and
Richard M. Rosenbaum, a Republican who is challenging Mr. Pataki in the party's
Sept. 13 primary. Both opponents have suggested repeatedly that Mr. Pataki must
have something to hide.

But yesterday, Mr. Pataki, who has been in elected office since 1982, when he
became Mayor of Peekskill in northern Westchester County, released 14 years of
returns. His running mate, Elizabeth P. McCaughey, released only three years of
returns, saying she had previously filed jointly with her ex-husband.

Challenge to Cuomo

Mr. Pataki also made available details of his property purchases and sales, a
statement of net worth, a list of legal clients, and medical records, which
showed that Mr. Pataki has enjoyed good health except for a persistently bad
knee and a 1988 bout with Lyme disease. He also released optometric records to
back up his assertion that he failed his Army physical and avoided military
service during the Vietnam War because of severe nearsightedness.

Before Mr. Pataki's records were made available, Mr. Cuomo's campaign manager,
John A. Marino, held a news conference yesterday morning to demand that Mr.
Pataki release tax returns for each of the 12 years he has been in public
office. "The first test of leadership is honesty and George Pataki is failing
that test," Mr. Marino said.

Mr. Pataki's campaign manager, Robert Ryan, responded by challenging Mr. Cuomo
and his wife, Matilda, to disclose their net worth. If they did, Mr. Ryan said,
Mr. Pataki would consider disclosing additional details, including copies of the
$60,000 loan agreement between Mr. Pataki and a Westchester developer, Unicorn
Contracting, that later bought property from Mr. Pataki and his brother.

A Cuomo spokesman, Joel R. Benenson, said that Mr. Cuomo -- who receives a
$130,000 salary, lives rent-free in the Executive Mansion, and has received more
than $1.2 million in honorariums since 1983 -- is not a millionaire. But he
would not specify the Governor's net worth or that of his wife, whose father
reportedly left her a substantial inheritance.

$929,000 Net Worth

Mr. Pataki's tax returns showed that he and his wife had an adjusted gross
income averaging about $64,000 over the last 14 years, ranging from a low of
$12,075 in 1986 to a high of $119,727 in 1987. Their income in 1993 was 76,405.

But a net worth statement provided by the campaign estimated the value of the
Patakis' assets at $1.755 million, with $1.66 million of the total coming from
four pieces of property they currently own. They have liabilities of $826,000,
most of it from mortgages on his real estate, and the campaign put their net
worth at $929,250.

Those figures probably significantly underestimate the Patakis' potential worth.
They do not reflect the fact that Mr. Pataki and his brother, Louis Pataki Jr.,
have won approval to subdivide and develop part of their family's farm in
Peekskill. Four lots were sold to Unicorn on April 7, bringing Mr. Pataki
$75,000 for his share, but another 27 lots have not been sold.

The Patakis recently took out a $90,000 second mortgage on their house in
Garrison to help meet living expenses during the campaign. But Mr. Pataki said
in a recent interview that the sale of the farm property would provide security
for his family if he loses the election.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              139 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War;
'Bad Paper' Discharges

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 171 words


To the Editor:

Re "Heal the 'Bad Paper' Veterans" (Op-Ed, July 30): Maxine Waters and Jonathan
Shay would have the Pentagon automatically upgrade more than 560,000
less-than-honorable discharges issued during the Vietnam War era. The Department
of Veterans Affairs would then award billions to the new beneficiaries.


Bad-paper holders are not eligible for veterans benefits until the document is
upgraded to an honorable or a general discharge. Representative Waters and Dr.
Shay claim the upgrading is a financial burden for bad-paper holders. However,
nonprofit veterans groups like the Air Force Association offer free discharge
upgrade assistance to all veterans.

Ms. Waters and Dr. Shay assert that some bad-paper holders "were victims of
racism: the rod of military justice did not fall with equal force on all
offenders in Vietnam." Just that drove Congress to mandate case-by-case review
in upgrading military discharges.
ALLEN G. HARRIS
Pres., N.Y. State Air Force Assn.
New York, Aug. 4, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              140 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War;
Soldier and Activist

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 168 words


To the Editor:

As a Vietnam veteran and antiwar activist, I feel I must comment on Gregg M.
Taylor's July 30 letter.


In 1963 I enlisted in the United States Army, as I considered it my duty as a
citizen. When I received orders for Vietnam, I had reservations about the wisdom
of United States policy, but I did my duty. What I saw in Vietnam and my study
of the subject convinced me of the tragic mistake our country was engaged in.

When I returned to the States and Ohio State University after my honorable
discharge, I added my voice and energy to the antiwar movement. Today, as I
reflect on the Vietnam era and my actions, I only regret that I did not do more
to oppose the war.

When looking again at the arguments presented at the time, I am more convinced
than ever that there was no sound rationale for United States involvement in
Vietnam. I feel I served my country and did my duty both as a soldier and as an
antiwar activist.
STEVEN BORNSTEIN
Columbus, Ohio, Aug. 1, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              141 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War;
Students Weren't Selfish

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


To the Editor:

Gregg M. Taylor is, a quarter-century later, sadly misinformed (letter, July
30). While accusing the Vietnam War protesters of self-interest, he ignores two
important points: (1) at the height of the 1960's protests, students had the
absolute protection of student deferments, and (2) a very large percentage of
the protesters were women and not subject to the draft.


The reality was the opposite of Mr. Taylor's accusations. Protesters who tried
to organize a student strike against war work at the University of Wisconsin
used the slogan "Work, Study, Get Ahead, Kill" to shame students into joining
the strike.

Moreover, in my own case, I was expelled from my university because of my
antiwar activities and immediately subject to the draft. As far as the question
of avoiding getting shot, two months after my draft physical I was picking fruit
in Israel along the Gaza Strip border, which was then relatively pacific only
because of the unexpected early victory in the 1967 war two weeks earlier.

While student antiwar protesters did not suffer the magnitude of violence of
those forced to walk point in the benighted search and destroy tactics, many
protesters have their own war stories, made even more horrifying because the
violence directed at them was perpetrated illegally by their own Government.

No, protesting the war was by no means the safest course of action, nor was it
the surest and most opportune path to a successful and remunerative career. It
was, however, for thousands of very young men and women, the only possible path
to take, given the circumstances of the Vietnam War.
MARC FURSTENBERG
New York, Aug. 3, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              142 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 13, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vets Earned the Right to Protest War

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 227 words


To the Editor:

Re "Vietnam War Protesters Had Selfish Motives" (letter, July 30): As one of the
Vietnam War veterans who protested against the war after I returned from Nam, I
share Gregg M. Taylor's doubts about the motives of many student protesters.


He believes that many of the most virulent protesters from top colleges "were
outraged that their orderly progression to the upscale gravy train would be
interrupted by mandatory military service," and "their hysteria was fueled by
the prospect of getting shot in battle."

Young men from patriotic middle-class working families and the poor provided
most of the American troops in battle. Most of the wealthy and well-educated
avoided the draft by obtaining positions that afforded draft deferments.

Almost totally forgotten were those noble souls who willingly accepted a jail
cell rather than serve in what they considered an immoral war. Somewhat
analogous was the stand taken by Henry David Thoreau, who chose prison rather
than pay taxes to support the Mexican War.

Like many Vietnam vets, I only felt comfortable marching in protest with other
veterans. We had earned the moral right to tell our country that the war was an
immoral horror perpetrated by stubborn men too blind to see their errors, or too
proud to admit them.
MICHAEL J. GORMAN
Whitestone, Queens, Aug. 3, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              143 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 14, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 860 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    26   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young
           boy learns a deadly secret.

 2     7   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 3     8   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 4     4   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 5     9   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 6    18   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.

 7     3   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics
           and murder.

 8     4   A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.)
           Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which
           he stumbled.

 9*    3   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother
           wins $60 million in a lottery.

 10    3   FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San
           Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of
           the border.

 11    3   GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother
           versus a stalking, unseen killer.

 12    3   SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.)
           While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of
           crimes.

 13   12   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer
           pursues his firm's missing partner and a
           multimillion-dollar fund.

 14    2   THE HORSE YOU CAME IN ON, by Martha Grimes. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A British sleuth and a case of murder and mayhem in
           Baltimore.

 15    2   LOVE BEYOND REASON, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A
           woman is tempted by the brother of a man who abused her
           late sister.

 16*  103  A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           Racial tensions during a trial.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    31   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    562  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3*   15   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 4    13   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           Mood-changing medications.

 5    14   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           young woman's mental illness.

 6*   31   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 7*   78   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 8*   12   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Business innovation.

 9     4   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded in the past
           and present.

 10    4   O.J. SIMPSON: American Hero, American Tragedy, by Marc
           Cerasini. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) The life of the legendary
           football player who has been accused of murder.

 11*  148  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 12*  41   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 13    5   STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski.
           (Harper Paperbacks, $6.99.) A memoir by the man who played
           Captain Kirk.

 14   62   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 15*  11   FORTUNATE SON, by Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) The
           autobiography of a Marine general's son who was mutilated
           in Vietnam.

 16*  19   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 17*   1   FALLEN HERO, by Don Davis. (St. Martin's, $4.99.) The life
           of O.J. Simpson.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    178  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2     3   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial,
           $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 3    11   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 4    40   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending July 30, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              144 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Smack Madness: 40 Years of Demon Heroin

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

SECTION: Section 2;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2484 words


POOR ZED. HE HAS BARELY ARrived in Paris, checked into the hotel, made love with
a beautiful prostitute and taken a quick look at the blueprints for the bank
robbery the next day when his childhood friend Eric makes a startling
suggestion: "Now we do heroin."

So begins the film "Killing Zoe," which opens on Friday, and some of the most
festive heroin scenes in recent film history. Eric (Jean-Hugues Anglade) shoots
up, but the other bank robbers smoke the drug, "chasing the dragon," in foil
straws. One man explains to Zed that the feeling will be as if "the rest of the
world is in a bubble of glass and you are rubbing up against it like a bad
windshield wiper." Zed (Eric Stoltz) considers this and says, "I'll do it
anyway."

Soon they're joy-riding like teen-agers (they appear to be snorting cocaine as
well, which may explain an exuberance uncharacteristic of heroin users) and
dancing in a circle at a basement Dixieland club where they fix openly at a
table and insist that Zed do more heroin. Granted, the bank job does not go
well, and Zed throws up. But that night he gets to see pretty animated blue
notes rising from the band's instruments like bubbles underwater.

"People put me through hell because of those blue cartoon notes," says Roger
Avary, the 28-year-old director and writer of "Killing Zoe." "But anybody would
be an idiot to think that drugs aren't fun. Or why would people do them?"

Mr. Avary didn't write heroin into the script for fun, however. "To me, that was
the farthest you can go, the worst thing to do the day before a dangerous job,"
he says. "What would throw you off the most? The most destructive thing I could
think of was heroin."

"Killing Zoe" is one of at least four new films in which heroin has a big role.
The others include Quentin Tarantino's "Pulp Fiction," which will open the New
York Film Festival next month; "Fresh," which opens Aug. 26; and "L.627," a 1992
French film that was released locally last month.

Is the drug's sudden screen visibility a fluke, as a new generation of young
auteurs make their mark? (Mr. Tarantino is executive producer of Mr. Avary's
film; Mr. Avary was one of the writers of Mr. Tarantino's new film; Lawrence
Bender, producer of "Fresh," produced Mr. Tarantino's "Reservoir Dogs" and was
executive producer of "Killing Zoe.") Or does it reflect the drug's new
fashionability, which has been widely reported since the death of River Phoenix
last October?


 For many reasons, including bumper crops of opium poppies, heroin is purer than
ever, pure enough to let a new AIDS-aware, needle-wary generation snort or sniff
it instead of injecting it. Federal Drug Enforcement Administration figures and
hospital emergency-room admissions confirm that heroin use is increasing.

However, Dr. David Musto, a professor of the history of medicine at Yale
University, isn't particularly worried.

"There has been a prediction that we were going to have a heroin epidemic for
years," says Dr. Musto. "If we do have an increase, it will be moderate because
we don't have the same kind of cultural receptivity to drugs that we did in the
60's and 70's. The middle class has dropped drugs."

The plot of "Killing Zoe" amuses Dr. Musto because it "reinforces a stereotype
that is 75 years old."

"That is exactly the claim made in the 20's," he explains, "that criminals took
heroin to get up the nerve to commit daring bank robberies."

And seeing heroin in more films may not be the worst thing that can happen to
impressionable American audiences, he adds, especially if they see the
consequences too. One of the reasons the heroin epidemic of the 1950's took many
by surprise was an almost complete public ignorance of the drug, partially
because movies hadn't touched the subject in decades.

Heroin doesn't look like much fun in "Pulp Fiction." A drug kingpin's young wife
(Uma Thurman) mistakes it for cocaine and snorts it while her escort (John
Travolta) is in the bathroom talking himself out of sleeping with her. The
subsequent panic, which includes an adrenaline injection right into her heart,
is unlikely to be anybody's idea of a pleasant evening. On the other hand, for
most of the characters life goes on as usual the next day.


HOLLYWOOD HAS MADE PLENty of films with heroin scenes in the last 40 years, but
until recently the drug was almost always at the heart of the plot -- not a
casual aside. Characters may have smoked packs of cigarettes or downed repeated
martinis without commenting on the practice, but they generally didn't shoot up
before going out to dinner just to be sociable.

Boaz Yakin, the director and writer of "Fresh," deliberately made heroin only
one of many villains in his film about a 12-year-old heroin runner in Brooklyn.
" 'Fresh' shows drugs as a destructive force," he says. "But violence has become
violence for its own sake. Drugs are a part of it, but they are not the be-all
and end-all of social disintegration."

When the Hollywood Production Code (administered by the Hays Office, named for
Will H. Hays, its first director) went into effect in the 1930's, it forbade
affronts like burping on screen, scenes with couples, even married ones, in bed
together and any depiction of narcotics. It wasn't openly challenged until 1955,
in Otto Preminger's "Man With the Golden Arm."

With its cautious language (when someone calls the main character "the best
dealer in the business," he means at the card table), the film seems almost
quaint. But it was powerful stuff at the time, and what moviegoers may now see
as cliche was genuinely daring.

Frankie (Frank Sinatra), whose arm is golden because of his skills as a drummer,
gets off a bus and tells a friend, "The monkey's gone." Friends ask, "How are
you, Frankie? I mean . . ." It becomes clear that


Frankie has been away, kicking a horrible but unnamed habit.

When he succumbs to temptation again, Frankie is seen fixing only once. The
pusher (Darren McGavin) approaches, syringe in hand, but the camera quickly cuts
to a close-up of Frankie's face and his expression of mild relief. In the
beginning, Frank tells Molly (Kim Novak), the blonde with the heart of gold,
that he did it "for kicks." He thought he "could take it or leave it alone."

After he blows an audition because his hands are shaking, he knows it's time to
go cold turkey, a term Molly seems to know. All it takes is a few days locked in
Molly's apartment, with the knives and scissors hidden, a little trembling in
the fetal position, and he's cured, eager for breakfast and a clean shave.

In the world of heroin movies, that may have been the last of the happy endings.

When the drug culture of the late 1960's took hold, the plight of addicts became
a popular film topic. Everyone felt a lot freer to show the gruesome details.


 "The Panic in Needle Park" (1971) starred Al Pacino as a small-time New York
crook who insists he's only chipping (using heroin occasionally, for fun) and
Kitty Winn as the young woman who loves him and eventually joins him in
addiction. This time around, heroin is referred to as smack, buying drugs as
scoring and taking an overdose as OD'ing, and film audiences, now drug savvy,
had no trouble understanding. When Bobby (Mr. Pacino) announces to a pawnshop
owner, "Esther, I'm a dope addict," it's true but it's also his playful way of
asking for $25 instead of $10 for a television set he has brought in. (Dope
addicts have expenses.)

The director, Jerry Schatzberg, includes what are still perhaps the most graphic
and hard-to-watch close-ups of needles piercing bulging veins, blood entering
syringes and general physical deterioration. At one point, a character nods off
with a syringe still in his arm; Helen (Ms. Winn) casually pulls it out for him.

At the end of the film, Bobby has been betrayed and Helen has become a very
unhappy hooker, but the two are still alive.

This is not the case for the subjects of what became the most popular subgenre
of addiction movies: the celebrity and how he or she came to ruin.

From Diana Ross as Billie Holiday in "Lady Sings the Blues" (1972) to Forest
Whitaker as Charlie Parker in "Bird" (1988), the pattern is the same. The
performer has enormous talent but heroin is too powerful; the career goes to
hell; ultimately the body is found, and audiences can go home feeling superior,
lucky or both.

In the final scene of "Bird," the medical examiner, telephoning in his report of
Parker's death, describes him as "approximately 65 years of age." Baroness Nika
(Diane Salinger), in whose house Parker has died, corrects him in a world-weary
voice: "He was 34."

"Lenny" (1974) portrayed heroin use as pure 1950's beatnik decadence. The
comedian Lenny Bruce and his wife, Honey (Dustin Hoffman and Valerie Perrine),
are shown with a houseful of musicians in various stages of stupor and undress.
The last scene is of Lenny, lying naked on the bathroom floor, dead of an
overdose.

In "Sid and Nancy" (1986), the story of the rock musician Sid Vicious (Gary
Oldman) and the girlfriend he eventually murders, Nancy Spungen (Chloe Webb),
audiences learned that to be a junkie is to be too wrecked to notice that your
hotel room is on fire. To be a famous junkie is to throw up at a sidewalk cafe
in Paris just as a fan stops by and still have the admirer fawn.


HEROIN HAS A CENTRAL role in another film genre: police movies. But in these,
the misery of the poor addicts is completely beside the point. In "The French
Connection" (1971), the audience is much too busy watching Popeye Doyle (Gene
Hackman) in car and subway chases to give much thought to the 60 kilos of heroin
he's after.

But the drug's one scene is memorable. A young chemist tests a sample with a
mini-lab set up in a hotel suite. "Two twenty, lunar trajectory,
junk-of-the-month club," he announces, obviously impressed, as the liquid rises.
"Two thirty, grade A poison, absolute dynamite, 89 percent pure junk. Best I've
ever seen!"

In "L.627," the members of a Paris drug squad seem more concerned with quotas
and bureaucracy than with arresting big dealers. The only addict audiences hear
from is Cecile (Lara Guirao). "I'm still on a gram a day," she announces
casually, meeting Lulu (Didier Bezace), the one conscientious police officer,
for lunch and a stroll through Pere Lachaise. "Got any leftovers? . . . I'm
getting chills and all."

The genres get mixed a bit, and the plots thicken, when a dealer or a police
officer is foolish enough to become a user as well. Jason Patric and Jennifer
Jason Leigh played cops who go a little too far undercover in "Rush" (1991). At
first, Kristen (Ms. Leigh) is so naive she can barely roll a joint. But Jim (Mr.
Patric) borrows her leather belt to tie off, then explains what he's doing step
by step. He's injecting baby laxative this time, but not for long. Later,
Kristen is forced to do the real thing. When Jim tells a dealer "She don't fix,"
the latter insists. Things end badly for everybody.

The lesson of "Who'll Stop the Rain" (1978) was clear: don't deal or your wife
may end up hooked. John (Michael Moriarty), a journalist in Saigon, talks his
friend Ray (Nick Nolte) into smuggling home "two keys of skag." But when he
delivers it to John's wife, Marge (Tuesday Weld), back in California, some
corrupt cops try to steal it. The two are soon on the run.

Marge is a little too attached to some unidentified pills (which she has left
behind in the rush), so Ray offers the only available alternative ("We're going
to get you high. . . . Snort it like coke"). Marge soon declares it "much better
than a week in the country."

"Who'll Stop the Rain" blames the Vietnam War for everything. But in other ways,
the film is familiar. When John looks into Marge's drug-changed eyes and says
"When did you start?" it is exactly the same scene from "The Panic in Needle
Park" when Al Pacino kisses Kitty Winn, gets a good look at her eyes, pulls her
to him and asks, "When did that happen?" And if all the major characters in
"Who'll Stop the Rain" don't end up dead, it's only because they empty the evil
white powder onto the ground and drive away. When it's time to moralize, why be
subtle?

Even "Drugstore Cowboy," Gus Van Sant's 1989 film about a quartet of small-time
addicts and pharmacy thieves, which was accused of glamorizing drugs, paints a
bleak picture. These people have to open their front door with guns drawn and
can't own a dog because the last one led police directly to their house. The
plot includes one fatal overdose.

The difference in some newer films may be that users occasionally defend their
behavior. In "Drugstore Cowboy," Bob (Matt Dillon), whose drug euphoria is
illustrated as a Magritte-like sky dotted with dreamily tumbling spoons,
syringes and sometimes cows, is not that repentant when he quits. "I'm a
junkie," he says. "I like drugs. I like the whole life style. It just didn't pay
off."

And an elderly former priest (played by William S. Burroughs) expresses his
opinion about "right wingers": "Narcotics have been systematically scapegoated
and demonized. The idea that anyone can use drugs and escape a horrible fate is
anathema to these idiots."

A similar speech appears in "Liquid Sky," a 1983 film about aliens who visit
Manhattan to collect the chemical produced by heroin euphoria. In an early scene
of this downtown-chic movie (people sometimes tie off with silk scarves), Paul
(Stanley Knap) is seen fixing in an apartment kitchen. "People have been using
opiates for centuries," he tells his wife. "Ancient Egypt, Greece, Rome, India,
China. Everybody used it. Nobody thought it was destructive or dangerous. They
didn't think it was immoral to be euphoric." He adds that at the turn of the
century, any housewife could buy opium derivatives at the drugstore.


 Paul is right (as Dr. Musto of Yale points out, the Bayer Company introduced
heroin as a cough suppressant in 1898), but his is truly a minority voice on
screen. If young Hollywood has decided heroin is cool, they didn't learn it at
the movies. While "Easy Rider" showed marijuana as an appropriate
around-the-campfire digestif and cocaine was a laughing matter in Woody Allen
movies (that memorable expensive sneeze in "Annie Hall"), heroin has invariably
been treated as deadly serious business, leading to a miserable existence, if
not actual death.

Until now?

The film makers say no. "I don't know if I'd call 'Fresh' an anti-drug movie,"
says Mr. Yakin. "I loathe to be a messenger. But I wanted to deglamorize this."

Of "Killing Zoe," Mr. Avary says he asked himself, "Is it going to be completely
irresponsible to make a film about heroin?" He says he considered trying the
drug for research purposes but changed his mind.

"You can never anticipate what your film is going to do," he adds, "but the
message should be: extremes are what destroy us, extremes of all kinds."

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the new film "Killing Zoe," Jean-Hugues Anglade, left, on
trombone, jams with the band after shooting up the night before a bank job.
Below, in "Pulp Fiction," after a burger and a shake, Uma Thurman goes home and
mistakes one white powder for another. But life goes on. (Linda R. Chen/Miramax)
(pg. 9); Scoring Smack: Al Pacino, at left, plays a small-time crook who visits
a shooting gallery in the 1971 film "The Panic in Needle Park."; A Celebrity in
Ruins: Diana Ross played Billie Holiday in "Lady Sings the Blues," a film in
which talent is strong, heroin stronger. (Movie Still Archives) (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              145 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VOWS;
Traci Farber and Seth Kamil

BYLINE: By LOIS SMITH BRADY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 54; Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 628 words


WHEN he is in a romantic mood, Seth Kamil is far more likely to take Traci
Farber a container of Malaysian rice pudding or a dozen litchi nuts than a dozen
red roses. In fact, he wooed her with ethnic food. After their first date, he
sent her a brick-size napoleon pastry as a way of saying thank you; another
time, he showed up on her front step with sour pickles from Gus's Pickles on the
Lower East Side.

Mr. Kamil, 27, is a Ph.D. candidate in American ethnic and urban history at
Columbia University. He also works as a director of Big Onion Walking Tours, a
company that offers narrated strolls through places like the Bowery, Chinatown,
Ellis Island and multi-ethnic eating spots below Houston Street. Mr. Kamil,
whose specialty is a tour titled "Jewish Lower East Side," can tell endless
stories about the people who lived there in the early part of the century, from
Yiddish-speaking immigrants to tough saloon keepers to colorful criminals like
Gyp the Blood.

"Gyp the Blood was a hired killer in the 1920's," he said. "When the police
arrested him, there was a price list in his pocket. He charged $3 for a black
eye, $5 to chew a person's ear off and $100 for the big job."

Two years ago, Mr. Kamil met Ms. Farber while he was leading a group through the
Eldridge Street Synagogue. Ms. Farber, now 28 and a vice president at Bankers
Trust in New York, happened to be working as a volunteer that day, cleaning
stained glass windows as part of the 1887 synagogue's restoration effort.

For their first dates, he took her to his favorite out-of-the-way places like
the Golden Unicorn on Catherine Street for dim sum and the Vietnam Restaurant in
a dingy-looking basement on Doyers Street near the Bowery.

They had their first serious relationship talk over pastries at Caffe Roma in
Little Italy. "It was six weeks into our relationship, and we both knew it was
getting serious," Mr. Kamil recalled. "Traci and I sat down and I said to her:
'I am a graduate student. I make no money. I don't know when or where I'm going
to get a job. If you can't handle this, let me know.' "

Ms. Farber was accustomed to dinner dates at places like the Rainbow Room rather
than tiny ethnic restaurants without tablecloths or air conditioning: "I always
thought I would marry a big investment banker and maybe not have to work," she
said a week before her wedding. "It was very confusing when I met Seth. I had a
mental meltdown. But I began to see that the things I thought were so important
-- security, owning a house in Westchester, money -- might not be. What's
important is that you can't wait to get home from work to see this person."

On Aug. 7, they were married at the Rye Town Hilton in Rye Brook, N.Y., in a
traditional Jewish ceremony that contained many elements from the weddings that
took place 100 years ago on the Lower East Side. The couple signed a
hand-painted ketubah, the ancient Jewish marriage contract, and everyone sang a
Hebrew song and kept time by clapping his hands.

Throughout the wedding day, the bride wore a silver ring with a miniature
three-inch-tall house attached to it, symbolizing the temple in Jerusalem and
the creation of a new household.

During the reception, a few of the 160 guests commented that the couple opened
up unknown worlds to each other. For the bride and bridegroom, the romance was
like finding an unmarked doorway to a secret nightclub or bookstore downtown.

"She introduced him to Wall Street and the World Trade Center and all that power
up a million miles in the sky," said Zak Braiterman, a Ph.D. student in
religious studies at Stanford University and an old friend of Mr. Kamil's.

And he teaches people about the Bowery, the world of the streets, and history
rather than futures.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Traci Farber and Seth Kamil; Rye Town Hilton, Rye Brook, N.Y.,
Aug. 7 (Photographs by Susan Harris for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              146 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WOODSTOCK '94: THE OVERVIEW;
Woodstock Redux: New Sea of Young People

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1390 words

DATELINE: SAUGERTIES, N.Y., Aug. 13


The 25th-anniversary Woodstock celebration today took on the look of a benign
natural disaster attended by more than 200,000 mostly cheerful victims.State
officials declared the concert site and its parking areas filled to saturation
and began blocking off roads as far as 15 miles away to try to stop more people,
including ticket-holders, from coming.

A vast sea of tents and bodies swamped the rolling hills, woods and creek beds
of the 840-acre farm where the festival is being held this weekend, making it
increasingly difficult to clear away accumulating trash and maneuver emergency
vehicles. Rivers of people inching their way toward toilets, telephones, water
and food snaked interminably past encampments of tents and groggy, recumbent
bodies.

The New York State Police predicted it would take 20 to 25 hours to clear the
site after the concert winds down late Sunday because most people will have to
be loaded onto school buses and shuttled to parking lots as far as 30 miles
away. The task could become complicated by thunderstorms late Sunday afternoon.

Rain was already falling steadily by late this afternoon, and as many as 100
people could be seen dancing to the rap music of Cypress Hill in a large mud
lagoon in the main festival field. Elsewhere, people could be found completely
covered in mud in scenes reminiscent of the thick mud that engulfed the original
Woodstock.

A 44-year-old Long Island man was found unconscious and was later pronounced
dead after being flown to a hospital in Kingston. He was identified as Joseph G.
Roussel of West Babylon. The authorities said the cause of his death was
complications from diabetes. Otherwise, various medical personnel reported
treating from 600 to more than 1,000 injuries, most of them minor, including
overdoses and dancing injuries.

Despite mounting problems, many in the crowd didn't seem to notice. Some said
they had expected nothing less. And when the concert charged into high gear
shortly after noon and one of the few original Woodstock performers here, Joe
Cocker, launched into "Feeling All Right," anyone with a dissenting view lost
all chance of being heard above the roaring approval of the crowd.

And when Mr. Cocker later broke into "With a Little Help From My Friends," which
he sang at the original Woodstock and which most of the crowd had probably seen
him perform in the concert film, tens of thousands of people raised their arms
to the sky and began singing, too, in what some said was the emotional high
point of the festival so far.

But it seemed unlikely that the festival would acquire the cultural and mythic
heft of its predecessor, despite the promoters' suggestions that the potential
was there. For too many people at the three-day event, it seemed to be primarily
a very big concert with a very big budget before a very big crowd.

"There's certain things in life that there's only one of," said Marie Rice, a
television reporter in her 40's from Buffalo who was not covering the festival
but had come anyway with her sister and a friend. "There's only one Love Canal.
There's only one Elvis. And there's only one Woodstock."

A few people suggested the event was marked by an awareness of the new
generation's "own Vietnam": environmental pollution, diminished opportunities,
economic stagnation, perhaps AIDS, depending on who was asked. But others said
those issues did not pervade the festival in the way that the Vietnam War is
remembered to have energized the original Woodstock.

'Vote for What?'

Volunteers for Rock the Vote, a group that fights voter apathy by encouraging
young people to register, said they were struck by how many people didn't know
what voter registration was. "Vote for what?" they said they were repeatedly
asked.

"To say our generation has its own Vietnam is maybe trying too hard to make a
specific link between generations," said Eric Morris, a 24-year-old writer from
Manhattan who is working on a book about the Black Panther Party. "Our
generation is in the process of defining itself. We may never have our Vietnam.
But maybe most generations don't."

The crowd was mostly young and mostly white, full of 17-year-old high school
students thrilling to the sight of so many seeming soul mates. But there were
many others: Vietnam veterans, Danish tourists, vacationing families from South
Carolina, even children as young as 6 who had become lost. Yuppies appeared to
be a tiny minority.

Changed by Woodstock

There were even a few original Woodstock veterans. George Quinn said he came
this time in part because the first one changed his life. He had been 27, a
construction worker who defended the war. His reason for attending was to see
Janis Joplin, but the sight of "that many people in one spot that were entirely
nonaggressive" made him realize there were other ways of living.

Mr. Quinn went home and eventually left his wife and moved into what he
described as a colony of hippies near the site of the original Woodstock
festival, Bethel, N.Y. There he met Nancy Monaghan, now 47, with whom he has
lived the past 21 years and with whom he was attending this weekend's festival.

Many this time came simply for the music, geared to people in their late teens
and 20's. But others were drawn, in ways few could articulate, by the power of
the Woodstock name. "Most of us are looking for something we know we're not
going to find here," said Taras Mauch, a 21-year-old student at the University
of Massachusetts. "But we know we've got to look."

For those with credit cards and Woodstock scrip, which is the required currency,
there were innumerable ways to spend money: official dog tags, official comics,
official Woodstock phone cards, Frisbees, key chains, disposable cameras,
amusement-park rides, nose piercings, wind chimes, serapes, body suits, body
painting, popcorn. Some other things were harder to come by, but reportedly not
impossible. A youth stood forlornly in the crowd with a hand-printed sign: "I
want acid."

Drinking, Dancing and Deer

The injuries treated at the festival's 104-bed hospital included 30 LSD and
alcohol-related overdoses, said Kathy Yanas, a spokeswoman. She said they
included some 30 injuries from moshing, a sometimes violent form of contact
dancing, and a broken nose incurred in a run-in with a deer.

By early today, all the parking lots were declared full and closed. Because of
inexperienced workers, 20 percent of the lots' capacity had been wasted,
officials said. Thousands of people had passed up designated camping areas and
pitched their tents in the vast field facing the main stage. From the stage,
festival officials repeatedly beseeched them to move.

Though state and festival officials said no one else would be allowed to enter
the site and only local traffic would penetrate the perimeter of roadblocks,
people arriving with and without tickets, some of whom said they had hiked for
miles, continued to walk through gates at the shuttle-bus drop-off point. But
tonight, one of the promoters, John Scher, said special efforts were no longer
being made to keep people out. "We're not killing ourselves to stop people who
find ways to get in," he said.

At least a few local residents were enjoying the town's new-found notoriety.
"From now until the end of time, when people ask where you're from and you say
Saugerties, they'll say, 'How was it?' ," said Chris Connerton, 39, a building
contractor.

A few, at least, didn't want to stick around to find out.

James and Michelle Payne, a couple from Davison, Mich., both aged 24, came
expecting the proverbial once-in-a-lifetime story they could tell the children
they don't yet have. Instead, they found a place where it took two hours to go
to the bathroom and where people, including themselves, paid $11 for a small
cheese pizza.

It was supposed to take the Paynes a little over 9 hours to get to the festival;
it took 15. Arriving in Saugerties in the middle of the night, the Paynes were
sent 30 miles north to a parking lot that was closed. From there, they were sent
to a lot 25 miles south.

"We're just going to drive until we find a motel," Mrs. Payne said late Friday
night, unmoved by the news that all motels for miles around were full. "We
really expected more. They forgot the true meaning of the original Woodstock."


LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: People dancing in a pit of mud yesterday near the main North
stage at the Woodstock '94 celebration in Saugerties, N.Y. (Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times) (pg. 1): More than 200,000 people spread out on the 840-acre
farm in Saugerties, N.Y., where the 25th anniversary Woodstock celebration is
being held. (Kieth Meyers/The New York Times) (pg. 42)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              147 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
The Embarrassing Collapse of the Crime Bill

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT;   Frank Rich is on vacation.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 715 words


Erodito Musse Jr. is a big fellow, 19 years old, with a neat mustache and short
brown hair. He lives in Brooklyn, in a neighborhood in which both drugs and guns
are more plentiful than fresh air. He's a nice fellow, but he's not the sort of
person that Newt Gingrich or the National Rifle Association cares anything
about. If Erodito were to take, say, a bullet in the head -- well, who would
notice? Certainly not Newt. To the big shots in Washington, Erodito's a nobody,
a poor kid in a poor neighborhood. He's not even a blip on the radar screen of
America's ruling elite.

Erodito came to mind last week as I watched the pathetic crime-fighting efforts
of the White House and Congress collapse in an embarrassing heap. When the crime
bill -- which was no prize -- was scuttled, Mr. Gingrich seemed almost to dance
with delight. A punishment had been inflicted on the President, and for the
boorish Mr. Gingrich that was cause for celebration. Forget about the
implications for the victims of violent crime in America. Forget about the likes
of Erodito Musse Jr.


Erodito and a friend, Mariano Esquilin, also 19, came by my office not too long
ago. I spoke to each, separately, about his life. The conversations were like
the long emotional talks I had back in the 1960's with close friends, about the
same age, who had been in combat in Vietnam.

"My primary concern," said Erodito, "is just staying alive. That's the rough
part. I didn't think, when I was growing up, that it could get this bad. I've
lost 19 friends.

"I was 12 when I first witnessed a murder. It was right in front of me, right
out on the sidewalk. We lived in East Flatbush then. I knew the guy who killed
the person. He came right up to him and shot him in the back of the head. I just
ran up the stairs. I was shocked. I told the cops I didn't know nothing.

"I was 14 the first time a friend of mine got killed. We called him Tazz. He
moved to New Jersey, but he came back to Brooklyn and he got shot up. He died,
and then suddenly people just started dying, to tell you the truth."

Erodito paused and turned absently toward the window. He took a deep breath.
"After a while," he said, "you just don't cry anymore. You just hold it in. You
just gotta make sure it doesn't happen to you."

Mariano Esquilin is tall and thin and a bearer of hair-raising stories delivered
in a matter-of-fact tone. "Crime happens every other minute," he said. "You
could be coming out of the grocery store and just catch a stray bullet. Last
year I got shot myself. May 4. A young kid on a bicycle, no older than 15 or 16,
pulled a .380 automatic from his waist and began shooting. I don't know why.
Nobody said nothing to him. Maybe somebody stared at him."

He pointed to the bridge of his nose. "The second shot hit me, right here. It
hit this bone here and came out the nostril."

He told about a night when he and several friends went to a club and shooting
erupted. "People were being thrown out because you couldn't wear hats in the
club. There was a conflict over who would get their money back. I heard about
eight shots. One guy was on the floor. He was dead. My friend, Andre, got shot
in the face. The bullet hit the jaw bone and traveled to his spinal cord. He's
paralyzed.

"I have several friends who were shot. Some survived. When I see so many things
happening to my friends, and what happened to me, I think to myself that I am
tired of living this way."

While the politicians in Washington are exploring absurd new depths of
ineffectiveness and ineptitude, the slaughter of Americans, especially the urban
young, continues unabated. At times the deaths seem to come in waves. In the
Bronx last Monday night two boys, both 17, were shot to death in a dispute.
Their names were Derek Valentine and Heath Christopher Simmons. In the Bronx
last Tuesday night two boys, ages 18 and 19, were shot to death in a dispute.
Their names were Floyd Ferguson and Granville Gordon. It goes on and on.

Erodito Musse Jr. told me: "I feel like I'm trapped in a cage and can't get out
with all this violence going on. I wish somebody could do something."

What our leaders in Washington did was cobble a crime bill together that was no
great shakes to begin with, and then they couldn't even pass that.

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              148 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Forrest Gump' Tries to Turn Back Clock but Distorts Our Past

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


To the Editor:

Re "It's 'Forrest Gump' vs. Harrumph" (The Week in Review, July 31): And I
thought I was the only anti-Gump grump.


What really bothers me is the movie's attempt to pass for social history. I'm 22
years old, have a bachelor's degree in history and am a political moderate, in
some ways a conservative. Yet to me "Forrest Gump" seems downright reactionary.

"Forrest Gump" pulls off a bit of legerdemain to rewrite history aimed at the
hearts of those cultural rightists -- of any political party -- who believe that
the American body and soul have been allowed to stray too far since the end of
World War II.

The title character reaches prosperity via down-home values. His route is set
against the way of self-destruction through decadence of characters who are
dedicated to social change or to fulfillment through sensuality. Thus "Forrest
Gump" soars on the winds of public opinion.

The movie rides the strength through-virtue bandwagon by contrasting the lives
of its main characters, Forrest Gump and Jenny Curran. Although handicapped by
an I.Q. of 75, Forrest succeeds through values he learned from his Southern
churchgoing mother. He makes his mark on the American cultural landscape but is
puzzled by the success of Elvis Presley and John Lennon, conscientiously
reminding us of their untimely deaths. The purveyors of American pop culture are
doomed without Forrest's moral backbone.

So, unfortunately, is Jenny, Forrest's childhood friend. She shows a rebellious
streak by posing for Playboy, protesting the Vietnam War and experimenting with
sex and drugs. The result? She becomes one of the first victims of AIDS, but at
least acknowledges responsibility for it ("I was sick," she confesses).

"Forrest Gump," for all its artistic merit, is a placebo aimed at a new
generation fearful of crime on the streets and sex on television. Reversing
"Catch-22" and other movies that tried to expose the hypocrisy of the American
mainstream, "Forrest Gump" portrays every agent of American social change since
1945 as a fool or lunatic. An Abbie Hoffman-like character speaking before a
crowd of antiwar demonstrators is remarkable, in Forrest's narration, only for
his fondness for profanity.

"Forrest Gump" makes it seem easy to solve America's social ills by turning back
the clock to an imaginary time when we were fed a strict diet of God, family and
country, when nice girls didn't, and when the police weren't required to read
you your rights.
MAX LINDENMAN
New York, Aug. 5, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              149 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: FLLOYD BENNETT FIELD
Making Do;
A Unit Ready for Anything, Even the 1940's

BYLINE: By JACQUELINE CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 7;  Column 2;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 172 words


Formed in the 1920's, the Emergency Services Unit is the closest thing to a SWAT
team on the current police force; its 270 officers are trained to rappel off
buildings, scuba dive and perform rooftop helicopter rescues.

Now, to make way for a National Parks Service expansion, it is leaving its World
War II-era hangar at Floyd Bennett Field for another building on the other side
of the field.

Budget cuts have forced the unit to rely on donated military equipment and to
use its own mechanical savvy to adapt equipment to meet its needs.

Among the relics doing the job are two LaGuardia bomb trucks, which were
invented and built during bomb scares in the 1940's by cable stringers for the
Manhattan Bridge.

Officers sometimes refer to their commander as the "curator," but the joke
belies the dedication they have in keeping their unit ready for anything.

As Officer Steven Malagraph puts it, "Our equipment is the best of the best," he
added. "It's got to be simple, but it's got to do the job."   J.C.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: LaGuardia bomb truck: if a bomb explodes within the basket of
steel cables, gases escape but shrapnel is trapped.; Police Emergency Rescue
Vehicles: armored personnel carriers used during the Korean War. Used to drive
into areas that are under fire.; Life Amphibious Resupply Kraft, or LARK, a
Vietnam-era vehicle now used as a dive platform for water rescues. It can carry
up to 54 people. (Photographs by Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              150 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WOODSTOCK '94: THE OVERVIEW;
Woodstock: Music Fades and Muddy Trek Begins

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1123 words

DATELINE: SAUGERTIES, N.Y., Aug. 14


The 25th anniversary Woodstock celebration wound down today in a sea of mud and
trash and amid evidence of anarchy. Security deteriorated and some emergency
medical workers compared the scene to a war zone. But the promoters pronounced
the event a huge success.

Thousands of people, hauling rain-sodden bedding and wearing garbage-bag
ponchos, found themselves forced to stand in a mile-long line for hours before
they were able to board shuttle buses that took them to parking lots as far as
30 miles away. Many set out on foot. Some found their cars stuck in the mud at
the parking lots and paid local residents as much as $100 to pull them out with
tractors.

But through it all, the three-day concert rolled toward its finale with
remarkable precision -- on two vast stages, four huge video screens and
pay-per-view television. In the end, hundreds of thousands of people had gotten
what they came for, a mega-concert by some 50 scheduled bands and numerous
special guests, executed for the most part without a visible hitch.

At the concert's peak, officials estimated that 300,000 to 350,000 people were
living in a space the size of Central Park and that medical personnel were
treating a new patient every 20 seconds. There were countless bad reactions to
drugs, broken bones and cases of exhaustion and dehydration.

Some among the over-stimulated, sleep-deprived diehard fans who remained here
today said they were angry and disappointed by what the concert had become. But
most appeared to accept and even embrace the conditions, as though they figured
that their survival would one day become a badge of honor.

"I want to make it through," said Rich Campone, 33, a social worker from the
Bronx, who said he was having fun "in a weird way" even though he was afraid to
eat or drink anything for fear of then having to use one of the portable
toilets. "Maybe if I could do this, I could do a lot of things."

Officials reported a second death since the festival began Friday. Lieut. Col.
James O'Donnell of the New York State Police said Edward R. Chatfield, 20, of
Grove City, Ohio, died on Saturday from a ruptured spleen, a pre-existent
condition for which he had been taking antibiotics. Earlier, a Long Island man
had died of complications of diabetes.

The police also said that two women heading home to the Chicago area were killed
this morning in a car accident on the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway in Schuyler,
N.Y. The driver of the car fell asleep, the police said.

Some 1,600 people had been treated in the festival's hospital, said John J.
Clair of the State Department of Emergency Medical Services. Thousands more had
been treated at 13 first aid tents. Dr. Ferdinand Anderson, the festival's
medical director, said that during the peak period, "I would much rather have
been in the Korean War or the Vietnam War in that time period."

During that time, late Saturday and early today, ambulances roared incessantly
along the festival roadways, through the eerie glow of flood lights, moving
patients, some in restraints, to hospitals on and off the site. Emergency
medical technicians tore out of the first-aid tents and plunged into the crowd,
hauling out the sick and injured, many of them covered in mud.

Yet Dr. Anderson and others said the casualties were no greater than expected,
based on statistics from past events. Dr. Robert Strauss, a medical-command
director, said, "It's a very peaceful crowd, remarkably peaceful." Nearby a
young man with a black eye and fresh stitches in his forehead stood quivering.
An 11-year-old girl, who Dr. Strauss described as "very drunk," had been
treated.

And Still They Came

Throughout the day, the line of departing people grew while a string of empty
buses, stretching for miles, waited to pick up passengers. One driver, Dan Lail,
said he waited nearly two hours to get one load. At one point, he leaned out and
took a snapshot of the line of people: "I'm going to put it in the scrapbook,"
he said. "You know what I mean?"

At the same time, new arrivals continued to straggle into the festival on foot
and in taxis, wandering out into the sprawling fields of mud and settling down
near the two stages. Some had driven all night, abandoning their cars on lawns
as far as 11 miles away because the state police had blocked roads into
Saugerties.

People sprawled on blankets and cardboard atop the glistening mud, surrounded by
brand-name trash bearing the logos of the festival's corporate sponsors like
Pepsi and Haagen-Dazs. T-shirts were selling briskly. In some areas, the stench
of treated human waste was in the air. "Good morning, Woodstock," an announcer
called from the stage. "The sun is in our hearts."

"In this one little area, you experience everything," marveled Keith Mancini,
24, a 24-year-old waiter who had left his home in Warwick, R.I., at midnight and
arrived here at dawn. "There's all this mud, there's all this discomfort and a
gospel band at 10:30 on a Sunday morning. You don't even have to miss church
here."

At a news briefing, the organizers seemed exhilarated by the concert, praising
the people who came and how they had behaved. "If there is anything that comes
out of this, it's a reaffirmation of the human spirit," said John Scher, the
president of Polygram Diversified Entertainment, which promoted the event with
Woodstock Ventures. "The spirit seems to be great. The kids are wonderful. The
music is wonderful."

Garbage Bags as Umbrellas

As the concert moved toward closing and intermittent rain continued, medical
officials converted a hospitality tent, set up by Pepsico for V.I.P. guests,
into a heated facility for hypothermia victims who might come in during the
night. Tens of thousands of garbage bags were being given to people waiting in
line to leave.

On one bus leaving, strangers argued about whether they were glad to have come.
Many were; Jeff Poirier was not. Mr. Poirier, 31, a graphic artist from Bay
City, Mich., had won four tickets, tents, sleeping bags and a cellular telephone
from a Michigan radio station that had asked him to call in reports.

"I learned the wrong lesson at Woodstock," said Mr. Poirier. "I learned I love
my meaningless little life and all my materialistic things -- my car with air
conditioning, my bed, running water." He said he had enjoyed himself until the
rain started. But what upset him most were announcements over the public address
system that small children were lost. "My wife cried," he said.

Asked about his radio reports back to the station, Mr. Poirier said, "I
candy-coated it. I made it sound like I was having a better time than I was. I
didn't want to make it sound like hell. I wanted to sound grateful to the
station."

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With waterlogged blankets andsleeping bags, some fans began the
trip hom from Woodstock '94. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              151 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
The Cold War and Its Unanswerable Questions

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 894 words



The Cold War
A History
By Martin Walker
392 pages. A John Macrae Book/Henry Holt & Company. $30.

The cold war was an ideological war, a weapons war and an economic war. It
lasted longer than World War I, World War II and the Korean and Vietnam Wars
combined. Now that only one of the adversaries remains a superpower, Western
historians are warring over several theoretical questions: When did the cold war
actually begin? Was the Soviet Union alone responsible or should some of the
blame be shared by the United States? Can any American Administration take
credit for "winning" the cold war? Was the cold war avoidable or were the United
States and the Soviet Union, in the phrase of the disarmament expert Paul C.
Warnke, two apes on a treadmill?

In a highly readable book, "The Cold War," Martin Walker grapples with most of
these questions without necessarily answering them. He examines almost half a
century of confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union. His
book smites both sides with long-forgotten details about the distrust that
caused Washington and Moscow to destroy their wartime alliance the moment Nazi
Germany was defeated. He writes from strength: now the United States bureau
chief of the London newspaper The Guardian, he also reported from Moscow and
wrote "The Waking Giant: Gorbachev and Perestroika."

Mr. Walker begins his fairly evenhanded survey with the 1945 Yalta conference of
the Allied leaders to agree on war strategy against Germany and Japan and settle
the broad outlines of the peace. He then covers the effect of the dropping of
the atomic bombs and the buildup of terrifying nuclear arsenals, satellites in
space, the Cuban missile crisis during the Kennedy Presidency, the American loss
in Vietnam, the policy of containment, the demise and revival of detente,
Mikhail Gorbachev and the end of the cold war.

Throughout "The Cold War," the author delivers telling scenes of conflict in
Washington between statesmen who wanted to trust the Soviet Union and those who
were opposed to any postwar aid that might sustain the war-battered Communist
regime. In the early days of the Truman Presidency, Secretary of War Henry L.
Stimson wanted to share the atom bomb's secrets with the Russians as a goodwill
gesture. And Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson argued: "The advantage of
being ahead in such a race is nothing, compared with not having the race." But
neither Stimson nor Acheson prevailed.

Recent revisionist historians have shifted some of the fault for the cold war to
American rigidity. Yet nothing in the Stalin record -- as exposed by Kremlin
leaders themselves after the dictator's death -- offered hope for a renewal of
the wartime alliance or democratization in the Soviet Union and its satellites,
which were held in line by Russian tanks.

Mr. Walker's book isn't quite revisionist history, yet at times he seems
inclined to see the bright, neo-Orwellian, side of the cold war. What I found
most startling was his cool emphasis on the positive economic achievements of
the cold war for the world.

Writing about the two major shooting wars in Korea and Vietnam during the cold
war era, he makes much of the fact that "America's cold war defense budgets also
pumped investment into the now-booming economies of the Pacific Rim. Japan's
economic miracle can be dated with some precision to the effect of the Korean
War, when Japan became the main base for the U.S. war effort." Again, on the
Vietnam War, he says that "Japanese Hondas and stereos and radios packed the PX
stores on the American bases.

"The hotel boom of Bangkok followed the Thai capital's designation as a main
rest-and-recreation center."

This sanguine interpretation neglects the human side of the equation: the
millions of military and civilian casualties in both wars, the waste of
resources that might have been used to improve living standards instead of
sophisticated armaments and the environmental damage caused by chemical weapons
and aerial bombing. Korea and Vietnam were not PX-land.

On the tantalizing question of whether the cold war was inevitable, Mr. Walker
writes: "It is just possible, had Roosevelt lived, and had there been no
stricken Europe between them, no Western European Allies still festooned in
embarrassing colonial entanglements, and in a most prickly pride, that the cold
war might not have got under way. But Roosevelt was dead, the Americans had the
monopoly of the bomb and Europe sprawled between the victors, to be occupied,
rescued or fought over."

There are enough ifs here to render even guesswork futile, but the author's
speculation is pleasing to contemplate.

Fiction may be considered inappropriate as valid history by nostalgic cold
warriors on both sides who are still claiming credit for the end of the cold
war. Nevertheless, there's an admirable human quality and perhaps more than a
measure of truth in what John le Carre's exemplary intelligence agent, George
Smiley, had to say about the cold war in "The Secret Pilgrim":

"It was man who ended the cold war in case you didn't notice. It wasn't
weaponry, or technology, or armies, or campaigns. It was just man.  Not even
Western man either, as it happened, but our sworn enemy in the East, who went
into the streets, faced the bullets and the batons and said: 'We've had enough.'
"

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin Walker (Henry Holt & Company)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              152 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WOODSTOCK '94: THE MUSIC;
Minor Discord Amid the Nostalgia-Trip Harmony

BYLINE: By JON PARELES,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: SAUGERTIES, N.Y., Aug. 14


Bob Dylan played Woodstock '94 tonight, 25 years after he avoided the first
Woodstock festival. Except for only two recent songs, Mr. Dylan and his four-man
band played a set they could have performed at the original festival: one
masterpiece after another from the 1960's. It wasn't 25 years too late.

"All Along the Watchtower" -- a song about claustrophobia, commercialism and
unknown portents -- mutated to fit the last day of the gigantic festival.
Others, like a blistering "Highway 61," sounded like greetings and dour warnings
from one generation to the next.

Mr. Dylan is leading one of the best bands of his career, a group that switches
from bluesy American rock to a drumless string-band lineup. And his singing has
grown heartfelt again. As always, he toyed with melodies, never repeating a
phrase. But he sang so clearly, and with such mercurial emotion, that
long-familiar words took on new shades of tenderness and rancor, accusation and
wiliness.

Common Ground?

He juxtaposed oracular songs, like "It's All Over Now, Baby Blue," with personal
ones, like "It Ain't Me, Babe" and "Don't Think Twice." He didn't indulge the
huge audience, which moshed while he sang, until he chose "Rainy Day Women Nos.
12 and 49," with the chorus "Everybody must get stoned," as an encore.

For much of its third day, Woodstock '94 seemed to suggest common ground between
generations, where tastes overlap in danceable grooves and utopian hopes. But
Green Day, a Bay Area rock band, seized the festival's punk moment this
afternoon. Playing for an eager crowd, Green Day was a blast of punk-pop: fast,
exuberant, catchy songs of suburban discontent that ask, "Do you have the time
to listen to me whine?"

Its guitarist, Billie Joe, and bassist, Tre Cool, taunted the dirt-spattered
crowd, which started hurling mud and straw at the stage. While the rhythm
section played on, Billie Joe exposed himself, smashed a microphone on the stage
(the audience clapped along in rhythm), then tossed divots back into the
audience. He told the audience that if it chanted instructions to shut up, Green
Day would. He cued them with a "1,2,3"; when they responded, the band quit.

Both band and audience seemed to treat the fracas as a matter of boyish high
spirits, approving its entertainment value. The audience shouted for an encore.
It was one more Woodstock '94 episode that showed the distance from 1969. So did
the set by Porno for Pyros, the band led by Perry Farrell, founder of the
Lollapalooza Festival. The songs took up taboo impulses -- murderous feelings,
polymorphous sex -- in music that kept shifting style. For spectacle, Mr.
Farrell presented a sexualized rock-and-roll circus, complete with acrobatics on
a rope, topless simulated lesbian coupling and a twirler with a flaming baton.

Saturday's late-night lineup had emphasized the anger and alienation of current
rock. Nine Inch Nails snarled its bitterness, followed by Metallica's
hard-riffing songs -- some grinding, some jet-propelled -- about death,
dismemberment and other apocalyptic fears. Metallica was both streamlined and
weighty, an efficient machine that generated sing-alongs and waving hands in the
audience as far as the eye could see.

A Song Without a War

Aerosmith, which followed, seemed supercharged by competition. Its songs are
part blues-rock, part arena-rock, poised between the Rolling Stones and later
heavy metal. In a set that stretched two hours, to about 3:30 A.M., Aerosmith's
blues roots and cartoonish humor were amply displayed.

Today, much of the music was similarly kindly. The morning opened with Country
Joe MacDonald reprising, from the 1969 festival, his "Fish" cheer and
"Feel-Like-I'm-Fixing-to-Die Rag," which seemed marooned without the Vietnam War
it protested. Shirley Caesar, Phoebe Snow, Thelma Houston, Cece Peniston and
Lois Walden then sang classic gospel songs with fervent virtuosity. Arrested
Development's songs were determinedly positive, urging unity, tolerance and
respect for history, but on stage its bass riffs and catchy melody phrases
overwhelm any didacticism.

The Neville Brothers, whose experience dates back through three decades of New
Orleans rock, could have been Arrested Development's elder relatives, generating
all their rhythms from live instruments and meshing in buoyant New Orleans and
island-hopping rhythms. Santana, which appeared at the 1969 festival, brought
its own galaxy of Latin rhythms and searing guitar solos, while Jimmy Cliff used
reggae songs to urge one-world love.

Both baby boomers and younger fans of so-called "classic rock" savored brand
names like Traffic and the Allman Brothers Band. Paul Rodgers, formerly the lead
singer with Free and Bad Company, sang chest-heaving arena-rock versions of old
and new songs; Slash, the guitarist from Guns 'n' Roses, sat in.

The Spin Doctors offered a tepid version of grooves learned from the Allmans and
the Grateful Dead; not wasting time, they have already recorded a new version of
Joni Mitchell's "Woodstock."

There were also bands from Africa presented by Peter Gabriel's World of Music,
Arts and Dance: Xalem, with Senegalese drumming; the Justin Trio, playing
glimmering music from Madagascar; Geoffrey Oryema, from Uganda, and Hassan
Hakmoun, from Morocco, with his band Zahar. To pacify a crowd impatient for
Green Day, Mr. Gabriel joined Zahar for a song.

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 17, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A music review on Monday about the Woodstock '94 festival in Saugerties, N.Y.,
misidentified one of the gospel singers who performed on Sunday morning. She was
Mavis Staples, not Shirley Caesar. The review also referred incorrectly in some
copies to a song performed by Bob Dylan. It was "Rainy Day Women No. 12 and 35."


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              153 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cruising Takes On New Image

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: HUNTINGTON, W.Va., Aug. 14


As darkness enveloped the riverfront, the teen-agers began gathering. They were
driving souped-up junkers, pickups, vans and motorcycles.

They had come to the big city from the small towns and hollows of West Virginia,
Kentucky and Ohio, places with no cable and only four television channels that
manage to penetrate the hills if they are lucky. They had six-packs in the back
seat, and rap and country on the stereo. It was Saturday night, and they were
looking for action -- romance, sex, a drag race. There was talk of a fight.

Shane Newman, 17, from Chesapeake, Ohio, in a black muscle shirt and jeans,
skeleton tattoos on his arms and blond hair over his shoulders, was at the wheel
of his brown and tan Caprice lowrider. "This is the lowest one in the tri-state
area," he boasted as his lowrider bounced perilously on its shocks.

He turned left off Veterans Memorial Boulevard, across from the railroad tracks
beside the Ohio River. There, in the usual spot, were the police. They looked at
Shane. Shane looked at them. He smiled. There was no tension. This was no
showdown. Shane began driving up and down the two-lane strip, all two and a half
blocks of it.

Campaigns Against Cruising

This was not "American Graffiti," the classic movie about cruising in Modesto,
Calif., before the Vietnam War. Shane was cruising Cruise Avenue -- that is the
name of the strip, not Main Street. There are no stores or restaurants along
Cruise Avenue, only a brightly lighted parking lot. This is chaperoned cruising
in a designated zone.

This is how teen-agers cruise in the 1990's -- when they are allowed to cruise
at all. Some towns, like Tempe, Ariz., have tried to chase off cruisers by
blasting classical music from speakers. Others, like Eugene, Ore., ticket
vehicles that pass a designated sign more than two times in a specified time.

The Florida Department of Law Enforcement is looking into low-pressure sodium
lamps. The lamps render complexions a sickly white. They are particularly unkind
to teen-age skin, said Diane Zahm, a researcher at the department.

"It makes their acne stand out," Ms. Zahm explained. And so, the idea is, the
teen-agers will go somewhere else.

Teen-age cruising, which became popular in the 1940's, was supposed to be about
rebellion. It signified freedom, like the automobile. In the old days in
Huntington, back in the 1980's, teen-agers cruised along bustling Fourth Avenue
downtown. Traffic was so heavy it could take 45 minutes to drive eight blocks.
After complaints from merchants, the city created Cruise Avenue. Cruising on
Cruise Avenue is like playing spin the bottle with your parents watching.

There are rules, and the teen-agers follow them. The six-packs, as it turned
out, were soft drinks. Drinking is not allowed. Music has to be played at a
moderate volume, not blasted. The police officers were downright friendly; two
were on horses, Max and Petey.

Cruising Without Moving

Sherman Edwards, 19; Brian Carson, 18, and Bobby Wintz, 18, and their buddies
from an unincorporated town of 2,800, Lesage, W.Va., seven miles away were
sitting on the back of Bobby's red pickup. They were cruising without actually
moving. "We don't have enough gas to cruise," Sherman explained.

Sherman recently finished Army basic training, and expects to be stationed in
Virginia at Fort Eustus. His friends, who all graduated from Barboursville High
School in June, are looking for jobs. They are on tight budgets. Cruising,
especially cruising while parked, is cheap entertainment.

"The movie theaters are too expensive," Sherman said. "They get you on the food.
A candy bar costs $2. It's better to wait till the movie comes out on video.
Then you can go the grocery store and get food."

The moon hung over the parking lot. The young men gazed at the parking lot and,
a few blocks distant, the 10-story Radisson Hotel, with its big red neon sign.
The hotel was sold out because the West Virginia Elks were having their
convention. On the tracks behind Cruise Avenue, the coal train rumbled along, a
remnant of another West Virginia.

"Huntington's a boring town," Bobby said. "A lot of people are heading to South
Carolina. I'm thinking about Georgia. I heard there's a lot of pretty women in
Georgia."

Brian had joined his friends after arriving earlier in his white 1984 Dodge
Charger. He bought it for $250, money he earned by helping his father put in
septic tanks. Like most of the other cruisers, Brian has plans for his car. "I'm
going to put a Mustang GT motor in it," he said.

It was 11 P.M. Brian turned up the volume on the Charlie Daniels song on his
tape deck: "What This World Needs Is a Few More Rednecks." He and his buddies
watched the cars go by. It was a slow night with fewer than 100 cars. They had
seen the same cars, and the same people, Friday night and the weekend before and
the weekend before that.

"It's better than sitting home and watching TV," Brian said.

Two young women, a blonde and a brunette, went by in a red convertible Mazda.
They did not look at the young men on the back of the pickup.

"They're snobs," Bobby said. "They got an attitude."

Then a white Pontiac Grand Am drove slowly by. The girl in the passenger seat,
who looked to be about 16, had long brown hair and a big smile. She was smiling
at the young men on the back of the pickup.

"That is a beautiful girl," Brian Carson said.

He watched the Grand Am until it disappeared down the strip and into the night.
No, he said, he would never have dreamed of driving after her. "I'm too shy," he
said.

If Shane Newman had the lowest car on the strip, then 19-year-old Don Joyner had
the highest truck, a blue Toyota. "It's 11 inches higher than a stock Toyota,"
said Don, from Raleigh, N.C., who was in town visiting his best friend, Chad
Spangler, 19.

The truck glowed in the moonlight. "I don't mean to brag, but I love my license
plate," Don said, showing off his plate, with the letters HOWHIRU. "I love my
whole truck. I put all my money into it. I work at a golf range. I do
everything."

At 11:20, a police car in the parking lot turned on its red light and moved down
the strip. The officers on horseback followed sedately. It was all part of the
ritual. The cruisers began leaving.

Shane Newman headed back across the river. Don Joyner and Chad Spangler, who had
money to spend, went to a downtown club. Brian Carson and his friends drove
around town and then headed home. They would probably be back the next weekend.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Summer's Tides: A periodic look at the season nationwide.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Shane Newman, 17, of Chesapeake, Ohio, out for a night of
sanctioned cruising in Huntington, W.Va. (Chip Ellis for The New York Times)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              154 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Petroleum Deal

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 12;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 125 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Aug. 15


A unit of Union Texas Petroleum Holdings Inc. said today that it had received
approval from Vietnam and its state-owned oil company to purchase a 25 percent
interest in an area being explored for oil and gas off the coast of Vietnam. The
Union Texas Asia Corporation received the approvals from Petrovietnam and the
State Committee for Cooperation and Investments. Union Texas Asia did not
disclose the terms of the acquisition, under which it obtained 12.5 percent
working interests from both Lasmo P.L.C.'s Lasmo Vietnam Ltd. and Cieco Con Son
Inc. Lasmo, the operator for the project, and Cieco each hold half the remaining
interest in the block. The companies were awarded an initial five-year
exploration contract for the block in August 1992.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              155 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 16, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

How a Movie Satire Turned Into Reality

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 15


No one ever said Oliver Stone shrank from controversy. But even the 47-year-old
director, who is not above a little shrewd self-promotion, seems amazed at the
stir his newest movie, "Natural Born Killers," has created, and it hasn't even
been released yet.

"I began this film as a satire; I wanted to have some fun," Mr. Stone said of
the film, which seems plucked directly from today's insanely violent headlines.
"It was before the Menendez brothers, before the Bobbitts, before Amy Fisher and
Joey Buttafuoco, before the O. J. Simpson case. Well, it's not so much satirical
now, but reality-based. It's eerily happening."

Mr. Stone's surreal, blood-soaked film opens on Aug. 26. Whether audiences love
it or hate it -- and they will do both -- Warner Brothers, the producers, are
plainly nervous about a film that, satire or no, is as lurid, hypnotic, ugly and
over the top as any studio film in years.

Exhibitors are nervous too, privately telling studio executives they are uneasy
with a movie about two psychopaths on a killing spree and their avaricious
exploitation by the news media, which turn them into pop icons. Studio
executives admit the exhibitors are nervous, but they point out that no one has
yet canceled "Natural Born Killers." The film is rated R (Under 17 requires
accompanying parent or adult guardian).

Mr. Stone, who makes films that deliberately outrage many moviegoers, said
simply, "I felt I should press the envelope on this one."

A Complex Editing Job

The highly stylized $34 million "Natural Born Killers" stars Woody Harrelson and
Juliette Lewis as the two lovers who embark on a violent odyssey across the
American heartland. The two finally confront a tabloid television show host
(Robert Downey Jr.) and become celebrities. Eventually, they land in prison run
by a warden (Tommy Lee Jones) who is as deranged as they are. The movie was
based on an original screenplay by Quentin Tarantino ("Reservoir Dogs," "Pulp
Fiction"), who receives story credit. Mr. Stone is one of the authors of the
screenplay, as well as director.

Whether Mr. Stone is deploring violence or exploiting it, the film is, for many
of those who have seen it in previews, an audaciously powerful work. It's also
weirdly funny, with a flashback of the female killer's adolescence staged as a
sitcom with Rodney Dangerfield, the comedian, as her foul, incestuous father.
There are also cartoons, television-style re-enactments, black-and-white scenes
and mock documentary reportage. Mr. Stone said it took him nearly a year to edit
the film, about twice the time it takes to cut most movies.

Despite the enthusiasm of early reviews, some of which have compared it to
Stanley Kubrick's "Clockwork Orange," top Warner Brothers executives, speaking
on condition of anonymity, said the studio was uneasy about the violence. But
they denied reports that the marketing of the movie had sought to play down its
bloody content. In fact, billboards and movie trailers seek to depict the film
as a social satire rather than a drama about two killers.

A Difficult Sell

"We knew this film would be incredibly controversial," said one Warners
executive. "We realized that from the beginning. There's obviously a level of
concern that it will polarize the audience. It could do that."

"It's a very difficult film to sell," the executive added. "How do you sell a
film about two despicable people and the media turning them into heroes? How do
you do that? It is a social satire. Implicit in the marketing of the film is its
violence."

As if anticipating criticism of "Natural Born Killers," Warners Brothers has
actively joined in the defense of the film, pointing out that its depiction of
television's craving for serial killers is thoroughly realistic.

"From Diane Sawyer's interview of Charles Manson to Stone Phillips' interview of
Jeffrey Dahmer -- between Feb. 17 and May 27 of this year alone --
'reality-based' tabloid and network news shows such as 'Inside Edition,' 'Hard
Copy,' 'A Current Affair,' and 'Prime Time Live' broadcast 45 stories that
graphically focused on murders, spree killers and their victims," read the
studio's production notes for the film. "Killers are the hottest media draws in
town."

Laughing Through the Gore

Mr. Stone said he was somewhat fearful of the reaction to the movie, but early
screenings in Seattle and Chicago calmed him. "We previewed it numerous times
with younger audiences, and they laughed through the heavier parts," he said.
"At that point, I knew we were in the ballpark."

In the past, the director has complained constantly about what he viewed as the
unfair reaction of newspapers and magazines to his films, especially "J. F. K.,"
which was widely criticized for its depiction of a Government-wide conspiracy to
kill President John F. Kennedy. At the same time, few directors deal with the
newspapers and magazines as skillfully as Mr. Stone.

"I just reflect what I see around me," he said. "The media has played heavily
into violence because of the ratings. Each week we're deluged with a new soap
opera insuring ratings, money and hysteria. Just look at television."

"Americans have a schizophrenic attachment to violence," he said. "One part is
aversion and condemnation. The other part is a sleazy attraction to it. And the
media is part of that."

Mr. Stone said he was chilled while watching O. J. Simpson's celebrated ride in
a white Bronco, with the police and reporters close behind. "The concept of fans
waving and applauding matched the images that I had in the movie," he said.

'An Outrageous Story'

Mr. Stone said he began "Natural Born Killers" shortly after completing "Heaven
and Earth," the third and least successful film of his Vietnam trilogy, after
"Platoon" and "Born on the Fourth of July." "I wanted to have fun," he said.
"And I really wanted to do a combination of a road movie, like 'Bonnie and
Clyde,' and 'Easy Rider,' and a prison film, like 'The Great Escape' and
'Papillon.' "

"It's such an outrageous story," he said. "And in the time between optioning the
film and making it, tremendous things have happened on America's landscape." Mr.
Stone insisted that some of his other films, such as "Scarface," "J. F. K." and
"Platoon," were far more violent than "Natural Born Killers." Those earlier
films, he said, were realistic, while his current one is not.

"There's not a gruesome scene in the film," he said, making a point that's
highly debatable.

"It's a love-it-or-hate-it movie," he said.

No one is likely to argue with that.

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 17, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

Because of a mechanical error, an article yesterday about the making of Oliver
Stone's new film, "Natural Born Killers," included an incomplete paragraph in
some copies. It should have read: "As if anticipating criticism of 'Natural Born
Killers,' Warner Brothers has actively joined in the defense of the film,
pointing out that its depiction of television's craving for serial killers is
thoroughly realistic."


GRAPHIC: Photos: Woody Harrelson as Mickey Knox in Oliver Stone's new film
"Natural Born Killers," a satire on violence and the news media. (pg. C15);
Oliver Stone (pg. C16) (Sidney Baldwin/Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              156 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Many Faces of Harlem's Main Street;
A Day in the Life of 125th: From Bustling to Restless to Cool

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1509 words


It's 2 A.M. on Saturday and the Uptown Comedy Club at 125th Street and Fifth
Avenue is literally shaking with the recorded thunder of rappers Warren G & Nate
Dogg, playing a seemingly endless variation on the gangster-chic theme that
dominates the street.

Much of 125th Street, Harlem's main commercial thoroughfare, surges with black
youth on foot, on bicycles, on motorcycles, in automobiles, Jeeps and even a
stretch limousine or two. A summer weekend ritual of see-and-be-seen, set to
Harlem's hip-hop rhythms and sensibilities, has evolved on the street of Hughes,
Divine, Powell and Malcolm X.

It is a place where thousands of the self-described cool, "def" and "dope" hang
out while a slightly older set gathers in shadowy hole-in-the-wall bars.

It is also a place in which old tensions can ignite quickly. Earlier this month,
the police, after reports of gunfire, clashed with 1,000 young people for almost
an hour near the McDonald's restaurant at 125th Street and Frederick Douglass
Boulevard. There were arrests and injuries. "These are good kids, no different
than any other kids," said William Morange, the commander of Harlem's 28th
Precinct, who stood in front of the Apollo Theater for much of last Friday night
and early Saturday. "I don't know what happened."

Nighttime on 125th can be like that: fast, edgy, sometimes inexplicable.

But this is a stretch of Harlem with many guises. In the first hours of
sunlight, it takes on the more measured cadence of work and worry, struggle and
responsibility, and often pain. Even with its recurring promises of
redevelopment, too few jobs and too much crime, violence and drugs, 125th Street
is full of enterprise: storefronts, restaurants, churches, vendors' stands,
theaters, banks and bars -- many decked in decors that range from the eccentric
to the Afro-centric.

From the East River to the Hudson, the restless street only permits itself a
fretful nap in the couple of hours just before daybreak. For the remaining 22,
it becomes a street theater, offering scenes of the dramatic, comic, tragic,
erotic, absurd and inspirational.

Herewith, a day in the life of 125th Street, the artery running through the
heart of Harlem.

5:30 A.M., FRIDAY Clarence and Cleo Kenney seem to simply materialize beside
their gleaming newsstand near the corner of Malcolm X Boulevard and 125th
Street. The retired schoolteachers hurriedly stock and straighten bins of
newspapers, magazines and comic books, most with black themes.

A few feet away, a 54-year-old homeless man wearing an eyepatch shuffles behind
a shopping cart. For much of the day he will mine the mounds of curbside garbage
rich in deposits of redeemable bottles and cans. Across the street men and
women, many with signs of slumber clinging to their faces, stop by a
coffee-and-doughnut stand before climbing like sleepwalkers into buses and
subway cars: workbound.

As the predawn darkness begins its daily retreat, 125th Street begins to pulse
with life. As sure as the morning, Joe Knight, a 50-year-old unemployed
bookbinder, makes his way to 125th Street.

Once there, Mr. Knight works the street for "any change you can spare,"
approaching cars and trucks stopped by the traffic light at Malcolm X Boulevard.
Police officers usually order him to move along, he says.

"They are trying to make this the new AK-47," Mr. Knight says, comparing the
bottle of window spray hanging from his belt to an assault rifle. Mr. Knight,
who says he is a Vietnam veteran, says the Giuliani administration's move
against quality-of-life nuisances is making his pursuit of an "honest dollar" a
crime.

He says he has been out of work for 22 months, his unemployment benefits ran out
last year and he supports his three children through welfare benefits. For much
of the morning, Mr. Knight, well-groomed in work pants, a light jacket and wide
bent-brimmed hat, politely approaches drivers and asks them to help him make
ends meet.

For hours he trots along the center line of 125th Street, asking for a handout.
"It's my job," he says.

7 A.M.  Anna Bates, a 61-year-old clerk at Woolworth's, is waiting patiently for
the doors to open. She is respectfully referred to as "Big Moms" by generations
of youngsters who have worked and grown up in the old five-and-dime store. She
says she has worked there for the last 36 years. Next year, according to her
plans, will be her last.

"It's about time to retire," she says with a self-satisfied chuckle.

7:30 A.M.  Merchants are beginning to sweep and hose off their sidewalks; the
frequency of buses growling along the street starts to increase, forming
caravans of people arriving and leaving Harlem.

The first of the metal gates that are pulled down over storefronts at night like
corrugated eyelids are unlocked and rattle loudly as they are hoisted.

Woolworth's gates, like many along the street, are painted in a carnival style
that depicts black heroes and urban dreamscapes.

Before disappearing inside, Ms. Bates scans her street as it rustles with
mounting activities.

"It has changed a lot," she says, remembering the early 1960's, when Jackie
Wilson played the Apollo Theater and the street dressed its aspirations in a
suit and tie rather than outsized T-shirts and sagging jeans.

NOON The street is fully transformed into its workday incarnation. There are few
vacant storefronts. At Sister's African Hair Braiding Center, a score of
customers line the walls, two or three deep. The stylists, mostly from West
Africa, ply the ancient art of hair braiding from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M., seven days a
week.

Many of the hair styles take four to five hours to complete, costing an average
of $50, says Aminata Dia, the shop's manager, who is a native of Senegal.

"It's very nice and friendly here," says Bernice Nicks, 57, a woman in a
wheelchair whose home attendant suggested getting her hair braided.
Finger-length braids frame her face. "It's my first time and I think it looks
nice."

2 P.M.  Along several blocks on the west side of the street, starting at Malcolm
X Boulevard, the sidewalks are crammed with vendors' stands, many stretched end
to end. They sell almost anything that can fit on folding tables or hang from
chain-link fences, from T-shirts to bean pies to bootleg videotapes of movies as
new as "The Mask" and "The Lion King."

Many merchants are West African and much of their wares are from their
homelands: beads, wooden jewelry, sandals, art objects, musical instruments,
kente and mud cloth by the bolt or fashioned into suits and shirts and dresses.
The vendors lend a touch of charm and chaos to 125th Street, though they have
been a source of considerable irritation to rent-paying merchants who have been
lobbying to get them off the street. Despite all city efforts, they remain.

Even some of the vendors consider the situation out of control.

"I'm not happy," says Jimmy Lee, who has been a street vendor for 35 years in
Harlem. He sells handmade pillows on the southeast corner of 125th Street and
African Square. "If their country is so great why are they coming here?"

Mr. Lee, 50, who says his father is from Africa, says American-born black
vendors are being squeezed off 125th Street by an influx of African vendors who
the police have chased away from selling in Brooklyn and the Bronx.

8 P.M.  Vendors and merchants begin to leave 125th Street. Some say the absence
of a heavy police presence makes it dangerous to do business at night.

9 P.M.  The first tides of teen-agers and young adults begin to flood 125th. Now
it belongs to entrepreneurs like Antonio Gloss and Rodney Hunter.

Mr. Gloss, 28, equipped with his own air compressor, airbrushes T-shirts to
order -- $15 and up -- right on the street like a contemporary Impressionist. In
the glow of the Apollo marquee, he creates colorful fantasies of street scenes
and characters, each signed with his logo: Harlem 125th Street.

Mr. Hunter, 26, is one of several photographers who for $6 will take a Polaroid
picture of anyone who wants to pose against wall-sized paintings of favorite rap
artists.

MIDNIGHT Scores of people want to document their night memories of 125th Street
with Mr. Hunter and Mr. Gloss.

"People like taking pictures," Mr. Hunter says. "They want it to last forever."

2 A.M., SATURDAY There are polished cars and buffed bodies moving to their own
midtempo, bass-heavy sound tracks. It's a virtual block party as far as the eye
can see, complete with malt liquor and marijuana, soda and potato chips.

The party is still pounding the old pavement of 125th Street until 3:30 A.M.,
providing the opportunity for Mychele Boykin, 18, of Jamaica, Queens, and Steven
Wright, 19, of the Bronx, to meet and exchange telephone numbers.

"He just came up to me and said, 'What's your name?' " Ms. Boykin said of their
not-so-chance meeting on the street.

Dewayne Shelton, a 25-year-old telephone cable splicer, rode his 10-speed
mountain bike to 125th Street from the Bronx to observe the street scene. "This
is our village," he said.

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The artery from which life springs in Harlem is 125th Street.
Nearly always awake, its moods vary with the hour. In the daytime, it is center
for enterprise. Starting at Malcolm X Boulevard, vendors cram the sidewalks with
their wares. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times); Nighttime on 125th Street has
its moments of tension and excitement, but most of all it is a time to meet
people. A block-party atmosphere gave Mychele Boykin, 18, of Jamaica, Queens,
and Steven Wright, 19, of the Bronx, a chance to meet. (Lenore Davis for The New
York Times) (pg. B1); In the bustling workdays of 125th Street, businesses offer
a variety of services as varied as the area. A visitor, Mary Powell, foreground,
who is from Greenville, S.C., had her hair braided for the first time.; Anna
Bates, who has worked at Woolworth's for 36 years, waited for the store to open
so that she could begin another day as a clerk. To generations of storegoers,
she is known as "Big Moms." (Photographs by Lenore Davis for The New York Times)
(pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              157 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Shanghai Journal;
Chinese Scene: Dogs, Chased by Snarling Officials

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI


At the Shanghai Naughty Dog Pet Shop, Baby and Tony have stopped in for their
weekly pedicure and shampoo.

"They are like my children," said Annie Jiang-Jing Wu, the proud owner of Baby
and Tony, two pampered, overfed mutts that are treated each week to a $15
grooming in Shanghai's fanciest pet store. The outside of the year-old shop is
designed to look like a castle, with gold-tipped turrets and a marble entryway,
and inside the dogs are treated like royalty.

"I think it would be lovely to have real children someday, but I cannot believe
that I will love children as much," said Mrs. Wu, 30, who has a high-paying job
in a Shanghai cargo company and has adopted a Western first name.

Once seen here only as a source of food, dogs are the newest status symbol in
China, one more sign of this country's embrace of capitalism and the things that
money can buy.

A recent Government survey found that 6 of 10 city dwellers in China already
have a television set, a refrigerator and a washing machine. For many newly
affluent urban families, a pet dog comes next on the list.

Nowhere are dogs more of a passion than in Shanghai, a metropolis of 13 million
people that is China's biggest, richest and most cosmopolitan city. With the
opening up of the economy, Shanghai has reclaimed its role as the country's
financial capital.

But the enthusiasm of Shanghai's dog owners is not shared by the old-line
Communists who still run this city, who will tell you that some of the "running
dogs of capitalist imperialism" have two legs, while others have four.

Pet dogs are not just "naughty" in the eyes of municipal officials -- as in the
name of that pet shop -- most of them are illegal. In July, the city announced
plans to capture and kill as many unlicensed dogs as the police could hunt down.

"We have trapped several hundred dogs over the last few weeks," said Xu Wei Qu,
senior veterinarian with the Shanghai Municipal Center of Veterinary Medicine.
"People are becoming rich and they want to keep dogs as a way of showing off.
But they do not know how to care for these pets."

The city estimates that Shanghai has 100,000 dogs. But only 3,700 have licenses,
available only to the handful of dog owners who can prove that they have a large
home and tolerant neighbors, and have vaccinated their dogs against rabies.

Dr. Xu said the city had begun this summer's anti-dog campaign mainly out of
fear of a rabies epidemic. After more than 30 years without a recorded case of
rabies, he said, Shanghai saw the disease return in 1992. Last year two people
died after bites from rabid dogs.

China's Communist leaders have always gone easier on cats, mostly because they
are much less of a drain on the food supply -- and, like dogs, are sometimes
used as food themselves. There is no licensing requirement.

But dogs have never fared well in this city or anywhere else in modern China.
After the Communists took control of the country in 1949, pet dogs were banned
as a symbol of decadence, a criminal extravagance at a time of food shortages.
If they were good for anything, they were good for dinner. Dog meat remains a
common dish in China and in a number of other Asian countries, including South
Korea and Vietnam.

The dog-hating pronouncements are still seen in the Government-controlled press.
"China is still very poor," the Guangming Daily newspaper said last month.
"There is no reason for us to spend such a lot of money on dogs." Dogs, it said,
"bring great stress to social order and stability." (Never mind that the
country's supreme leader, Deng Xiaoping, is known to dote on his own pet dogs.)

The police may be tough on dogs here -- in Shanghai, captured dogs are usually
carted away in cages, later to be used in medical experiments and then killed --
but they are downright brutal in the capital, Beijing.

There, dogs are beaten to death on the spot, often as their owners watch, by
police officers wielding long metal poles. Beijing's dogcatchers are known as da
gou dui -- "dog-beating teams."

The thought of such savagery sends chills through the customers wandering the
aisles of the Naughty Dog shop, where they come to choose among brands of
imported Australian pet food ($15 for a four-pound bag), Japanese-made dog
shampoo ($10 a bottle) and chew-toys in the shape of baby bottles.

The shop, a joint venture between Taiwanese and Chinese investors, sells dogs
from air-conditioned cages along one wall. The purebreds are imported from
Taiwan and include a $2,000 Yorkshire terrier and a $1,500 French poodle, its
tail and ears dyed lavender. Those prices would represent more than a year's
income for most Chinese workers.

"We can special-order larger dogs like German shepherds," said the manager, Zhu
Shunwei, 22. "It only takes a month for delivery."

Mr. Zhu is trying hard to drum up business, which has fallen sharply because of
the city's dog roundup. "People will become very angry if their pets are taken
away," he warned.

Yang Bing, a 26-year-old computer technician who did not want to give her full
name because she wants to protect her pet, was shopping for a present for Didi,
a small, pug-nosed dog of undetermined breed that she bought three months ago
for $180, equivalent to two months' salary.

"I used to walk the dog every day, but now it is too dangerous because the
police might see her," said Miss Yang, who is having trouble sleeping at night
as she plots Didi's escape from Shanghai. "If they come after my dog, I will try
to get her to my friends in the countryside, where she will be safe. I will not
let them hurt my Didi."


LOAD-DATE: August 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dogs are the latest status symbol in China, but they risk death
if caught by the police. A dog was groomed at the Naughty Dog Pet Shop in
Shanghai, a city with 100,000 or so dogs but only 3,700 of them licensed.
(Adrian Bradshaw for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              158 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 18, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

P.& G.'s Vietnam Plan

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 69 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Aug. 17


The Procter & Gamble Company has applied with a local partner to set up a $14.3
million plant near Ho Chi Minh City, the official Vietnam News reported today.
P.& G. would have 70 percent of the joint venture, it said. The plant would be
in Song Be province near Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, according to an
application made to Vietnam's State Committee for Cooperation and Investment,
Vietnam News said.

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              159 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Inside the World's Most Profitable Bank

BYLINE: By EDWARD A. GARGAN

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2905 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


IF money talks, then the local currency here says it all.

Four out of every five bills in Hong Kong bear the image of the erector
set-style headquarters of the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, the most powerful
financial presence in this British colony and by far, the most visible and
influential bank in Asia.

Besides minting Hong Kong dollars, the bank has spent much of the last century
swaggering through China and across Asia. It has supported trading throughout
the region for more than a century. It has helped finance the rise of some of
the greatest fortunes in Hong Kong. And it has grown spectacularly in the last
decade, benefiting from the rapid advance of Asia's economies and using its
Asian profits to pay for the bank's moves into the Middle East, Europe and North
America.

Since 1990 the banking company's stock, which trades here and in London, has
tripled, almost in lock step with Hong Kong's stock market. Investors value the
bank at $29 billion, far more than the market value of better-known banks like,
say, Citicorp, at $17 billion, and trailing only eight big Japanese banks. The
Hong Kong bank's London-based parent company, known as HSBC Holdings Plc., is
quite simply "the most profitable bank in the world," observes Karen Udovenya, a
vice president with Morgan Stanley Asia.

But today, the financial juggernaut may be losing momentum. Throughout its Asian
stronghold, the Hong Kong bank faces a growing crop of newly aggressive rivals
-- banks from the United States, other Asian countries, even mainland China. In
Hong Kong, the bank has the uncertainty of what, if any, changes the Communist
landlords will make in the colony's vibrant capitalist economy in three years,
when Britain's 99-year lease expires and Beijing takes over. And that political
question looms large for the 129-year-old Hongkong and Shanghai Bank.

Though it has offices in 65 countries, the bank still earns two thirds of its
profits in tiny Hong Kong. A costly diversification strategy that was aimed at
reducing that dependence has produced little in the way of real profits. Midland
Bank, the linchpin of the bank's foray into British banking, only recently
turned the corner, while Marine Midland, its biggest American acquisition, is
back in the black but is less than two-thirds the size it was in 1987, when
purchased.

What's more, the bank's staid culture -- an old boy network dominated by
Englishmen and Scots -- is under assault. Evolved from the bank's colonial
heritage, it worked well when banking profits depended on long-standing
relationships with clients, government connections and limited competition. But
competition is much more open today, as banks are increasingly becoming
fast-paced traders in the global money markets.

The Hong Kong bank is changing its ways and diversifying its corporate culture,
opening its ranks to more Asians and women. But the question is whether the bank
is making the transition quickly enough. The bank's top executives seem to be in
no hurry, and certainly in no hurry to leave the bank. Several of them are
nearing, or in some cases way past, 53 years in age, the point at which most of
them could qualify for a full pension.

With a self-confidence nurtured by decades of success, they claim to be
untroubled by the mounting pressures on the bank. "I see these changes as a
challenge, not as a threat," said Sir William Purves, the 62-year-old chairman
of the bank's holding company in London.

Two other key managers are John Gray, 60, who runs the Hong Kong bank and is its
point man on China, and John R. H. Bond, chief executive of the parent company
and a relative youngster at 53. Mr. Bond, who also runs Midland Bank, is the
odds-on favorite to succeed Sir William when he finally tires of the role. "It's
his job to lose," a senior executive of the bank said of Mr. Bond.

It is these three men who helped build the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank from a
struggling regional bank into the world's 13th largest bank. Last year, the bank
earned $3.8 billion before taxes -- more than any other bank in the world, on
assets of $305 billion.

Though the bank's 1993 return on assets of 1.25 percent placed its sixth
worldwide, behind institutions like J. P. Morgan and BankAmerica, it exceeds
every bank of equal or greater size, a notable feat for a bank of its
conservatism.

So far this year, pretax profits are up 24 percent in the six months ended June
30, though not without some window-dressing. Operating profits before special
provisions are running about 4 percent behind last year because of higher
expenses and losses in bond trading and foreign exchange. Yet, thanks to a much
slimmer provision for bad debts than last year's, pretax profits came in at a
respectable $2.25 billion.

On the subject of Hong Kong's future, the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank's senior
managers sound like unreconstructed optimists. The Chinese, Sir William argues,
would be loath to tamper with the money-making city-state, which is both a model
of freewheeling capitalism and the economic gateway to China. "They have every
intention of getting the most they can out of Hong Kong," he said.

The bank certainly does not want to see change in Hong Kong. It is one of the
coziest banking environments on earth, especially for the Hongkong and Shanghai
Bank. Because the bank's parent also owns 61.48 percent of its next largest
competitor in Hong Kong, the Hang Seng Bank Ltd., it jointly controls 365 bank
branches in Hong Kong, and enjoys 60 percent of the market as measured by
deposits, analysts estimate.

And the market is a banker's dream of high profit margins and low taxes.
Corporate taxes here are just 16.5 percent, and deposit accounts yield less than
the rate of inflation, largely because of a government-sanctioned banking
cartel. That means that banks can get away with charging 7 or 8 percent interest
on funds that only cost them 1 or 2 percent.

STILL, there is no guarantee that the bank's lucrative arrangement will
continue. And the political uncertainty of China taking over the colony may be
less a threat than the changes in local banking that are being wrought by market
forces.

Danny Truell, the head of Hong Kong research at S. G. Warburg Securities (Far
East) Ltd., warns that Hong Kong's effective negative interests rates are
already pinching deposit growth, chasing funds into the stock market and into
real estate. An easing of growth in the bank's high-margin business of
deposit-taking and lending comes at a time when the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank's
earnings from foreign exchange and bond-trading operations are down. Yet, Mr.
Truell adds, "This is still going to be a very profitable bank."

For years, Hongkong and Shanghai Bank executives have brushed aside questions
about the bank's commitment to Hong Kong by simply pointing to its monumental
headquarters, opened in downtown Hong Kong in 1985. The 52-story building was
designed by Norman Foster, a famous British architect, and it was rumored to
cost more than $1 billion. Inside the gray exoskeleton of cross beams and pipes,
visitors are transported first by a suspended escalator -- positioned off-center
in accordance with the Chinese superstitious practice of feng shui -- and then
whisked upstairs by elevators whose dashboards blink with the latest
stock-market quotes.

But two years ago, the Hong Kong and Shanghai Bank bought Midland, a large
British bank, in a $6 billion deal -- and the move raised new questions about
the bank's confidence in Hong Kong's future. The investment itself was a sizable
diversification outside the colony. Beyond that, the bank set up a holding
company in London, HSBC, and Sir William and a group of the headquarters staff
went to Britain.

Sir William insists that the London move betrays no lack of faith in Hong Kong.
The holding company, he explains, had to be set up to allay the fears of British
regulators about having a foreign bank owning a major British bank. Sir William
insists he is staying on London mainly to guide the integration of Midland with
the Hong Kong bank's operations, including the two banks' capital markets and
treasury groups in London.

SIR WILLIAM is also staying on in the bank's top job longer than he had
indicated earlier. At 62, he is already nine years beyond the age at which he
could have retired, given the many years he spent abroad. Two years ago, he told
the The Financial Times in an interview that he was eager for retirement. These
days, he explains his plan is to remain HSBC chairman for "a couple more years."

Despite the London move, Sir William insists that Hongkong and Shanghai Bank
will remain first and foremost an Asian bank. "Asia is the home of the bank,"
said the chairman, who is known inside the bank as Willie. "As long as the
economies of Asia are growing at two to three times the economies elsewhere, it
will be our growth area."

Asian nations where the bank has a powerful presence -- Thailand, Indonesia,
Singapore and China, for example -- are growing 7 percent to 11 percent a year.
The region is a hotbed for foreign investment and trade.

The Hong Kong bank is extending its network in Asia. Last year, the bank opened
two new branches in India and four in Indonesia. It is scheduled to open a
branch in Taiwan later this year, and is expanding its foreign exchange and bond
trading operation in Japan. It has also applied for branch licenses in Vietnam,
whose long-dormant economy has revived with a vengeance.

Speaking of the Hong Kong bank's wealth of Asian experience, good and bad,
Clinton P. Marshall, the head of corporate banking, says, "We've been thrown out
of more countries in Asia than Citibank has ever opened in. We're used to
operating in very difficult conditions."

From its trading-port home base, the Hong Kong bank has always ventured abroad,
first into Asia and then across the globe. Its holding company controls dozens
of banks and financial institutions in markets ranging from Saudi Arabia to
upstate New York. In addition to the Midland Bank in Britain and Marine Midland
in the United States, (no prior relation despite the similarities in names), the
holding company also owns a cluster of investment banks under the Wardley Group
and James Capel names, the Hong Kong Bank of Canada and the British Bank of the
Middle East.

The Hong Kong bank's global reach owes much to the way it has groomed its
leaders. Once, it might have been regarded as training colonial emissaries, but
today the system has evolved into a regimen for educating an elite group of
cosmopolitan business people. Many of the Hong Kong bank's executives remember
it as a kind of corporate boot camp.

John Gray, who runs the bank in Hong Kong, can vividly recall the dreary January
day in 1956 when, at 22, he boarded a steamer in England for the month-long trip
east, with ports of call including Bombay, Penang and Singapore, before reaching
Hong Kong. For the young man, it was a rite of passage that his father underwent
before him, and a great uncle before that. "You didn't exist in the bank until
you got on the boat," Mr. Gray explained.

LIKE those before and after him, he wore wool suits in Hong Kong's sweltering
summers, charged through jungles in Malaysia with carloads of cash, ate curries
in Bombay, and reveled in the opportunity to play financial swashbuckler.

Mr. Marshall, for his part, remembers driving down the beach from Brunei Town to
Kuala Belait with a Land Rover stuffed with cash. "There weren't any roads in
those days, so down the beach we went," he said. "That was banking."

Being an "international officer," or I.O., as the trainees were called, meant
being willing to move anywhere, anywhere at all. "At the drop of a hat," Sir
William recalled.

The Hong Kong bank now has 98,400 employees, but it is still this tiny network
of some 400 international officers who provide the direction and culture of the
bank -- a culture which values long-term thinking, a cost-conscious operating
style and a disdain for bureaucracy.

Roughly 700 applicants vie for about a dozen spots each year. And until this
summer, all those chosen came to Hong Kong to learn the craft of banking. They
started their five years of training living on Hong Kong's Peak in a
barracks-like compound called Cloudlands, because it is often shrouded in mist.
Typically, the international officers moved around Asia every year or so after
that.

"The mess is where the I.O. culture and network starts," says Jacqueline
Gilhooley, who at 25 is one of only 12 women who have trained as international
officers since 1989, when the all-male tradition was dropped.

Ms. Gilhooley, like all international officers, is starting near the bottom of
the bank's hierarchy, sitting at a desk in a vast room shoveling heaps of import
and export documents around. Afterwards, she can expect to serve stints in
several other departs on her way to being trained as a well-rounded generalist,
which is what the bank wants its international officers to be.

The days when bank officers carried money through jungles in jeeps may be over.
But the tenets of the international officer culture remain, like an unswerving
commitment by both the bank and officers. "You sign up for life," Ms. Gilhooley
observed.

The Hong Kong bank wants to make sure it maintains that kind of loyalty from its
executive corps, but it is also trying to fine-tune its culture. To broaden the
training of its management recruits, their early indoctrination now starts at a
country manor in England, though young international officers who are assigned
to Hong Kong will then be housed in Cloudlands. The bank is also trying to
recruit more Asians, especially Chinese, into its management ranks, a goal that
has eluded it in all but a few cases. One rising star it is especially proud of
is Vincent Cheng Hoi Chuen, a Hong Kong Chinese, who on Nov. 1 will become the
bank's chief financial officer.

To Mr. Purves, the changes are a question of survival. "The world is a fast
changing place," he said. "Nothing stands still."

Trying to sprinkle its managerial ranks with Chinese seems a prudent display of
sensitivity since the Chinese will soon take control of Hong Kong. The bank
needs to remain in Beijing's good graces both to remain dominant in its home
market and to get a chance to participate in the banking opportunity that could
open up in China.

ALREADY the Bank of China, a group of 13 banks controlled by the Chinese
Government, is pushing hard into retail banking and the local business community
here. Recently, it won permission to start minting money later this year, a
privilege that the Hongkong and Shanghai Bank until now only had to share to a
small extent with Standard Chartered Bank.

"The Bank of China is clearly pressing here," said Mr. Truell, the Warburg
analyst. "They clearly are benefiting from People's Republic of China business."

In China, the Hong Kong bank is eager to return to Shanghai, the mainland's big
trading city, where the bank once held sway. Before the Communist revolution in
1949, the bank occupied a lumbering granite colossus in Shanghai's old financial
district Afterwards, the bank was evicted and the local Communist party moved
into the building.

The building has been put up for sale by the Communist Government. Whether it
makes sense to bid for the building now, with little prospect of much business
soon, is uncertain. China restricts all foreign banks to dealing in foreign
exchange, excluding Hongkong and Shanghai Bank from a vast swathe of the China
market. But Mr. Gray, whose father managed the Shanghai branch long ago, sounds
interested nonetheless. "We will submit a tender," Mr. Gray said. "It sends a
strong signal that the Hongkong Shanghai Bank is back in Shanghai."



A SATISFIED CUSTOMER

ONE of the Hong Kong bank's most loyal corporate customers is also one of this
territory's wealthiest men: Gordon Y.S. Wu, the builder of China's first
superhighway and the developer of power projects from China to Pakistan.

"They've been in on every one of my projects," explained Mr. Wu during an
interview in his 64th-floor office overlooking Hong Kong and its boat-filled
harbor. "All I've had to do is go up there and outline what I've wanted,
securities, repayment arrangements, and they're there. It's a tremendous bank."

Mr. Wu rubbed his hands across the mahogany conference table in his office. "Let
me tell you a story," he began. "I'm the seventh of nine kids and I worked for a
father who was reasonably wealthy. He decided to retire in 1969, and all of a
sudden, I was in a crisis because he was able to retire but I couldn't. If I
stick my head out and say, 'Pop, give me some money so I can start a business,'
I can see eight other hands."

"So I said, 'Pop, are you willing to give me a bank guarantee so I can raise
some money?' I was very persuasive. I said, 'If I make it, the guarantee becomes
academic. And if I don't make it, just don't give me any more.' He said, 'That
sounds fair. Go try your luck at the bank.' So I went to see the bank manager at
the time. The guy smiled and said, 'Yes, we know you. We know you can do it. No
problem.' I tried to get a little bit of mileage out of it. I said, 'Can I do it
without the guarantee?' He said no. And that fellow's name is Willie Purves."

Mr. Wu laughed at his memory and sighed. "We have both come a long way."

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Hongkong and Shanghai Bank, left in photo, stands alone on
the local currency. But new foes like the Bank of China, far left, are entering
the picture. (John Giannini for The New York Times)(pg. 1); John M. Gray,
chairman of the bank in Hong Kong, is the point man on China For trainees,
networking begins at the company mess. (Photographs by John Giannini for The New
York Times)(pg. 6)

Graph: "As Goes Hong Kong, So Goes the Bank" shows relative monthly performance
of the Hang Seng Index and HSBC holdings from 1990 to 1994. (Source: Datastream)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              160 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Discouraging Cubans

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


Low politics, not high principle, inspired President Clinton's ditching of the
double standard that for the last 28 years gave Cuban refugees near automatic
entry to the United States. Now, fleeing Cubans risk being stopped at sea by the
Coast Guard or Navy and returned to, of all places, the U.S. base at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.

It is a hasty, harsh and unnecessary move. But at least it brings a semblance of
equality to Washington's treatment of those fleeing impoverished Caribbean
tyrannies. And it implicitly recognizes that, with the cold war over, Cuba is no
longer a special case. The next logical step, which the Administration
unfortunately shows no sign of taking, would be to formulate constructive
diplomatic policies toward Cuba that could help ease the way to a democratic
post-Castro future.

The new policy is designed to deter the thousands of Cubans who have been
preparing to leave since Fidel Castro's regime stopped interfering with
departures earlier this month. Those who elude the Coast Guard and reach U.S.
soil will be detained indefinitely upon arrival. Only those who apply and are
found eligible for asylum before leaving Cuba will now receive automatic
admission.

That is roughly the same policy now applied to Haitians, with one crucial
difference. To apply for asylum while still living in Haiti is to court
murderous retaliation from government thugs, while discontented Cubans, at least
for now, are virtually being encouraged to leave. In both countries, the U.S. is
intentionally contributing to popular discontent with tough economic sanctions.

In both cases, generous treatment of the unintended victims of U.S. foreign
policy has been defeated by the politics of populist panic. Gov. Lawton Chiles
of Florida, facing a tough re-election fight, triggered Mr. Clinton's move by
declaring a statewide emergency Thursday. Mr. Clinton, whose own 1980
re-election bid in Arkansas was damaged when Cuban detainees from the last mass
exodus rioted at an Arkansas detention camp, readily sympathized with his fellow
Democrat's political plight. He also needs Florida's electoral votes for himself
in 1996.

The latest departures began after an anti-Castro riot on the Havana waterfront
two weeks ago, the most visible political protest in years. The Castro regime
may not exactly be in its death throes, but it is reeling from the global
collapse of Communism, the loss of Russian trade subsidies and the lack of any
obvious successor to Mr. Castro.

That would seem to offer openings for a diplomatic mixture of incentives and
threats that have begun to lure Communism's other orphans, like Vietnam and
North Korea, out of their isolation. Yet for fear of angering the ferociously
anti-Castro lobbies that are so powerful in Florida and New Jersey politics,
U.S. policy has been purely punitive, aimed at building up explosive pressures
in Cuba. The Administration is trying to sell its refugee ban -- and new package
of economic and political pressures -- to Cuban-American hard-liners as part of
this same effort.

Interestingly, Bernard Aronson, who served as Assistant Secretary of State for
Latin America in the Bush Administration and whose hard-line credentials are not
in doubt, presented in The Washington Post last week a more nuanced policy that
would offer specific U.S. diplomatic incentives as a reward for steps toward
democracy in Cuba. Such a policy is, in fact, suggested by the Cuban Democracy
Act of 1992. Unlike the sanctions provisions of that legislation, the
suggestions for a possible diplomatic opening have never been followed up.

It is not in the best tradition of the United States to interdict refugees. It
is surely not in the best interest of the United States -- or of Cuban democracy
-- to encourage violent upheaval in Cuba without also offering some hope of
peaceful change.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              161 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: August 21, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 848 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    27   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     8   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 3     5   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 4    19   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.

 5     9   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 6    10   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 7     4   SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) Two Navajo tribal policemen and a web of politics
           and murder.

 8     4   POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother
           wins $60 million in a lottery.

 9     1   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.)
           Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
           and a poem.

 10    4   FINNEGAN'S WEEK, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Bantam, $6.50.) A San
           Diego cop tracks a crime that results in horror south of
           the border.

 11    4   SNAGGED, by Carol Higgins Clark. (Dove/Warner, $5.50.)
           While in Miami, Regan Reilly contends with a variety of
           crimes.

 12    4   GUARDIAN, by John Saul. (Fawcett, $5.99.) A single mother
           strives to protect her children from a stalking, unseen
           killer.

 13    5   A SIMPLE PLAN, by Scott Smith. (St. Martin's, $5.99.)
           Madness besets a man who plans to pocket a fortune on which
           he stumbled.

 14   13   PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Warner, $6.99.) A lawyer
           pursues his firm's missing partner and a
           multimillion-dollar fund.

 15    1   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and
           recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    32   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2    563  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.

 3    16   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade
           teacher.

 4    32   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5*   79   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 6*   15   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           memoir of a young woman's mental illness.

 7    13   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.

 8    14   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 9     5   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people in
           the present and in the past.

 10*   1   THE LAST BROTHER, by Joe McGinniss. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy.

 11*  20   YOUNG MEN & FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of
           Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a
           Montana forest in 1949.

 12   149  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 13*  16   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) Issues
           affecting black Americans.

 14*  42   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 15   63   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    179  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    12   RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994
           edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.

 3     4   EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (Harper Perennial,
           $14.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.

 4    41   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 6, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              162 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 21, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Viewpoints;
Baseball Mediation: Get a Power Hitter

BYLINE: By KENNETH R. FEINBERG;   Kenneth R. Feinberg, a lawyer, is chairman of
Mediate Inc. in Washington. He has successfully mediated disputes about the
closing of Shoreham, the nuclear plant on Long Island, and about Agent Orange,
the defoliant used in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 9;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 409 words


BASEBALL fans sit and ponder. Will 1994 be the first year since 1904 without a
World Series?

The only hope is mediation, and that will be a struggle. The players and owners
are far apart. They accepted the offer of aid from the Federal Mediation and
Conciliation Service with little enthusiasm. And mediation is "nonbinding." The
parties can just walk away.

But there is one possibility. In the last 15 years, businesses have invoked
mediation more often to resolve disputes. And because mediation is nonbinding
and its processes flexible, businesses have learned that choosing the right
mediator is crucial.

In a patent dispute, for example, two computer makers might choose a mutually
respected software expert or intellectual-property lawyer as the mediator. When
industry customs are at issue, two oil companies might choose a prominent oil
executive. In court, parties cannot choose their judge. But in mediation they
can -- and this advantage has greatly aided its growth.

What about a huge dispute, with national implications, like the baseball strike?
The best bet is a well-known person, someone with presence, political
connections and a weighty reputation.

Why? Because the players and owners are more likely to listen to, even be cowed
by, an established authority. And because a powerful figure can bring political
clout to bear. And because a prominent mediator can direct great public pressure
on the parties. The mediator can take the high ground, stress the pettiness of
the squabble and -- with the public looking on -- beseech the parties to settle
for the good of the nation.

Kennedy did precisely that when he asked MacArthur to help settle a big dispute
between the National Collegiate Athletic Association and the Amateur Athletic
Union about control over college sports.

President Clinton, taking a page from Kennedy and from growing numbers of
businesses, should do the same. He should designate someone like Gen. Colin L.
Powell or Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf as the baseball mediator. Imagine the
pressure on the players and owners if the hero of Operation Desert Storm makes a
"nonbinding" settlement recommendation so our ballparks can again be filled with
eager, happy fans!

The mediators at the Federal mediation service are undoubtedly able. But they
are not well-known. The situation recalls 1981, when a respected but
little-known Federal mediator struggled with a baseball strike. The effort
failed.

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              163 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Used American Jeans Power A Thriving Industry Abroad

BYLINE: By SALLIE HOFMEISTER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words

DATELINE: PASADENA, Calif.


When the giant flea market outside the Rose Bowl opens at dawn, bargain hunters
from Thailand and Japan are the first on the field. Pockets bulging with wads of
$100 bills and carting big empty suitcases strapped to luggage dollies, they
load up on American artifacts like weathered leather jackets and rock-and-roll
memorabilia.

But the real quarry is used jeans -- especially Levis -- which can fetch as much
as several thousand dollars back home.

As another generation of teen-agers the world over embraces American culture,
secondhand jeans have become status symbols. A cottage industry, a thriving
underground economy, has sprouted west of the Mississippi to buy, wash and
repair used Levis for resale in countries from Finland to Australia.

No one knows for sure how many pairs are being shipped abroad. Precisely how
much profit is made is also a mystery because dealers are preternaturally
closed-mouthed about this all-cash business, as much to keep their competition
from rooting out their precious sources of supply as, in some cases, to stay
clear of the Internal Revenue Service.

What the dealers do say is that a vintage pair of jeans -- like Levis from the
1950's and 60's -- can bring $3,000 or more abroad, although most of the jeans
they sell there bring less than $100.

All in all, millions of pairs of used jeans are changing hands each year, worth
tens, even hundreds, of millions of dollars at retail. And the opening of new
markets like Vietnam and China will only add to the demand.

It is a business almost as secretive as the drug trade, and nearly as
splintered. But on the second Sunday of every month, outside the Rose Bowl,
everyone who is anyone in this exclusive circle, grown to perhaps 100 people
from a handful a few years ago, shows up to buy and sell used jeans by the bale
and to bargain for the vintage pieces.

On a recent Sunday, Max Shapiro, a San Francisco dealer, was having what he
called an uncharacteristically slow day. His biggest sale was a pair of Levis
from the 60's that brought $150, meager compared with the $3,300 he made on one
sale another day.

Nat and Lucky Wongchaiwat, a brother-sister team from Thailand, frequently hunt
here. In their early 20's, they make a monthly pilgrimage for 10,000 pairs for
their store in Bangkok. Recently, they placed a big order at Mr. Shapiro's
warehouse in San Francisco. At the Rose Bowl, they look for vintage pairs and
new sources of jeans.

Japan is still the biggest customer for used jeans, though the boom there has
cooled somewhat. But even Thailand, a much less prosperous nation, has become a
major importer, buying about 100,000 pairs a month, some dealers say.

"They can buy jeans made in Hong Kong for $6 but would rather have 501's for
$100," said Val Marco, a Los Angeles dealer who left his job as a vice president
at a Silicon Valley robotics company to sell jeans after repeatedly getting
offers for his Levis on business trips abroad.

A One-by-One Search

Dealers collect used jeans one by one at flea markets, garage sales and thrift
stores. They scour small towns and farm communities like Lubbock, Tex., and
Cody, Wyo., advertising in local papers that they will pay 50 cents to $15 a
pair.

On the appointed day they pull into town and do business out of tents or the
backs of tractor-trailers. They sort their purchases by quality and send them to
laundries, some of which clean nothing but used jeans, and then on to shops that
patch and mend them.

They sell some jeans through trendy vintage-clothing, jeans and urban-cowboy
stores. Encouraged by the grunge, retro and recycling movements, dress-down days
at the office and perhaps even the casual style of the Democratic White House,
these stores abound on the West Coast.

The bulk of the market, however, is abroad. It doubtless helps that most used
jeans are cheaper than new Levis, which cost $80 to $100 overseas, compared with
about $35 here. But the market really exists, both sellers and buyers agree,
because foreign youth is obsessed with the American past. Used Air Jordan
athletic shoes from the 1980's, sweaty and soiled, can sell for $800 or more in
Japan. Old Pendleton shirts go for $40 in Tokyo.

Cool and Rugged

But nothing says Made in America louder than jeans, especially the denim 501's
with the button fly that Levi Strauss & Company has made since 1873. Worn to a
softness that takes five years to achieve, used 501's are as cool as James Dean
and as rugged as the Wild West.

Kazuhiko Hanzawa, a sales clerk at Marvin's, a used-jeans and sneakers store in
the Harajuka district of Tokyo, says 501's are the most popular brand sought by
teen-age buyers. Prices at the store range from 10,000 to 100,000 yen, or about
$100 to $1,000.

Retail prices vary depending on the age, condition and country. "Grade A" 501's
-- those without holes or stains -- may fetch $40 to $50, while lower-quality
Grade B's go for about $20. Vintage 501's are among the most prized; predating
1983 and known as Red Lines, they are hand cut from a single piece of fabric
whose red-selvage edge is the inseam. They typically retail abroad for $70 or
more.

A Tightening Supply

But the highest prices are commanded by a fuller-cut and wider-legged Levis
design popular in the 1950's and 60's. The jeans are called Big E's, for the "E"
used until 1971 in the logo on the distinctive tiny red Levi tag. They typically
bring $500 to $2,000 in Japan.

Prices of all used jeans have jumped as supplies have tightened.

"I could easily sell 40,000 pair a month if I could find them," said Peter
Anestos of Pocatello, Idaho, who became a dealer four years ago after his
business as a steel mill equipment dismantler fell apart. "When I started, I was
getting $10 to $13, wholesale, for the best 501's and now I'm getting $25. Of
course, the price I pay for jeans has also doubled."

Many people in the business estimate there are 30 to 50 big dealers, who may
ship 10,000 pairs a month, with a few handling double or triple that volume.
Some are so aggressive that they try to corner the market in certain states.
Most dealers are on the West Coast because the more valuable button-fly 501's
are prevalent there. (Easterners tend to prefer the zipper fly because it
doesn't let in cold air.)

No one believes the rage in used jeans has hurt Levi Strauss, the biggest
marketer of jeans in the world, whose sales of Levis, estimated at $4.8 billion
last year, dwarfs the used-jeans market. In fact, Levi itself has responded to
the vintage wave. Last year it introduced, both here and abroad, 501's with a
"broken in" finish achieved by a combination of stone washing and sand blasting.

"It's probably the second- or third-most-popular finish after stone-washed and
after black," said Susan Shepherd, manager of the Original Levis Store, opposite
Bloomingdale's in Manhattan, where many shoppers are foreigners. "People
definitely want that look."

Even high-fashion designers like Ralph Lauren have recognized the trend. The
designer introduced a line last year called RRL to duplicate the quality and
construction of hard-to-find vintage pieces like old leather jackets, untailored
tweed coats and worn and weathered jeans. It took a year to develop the washing
technology to make the worn look possible.

Levi has also come out with something for vintage lovers like the singer Bryan
Adams, one of the biggest Levis collectors in the world. Last year, the company
reissued the "Big E's" design. Called "Capital E's," the jeans sell for $100 a
pair.

Limited Number Sold



No one expects the Capital E's to cut into sales of used jeans. For one thing,
Levi is selling only a limited quantity (it will not say how many). For another,
the new denim cannot compare with the original nubbier, inkier fabric, which
fades to the most desirable deep blue. Petrochemical-based indigo dyes were
reformulated during the oil crisis of the 1970's, and Levi Strauss changed
fabrics in the 1980's, when it switched from hand cutting of fabric to jigsaw
cutting to improve efficiencies.

In any case, used-jean dealers are more worried about their smaller rivals.
Competition in the last year has driven a few dealers to search for jeans in
cities as well as in the country by setting up networks of collection sites like
pawn shops, video stores and dry cleaners that buy jeans from their patrons for
a cut of the revenue.

Mr. Shapiro has signed up 90 drop points in California and 20 in Texas for Green
for Jeans, the used-jeans company in Point Richmond, Calif., that his brother
Bruce started. The company has an additional 15 jeans collection sites in
Missouri, and next month it will open a warehouse in Osaka to be closer to
buyers.

Like many dealers, the Shapiros have also branched into new lines, like Air
Jordans and Pendleton shirts.

Looking for Trends

Mr. Marco says rock-and-roll clothes from the 1960's and 70's are also hot. He
watches vintage-savvy designers like Ralph Lauren for the latest trend. Though
Mr. Lauren will not talk about his shopping habits, Mr. Marco has heard that he
is buying sweatshirts from the early 1900's. "He'll copy them and sell them this
fall," Mr. Marco predicts.

Still, for dealers like Mr. Marco, nothing compares with the romance, history
and mystery of old jeans.

"I bought 40 pieces from the Great Depression a few weeks back from a lady in
Oklahoma who had boxes of her mother's clothes in the garage," he said. "She had
the whole family's jeans and they must have had six or seven kids. You could see
how much that family suffered from their jeans, how the grandma had sewed on the
patches. One pair had 100 patches."

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secondhand jeans propel a thriving cottage industry. Buyers
check used denim at a Pasadena, Calif., market. (Marissa Roth for The New York
Times)(pg. D3)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              164 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Albert Blaustein, Who Drafted Nations' Constitutions, Dies at 72

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section D;  Page 8;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 600 words


Albert P. Blaustein, a law professor who dedicated nearly three decades of his
life to drafting constitutions for nations in transition, died yesterday at Duke
University Hospital in Durham, N.C., after suffering a heart attack. He was 72.

A fervent believer that a constitution could help a nation define its legal,
political and moral identity, Mr. Blaustein wrote the constitutions now in use
in Liberia and Fiji, contributed large parts of the constitutions of Zimbabwe,
Bangladesh and Peru, and had a hand in the drafting of about 40 others,
including those of Nicaragua, Romania and post-Soviet Russia.

From his home in Cherry Hill, N.J., Mr. Blaustein, who taught at Rutgers
University School of Law in Camden, was frequently summoned by dissident groups
as disparate as the Inkatha Freedom Party in South Africa and a coalition of
lawyers in Nepal to help them stake out their positions in drafting new
constitutions. Those calls became frequent in recent years, as areas of the
world, from Central America to Eastern Europe, underwent wrenching change.

In a 1983 interview, Mr. Blaustein said: "A constitution is more than a
structure and framework for government. It is in many senses a nation's
frontispiece. It should be used as a rallying point for the people's ideals and
aspirations, as well as a message to the outside world as to what the country
stands for."

Mr. Blaustein would attempt to interject Western liberal notions into the
constitutions he drafted; in the 1970's he tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade
the leaders of the new majority-rule government of Zimbabwe to grant equal
rights to women. But he acknowledged that for a constitution to work, it must
reflect a country's culture and history. "We cannot put constitutions together
like prefabricated henhouses," he said in the 1983 interview.

Praises Constitution

While he praised the United States Constitution as a document that had worked
well, even in crisis -- he noted that "When Mr. Nixon left power, the only
person with a gun was a policeman directing traffic" -- he said that if he were
asked to revise it, he would make the right to privacy and freedom of travel
explicit provisions.

Mr. Blaustein's contributions to nation-building began in 1966, when, at the
request of the United States Government, he traveled to South Vietnam to advise
that country in drafting a constitution.

By that time, he had established a formidable reputation as a legal scholar and
the author and editor of many books. "Desegregation and the Law," (Rutgers
University Press, 1957) which he co-wrote with Clarence Clyde Ferguson Jr., was
a critical and commercial success. His other works include "The American Lawyer:
A summary of the Survey of the Legal Profession," (University of Chicago, 1954),
which he co-wrote with Charles O. Porter.

He taught at New York Law School in the mid-1950's and at Rutgers from 1955
until his retirement in 1992.

Born on Oct. 12, 1921, in Brooklyn, Mr. Blaustein graduated from Boys High
School at age 16. He graduated from the University of Michigan at 19 and became
a reporter with The Chicago Tribune.

He served in the Army during World War II and again in the Korean War, attaining
the rank of major. Between the wars, he went to law school at Columbia
University and practiced law in Manhattan at his father's firm.

He is survived by his wife, the former Phyllis Migden; a daughter, Dana Litke of
Northfield, N.J.; two sons, Mark Blaustein of Fort Lee, N.J., and Eric Blaustein
of Cary, N.C.; a sister, Marjory Simon of Purchase, N.Y., and four
grandchildren.

NAME: Albert P. Blaustein

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Albert P. Blaustein (Dan Miller, 1990)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              165 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 23, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Albert P. Blaustein, a Drafter Of Constitutions, Dies at 72

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


Albert P. Blaustein, a law professor who dedicated nearly three decades of his
life to drafting constitutions for nations in transition, died on Sunday at Duke
University Hospital in Durham, N.C., after suffering a heart attack. He was 72.

A fervent believer that a constitution could help a nation define its legal,
political and moral identity, Mr. Blaustein wrote the constitutions now in use
in Liberia and Fiji, contributed large parts of the constitutions of Zimbabwe,
Bangladesh and Peru, and had a hand in the drafting of about 40 others,
including those of Nicaragua, Romania and post-Soviet Russia.

From his home in Cherry Hill, N.J., Mr. Blaustein, who taught at the Rutgers
University School of Law in Camden, was frequently summoned by dissident groups
as disparate as the Inkatha Freedom Party in South Africa and a coalition of
lawyers in Nepal to help them stake out their positions in drafting new
constitutions. Those calls became frequent in recent years, as areas of the
world, from Central America to Eastern Europe, underwent wrenching change.

In a 1983 interview, Mr. Blaustein said: "A constitution is more than a
structure and framework for government. It is in many senses a nation's
frontispiece. It should be used as a rallying point for the people's ideals and
aspirations, as well as a message to the outside world as to what the country
stands for."

Mr. Blaustein would try to interject Western liberal notions into the
constitutions he drafted; in the 1970's he tried, unsuccessfully, to persuade
the leaders of the new majority-rule government of Zimbabwe to grant equal
rights to women. But he acknowledged that for a constitution to work, it must
reflect a country's culture and history. "We cannot put constitutions together
like prefabricated henhouses," he said in the 1983 interview.

While he praised the United States Constitution as a document that had worked
well, even in crisis -- he noted that "when Mr. Nixon left power, the only
person with a gun was a policeman directing traffic" -- he said that if he were
asked to revise it, he would make the right to privacy and freedom of travel
explicit provisions.

Mr. Blaustein's contributions to nation-building began in 1966, when, at the
request of the United States Government, he traveled to South Vietnam to advise
that country in drafting a constitution.

By that time, he had established a formidable reputation as a legal scholar and
as the author and editor of many books. "Desegregation and the Law," (Rutgers
University Press, 1957), of which he was co-author with Clarence Clyde Ferguson
Jr., was a critical and commercial success. His other works include "The
American Lawyer: A Summary of the Survey of the Legal Profession," (University
of Chicago, 1954), which he wrote with Charles O. Porter.

He taught at New York Law School in the mid-1950's and at Rutgers from 1955
until his retirement in 1992.

Born on Oct. 12, 1921, in Brooklyn, Mr. Blaustein graduated from Boys High
School at age 16. He graduated from the University of Michigan at 19 and became
a reporter with The Chicago Tribune.

He served in the Army during World War II and again in the Korean War, attaining
the rank of major. Between the wars, he went to law school at Columbia
University and practiced law in Manhattan at his father's firm.

He is survived by his wife, the former Phyllis Migden; a daughter, Dana Litke of
Northfield, N.J.; two sons, Mark Blaustein of Fort Lee, N.J., and Eric Blaustein
of Cary, N.C.; a sister, Marjory Simon of Purchase, N.Y., and four
grandchildren.

NAME: Albert P. Blaustein

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Albert P. Blaustein (Dan Miller, 1990)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              166 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Johnson's Vietnam Deal

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;   Page 9;   Column 6;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 120 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Aug. 23


Johnson & Johnson, the medical, pharmaceutical and baby products company based
in New Brunswick, N.J., has opened two offices in Vietnam under licenses
received from the Government. The main representative office is in Ho Chi Minh
City, with a branch office in Hanoi. A team of executives led by the company's
group chairman, Christian Koffmann, received the licenses on Monday. Products
will be imported from the company's operations in other countries in Southeast
Asia to supply the Vietnam market, the officials said. Johnson & Johnson is
among about 20 United States companies that have set up offices in Vietnam since
February, when President Clinton lifted a 30-year-old economic embargo against
the country.

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

FLIGHT FROM CUBA: THE OVERVIEW;
CASTRO RULES OUT ANY MOVE TO HALT FLOW OF REFUGEES

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 6;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1384 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Aug. 24


Challenging President Clinton's decision to send Cuban refugees to Guantanamo
naval base as an "absurd response" to the mounting immigration crisis between
the United States and Cuba, Fidel Castro said tonight that he would make no
effort to halt the flow of people leaving his country.

Speaking on state television, the Cuban President said the United States was to
blame for the exodus that began earlier this month and is growing by the day.
New policy measures announced by Mr. Clinton in recent days only "make the
problem more complicated," Mr. Castro said.

"They cannot blame us for that situation," Mr. Castro said. "They created a
mentality in a lot of people" in Cuba that "they had the right to travel to the
United States illegally."

American efforts to provoke what Mr. Castro described as massive illegal
immigration gave Cuba "no alternative" but to loosen its rules on leaving the
country and instruct its Coast Guard to allow malcontents to take to the seas.
He characterized Cuban policy as eminently humane, and contrasted it with the
American decision to send Cuban refugees to Guantanamo, which he called a
"concentration camp."

The Cuban leader also portrayed Mr. Clinton as a prisoner of Cuban exile groups
here, which he called "a fascist mafia of the extreme right." Mr. Clinton, he
said, had been "pressured by ultra-rightists" to take steps intended to destroy
the Cuban revolution, only to see his efforts backfire.

Wearing the familiar olive green uniform of the commander in chief of the Cuban
military, Mr. Castro spoke for more than 90 minutes, offering his interpretation
of hijackings in Cuba and actions by Washington that he said initiated the
crisis. His remarks were broadcast live in the United States, in a simultaneous
English translation on CNN and in Spanish by the Telemundo network.

The speech was Mr. Castro's first public comment on the crisis since Mr. Clinton
announced last Friday that Cuban refugees would no longer be allowed to enter
the United States, and followed up a day later with a package of harsh new
measures intended to further isolate Cuba. For the most part, Mr. Castro
reiterated statements he made in similar appearances on Cuban television earlier
this month, indicating that he is not interested in striking a conciliatory tone
in an effort to resolve the crisis.

Mr. Castro also referred to a statement last weekend by Leon Panetta, the White
House Chief of Staff, that the Clinton Administration is considering a blockade
of Cuba. He warned against such an action, saying it would be "an act of war."

As he has done innumerable times in the past, Mr. Castro fixed the blame for
most of Cuba's problems on the economic embargo the United States has enforced
against his country since the early 1960's. "These measures compel the massive
exodus," he said.

Earlier today, two senior Cuban officials also said that Washington was mainly
to blame for the exodus, and said Cuba would try to end the flow of refugees
only if the United States agreed to broad talks on a full range of bilateral
matters.

Speaking at a news conference in New York this morning, Cuba's chief delegate to
the United Nations, Fernando Remirez de Estenoz Barciela, said that, though his
Government regards the exodus as primarily an American problem, Cuba is willing
to discuss ways to halt the flow of refugees that has filled the Straits of
Florida for the last two weeks.

But he added that the United States must in turn demonstrate its willingness to
address the questions Cuba believes are the "true causes" of the migration,
including Washington's three-decade ban on trade with Cuba.

"Migration itself could be one of the topics," Mr. Remirez said. But he said
"the issues of lifting the blockade, the Guantanamo naval base" and "subversive
radio and TV transmissions against Cuba would have to be part and parcel of a
comprehensive negotiation process."

Washington Rejects Talks

American officials had no immediate reaction to Mr. Castro's speech late
tonight, but earlier today the Administration promptly rejected the Cuban
diplomat's suggestion of bilateral talks, dismissing it as an attempt by Mr.
Castro to divert attention from his own internal problems. And the
Administration reiterated its resolve to house fleeing Cubans at expanded camps
at Guantanamo Bay and elsewhere rather than allow them into the United States.

The Cuban population at Guantanamo, estimated at 2,000 before today, was certain
to grow drastically, with 7,000 Cubans on their way there in Coast Guard boats
this morning and another 2,791 fetched from the sea by 10 P.M.

Presaging Mr. Castro's remarks this evening, the Cuban Foreign Minister, Roberto
Robaina, said at a news conference in Santiago, Chile, today that in the absence
of broad negotiations, the Cuban leader is prepared to continue with his current
policy of turning a blind eye to the hundreds of rafts and boats that are now
leaving Cuba daily.

Under the new rules announced by President Clinton on Saturday, Cuban-Americans
would no longer be allowed to visit or send money to relatives in Cuba. In
addition, anti-Castro broadcasts to the island will be increased, a step that
Mr. Castro bitterly criticized tonight, calling it a provocation.

Fancy Chairs or Plain Seats

Addressing reporters at the end of an official visit to Chile, Mr. Robaina said
his Government was prepared to meet with American representatives at any time,
at any place and on any level. "We are willing to talk with the United States
with one condition, which is that there be no conditions," he said.

But both Mr. Robaina and Mr. Remirez indicated that the Cuban Government is not
willing to discuss bringing an end to Mr. Castro's 35 years in power, which the
United States argues is the only way to solve Cuba's political and economic
crisis. "Any negotiations will have to include accepting us as we are, with full
respect for the Cuban people," Mr. Remirez said.

"Cuba does not have to return to democracy, because Cuba is in a democracy," Mr.
Robaina argued. "The question of when Fidel decides to go to elections or not is
a problem of a personal decision of Fidel.

Reject Third-Party Role

The Cuban diplomats also rejected suggestions that either the United Nations or
a third country might act as a broker between the two nations, which have not
maintained diplomatic relations in more than 30 years.  "Any negotiation ought
to be direct," he said.

In dismissing the Cuban offer, American officials called it an attempt by Mr.
Castro to win some breathing space from his deepening domestic problems. At a
news conference in Washington, the Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, Peter Tarnoff, said the real issue was Mr. Castro's aversion to
democracy and his economic policies.

"We see nothing to be gained from the kind of talks" the Cuban diplomats
proposed, Mr. Tarnoff said. "It should be clear after 35 years to Fidel Castro
and his Government that the way he is managing the affairs of the island is a
failure."

By arguing that the real cause of the immigration crisis is the American
economic embargo, Mr. Castro was repeating a long-standing Cuban position. In a
speech delivered just as the refugee exodus was beginning earlier this month, he
argued that Cuba could no longer afford to be "the guardian of the North
Americans' coasts" if Washington continued to strangle the faltering Cuban
economy.

When President Clinton took office 19 months ago, Mr. Castro made overtures,
hoping to capitalize on the change in Washington. But in recent months he has
expressed exasperation at the Administration's willingness to deal with other
old enemies while continuing to ignore Cuba.

"The United States talks with Vietnam and looks for solutions to the problems of
Vietnam, and even talks with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea," Mr.
Castro said, referring to North Korea, in a speech earlier this month. "But it
will not talk with Cuba."

In fact, since Mr. Clinton took office, there have been some low-level contacts
between the United States and Cuba on technical issues, including immigration.
But Mr. Castro has made it clear that he expected more progress with the
Democrats in power and was growing impatient with that slow pace.

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Cuban Foreign Minister, Roberto Robaina, said at a news
conference yesterday in Santiago, Chile, that the Cuban leader, Fidel Castro,
was prepared to continue turning a blind eye to the hundreds of rafts and boats
that are now leaving Cuba daily. (Reuters) (pg. A19)

Graphs: "TALLY: Fleeing FromCuba" shows number of refugees arriving each day,
weekly totals and weekly totals for the entire 1980 Mariel boatlift. (Sources:
Immigration and Naturalization Service, U.S. Coast Guard, Council for
Inter-American Security) (pg. A19)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 25, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Chairman of Disney Studios Resigns

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;   Page 1;   Column 3;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Aug. 24


The Walt Disney Company announced today that Jeffrey Katzenberg, the longtime
chairman of its Disney Studios and one of Hollywood's most powerful executives,
was leaving at the end of next month. Mr. Katzenberg had sought -- and failed to
get -- the No. 2 job at the Walt Disney Company, after Disney's president died
in a helicopter accident last April.

Disney said it was reorganizing its filmed entertainment business by creating
two distinct operations, one for motion pictures and one for television. Mr.
Katzenberg's film-making responsibilities will be partly assumed by Joe Roth,
the former chairman of 20th Century Fox and now head of Caravan Pictures, a Walt
Disney movie label.

Promotion at TV Unit

Richard Frank, who had served as president under Mr. Katzenberg at the Disney
studio since 1985, has been promoted to chairman of the newly created Walt
Disney Television and Telecommunications unit.

Both Mr. Roth, who will have the title of chairman of Walt Disney Motion
Pictures, and Mr. Frank will report to Michael D. Eisner, the chairman and chief
executive of the Walt Disney Company.

The news of the departure of Mr. Katzenberg, whose film division has been
integral to the success of Disney during the last 10 years, startled Hollywood.
His resignation leaves the company without two of its most prominent executives:
Mr. Katzenberg and Frank G. Wells, who was killed in the helicopter crash while
serving as Disney's president and chief operating officer.

At the same time, Mr. Eisner is recovering from quadruple-bypass heart surgery
performed last month.

During the last several weeks, there had been talk at Disney and in Hollywood
that Mr. Eisner was reluctant to promote his old friend, Mr. Katzenberg, despite
their long association at Disney and, before that, at Paramount's movie-making
operations.

Mr. Katzenberg's associates said today that if he had been offered the
president's job at Disney he would have stayed.

In an interview, Mr. Katzenberg said: "It never got to an offer. It was not
about a job opening. It was about an opportunity and a type of partnership that
really wasn't in the cards.

"I've not made any plans at all. I don't know what the opportunities are that
are out there. I need to finish out the last 30 days of my contract."

The 43-year-old executive said he had informed Mr. Eisner and Mr. Wells a year
ago that he might leave after his contract expired in September.

"I told them of my need for greater challenges, new mountains to climb," Mr.
Katzenberg said. "At the end of the day this was not about a new job title.
People have never really understood that. It's about me looking for bigger
challenges."

'A Lot of Shopkeepers'

In a telephone interview, Mr. Eisner, asked how he felt, said, "I've had less
stressful days in my life." He added that Mr. Katzenberg had yearned to run his
own company and his decision to leave was not based on the Wells job.

"Jeffrey needs to run his own store," Mr. Eisner said. "Our store has a lot of
shopkeepers already. The one job that was open is not one we felt was suited to
his skills."

Almost immediately, speculation centered on Mr. Katzenberg's leaving for a top
job with Matsushita, which owns MCA/Universal; Sony, which owns Columbia and
Tristar Studios, or the ABC or NBC television networks.

Meanwhile, Sony issued an unusual statement late today saying the speculation
that Mr. Katzenberg was joining the company was unfounded. A Sony representative
said, "Mr. Katzenberg is not joining Sony, nor have there ever been any
conversations between Mr. Katzenberg and Mr. Schulhof on this question." Michael
P. Schulhof is chairman of Sony.

During Mr. Katzenberg's tenure at Disney, animated musicals like "Beauty and the
Beast," "The Lion King" and "Aladdin" have turned into billion-dollar-plus
franchises for the studio.

Friends of Mr. Katzenberg said his intention to leave the company as far back as
last year was underscored by the fact that he failed to exercise a contractual
clause that would have extended his stay at Disney for two more years and
guaranteed him at least $100 million in stock options.

Under the arrangement, Mr. Katzenberg would have been compelled to remain two
more years beyond 1994. But Mr. Katzenberg decided last year not to extend his
contract, telling close friends that he had enough money and did not want to
give up two more years of his life to Disney.

The impact the decision will have on the Walt Disney Company, Hollywood and Wall
Street is unclear. The decision stunned producers and top executives at Disney,
many of whom are close to Mr. Katzenberg. Several of them wept at the news.

The reaction was muted on Wall Street, where the news broke about 4:30 P.M.,
after the close of the market.

David Londoner of Wertheim Schroder & Company, said: "One of the good things to
come out of this is that the policy of releasing 60 films a year will probably
go by the boards, and Disney will concentrate on a more modest number of films.
It is no secret that Disney's live-action films over the last couple of years
have not been as good as they were in the first five years, when this management
group took over."

Shares of Disney rose 75 cents, to $43.25, on the New York Stock Exchange today.


Finding 'Good Ideas'

Mr. Roth will be responsible for all live motion pictures as well as the
marketing and distribution of all Disney films.

"My immediate intention is to go in and read the material and hopefully continue
to supervise the slate of films," he said. "If somebody asked me how many films
I'd make, I'd probably answer, 'As many good ideas as I can find.' "

But Mr. Roth indicated that his taste probably differed from Mr. Katzenberg's,
who has made some highly successful live-action films like "Pretty Woman," "The
Hand that Rocks the Cradle" and "Good Morning, Vietnam," but has also been
criticized for producing too many weak family-style and teen-age comedies.

"I come at it from a slightly different way, with a slightly different
appetite," Mr. Roth said.

Mr. Eisner's decision not to give Mr. Katzenberg the No. 2 job had been in the
planning stage for several days, and may have caught Mr. Katzenberg by surprise.
Mr. Eisner had been in private negotiations with Mr. Roth, and had discussed his
plans concerning Mr. Katzenberg with members of the Disney board.

Board members apparently agreed that Mr. Katzenberg's talents as a film and
television executive did not match Mr. Wells's skills as a labor negotiator,
businessman and Wall Street deal maker.

'Tremendous Respect'

Raymond L. Watson, a member of the Disney board and chairman of the executive
committee, said the situation had been "fully discussed in the board room."

Mr. Watson, who is vice chairman of the Irvine Company, a large land developer
in Southern California, added: "There is tremendous respect for Jeffrey. We
understood that he had the desire and ambition to do something different.

"He wanted to be the No. 2 person and the chief operating officer of the
company. That was the kind of job that he was interested in as we, the board,
understood it.

"We heard his ambition was to move on to something else more than what he had
been doing. And within the company there was no opportunity to go beyond the job
he has there.

"Frank's job was a totally different kind of job. This job is a partnership in
which Michael needs complementary kinds of talent. This is a different person
than Jeffrey. The most important thing is to reinforce Michael."

As part of the reorganization, Mr. Eisner said Sanford M. Litvack, the company's
executive vice president for law and human resources, would essentially take
over some of the responsibilities and tasks carried out by Mr. Wells. It is
those tasks that Mr. Katzenberg had sought.

The announcement said Mr. Litvack would "assume the role of chief of corporate
operations responsible for the day-to-day supervision of internal matters as
well as external relationships and dealings with governments, communities and
other corporations."


NAME: Joe Roth; Jeffrey Katzenberg

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jeffrey Katzenberg, a top Hollywood executive, is stepping down
as chairman of the Disney Studios. (Camera Press/London); Joe Roth, ex-chairman
of 20th Century Fox, will become head of Walt Disney Motion Pictures. (Michael
Going)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV WEEKEND;
Looking Back on a Life Of Divided Loyalties

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 15;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 855 words


"Long Shadows" is the kind of formulaic, sentimental film biography that tells
its story in flashbacks and begins with the subject in old age, looking over a
desk full of well-worn, memory-inducing photographs. In this case, the subject
is Haru Reischauer, an Asian-born, Western-educated woman whose interesting
bi-cultural life earned her some fame and historical import when her husband,
Edwin O. Reischauer, was named American Ambassador to Japan by President John F.
Kennedy.

The film begins in 1990, just after her husband's death, the day his ashes are
to be ceremonially scattered over the Pacific. In her home in La Jolla, Calif.,
Mrs. Reischauer (played by Fumi Dan, a lovely 37-year-old Japanese actress, who,
in the late-in-life sequences, is caked in truly unpersuasive makeup), is
indulging in grief-stricken nostalgia. As quick as you can say Land of the
Rising Sun, the film returns to prewar Japan, where Mrs. Reischauer, then known
as Haru Matsukata, grew up in a privileged household with a healthy respect for
Occidental culture that ran counter to Japan's prevailing nationalism. Sent to
college in the United States, somewhat against her will, Haru didn't feel quite
at home there, either. And indeed, the film takes as its theme the notion that
Haru's life, straddling the Pacific, leaves her feeling like a fish out of water
wherever she is. The feeling is naturally exacerbated by World War II and its
aftermath.

Such a life is not a bad vehicle for examining history; nor is it a story
unworthy of telling simply for its own sake. But "Long Shadows" forgoes these
intentions and instead concentrates on turning Mrs. Reischauer's life into
inspirational melodrama, the story of a woman whose conscience moves her to
struggle, in the words of the promotional material, "against prejudice and
ignorance that had been inflamed by the war."

Circumstances persist in making her choose sides; an early romance with an
American journalist is poisoned by her loyalties to her family. It isn't until
1956, when she is past 40, that she marries at all; her husband was an American,
born in Japan to missionary parents, who had become a Harvard professor and a
renowned scholar. They share their reminiscences, and their courtship is
cemented, in part, by the following exchange:

"I hated the war," she says.

"Was it very bad for you?"

"Not compared to others."

No wonder they fell in love.

Mr. Reischauer was a widower, and much is made of his children's reluctance to
accept his new wife. Eventually, of course, they do, but only after she
struggles to make a family Thanksgiving dinner and goes into private anguish
because she failed to replicate the first wife's zucchini bread.

Mr. Reischauer, whose kindly, ambassadorial grace is played to the hilt by Matt
Frewer, was the American Ambassador in Japan from 1961 to 1965, a ticklish time
in relations between the two countries owing to a sensitive security treaty that
had American nuclear submarines parked in Japanese waters and the onset of the
Vietnam War. And history has largely judged his tenure successful. "Long
Shadows," however, presents him as becoming less caring and human to his wife as
he becomes more professionally diplomatic.

"No sooner do we get through the interest equalization tax problem than we run
smack into fish and textiles," he says to Haru, with a chuckle, a great,
inadvertently hilarious line.

Indeed, according to the film, it is his wife's poise and integrity that flowers
in her return to her homeland, and it is also she, by shaming her husband into
resigning over his disapproval of American involvement in the Vietnam War, who
is responsible for their leaving Japan in the end.

In one final injustice that needs righting, back in America, her husband goes on
to further glory as a professor and scholar while she herself flounders,
unmotivated and depressed. She pulls herself out of it by writing a successful
book, and on the morning of the scattering of her husband's ashes, her grandson
tells her it has been assigned by his history professor.

Apparently, that's when she decides to write another book, "Long Shadows." And
it turns out that this is the kind of film biography that ends with its subject
sitting in front of a computer screen, typing away, while benign ghostly images
of people from her past walk in through the picture window to stand quietly and
support ively behind her.

AMERICAN PLAYHOUSE
Long Shadows
PBS, tonight at 9.
(Channel 13 in New York.)

Written by Milan Stitt; Sheldon Larry, director and co-producer; Ricki Franklin,
producer; Ms. Franklin, Hiroyuki Takazawa and Hisashi Yokota, executive
producers. A co-production of NHK in Japan and KCET in Los Angeles, in
association with KCTS in Seattle. Lindsay Law, executive producer for "American
Playhouse."

WITH: Fumi Dan (Haru Reischauer), Matt Frewer (Edwin O. Reischauer), Aeryk Egan
(Young Bobby), Kimberly Cullum (Young Joan), Valerie Levitt (Young Ann), Tom
Simmons (Delivery Man), Diane Wiltshire (Miss Boynton), Mieko Yuuki (Mother),
Shigero Koyama (Father) and Shigeru Shiina (Photographer).

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 26, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
Suppose We Rent Some Cabins and Run Our Own Camp?

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 2;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 618 words


What's more alone than "Home Alone"? It's "Camp Nowhere," in which a band of
pre-teen-agers have the bright idea of escaping their pushy parents for the
summer. While the parents contemplate various educational camps for their
children ("Camp Microchippewa" is an option for the computer-conscious), the
campers scrounge up enough money to rent some empty cabins and hire Dennis Van
Welker (Christopher Lloyd) to pretend to be an adult. For Dennis, a
good-natured, down-and-out casualty of the 60's, this is not an easy assignment.

If "Camp Nowhere" stuck to the predictable high jinks -- buying toys, having pie
fights, jumping off the roof onto mattresses -- it would be about as welcome as
poison ivy. Fortunately, there's a funny screenplay (by Andrew Kurtzman and
Eliot Wald, two "Saturday Night Live" writers), good-humored direction by
Jonathan Prince, and a nice young cast. Most of the actors have television
experience, and they bring a sturdy, no-frills professionalism to their roles.

Best of all, this film provides a good opportunity for Mr. Lloyd, an actor who
has figured appealingly in many child-oriented hits (the "Back to the Future"
and "Addams Family" films; "Who Framed Roger Rabbit"). This time, Mr. Lloyd gets
to play a cheerful, eager burnout whose hippie past is never far behind him.
Reading the label on a medicine bottle prescribed for Morris (Mud) Himmel
(Jonathan Jackson), the campers' ringleader, he advises four pills every hour.
But the label says one pill every four hours.  "Ooh!" sighs Dennis. "Not the
first time that mistake's gotten me in trouble."

Dennis will try anything to fool a bill collector (M. Emmet Walsh), the local
law officer (Tom Wilson, the bully of the "Back to the Future" series) or the
campers' parents. This is handy, since some of those parents think they've sent
their children to military camp; some think it's diet, acting ("Shakespeare
Hamlet") or computer camp ("Binary Pines"), respectively.

The film's piece de resistance comes when the parents insist on visiting, and
their children stage a complicated four-tiered visiting day. This sequence is
long and amusing enough to make up for the film's slower stages. Best moment:
when a sign that reads "To Saigon" for mock military maneuvers is changed to
read "Miss Saigon" when the Broadway-minded parents arrive.

Smaller children may miss jokes like this, but they should enjoy the overall
good humor on display. And for adults in the audience, Mr. Lloyd is a definite
bonus. Trying to woo a pretty local doctor (Wendy Makkena), for instance, he
invites her to dinner, pretending to be Mud's loving father. Then Mud falls
asleep, and the boy becomes an inconvenient presence. Lovingly, Dennis lifts
Mud, opens the cabin door and deposits him in what is supposedly a bedroom --
and is actually the back porch.

Later on, confronted about this in broad daylight by the doctor, Dennis looks
suitably aghast. He surveys the porch, thinks fast, and delivers the only
feasible comeback: "Good lord, there must've been a tornado!"

"Camp Nowhere" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes mildly
off-color language and some smooching in its last reel.

CAMP NOWHERE

Directed by Jonathan Prince; written by Andrew Kurtzman and Eliot Wald; director
of photography, Sandi Sissel; edited by John Poll; music by David Lawrence;
production designer, Rusty Smith; produced by Michael Peyser; released by Buena
Vista Pictures. Running time: 96 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Christopher Lloyd (Dennis Van Welker), Jonathan Jackson (Morris Himmel),
Tom Wilson (Lieut. Eliot Hendricks), Wendy Makkena (Dr. Celeste Dunbar) and M.
Emmet Walsh (T. R. Polk)

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the young cast frolic in a scene from "Camp Nowhere."
(Suzanne Tanner/Hollywood Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

White House Picks New Chief of Staff For the Air Force

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 290 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 26


The White House today nominated Gen. Ronald R. Fogleman, head of the United
States Transportation Command, to be the next Air Force Chief of Staff.

General Fogleman, a 52-year-old fighter pilot, will replace Gen. Merrill A.
McPeak, 58, who is scheduled to retire in October after serving as the Air
Force's top officer since 1990. The appointment requires Senate confirmation,
which is expected.

As Chief of Staff, General Fogleman will be responsible for organizing, training
and equipping all active-duty and reserve Air Force personnel, and he will
represent the Air Force on the six-member Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Fogleman, an Air Force Academy graduate, has commanded the United States
Transportation Command at Scott Air Force Base, Ill., since August 1992. In that
post, he is the nation's top military transportation officer, coordinating air,
land and sea shipping.

The command also oversees wartime airlifts, and General Fogleman has been
involved in planning for possible military action on the Korean peninsula.

General Fogleman served as an F-100 pilot and forward air controller in Vietnam
and Thailand in the Vietnam War, earning a Silver Star and Purple Heart. He
moved up to command squadrons and air wings before ultimately serving as head of
American Air Forces in the Pacific from 1990 to 1992.

In another important military change of command, the Administration will soon
nominate Lieut. Gen. John J. Sheehan, director of operations for the Joint
Staff, to be the head of the United States Atlantic Command, a senior
Congressional official said today.

General Sheehan, who would be promoted from three to four stars, would succeed
Adm. Paul David Miller, who is to retire later this year.

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 27, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hail the Ugly American

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 110 words


To the Editor:

The headline on Yelena Khanga's Aug. 20 Op-Ed article, "Overrun by Ugly
Americans," continues a widespread misconception that is now almost 40 years
old.

The protagonist of "The Ugly American," the 1958 novel by William J. Lederer and
Eugene Burdick, was a hero, not a villain. He was the engineer who got out from
behind his desk and explored the Vietnamese countryside to determine the real
construction needs. Opposing him were the upper-class French, American and
Vietnamese Government experts who, without ever leaving Saigon, thought they
knew better. They didn't.

SHERMAN SIEGEL
King of Prussia, Pa., Aug. 20, 1994

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
Woodstock's Children

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words


A "WOODSTOCK," AS FUTURE dictionaries may define it, is (1) a mass concert in a
reeking mudhole, (2) a party weekend with hundreds of thousands of neighbors,
(3) a limited-scale calamity and survival drill, (4) a test of public civility,
(5) a generational rite of passage. Essential elements include soft drugs, some
nudity, overwhelmed security, the kindness of strangers and a sense of history
being made.

The blueprint came from the 1969 Woodstock festival, which created a happy myth
for the baby-boom generation: peace in wartime, fun amid the mess. Woodstock
'94, 25 years later, yielded the same images of joyful tie-dyed dancers and
acres of mud-spattered revelers. And the startling thing was that for so many of
the people who came to Saugerties, N. Y., living up to and living through those
images was everything they had hoped for. Suspicious of their boomer legacy,
they still wanted to sample it.

The children of the baby boomers may prefer Metallica and Green Day to Joe
Cocker and Santana, but many of them are convinced that the baby boomers
patented the secrets of carefree communal pleasure. If it took mud, traffic
snafus and a full set of off-key harmonies by Crosby, Stills and Nash to become
an initiate, then they'd stick it out, expecting redemption through adversity.
They've added their own neo-1960's twists; on the festival's third day, someone
had recycled dozens of discarded soda bottles to construct a peace symbol in the
mud.

After the overflowing 1969 festival, scattered longhairs, underground music fans
and antiwar sympathizers realized they weren't loners anymore; Woodstock
certified the extent of Woodstock Nation. In 1994, the younger generation
doesn't have an issue as starkly divisive as the Vietnam War, and it already
knows its own size and dress code from MTV, the Fox network and endless teen-age
movies. It's no surprise to see more people with tattoos and piercings -- not
after four years of Lollapalooza Festivals, which are single-generation affairs,
bewildering to most boomers. But people in their teens and 20's flocked to
Woodstock '94 anyway, convinced that they had missed something.

They have had to put up with their own set of stereotypes: Boomers have pegged
them as the generation of Nintendo and MTV, isolated and alienated and passive.
They're sullen because their elders had all the pre-AIDS fun and took all the
good jobs; their frustration erupts in the impersonal aggression of moshing. Yet
the turnout at Woodstock, and the number of people who said they were there
"seeking" something, suggests that comfort and consumption are not all the
younger generation wants.

They had seen the movie "Woodstock"; now, they were determined to experience it.
Afterward, perhaps, they would not feel so all alone.

Woodstock '94, reviving a trademark, was billed as an exercise in control and
cash flow, attempting to plug all the loopholes that bankrupted the 1969
original. Rock is the flower of capitalism; this time, capitalism would get its
full cut of the action. All advance information led to the belief that it would
be a theme-park Woodstock: Traffic would flow; tickets would be collected; drug
and alcohol use would be curtailed; vendors would thrive; toilets would suffice.
Performers from the 1969 festival would confer authenticity; younger hit makers
would sell the tickets. In 1994, there was also up-to-date techno music until
dawn, and those who couldn't face the actual journey, crowd or weather could
tune in the stage performances on live television, though what they saw was just
another rock concert.

Yet with a Woodstock, the name seems to be the destiny, and the destiny is chaos
that defies all predictions. This time, it's true, vendors profitably supplied
food through the festival. Aerosmith, working the late shift, finished out the
bill on Saturday night by 3:30 A.M, a lot earlier than the Jefferson Airplane in
1969. The site was not declared a disaster area. Still, nearly half of the
estimated audience of 350,000 got in free, unscreened for drugs or weapons.
Drugs, primarily 1960's staples like marijuana and LSD along with the newer
Ecstasy, were widely used; weapons, even in these gun-toting 1990's, were not.
New York State Thruway traffic jams were replaced by long waits for shuttle
buses. If there was free love, it probably involved condoms, and it took place
behind closed tent flaps.

The inevitable rain created the inexorable mud; people suffered from exhaustion,
bad acid (some laced with strychnine), too much alcohol or sprained ankles from
trying to walk around. But the ordeal became a ritual, one hallowed by 25 years
of old Woodstock yarns.

So different, so similar -- and the music told the same story. A full day of
preliminaries on Aug. 12 belonged to the current generation, presenting mostly
second-rate local groups followed by melodramatic, self-important bands familiar
from MTV. But the two days that made up the pay-per-view broadcast ricocheted
through the last 25 years, juxtaposing baby-boomer bands -- including the chief
icon, Bob Dylan -- with later arrivals.

Some of the younger bands, like Blind Melon and the Spin Doctors, are steeped in
boomer-style psychedelic jamming, while Arrested Development consciously echoes
the gospel-charged utopianism of early Sly and the Family Stone. Others, like
Nine Inch Nails, Green Day, Porno for Pyros, Metallica, Cypress Hill and the
Rollins Band, are anything but utopian; they're bored, frustrated, angry. And
they were a reminder that while the boomers set the terms of this Woodstock and
held forth from the stage, they weren't having the only say.

On stage, the contrast was clear between aging hippie types, graying and just
standing there -- or worse, like the portly Joe Cocker and Stephen Stills,
jumping to end songs -- and the exuberant physicality of the younger bands. The
hip-shaking, high-kicking, 46-year-old Steven Tyler, who led Aerosmith through
jokey come-ons and power ballads, was an exception in his generation; Bob Dylan
understood that all he had to do was dress well (in a desperado's black suit),
keep a poker face and sing from the heart.

Woodstock Nation II has grown up on the spectacles of arena-rock and MTV, and
doesn't equate showmanship with superficiality. Peter Gabriel, the last
performer on the bill, had dance routines and lighting effects, but still
sounded idealistic when he sang "Biko," about the martyred South African.. Among
the younger bands, Shannon Hoon of Blind Melon, wearing a long white skirt,
writhed and leaped as if the stage were electrified; Tim Booth of James flopped
rubbery arms and legs; Perry Farrell, of Porno for Pyros, did a perfect
pratfall, and it was hard to tell whether the stage was slippery or he had
planned it.

For these performers, the poses weren't sexual preening. They acted out inner
torments and frustrations, unafraid to look graceless. Their bodies semaphored
that they were filled with wild, thwarted energy; if they didn't discharge it,
it could kill them.

What some startled boomers couldn't understand about Woodstock '94 was the
vision of aggression as celebration. This was Woodstock with a giant mosh pit,
full of colliding bodies and crowd-surfers, roiling and pullulating to the
music. Green Day taunted the crowd, and was pelted with mud until its set turned
into a melee of stage crashers and band members grappling with security guards;
Wavy Gravy was shocked and worried, but the audience took it as pure
entertainment. Metallica used slow-grinding and jackhammer riffs to sing about
nightmares and devastation; acres of arms waved to the rhythm, like lightning
rods in reverse. Bands like Metallica and Nine Inch Nails rub their listeners'
noses in bad news, yet somehow leave them cheered and invigorated.

Such music seems diametrically opposed to the hopeful messages of groups like
the Neville Brothers or Traffic, who performed on the boomer-dominated final day
of the festival. For rock fans now, it's not a matter of philosophical
consistency, but more like changing channels. The alienated fury of Metallica
has its own compartment, alongside the pleas for unity of Arrested Development
and the faith in love espoused by Santana or Melissa Etheridge.

There was moshing throughout Woodstock '94, even into a Sunday-morning gospel
segment. For the older bands, it was gentle, almost stately, with bodies being
carried through the crowd in slow-motion; it was a communal dance, with the body
contact that hippie swayers in the 1960's rarely made. Older audience members,
rightly worried about bruises and lost eyeglasses, didn't join in; like
hitchhiking and free love in 1969, moshing in 1994 was something best left to
the younger people.

The kids turned out to be more open-minded than their elders, who grimaced
through the younger bands or simply fled. They couldn't take the noise, the
harsh sounds and ideas that simply sound like heightened realism to the next
generation. For its young majority, showing up at Woodstock '94 signaled a sense
of hope, that some Edenic magic could be passed on to a generation that looks
forward only to pointless jobs and polluted terrain. They have passed the
initiation. But they know they will have to be tougher than their parents, and
Woodstock '94 won't be their last survival test.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A photo essay of the 1994 Woodstock Festival. (Photographs by
Fred R. Conrad for The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Claire Hsiang and Christopher Marx

SECTION: Section 1; Page 44; Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


Claire Bing-Yuan Hsiang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Harry C. Hsiang of New
York and Taipei, Taiwan, was married yesterday to Christopher William Marx, the
son of Mr. and Mrs. William B. Marx Jr. of Chatham, N.J. The Rev. Richard
Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.

Mrs. Marx, 28, graduated from Williams College and received a master's degree in
creative writing from the University of Michigan. She is a development
consultant to the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund in New York
and a writer.

The bride's father, a vice president at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
in New York, is also the general manager of the Metropolitan Insurance and
Annuity Company in Taipei. Her maternal grandfather, the late Hu Lien, was a
general in the army of Taiwan and was that country's Ambassador to Vietnam from
1965 to 1972.

Mr. Marx, 27, graduated from Harvard University and received an M.B.A. degree
from Stanford University. He is to become a management consultant next month at
the Boston Consulting Group in New York.

The bridegroom's father is an executive vice president at the AT & T Corporation
and the chief executive of its Network Systems Group, both in Basking Ridge,
N.J.


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Claire and Christopher Marx. (Juanita DeSilva)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: Best of Enemies;
Castro, the Man With Few Cards, Always Winds Up the Dealer

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1595 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


HIS country may be crumbling around him, its economy reduced to ruins and its
people so disgusted with their situation that some have marched in the streets
of Havana this month, openly demanding his ouster. But for all his problems at
home, Fidel Castro still retains a remarkable ability to bedevil the United
States and to transfer the burden of his own domestic failings to the adversary
he has fought with such gusto and relish for more than 35 years.

In what has become a rite of passage for every American President since
Eisenhower, Bill Clinton is now learning that lesson the hard way. The internal
crisis that began less than a month ago with boat hijackings and a riot in
Havana has quickly been transformed into a crisis of American foreign and
immigration policy, with the United States now forced to provide temporary
refuge at places like the Guantanamo Bay naval base for the more than 16,000
disenchanted Cubans intercepted as they headed for Florida aboard rickety rafts.
As was the case during the 1980 exodus from the port of Mariel, Mr. Castro,
playing a weak hand with consummate skill, is now dictating the course and tempo
of events while Washington, with far more resources at its disposal, struggles
to respond.

"Everything that he is doing today is consistent with what he has always done,
which is to be creative with his limited options," said Tad Szulc, who wrote the
biography "Fidel: A Critical Portrait" with the Cuban leader's cooperation. "He
has been doing this for a living for 35 years, and realizes he has only one card
to play, the weapon of the refugees. He needs the breathing space and knows that
the only way to get it is to force the Americans into a dialogue."

If anything, Mr. Castro seems energized by his clash with a young, untested
President, whose foreign policy staff includes many of the same officials who
were also involved in Mariel. In eclipse since the collapse of the Soviet bloc
five years ago, his image tarnished by reports of Cubans going hungry and the
collapse of the health and education programs that were the proudest
achievements of the Cuban Revolution, the Maximum Leader is back on the front
lines and in the international limelight again, leading the efforts to quell
internal discontent and cut the yanquis down to size.

Mr. Castro comes well-equipped to the latest confrontation with his "closest of
enemies," as Wayne Smith, former head of the United States Interests Section in
Havana, describes the United States-Cuba relationship. He is known to be an avid
viewer of CNN on the satellite dish that was Ted Turner's gift to him a decade
ago, and, Mr. Szulc said, not only sees that Mr. Clinton has his hands full with
domestic legislation and with Bosnia, Korea and Haiti, but knows how to use that
knowledge to his own benefit. He is also well aware that the United States,
given its values and domestic political pressures, cannot afford to send back
the "anti-social elements" he is encouraging to leave, even though Mr. Clinton
has reversed the longstanding policy of automatically granting asylum to fleeing
Cubans.

"Fidel is a shrewd student of United States society, institutions and
government," Jose Luis Llovio Menendez, an ex-Cuban official, wrote in
"Insider," an account of his 17 years in the revolutionary elite. He said Mr.
Castro "understands the limitations on a President's power to act in many
critical circumstances. This knowledge informs his every strategic maneuver."

As Mr. Castro's oldest associates tell it, that has always been the case. "He
knew from the beginning that to be a great man he had to confront a great
power," Carlos Franqui, one of Mr. Castro's earliest comrades in arms, said in
an interview. In a letter written in June 1958 while still in the Sierra Maestra
fighting the Batista dictatorship, Mr. Castro said of the United States that
"when this war is over, a much longer and larger war will begin for me: the war
I'm going to wage against them. I realize that this will be my destiny."

More often than not, of course, Mr. Castro has found the United States only too
happy to oblige that ambition. Ludicrous assassination schemes, the botched Bay
of Pigs invasion and diplomatic campaigns aimed at isolating him internationally
all added to his revolutionary luster, remaining propaganda fodder for Havana
long after the United States pledged, as part of the solution to the Cuban
missile crisis of 1962, not to use force to overthrow Mr. Castro.

Occasionally, however, Washington has shown itself able to defuse challenges Mr.
Castro has manufactured. In September 1965, for example, in an immigration
crisis handled so deftly that it has been largely forgotten, Mr. Castro
announced that any malcontents were welcome to leave from the port of Camarioca.
Over the next month, more than 5,000 Cubans took to sea in small vessels of
every type, straining the ability of the Coast Guard to intercept and assist
them.

The Johnson Administration, preoccupied with Vietnam and fearing a tragedy in
the Straits of Florida, quickly proposed an open-ended refugee airlift if Mr.
Castro would call a halt to the exodus. He accepted the offer, and the ensuing
"freedom flights" lasted into the 1970's, bringing more than 200,000 Cubans to
the United States with virtually no fanfare or any real political cost for
either side.

"That is the model Cuba likes for migration, and Castro said as much" last week
in a rambling speech on Cuban TV, said Lisandro Perez, director of the Cuba
Research Institute at Florida International University. "He wants an escape
valve that is orderly and drawn out and not very splashy." This time, Mr.
Castro's call for high-level negotiations was rejected, though the
Administration said yesterday it would like to quickly resume mid-level talks on
migration with the aim of stemming the flow of refugees.

In fact, though Mr. Castro likes to portray American policy toward his
revolution as one of unrelenting hostility, the record indicates otherwise. All
nine presidents since the days of Eisenhower have sought to take the approach
recommended by then-Vice President Richard Nixon as he emerged from his
Washington office with his arm around the Cuban leader after they met there in
April 1959: "We're going to work with this man."

Mr. Nixon himself would later negotiate an anti-air-hijacking agreement with Mr.
Castro. And under President Ford, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said he saw
no reason for "perpetual antagonism between Cuba and the U.S." In 1975, the
United States even voted with the majority at the Organization of American
States to end sanctions against Cuba, and under Jimmy Carter, an even broader
initiative was launched.

The Same Pattern

But Mr. Castro unilaterally abrogated the anti-hijacking agreement after blaming
the United States for the bombing of a Cuban airliner. The Ford initiative
collapsed when Cuban troops were sent to fight in Angola's civil war. As for the
Carter Administration's efforts to reduce tensions between the two countries,
they were answered with Mariel.

Despite those bitter experiences, however, Ronald Reagan was able to put aside
his aversion to Communism and reach accords with Mr. Castro on migration and the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Africa. "Each and every one of these Presidents
came to the conclusion that an important aspect of his Castro crisis required
negotiations," said Jorge I. Dominguez, a Cuba expert at Harvard's Center for
International Affairs.

With Mr. Clinton, the Cuban leader's behavior thus far has followed much the
same pattern. "Every time an American President takes office, Castro starts by
throwing bouquets," said Mr. Franqui, who fought in the Sierra Maestra with Mr.
Castro and wrote "Family Portrait With Fidel" after breaking with him. "But at a
certain moment, he always provokes a problem."

In the current crisis, Mr. Castro has repeatedly said his ultimate objective is
the lifting of the economic embargo that the United States has maintained on
trade with Cuba for more than 30 years. But the embargo has also worked to his
benefit, not only because he can blame it for Cuba's economic ills but also
because it is easily circumvented, and an American offer to discuss ending the
embargo in return for political reforms might well put Mr. Castro in a difficult
spot.

"I have always believed he is more afraid of openness than isolation," Dr. Perez
said. Lifting the embargo "would allow him greater options for trade, yes, but
he doesn't have any money to buy anything. It wouldn't really multiply the
possibilities of trade, but it would bring in a flood of ideas and dollars,
which are dangerous, and deprive him of a political tool."

Or as Mr. Nixon put it in a book published just before his death this spring,
"the plain fact . . . is that after 35 years of Castro's rule, the hard line
against him has failed to get rid of him." With the Communist bloc gone, "our
best service to the Cuban people now would be to build pressure from within by
actively stimulating Cuba's contacts with the free world," Mr. Nixon concluded.

No matter what the outcome of his umpteenth clash with Washington, Mr. Castro
plans to stick around. In Colombia three weeks ago, he compared himself to the
Great Liberator of the Americas, Simon Bolivar, and vowed to keep on frustrating
"those who want to see me away from all this."

"Revolutionaries never abandon the battlefield," he explained. "Revolutionaries
do not go into retirement as long as their services and efforts are required."


LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dwight D. Eisenhower -- Castro is beginning to "look like a
madman," he said in January 1960. His C.I.A. began plans to unseat the Cuban
leader. (George Tames/The New York Times); John F. Kennedy -- He paced all night
in anguish after the Bay of Pigs invasion, then obsessively pursued covert
operations against Castro; Lyndon B. Johnson -- He left Castro mostly alone,
keeping the deal that ended the missile crisis, and negotiated flights out for
200,000 Cubans. (The New York Times); Richard M. Nixon -- He kept up a
low-profile dialogue with Castro, but had to cope with Soviet efforts to
establish a nuclear submarine base in Cuba. (United Press International); Gerald
R. Ford --
Early in his presidency, tensions with Cuba eased -- until Castro dispatched
50,000 troops to Angola in 1975 and 1976; Jimmy Carter -- He wanted to "resolve
the Cuba question," but had to contend with the Soviet brigade in Cuba in 1979
and the Mariel boatlift in 1980. (The New York Times); Ronald Reagan -- He
focused on fighting Cuban influence in Central America and Grenada, but also
reached two major agreements with Castro. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times);
George Bush -- He provided unilateral assurances that the U.S. would not attack
Cuba. Castro's agitation in Central America continued; Bill Clinton -- Castro,
who wants him to end the embargo, arranged an exodus to get his attention.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Virginia, Gun Buyers See Danger In Crime Bill

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 838 words

DATELINE: WARRENTON, Va., Aug. 27


On the morning after the Senate passed President Clinton's crime bill, the phone
at Clark Brothers Gun Shop here was ringing with calls from customers wanting to
know if their assault rifles were worth more now that they are about to be
banned.

Although many customers said they feared that the law would erode their liberty,
even more seemed mystified by all the big-city commotion about firearms.

"You see any thugs here?" asked Delbert Welch, a 32-year-old backhoe operator
who stopped in at lunchtime. "You see any guys in dark glasses trying to buy
machine guns? George Washington is probably rolling in his grave. If people had
taken his guns, there wouldn't be no America."

Warrenton, a town of 5,400 about 55 miles southwest of Washington, sits on the
cusp of two Virginias. In the urban crescent running from Washington through
Richmond to Norfolk, guns are generally viewed as exotic and scary. But in much
of the rest of the state, boxes of ammunition are stocking-stuffers, and gun
racks are popular accessories for pickups and sport utility vehicles. For many a
young man in rural Virginia, shivering in a duck blind with his dad or buddies
is a rite of passage.

In these parts, an assault rifle is called a long-range target gun. During deer
season, camouflage and blaze-orange gear can be hip school attire.

"You see a gopher in the garden, you shoot it," said David Frazier, 29, who has
been working at Clark Brothers since he was 17.

Lindsay May, the store's 15-year-old summer helper who says she wants to become
a neonatal pediatrician, proudly recalled shooting an eight-point buck last
year.

Guns Awaiting Buyers

Above the length of the counter, guns hang horizontally in bunches of six. In
vertical racks behind the counter, another 85 rifles await buyers.

The general manager, Scott E. Carter, took down an M-1A, a 10-pound, 44-inch
semiautomatic assault weapon with a walnut stock. Price: $1,995, used. He sells
one or two a week.

"Can you imagine someone strolling down the streets of D.C. with this in their
pocket?" Mr. Carter, 52, asked. "But this is going up in smoke because of what
people do to each other."

Nearby was another assault weapon, a 39-inch steel Colt Competitor, a civilian
version of the M-16. Mr. Carter said such firearms were favored by the kind of
people who like war movies or are fascinated by Jeeps and tanks.

"It's an ugly gun," he allowed. "But some people have ugly dogs. The
Constitution says you can have a gun, not what kind of gun. Once they get their
hands on this one, all it takes is an amendment to take the one that sits next
to it."

Even so, Mr. Carter predicted that the new anti-crime legislation would have
little immediate impact on the sales or prices of assault weapons.

The one-story brick store, topped by a life-size fiberglass grizzly bear, sits
at the junction of two major highways, next to a fireworks stand sporting a
Confederate battle flag. In addition to guns, Clark Brothers offers accessories
like camouflage makeup, cassettes for practicing goose calls and Hot-Spot, a
powder that its makers claim attracts deer. A poster above the inside of the
front door says, "Hitler, Castro, Qaddafi, Stalin: The experts agree -- gun
control works!"

Several customers said they were tired of having their side of the gun debate
ignored in Washington and by the news media. A sign on the counter urged
customers to redial repeatedly an '800' number that was said to cost an anti-gun
group 80 cents for each call.

Guerrilla Tactics

A poster displayed at the shooting range behind the store, advised: "Every time
you request information from Handgun Control Inc., you cost them $3 to $4 in
printing and mailing costs to answer you. Add it up. One million gun owners
could cost them $3 million to $4 million."

Guns have been a dominant issue for about five years in Virginia, where loose
gun laws have earned the state a reputation as the firearms supermarket to the
urban Northeast. According to Federal data in some years, Virginia was the
leading supplier of guns confiscated at crime scenes in the cities of New York
and Washington.

In 1993, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder signed into law a measure allowing a person to
buy only one handgun each month. But politicians take care to avoid offending
the state's substantial contingent of gun enthusiasts. The Democratic nominee
for governor in 1993, Mary Sue Terry, tried to assuage opponents of her plan for
a five-day waiting period for handgun sales by recalling how she had hunted
squirrels with a bolt-action Winchester shotgun from the age of 12. Ms. Terry
was overwhelmingly defeated by her Republican opponent, George F. Allen Jr.

Oliver L. North, the Republican nominee for Senate this year, has made
sportsmen's rights one of his main campaign issues, has the endorsement of the
National Rifle Association and has held several campaign events at rifle ranges.

When asked recently if he had ever hunted with an assault rifle, Mr. North
replied, "Yes, in Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CUTTINGS;
Private Jungle on a Tropical Island Called Astoria

BYLINE: By Anne Raver

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 38;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


ANTONIO CARELLA would like to visit his sisters and brothers in southern Italy,
but he hasn't taken a vacation in three years.

"Last time I did that, my banana plant died," he said, petting a green leaf the
size of a small canoe. "My friend overwatered it."

Mr. Carella, a retired chemist, looks tiny next to his newest banana plant, a
year-old Dwarf Cavendish. Some dwarf. It rises 12 feet from a six-gallon tub on
the edge of the asphalt yard that is the garden behind his little house in
Astoria, Queens. No bananas yet. But wait a year or two. Last summer, its
three-year-old mother produced 82 bananas.

"In August, right from the center of the plant comes a big stalk like a corn
tassel," said Mr. Carella in his little jungle of about 150 potted plants.
"Beautiful, a red-violet color. This tassel gets bigger and bigger until it's
almost two feet long, and then the weight makes it bend to one side."

Within a month, the stalk hung heavy with green bananas that in their natural
habitat -- some place like Malaysia -- would have ripened to a pinkish-yellow.
But in Astoria, by late September, it's getting pretty chilly for a tropical
banana, so Mr. Carella rolled his pet plant, along with his coffee tree, his
gardenias, the jasmines, the mango, the sapote, the fig, the you-name-it into
his little storefront on Steinway Street.

The big glass windows face south, so there's plenty of sun. But it's hard trying
to please all these different species. A lemon tree, for instance, likes cool
nights: it can't stand hot weather and humidity. But a banana, to ripen, needs a
cozy 70 degrees.

Every winter, Mr. Carella tries to strike a compromise. He makes the storefront
50 to 55 degrees. It keeps the tropical plants "sleeping," he says, "hibernating
like the bears," but doesn't overheat the lemons and gardenias. They suffer,
though. They battle bugs and their leaves drop off. He implores them to hold on,
hold on, until they can go out into their parking lot again.


But last March, as the sun got higher and hotter, those bananas in the window
ripened right up. Sweet little Cavendish bananas that sell for $1.60 a pound.
(Meanwhile, the bird of paradise, which likes it cool as a cucumber, was
gasping.)

"People used to pass by the window and do this," he said, doing a double take.
"They'd come in and say, 'Mister, are those real bananas?' "

Once a banana plant flowers and fruits, it dies. "It's an herb, not a tree," Mr.
Carella said.

But if you shear it off at the base, you'll see the big corm that can be divided
into four or five pieces and stuck into new pots. Mr. Carella is fond of white
plastic construction buckets he finds along the street. If you drill them with
holes, they make perfect planters -- or compost bins.

Almost every plant in Mr. Carella's little jungle has been started from a seed
or a cutting. Every month, he and other core members of the Pits (officially the
Rare Pit and Plant Council) get together for a pot luck dinner and sample some
fruit found at an ethnic market. Then they plant the pits, which accounts for
the cherimoya, the soursop, the black sapote, the mango, papaya, tamarind,
litchi, loquat, jambolan, carambola and many other tropical specimens in this
potted garden.

Some never fruit, but many others do. Some die -- from too much root-pruning or
too much fertilizer, or not enough of something that usually happens,
unrecorded, in a jungle.

"There aren't many books on growing these things in pots," said Mr. Carella, who
came to this spot from Bari, Italy, 40 years ago and never left. As a young man,
he dreamed of going to Malaysia and Vietnam as a journalist. But he married,
instead. He struggled along with what jobs he could find -- from working in an
Italian pastry shop to making bridal gowns. Then he got a master's degree in
chemistry at St. Francis College in Brooklyn. All the while he was creating his
own little Malaysia in front of a three-car garage.

"If I got rid of it, my sons would kill me," he said, staring at the shiny cars
parked inside. A grapevine, thriving from a Long Island cutting, is scrambling
above the doors. Plants three pots deep line the perimeter of this little
square.

Mr. Carella used to have even more tropical plants, until six years ago, when he
retired from the physiology department at the Downstate Medical Center (now the
SUNY Health Science Center) in Brooklyn. In the windowed laboratory, he coaxed a
pineapple to fruit, a coconut palm to reach the ceiling.

People at the lab called him Dr. Carella. "Not because I have a Ph.D.," he said,
"but because they used to bring in their plants and say, 'Doctor, what's wrong?"


At night, Mr. Carella likes to sit in a little chair near his fragrant jasmines
and take deep breaths. They, and a Verbena atriodora (he sneaked a little
cutting from Italy) and an Acacia farnesia -- a little puffy yellow thing that
smells lovely -- remind him of his childhood. So do the fragrant tuberoses,
which sit beside his six-foot cherry tomato plant.

"I was born in a garden," he said. "My grandmother grew grapes, quince, peaches,
oranges, figs. Nothing exceptional. Everybody grew them."

Gardenias grew like trees there. You never brought them in. And everybody had a
little fragrant carnation that you just don't see in America. Carnations here
don't smell.

"Here's something that nobody in New York ever sees," he said, showing off a
strange green fruit shaped like a fistful of pointy green fingers.  "Citrus
medica, or Buddha's fingers. It's a sacred fruit in Malaysia. It has a citrus
taste, but very, very strong."

And don't think that just because he loves the tropics Mr. Carella doesn't have
a fig tree or two -- loaded with sweet figs. And a little basil, a little
arugula, some oregano and parsley, a patch of radicchio. And don't forget the
Italian zucchini -- those pale green baseball bats so loved in Italy.

He makes Italian coffee, too, from a seven-foot coffee tree started from a fresh
bean six years ago. It yields about a pound a year. You pick the little
cherrylike fruits when they're bright red and find the beans inside. Soak them
in a solution of sodium bicarbonate, let them dry in the sun, and roast them
over the stove.

He pointed to a six-inch coffee-plant cutting in a plastic glass.  "Treat him
good, but not too good," he said. "Too much love, and a coffee plant will die."

THIS WEEK
What to Do With Those Precious Pits

If you're interested in tropical plants and starting them from seeds and
cuttings, you may want to join the Rare Pit and Plant Council, which was started
about 20 years ago by a Villager named Debbie Peterson and other New York plant
fiends who scour the ethnic markets for exotic fruits, eat them, then plant the
pits.

The group puts out a newsletter about eight times a year and has roughly 700
subscribers around the world. Subscriptions are $12.50, available from Marty
Biesc, 303 East 37th Street, New York 10016.

As for the garden, keep after the slugs and Japanese beetles. Compost old
zucchini vines and plants that have stopped bearing.

Reseed the bare patches of the lawn, and aerate the whole thing to help root
growth. Leave grass clippings (not clumps) on the lawn to return nitrogen to the
soil.

Continue to cut herbs like basil and oregano to dry or freeze for winter
cooking. But don't forget that plants like yarrow, anise hyssop, lavender, bee
balm, southernwood and lady's mantle make wonderful dried arrangements. And pick
those peppers.

Divide and replant irises.

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Antonio Carella and his Dwarf Cavendish banana plant. (Andrew
Lichtenstein for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              179 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cath-22 Plus: A Conversation With Joseph Heller

BYLINE: By Barbara Gelb;   Barbara Gelb and her husband, Arthur Gelb, are
revising their 1962 biography, "O'Neill," for publication next year.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3080 words


"A CROTCHETY old fogey of 28" is how Joseph Heller, with shrewd self-knowledge,
described his zanily exaggerated alter ego, Yossarian, the cynical bombardier
hero of "Catch-22." I found that description when I recently reread Mr. Heller's
classic 1961 novel before settling down with an advance copy of his new one,
"Closing Time," which purports to be a sequel to "Catch-22" and which will be
published by Simon & Schuster next month. That description of Yossarian reminded
me of my first impression of Mr. Heller, whom I met in 1974 when his second
novel, "Something Happened," appeared. He struck me immediately as a crotchety
old fogey of 51. He was also amusing and occasionally almost charming.

Five books later, Mr. Heller has evolved into an even more crotchety old fogey
of 71. During the only time that I formally interviewed him -- in 1979, just
before the publication of his third novel, "Good as Gold" -- he did his best to
appear winsome, in the evident belief that being seen as lovable would help sell
his new book. But the minute he knew the article was safely locked up, the
winning ways all but vanished.

For 20 years now, I have managed to overlook his frequent sulkiness, his
gluttonous table manners and his tendency to growl No before he even knows what
the question is. I have stayed on good terms with him largely because I relish
his aberrant sense of humor and his skewed way of looking at life -- an outlook
he insists has changed little since he wrote "Catch-22."

For many years Joseph Heller and his first wife, Shirley, lived across the
courtyard from my husband and me in an apartment building on the Upper West Side
of Manhattan. (They separated in 1981 and were divorced in 1984.) More recently,
we have become neighbors on Long Island, where Mr. Heller now lives full time
with his second wife, Valerie. She was his nurse in 1982, when he struggled to
recover from a terrifying neurological disorder called Guillain-Barre syndrome,
which temporarily paralyzed him. It was while he was convalescing (and falling
in love) that Mr. Heller was briefly transformed into someone genuinely amiable,
almost angelic. But it took him no time to get used to the idea that he was
going to survive, and the amiability quickly evaporated.

In "Closing Time," fans of "Catch-22" will find Yossarian once again fearfully
trying to sidestep his own imminent death. When the story opens, the
twice-divorced Yossarian is living uneasily in Manhattan, knowing that this time
there's no possible way out. Yossarian is now 68, although he should be 78,
since 50 years have supposedly passed since he was 28 in "Catch-22." (Confronted
with this bent chronology, Mr. Heller says, "I know, but I decided to ignore
it.")

In any case, even at 68, Yossarian is too old to sit naked in a tree, as he did
in "Catch-22," feigning the insanity that might get him out of flying that next
bomber mission he knows will be the death of him. He now calculates (in common
with Mr. Heller) that with luck he has seven more years before disintegration
sets in and the best he can do is deny, deny, deny -- something that Mr. Heller,
if not Yossarian, has been perfecting all his life. Not long after I got to know
him, Mr. Heller recommended a book he had found enlightening. It was "The Denial
of Death."

Also alive in "Closing Time" are Milo Minderbinder, the calculating mess officer
who is now a billionaire arms merchant on a global scale; Milo's foulmouthed
sidekick, ex-Pfc. Wintergreen; and the ever-meek Chaplain Tappman, who becomes a
sequestered secret weapon when he is discovered by his physicians to be
urinating heavy water.

It is unusual for an author to write a sequel to a classic work of his own and
even more singular that he should take up the narrative decades later. While he
appears, in "Closing Time," to be fictionally confronting his own mortality
again, he is, at 71, very fit. He works out regularly. He has a full head of
fluffy white hair. And he is once again in his prepublication winsome mode.
Recently, Mr. Heller agreed to answer some questions (and to evade some others)
about this hazardous return that he began seven years ago.

Barbara Gelb: You must have been aware, in attempting a sequel to a book as
famous and cherished as "Catch-22," and one that has sold in the millions, of
the gamble involved. Didn't it make you nervous?

Joseph Heller: No, but I was aware of certain limitations and certain
possibilities and certain risks that I was taking. I knew that the new novel
should not emulate the old novel on which it was based. "Closing Time" takes
place 50 years later. It had to be sufficiently different to justify existing on
its own.

B.G.: I was surprised to find only a handful of characters from "Catch-22" in
"Closing Time." How did you determine which characters you would abandon and
which, aside from Yossarian, you would bring along?

J.H.: I omitted most of those characters because they did not fit my concept of
the new novel. I did consider, in my early notes, using Colonel Cathcart [the
group commander who kept raising the number of missions] because I needed some
military men for my Washington scenes. But he would have been 90 years old now
and hardly credible. This was going to be a novel in which Yossarian himself
would be just a part, just incorporated into a broader canvas of our present
times. And while "Catch-22" begins with Yossarian, "Closing Time" begins with
the first-person story of a man named Sammy Singer, who becomes the novel's
focal character. He announces the scope and concept of this novel in the first
sentence: "When people our age speak of the war it is not of Vietnam but of the
one that broke out more than half a century ago and swept in almost all the
world." In my vision of the book that I wanted to write, Sammy Singer was a
paramount narrator -- and much more reliable than Yossarian.

B.G.: And with Sammy, you are for the first time writing seriously about an
angst-ridden, authentically Jewish character, aren't you, rather than about such
symbolically alienated characters as Yossarian, the mock-Assyrian, and Slocum,
the deracinated, generic misfit? I don't include the Jews in "Good as Gold," who
were caricatures, or in "God Knows," who were biblical parodies. Am I right in
assuming you wanted, this time, to write about Joe Heller, the aging
nonobservant Jew, looking back at his life?

J.H.: I suppose this is the first time I've written seriously about Jewish
characters. And it's the first time I've written seriously, rather than
satirically, about marriage. There's a different sensibility in this novel, in
the Jewish background of two of the characters -- Sammy and his friend, Lew
Rabinowitz -- and their wives and, through them, their children. I'm saying,
here, that marriage is a most satisfactory state. Sammy and Lew both love their
wives, say so, praise them, rely on them. "Closing Time" treats marriage as an
optimum, desirable state. Yossarian misses it.

B.G.: These characters have the same background as Joe Heller: the Coney Island
childhood, the struggling immigrant parents. But then, so does Yossarian -- who,
we learn in "Closing Time," is divorced and has been something of a philanderer;
he has many of your somewhat cynical social and political and sexual attitudes.
He also has aspects of your wary, if loving, relationship with your son -- not
to mention a romance with a nurse that is reminiscent of your courtship of
Valerie. Are Yossarian and Sammy the two conflicting sides of Joseph Heller?

J.H.: No. . . . Yes. This is not autobiography. I am not the subject of this
novel -- although, in this particular book, I've used more of the details of my
own experience and background than I've ever done before. Sammy is based on me
and on a friend named Gerald Broidy, for whom I wrote promotional copy in the
advertising department of Time magazine during the late 50's, and whom I still
see. Many details of Sammy come from my own life and work experience. Many
details I give to Yossarian also come from my own life and experience.

B.G.: Would you agree that this self-description by Yossarian in "Closing Time"
accurately describes Joe Heller: "a man who likes to be alone much of the time,
thinks and daydreams a lot, doesn't really enjoy the give-and-take of
companionship all that much, falls silent much of the time and broods and is
indifferent to everything someone else might be talking about"?

J.H.: That is me, yes.

B.G.: While you're being so candid, will you explain the significance, in
"Closing Time," of all three of your main characters -- Sammy, Lew and Yossarian
-- having sons all named Michael?

J.H.: It's to suggest an effect of shared experience, but I don't want to
interpret symbolic or esthetic elements of the book before it's available; it's
up to the reader to make those interpretations.

B.G.: I won't ask you to interpret any more symbolism, even that of your
subterranean basement beneath the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan that
obviously represents Hades, and of the terminal itself -- with its hordes of
homeless, its runaways, its depraved, and its Police Department holding pen --
which represents a kind of limbo, if not hell. Let me ask you, instead, how you
did the research for that. It's all very convincingly described.

J.H.: I found a very good researcher, Ken Miller, who gave me his own
descriptions and also looked up newspaper accounts and other written material
for me. I never went near the terminal myself for this book. The only time I
ever was inside was long ago, when I went to visit the man I call Lew in the
book, when he was ill with Hodgkin's disease, in a place that was best reached
by bus.

AND the information about police procedures in the terminal, as well as a
detailed physical description of all its levels, came from our mutual friend
Jerry McQueen, whom you probably recognized as the model for Larry McBride in
"Closing Time." He's the softhearted ex-homicide cop who has retired from the
Police Department and who, in this novel, is an even softer-hearted supervisor
with an undefined but genial agenda in the Port Authority. After Jerry assured
me there was no actual subbasement there, I was free to invent one.

B.G.: So Jerry McQueen is still being useful to you. Do you remember the role he
played in your first night out, after you had barely begun to recover from
Guillain-Barre syndrome? You had brought Valerie home with you as your nurse.
That must have been around 12 years ago.

J.H.: Wasn't that the night we went to the Russian Tea Room? I couldn't walk, I
was still in a wheelchair.

B.G.: And you were still having difficulty with your speech, and with chewing. I
couldn't believe you really wanted to dine out in your condition.

J.H.: I had all you people taking good care of me. I knew it would all work out.

B.G.: Yes, but you were as startled as the rest of us when, without a word,
Jerry rolled his car over the curb and pulled it to a stop on the sidewalk, only
inches from the restaurant's front door, sprang out, seized you in his arms and
whisked you inside. I've never seen you so ebullient, so purely joyful. That
night I've always thought you were as close to euphoria as you have ever come.

J.H.: It was more than euphoria, it was genuine happiness.

B.G.: You informed yourself of every detail of your illness, once you were
recovering, didn't you? You even wrote a book about it, "No Laughing Matter."
Disease is a theme that runs through all your books. Yossarian, then and now, is
abnormally knowledgeable about the minute symptoms of various arcane diseases,
fears he has the diseases -- or will soon get them -- and checks himself
compulsively into hospitals. Where does this obsession with disease come from?

J.H.: Nobody knows with certainty what shapes a personality. But I can guess. I
could assert that it came from the death of my father during a bungled operation
when I was 5. Few people, however, adhere anymore to the Freudian models of
developmental theory. I don't. I can point to people whose fathers died and who
are not morbidly obsessed. And, conversely, there are others who are similarly
obsessed, and whose fathers did not die early deaths.

It's very hard for me to find a specific cause for the sensitivity to disease
that insistently shows up in my work. That it's there, I know. It's been with me
for a lifetime. But these fears grow smaller with age, and since Guillain-Barre
I'm less afraid of disease. I've never been a hypochondriac. All my life I've
gone to doctors only when there were strong symptoms -- and that's been rather
infrequently.

B.G.: You said earlier that you don't write about yourself, that "Closing Time"
is not autobiographical, yet you seem to be deliberately calling attention to
autobiographical aspects by your several references in this new book to a
character named Joey Heller, and even mentioning Joey's rather widely known bout
with Guillain-Barre.

J.H.: [Growing a bit cross.] These autobiographical details of reality are
intended to supply a dimension of the factual to a book that's essentially a
work of fiction.

B.G.: Speaking of autobiographical detail, I notice that in this book you have a
mother bidding a controlled, unemotional goodbye to a soldier-son (Sammy), and
then collapsing into uncontrollable grief and tears after he's out of sight.
This is something you once told me actually happened between you and your
mother, something that profoundly shocked you.

J.H.: Yeah. But it didn't shock me at the time. I was told about it by my sister
long afterward.

B.G.: In "Closing Time," what is Yossarian really meant to be experiencing when
he descends, with McBride, deep into the bowels of the Port Authority Bus
Terminal and finds himself in the company of, among others, a lot of dead
writers?

J.H.: [Chuckling.] What he is experiencing is a cerebral vascular accident -- a
transient ischemic attack, in which people hallucinate. That whole episode is a
hallucinatory experience. But the things he hallucinates in that underground may
have meaning beyond the literal.

B.G.: Well, are you saying that to be in the company of other writers is to be
in hell?

J.H.: No. But if you consider the various areas the writers are found in --
there's the area for those we
know were depressed, the one for suicides, the one for alcoholics -- and there's
Kafka and Proust. I might be saying that the life of a novelist -- even a
successful novelist -- too often can be hell.

B.G.: I asked because I remember your telling me once that in your experience
novelists aren't really comfortable in each other's company.

J.H.: It's true, we don't seem to be. We don't form close friendships, not the
ones I know. Maybe they just don't like to be with me.

B.G.: Do you like to be with them?

J.H.: I do find it somewhat surprising that so many American novelists
eventually seem to fall into a state of despair. We've had so many reports of
instances of alcoholism and depression and suicide. [Emphatically.] I'm not
there -- yet. I'm doing very well emotionally -- or I think I am.

B.G.: I find your frequent references to "Death in Venice" an interesting
literary keynote of Yossarian's obsession with death, and also your use of
Wagner's "Ring" as a musical counterpoint -- but aren't you stretching a bit in
your analogy of Yossarian with Siegfried?

J.H.: Yes. And Yossarian knows he is kidding around when he extends that
parallel.

B.G.: Are you saying that you equate Yossarian's -- and by extension Joe
Heller's -- death with "Gotter dammerung?"

J.H.: No, it's not just Yossarian, it's Yossarian in the midst of this
cataclysmic atmosphere that I think I've created for the novel. If there is one
thesis to this novel, it's that things are coming to an end. They certainly are
coming to an end for Yossarian -- and for me and you -- that whole generation
that lived through World War II. If you have any question about it, the
reappearance of all those ancient men my age and over at the recent celebration
of D-Day should dispel that doubt.

B.G.: But are you saying, through Yossarian, that it's your fantasy that when
you go, you'd like to know you're taking everyone with you -- or, rather, that
when you're annihilated, you want no one else left, either?

J.H.: No. Of course not. I think the statement in the book actually goes
something like this: Milo asks Yossarian, "Do you really care now if the world
comes to an end shortly after you're dead?" And Yossarian thinks and answers,
truthfully, "No."

B.G.: And are you, at the same time, consoling yourself with the thought that
the dead, whom you will later, if not sooner, be joining, are, perhaps, more
interesting and congenial than the living -- as witness all the brilliant
writers wandering that subbasement of the bus terminal?

J.H.: Again, no. I would not want to be with the drunkards, misfits and suicides
Yossarian thinks he is seeing down there. I would much rather be with Kurt
Vonnegut or Norman Mailer or Gore Vidal. At least we have the same frame of
reference.

B.G.: Getting back to the Port Authority Bus Terminal as a symbol for hell --

J.H.: It's symbolic, yes, but it's also very real and present. The terminal is a
hell on earth.

B.G.: But at the same time, you have also replicated, in that subterranean abode
of the dead, the idyllic Coney Island of your boyhood -- with its colossal
amusement park and that dazzling carousel and the Cyclone roller coaster and all
those other alluring rides and games. That sounds more like your idea of
Paradise.

J.H.: Well, Sammy and Lew -- and even Yossarian -- when they look back at Coney
Island, they recall it as a very happy place to have grown up in.

B.G.: Am I right about there being less food in "Closing Time" than in your
other novels?

J.H.: Yes, there's less attention to eating. It did not fit this picture.

B.G.: But you do have that burlesque of a wedding feast in the bus terminal near
the end, featuring two consecutive meals -- a lavish dinner, followed almost
immediately by a lavish supper.

J.H.: That does fit the picture.

B.G.: Do you still eat two dinners a night?

J.H.: If they're offered. I can get very hungry after a big meal. My digestion,
like Yossarian's, is still perfect.

B.G.: Is "Closing Time" your summing-up? Your swan song?

J.H.: My summing-up, yes. Not my swan song.

B.G.: Will you write another novel?

J.H.: I have nothing else to do.

NAME: Joseph Heller

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph Heller at his home in East Hampton, L.I. (VIC DELUCIA/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST NEW YORK;
Treating Urban Shocks With Wartime Methods

BYLINE: By GARRY PIERRE-PIERRE

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 8;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 380 words


It has been more than a year since her 18-year-old son was gunned down in East
New York and she still bears the deep emotional scars from that day.

She remembers vividly the day he was born, their last conversations and when the
police arrived to tell her the bad news.

"I just thought about him all the time," said the woman, who spoke on condition
that her name not be used. "I felt that I was a bad mother and I let him down."

The woman is one of 25 patients being treated at the public Brookdale Hospital
Medical Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, a condition usually
associated with Vietnam War veterans.

The woman attends a one-hour weekly session with Dr. Renuka Tank, and as part of
her therapy she is taught physiological and mental relaxation techniques to help
her cope with the chronic flashbacks. During the sessions, she is reassured that
her behavior is normal, a key to treatment, Dr. Tank said.

"Their biggest problems are fear, anxiety and the loss of control," Dr. Tank
said. "They have to learn new coping skills and readjust."

These therapeutic methods became widely used about 20 years ago. In the last
five years, mental health professionals saw similar patterns among civilians,
particularly in inner cities, and began to use the same methods, said Dr. Stuart
Kleinman, a psychiatrist with the Crime Victims Center of Victim Services, a
Manhattan clinic that specializes in treating crime victims.

Dr. Kleinman, whose clinic also recommends clients to other hospitals in New
York, said that in addition to Brookdale, Mount Sinai, St. Luke's and St.
Vincent's hospitals and various rape crisis centers are treating victims using
the methods.

Costs are borne by Medicare, Medicaid and private insurance; in some cases,
treatment is free.

"In certain urban environments it seems inevitable that an individual will know
someone who was directly or indirectly touched by violence," Dr. Kleinman said.

While it is too early to track the success rate, some common clues to recovery
are emerging. Often, victims become champions of a cause.

"Now I am his voice," said the woman whose son was killed, and who lobbies on
behalf of gun control laws. "I have to be," she added, explaining, "because
somebody took his life."   G.P.P.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Renuka Tank seeks to help a patient regain control at the
Brookdale Hospital Medical Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. (Chester
Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 13; Page 1; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 128 words


MAKING IT WORK 3
Grizzled veterans of civic indifference take note: Michael J. Cortes wants to
help you (and fill the state's coffers, too).

NEW YORKERS & CO. 4
With talk of "bootstrap equity," a fast-growing program is guiding small
businesses across the economic frontier.



PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 10
Everybody's a critic (for a day) in the Bronx; local art on display in Flushing.


MOVIE CLOCK 11
What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.

GOOD EATING 12
New Chinatown, new territories: Soo-Hang and Chiu Chow fare, with tastes of
Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam.

SOAPBOX 13
When real estate and conscience don't mix: the education of a landlord. Plus,
letters and Photographer's Journal.

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 28, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PIONEER FINANCIER;
Eugene Matthews

BYLINE: By Michael Shapiro;   Michael Shapiro has written books on Japan and
Korea and teaches journalism at Columbia University.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 35;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3058 words


IN HANOI, WHERE THE EXPATRIATES GATHER on Friday nights for happy hour at the
Australian Embassy, Eugene Matthews stands apart. He works his way to the bar,
orders a double vodka with soda and lemon juice and finds a place where he will
be noticed but not bothered.

He lets people come to him, and when they do, he offers thin smiles and
perfunctory handshakes, except to those who, like him, remember a time when only
a handful of foreigners gathered on Friday nights.

Matthews, who is 35, is prickly about his position as the American businessman
with the longest tenure -- four years -- in Hanoi. He insists that he does not
fear competition. What troubles him is the gnawing sense that all the others who
have followed -- and the many others who have arrived since February, when
President Clinton lifted the 19-year American trade embargo -- have cluttered
Hanoi. So he avoids the company of the newcomers.

Late at night, after happy hour, after closing time for expatriate-run
restaurants like A Little Italian, he goes out and hails a bicycle rickshaw. He
tells the driver to follow his directions, which he issues in proficient, though
brusque, Vietnamese. They ride down the middle of the empty streets, flanked by
willows, the only sound that of rubber on pavement. They ride past the lakes in
the center of the city, past aging, mustard yellow French colonial villas. And
for the only time in the course of yet another long and purposeful day, both
Hanoi and Eugene Matthews are tranquil.

"I like Vietnam," he says. "I like the people. Hanoi is a place you can really
fall in love with. But most importantly, I'm here because I'm a businessman."

He appreciates the delicacy of his position in the vanguard of America's return
to Vietnam. Vietnam is desperate for foreign investment, technology, markets.
Its needs are profound: roads, bridges, hospitals, airports -- and quick and
effective courses in the rules and subtleties of doing business in the
international marketplace. It is among the poorest countries in the world. Yet
despite the country's average annual income of $200, Vietnam's boosters are
trumpeting the nation as the next -- and perhaps last -- great Asian frontier, a
potential market of 72 million people, more than 50 percent of them under the
age of 21, and a highly educated and inexpensive work force.

Since 1986, when the Vietnamese Government instituted its own form of economic
restructuring, called doi moi, the country has cut subsidies to its state-owned
businesses and spawned a market economy that boasts foreign investment laws that
are among the most liberal in Asia. Foreigners can own and manage 100 percent of
their Vietnamese ventures. Although there are widespread complaints of
bureaucratic tangles and too many hands seeking bribes, Vietnam has attracted
$9.2 billion in foreign investment.

"People are saying, 'Vietnam is the greatest thing since chocolate milk,' "
Matthews says. "Everybody wants to put money here. The problem is they don't
know where. There's a lot of opportunity here, but there are a lot of problems.
It's important that people have realistic expectations of the economics of this
country.

"There's no capital market in Vietnam, no stock market. You can't sit in Tokyo
or Hong Kong and make money in Vietnam. And there's no silver bullet. People
here will say to foreigners, 'My cousin knows the Prime Minister.' That's the
most familiar line, and people get sucked in. You have to be on the ground to
manage your investment here. Otherwise, your Vietnamese partner defines your
relationship with the Government, and when problems happen, no one knows you.

"But the biggest mistake comes when people don't recognize what Vietnam has.
People say they have no distribution system. But what about the Ho Chi Minh
Trail? What about all the goods that get smuggled in from China? It may look a
little different, but it's working. Nothing gets lost. Nothing gets wasted."

Matthews, a graduate of Harvard and Harvard Law School, was among those who
lobbied a succession of administrations to lift the embargo, insisting that the
longer the United States waited to return to Vietnam the further it fell behind
the Taiwanese, Japanese, French, Hong Kong, Australian and South Korean banks
and companies that had already leased and restored the villas they had chosen as
their corporate headquarters in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.

Matthews has staked out a position as middleman and financier who brings
together and negotiates with American investors and Vietnamese businessmen. "We
always like to choose a person who is hungry, and he came across as someone who
wanted to make his mark in Vietnam," says Lee Soo-Jin, a senior vice president
at American Express who worked with Matthews on a deal that brought the credit
card to Vietnam. "He was just very impressive -- his energy, his insights into
some of the workings of Vietnam. He does give good advice. He follows up.
Sometimes he comes across as a bit arrogant, but that's his style."

But Matthews is also sensitive to the needs, sensibilities and vulnerabilities
of Vietnam and its people. He knows there is just so much the market can bear,
financially and emotionally. He understands that of the many things that
Vietnamese fear, the greatest is of being devoured.

"If they opened this country up the way foreigners want it, you know who'd own
this country?" he asks. "All the foreigners. The Vietnamese are very smart
people. They've decided they're behind their neighbors and want to catch up.
Sometimes they overplay their hand, and those are the deals that never get done.
They're so afraid of being exploited."

MATTHEWS LIVES IN CENTRAL Hanoi, on the second floor of the French colonial
villa that houses his consulting and investment company, Ashta International.
Six Vietnamese and an American work for him, and when he lets them leave at the
end of the day, which can mean 8 P.M. or 11 P.M. or later, he programs the phone
so that it will ring upstairs, next to his bed.

He exercises sporadically, but does so, as with all things, in excess, as he did
when he trained for a triathlon four years ago and forced himself to learn to
swim. After working well past midnight to take calls from New York, he is in his
office by 8, six days a week. "The Government works Saturdays, so we work
Saturdays," he says. "The Vietnamese companies are open. We have a lot of work
to do." He brings in pizza for working lunches that he interrupts occasionally
to tease the young men who work for him about their girlfriends. He does not
mind when they tease him back. When he laughs, he claps his hands and doubles
over.

He is surrounded by people on the make -- not just expatriates but Vietnamese as
well. From the foreign press-center officials who extract fees for setting up
interviews to the old women on the sidewalk who charge a nickel to step on a
bathroom scale for a "health check," people everywhere are scrambling for
American dollars, the currency of choice.

Matthews's clients include Revlon, Lehman Brothers, MTV, American Express and a
large American pharmaceutical company whose name his contract does not allow him
to disclose.

It is this company's representatives, on their first visit to Vietnam, who are
Matthews's preoccupation this week. He arranges meetings for them with local
doctors, pharmacists and hospital administrators, all of whom want to hear just
how many billions of dollars this company is worth and how much money it might
have to spend. He also takes them to the converted monastery that houses Central
Pharmaceutical Factory No. 1, where they are offered a bittersweet lesson in the
costs of transforming a society.

The director, a slight 60-year-old man named Vo Huu Duc, greets them and,
apologizing for his English, explains why he and so many other managers of state
businesses now find it difficult to sleep at night. "I myself don't know what
will happen," he says. "I think about what to do tomorrow and the day after
tomorrow and the year to come to feed the workers."

Matthews leans forward in his seat, peeling one of the oranges brought by the
secretary. He whispers, "The guy is a classic story."

Vo Huu Duc tells how the company was founded in the jungle, during the
resistance to the French. It moved to the monastery in 1954, when the French,
defeated at Dien Bien Phu, departed. The Government owned his company, set the
prices and sent chemicals from a central warehouse. Business proceeded
predictably, if not necessarily prosperously.

But since 1989, when the Government cut off subsidies, he says that he has had
to cut his work force from 1,200 to 540. Matthews asks whether he has been
approached by foreigners, interested in a joint venture. The director,
disappointed, says he has not. His market base is stagnant and he has nothing to
invest in the oversized, aging plant. His chemists still work with old Polish
scales. The laboratories are lined with fading wooden cabinets. "Change is hard
to do," he says. "Even though all the buildings are very old, it's not easy to
destroy everything and rebuild."

Matthews, having met other men like Vo Huu Duc and heard their laments, wonders
whether he will soon be pushed out by a young and eager entrepreneur who will
quickly decide to tear down the monastery and build a new plant.

"He'd like to go faster, but he doesn't know how," Matthews says. "But he's a
survivor. He has young people working in his company. And he knows he doesn't
know."

And that, Matthews explains, is a quality foreigners too quickly overlook when
they meet people like Vo Huu Duc and assume he is incapable of change. It is a
mistake, he adds, too often applied to the northern half of the country, even by
his clients, who sense the south is where there is money to be made.

"It's a society ready to become what we know and expect," Paul Block, chairman
of Revlon International, says of southern Vietnam. In Ho Chi Minh City, there is
a cafe society that arrays itself along low tables beneath umbrellas on the wide
boulevard sidewalks. Men dress casually (in contrast to Hanoi, where they still
wear army fatigues) and women wear makeup and perfume and represent, for Block,
"people who enjoy their lives. It's like not trying to convince a third-world
society. Hanoi is much longer term."

That may be true, Matthews says, but only to a point. "The south is great if
you're selling high-volume, low-cost products. In terms of software development,
for example, you want to do that in the north. It's two different cultures. The
biggest market is Saigon. But the creativity is in the north."

In Ho Chi Minh City, Matthews introduces Block to people like Nguyen Kim Thoa,
director of the Saigon Cosmetic Company, who can barely contain her excitement
at the prospect, by no means assured, of a venture with Revlon.

Thoa, who wears a diamond ring on one hand and a ruby surrounded by diamonds on
the other, manufactures shampoo, soap and detergent. But her two biggest sellers
are perfumes named Saigon and Diana. She chose the name Diana, she says, after
an American song of many years ago. Saigon perfume is bottled, boxed and sealed
in a factory that is really no more than two adjoining rooms filled with people.
They fill the perfume bottles from tubes that are sealed with wooden clamps.
They glue on the labels with their fingers.

For Nguyen Kim Thoa, Matthews means Revlon, and Revlon, she hopes might mean a
$2 million investment in machines and training. The training, Matthews says, is
always a part of the deal. "They recognize what has happened to other developing
countries where they let the foreigners come in and they end up running
everything," he says. "They believe their people have the capacity to learn. The
Vietnamese are hungry for information and ready to learn. They don't know what a
derivative is, or a bond trade. But they're sophisticated."

EUGENE MATTHEWS GREW up in Sharon, Pa., a steel town outside of Pittsburgh. His
father died when he was 5 and his mother when he was 20, and though he has two
older brothers -- one is a college professor, the other a social worker -- he
has truly been at home in a succession of offices.

He spent a year with Wolf, Block, Schorr & Solis-Cohen, a Philadelphia law firm,
where he quickly discovered that he didn't much care for practicing law. Then he
decided that Japan held possibilities for someone who immersed himself in its
business culture and he moved to a town on the outskirts of Tokyo where he spent
the next two and a half years as the only foreign employee of a printing
equipment company. He left Japan in 1987 after convincing his employer to grant
him exclusive rights to distribute his products in North America and Mexico.

"Japan was my introduction," he says. "It's my home base. My focus is on Asia."
He relocated first to New York and then Bangkok, where, supported by his
interest in the printing equipment business, he began exploring the
possibilities in Southeast Asia. In February 1989, he went to Vietnam for the
first time. "It was new. It was untouched. It was stark. People talk about
making an impact on an industry. I was going for the country. There was no one
else over there."

He stayed for two weeks. He introduced himself to Government officials and the
managers of state-run businesses. Among the first people he met was a Ministry
of Trade official who spoke with him through an interpreter for two and a half
hours and then, having decided Matthews was sincere, shifted to flawless
English. He visited every few months. An official at the Foreign Ministry told
him that if he was serious about Vietnam he should live there.

"Part of me was jealous," says his lawyer, Thomas Schwarz, a partner at the New
York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom. "Part of me thought he
was a little crazy."

For three years he lived in a guest house at the Ministry of Education, a bleak
concrete dormitory where his kitchen doubled as the bathroom. He came,
ostensibly, to learn the language, because the only way to avoid violating
America's Trading With the Enemy Act was on a student visa and with the
understanding that he earn no money in Vietnam or spend more than $200 a day. He
lived on a dirt road that turned to muck on rainy days and where rats the size
of cats ran through the waste along the walkways.

He traveled the length of the country, freezing in an unheated railway car on
the 48-hour trip from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City one January. He did minimal
sightseeing: the ancient capital of Hue, the hill resort of Dalat, the beaches
of Nha Trang and, in Ho Chi Minh City, the rusting, shuttered American Embassy.

Matthews stood in front of the gate and looked up at the roof and recalled the
photographic image of the last Americans scrambling into helicopters as Saigon
fell in 1975. It is one of his few vivid associations with the war. He was too
young to fight or protest. Of the many remarkable things about his presence in
Vietnam, perhaps the most is the idea of a young American for whom the war has
little emotional resonance. "Vietnam," Matthews says, again and again, "is a
country, not a war."

EUGENE MATTHEWS DOES NOT believe in making excuses for the Vietnamese. He thinks
it patronizing to expect less from them because they are poor and still learning
about market economies. "I don't play with them," he says. "It's like with black
people, people saying, 'You can't expect a lot from them.' Some people come in
and give them too many excuses. But don't sell these people short. These people
are strong. You got to come strong with these people. Don't come short."

So he offers his harsh and sometimes gratuitous advice, "because I want them to
live up to their potential." He also recognizes that he is not dealing with
fools. When Vietnamese solicit bids for projects, he says, they will do so in
the vaguest way. The bidders offer their ideas, he says, from which the
Vietnamese solicitor will want to choose not one but bits and pieces from each.

"They want to get the best from everyone," he says. And that is why he is useful
to them. Matthews harbors no romantic illusions about his relationship with the
Vietnamese. He recognizes that it is to his advantage to have gotten there
first, but unless he can connect the Vietnamese with capital, the Vietnamese
will turn to someone else. Race, he insists, is immaterial. "Many Americans came
to talk," says Nguyen Kim Thoa of Saigon Cosmetic. "Mr. Matthews brought
Revlon."

With the Vietnamese, he says, he can be blunt and need not perform the polite
dance of negotiation required of him in Japan. While his manner may not always
be appreciated in Vietnam, it is nonetheless understood.

"Oh, Mr. Matthews, when he first came here he might not have understood Vietnam
and he came wanting to meet high-level people because he was from a big
country," says Hoang Thi Lan, the deputy director of the Vietcom Bank with whom
Matthews negotiated the American Express deal. "Now he's discovered that it's
the work people do that's most important." Then she smiles, remembering the
meeting, and adds, "He's very American."

Matthews grows wistful when he talks of life, in the distant future, after
Vietnam. He talks of a family and a home in Telluride, Colo. He likes Colorado
because of its beauty and remoteness. And as he talks of what this life will be
like he sounds very much like a man trying to convince himself of a future he
thinks he should want. For now, the future is defined by "small simple deals."

They are deals like his $18 million joint venture with Vinamilk, the Vietnam
milk company. He believes that milk represents a product that Vietnamese have a
willingness -- and the money -- to buy.

"We are here to make an investment," he tells Nguyen Tan Xe, the director of the
agricultural services department of the People's Committee in Ho Chi Minh City.
"We are also here to make a profit."

With that Xe smiles and tells Matthews that he, too, has a venture in mind, a
small sugar refinery.

"How much money?" Matthews asks.

Xe says he doesn't know.

Matthews folds his papers and puts away his pen. As he prepares to leave, he
says: "I make you a promise. If Ashta is successful, we will surely make other
investments in Ho Chi Minh City. If the first one is profitable."

NAME: Eugene Matthews

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Matthews in Hanoi. He understands what the Vietnamese fear most
-- being devoured. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL SHAPIRO)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Change Begins at Home In Hamilton Fish District

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, Aug. 23


For as long as anyone can remember, a Hamilton Fish has represented the
mid-Hudson River region in Congress. The family traces its conservative roots to
the nation's birth.

This year, with the incumbent Hamilton Fish having decided not to seek a 14th
term in the House of Representatives because of poor health, the dynasty may
end. If it does not, there will still be a major change.  The Hamilton Fish
currently seeking the seat, the incumbent's son, is a Democrat.

Last week, Hamilton Fish Jr. received his father's endorsement in the Sept. 13
primary. Representative Fish has declined to back any of his seven fellow
Republicans in that primary.

Two other Democrats are seeking their party's nomination.

Changes in District

New York's 19th Congressional District, once heavily Republican, is much more
balanced since the 1990 redistricting that extended its southern border deep
into Westchester County. All of Putnam County and parts of Dutchess and Orange
counties make up the rest of the district, which now encompasses 113,400
registered Republicans, 91,200 Democrats and 87,000 unaffiliated voters.

The first Democrat to seek the Congressional nomination was Dennis Mehiel of
Armonk, a businessman and a former chairman of the Westchester Democratic Party.

Mr. Mehiel, who has contributed $250,000 to his own campaign and expects to
raise an additional $300,000 to pay for radio and television ads, took aim at
Mr. Fish in one of his first television ads.

"Hamilton Fish Jr. owned a magazine that printed anti-Semitic articles and said,
'Hey, don't blame me. I'm only the publisher,' " the ad said.

Article by Gore Vidal

The magazine was The Nation and the 1986 article, by Gore Vidal, attacked the
publisher, Norman Podhoretz. Mr. Mehiel said that the article "portrays
Jewish-Americans as not owing their first loyalty to America, the country of
their citizenship, perpetuating a charge that has been leveled against Jews over
the centuries."

The charge of anti-Semitism created a stir in the district, with the backers of
Mr. Fish saying that the article was not anti-Semitic and that it was fair
comment in a journal of opinion.

"Negative campaigning is offensive and turns off voters," Mr. Fish said. He
added, "The voters in this district will reject the message and the messenger."

Mr. Fish, who no longer publishes The Nation, is now a senior adviser to Human
Rights Watch, which monitors 70 governments around the world to enforce
compliance with human-rights standards.



Shift to Economic Issues

Although the Mehiel ad is still being shown, he and Mr. Fish are focusing on
economic issues in the district, particularly the widespread layoffs among
white-collar workers.

Mr. Mehiel campaigns on a platform of economic renewal and job creation. He says
he worries that young college graduates and those trained for other jobs "cannot
raise their own families where they grew up" and he proposes Federal tax credits
for job creation.

Mr. Fish favors Federal assistance in expanding new technologies and exploring
new global markets, as well as simplifying the paperwork required of business
and easing of credit.

This is not the first time that Mr. Fish, who lives in Garrison, and Mr. Mehiel
have faced each other politically. They lost a three-way primary for the 20th
Congressional District in 1988 to Nita M. Lowey, who went on to defeat the
Republican incumbent, Joseph J. DioGuardi.

A Change of Plans

The third Democrat seeking the nomination, Neil McCarthy of Lewisboro, was the
party's nominee in 1992, losing to Representative Fish. Mr. McCarthy, a lawyer
and former Federal prosecutor, had not intended to run again, but he changed his
mind, an aide said, with Representative Fish's decision to retire.

He has the support of the state A.F.L.-C.I.O. and uses house parties and small
gatherings to raise money and gain political support. "My campaign is more grass
roots and door-to-door than Mehiel, who has the money, or Fish, who has the
name," he says.

The Republican contenders include Mr. DioGuardi, who moved into the 19th
District to run for the seat being vacated by Mr. Fish. Describing himself as
the most conservative candidate in the race, he urges voters to "Re-elect
DioGuardi" and says his old 20th District included 200,000 Westchester residents
who are now in the 19th.

Mr. DioGuardi, an exuberant campaigner, advertises himself as "the only
certified public accountant to have been elected to Congress."

Party Worker Running

The Republican slate includes one woman, Sue W. Kelly of Katonah, who works in a
hospital as a patient advocate. She said she has been "involved for 14 years in
the Republican Party, helping to put people in office." Now, she said, "I've
decided to run for myself." She expects to spend $300,000 on the primary
campaign.

"I'm not running as a politician, nor as a woman," she said, "but as a person
caught in the same economic trap as everyone else in the region."

Guy Parisi, a Chappaqua lawyer who has long been active in Republican Party
ranks, was the choice of the Westchester party chairman, Anthony J. Colavita.
But despite such support, the party convention in June was unable to reach a
consensus, throwing the decision into a rare Republican primary.

Mr. Parisi, a former village justice and Albany lobbyist for Westchester County,
has the advantage of enlisting party loyalists to help reach the Republicans who
vote in primaries.

Four Veterans in Race

Four of the Republican candidates have military credentials. One is a nine-term
Assemblyman, Glenn E. Warren of Fishkill, a Marine helicopter pilot in Vietnam
who was shot down three times. He was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross
twice. His political base is in Dutchess County.

Paul W. Bucha of Somers, a graduate of the United States Military Academy at
West Point, which is in the district, won the Congressional Medal of Honor in
Vietnam. He says he has been involved in international finance, marketing and
real estate for 15 years.

John Flanagan Jr., of Brewster, is a brigadier general in the Air Force Reserve,
as well as an author, lecturer and consultant. He flew 300 missions in an
unarmed spotter plane in Vietnam and was awarded the Silver Star. He is a
faculty member in transportation management at St. Francis College and St.
John's University in New York.

He says jobs and crime are the major issues in the district, favors military
intervention in Haiti to "restore democracy," and says he offers the financial
knowledge of a businessman, the vision of a professor, the leadership of a
military officer and the objectivity of an author.

Another candidate, Joseph M. Corrigan of Wappingers Falls, has devoted his
campaign almost entirely to the issue of servicemen missing in action in
Vietnam. A former marine, he has played a role in negotiating for their release,
acting as a link between Hanoi and Washington.

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 1, 1994, Thursday

CORRECTION:

An article on Monday about the Congressional race in the 19th District in New
York State referred incorrectly to Norman Podhoretz. He is the editor in chief
of Commentary magazine, not a publisher.


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

STORYTELLING WITH: Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot;
The Black Bourgeoisie: A 90's View

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


OUTSIDE, Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot's town house looks like the one on "The Cosby
Show." Inside, its rooms are full of the accouterments of middle-class life:
books, paintings, artifacts from traveling.

A golden-brown woman with perfect posture and comb-pinned hair, Dr.
Lawrence-Lightfoot, a Harvard University sociologist, stands in the living room
next to the piano, on which sits a sculpture of her daughter, Tolani, 13, and
son, Martin, 11.

It could be a scene straight out of the book "Black Bourgeoisie," the scathing
1957 portrait of the black middle class by the late Prof. E. Franklin Frazier,
the eminent black sociologist. But appearances can be deceiving, as Dr.
Lawrence-Lightfoot points out in her latest book, "I've Known Rivers: Lives of
Loss and Liberation" (Merloyd Lawrence/Addison-Wesley; 1994).

Dr. Frazier said that middle-class blacks reject their roots to rise in the
so-called mainstream world, bent on assimilation into white society. It's an
idea that is still alive today. In school, some black children taunt others for
"acting white" if they study, get good marks and speak standard English. Blacks
who leave the inner city for the suburbs are often seen as abandoning their
race. Even discussions of Mr. Cosby's show in news articles initially centered
on whether his was a "real" black family.

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot thinks Dr. Frazier's portrait is distorted, and in her
book she sets out to overturn his portrayal of the members of the black middle
class as materialistic assimilationists, wounded, repressed and disconnected
from the larger black community. The black middle class, she says, is much more
complex than that.

Today, few sociologists embrace Dr. Frazier's thesis in its entirety, but no
discussion of the black middle class escapes his influence. His work still
infuses everything from sociological studies to movies like Spike Lee's "School
Daze" and "Jungle Fever," with their mordant commentary on the post-1970's
generation of buppies and wannabees.

"Frazier is the touchstone; he catapulted me into thinking about his
representations of us," said Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot, 50, who is an animated
speaker. Her family introduced her to Dr. Frazier's book when she was a
teen-ager in Pomona, N.Y. Her mother, Margaret Morgan Lawrence, is a child
psychoanalyst, whose life Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot chronicled in her 1984 book,
"Balm in Gilead: Journey of a Healer." Her late father, Dr. Charles Lawrence,
was a professor of sociology at Brooklyn College.

Sunday dinners at the Lawrences often included spirited conversations with
friends like the historian John Hope Franklin; Kenneth Clark, the psychologist,
and Hyland Lewis, the sociologist. When Dr. Frazier's book first appeared, these
strivers, who considered themselves part of the black middle class, came to
dinner ready to grapple with his thesis that people like themselves led sterile
and rootless lives.

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot recalled that she was troubled by Dr. Frazier's
portrayal. It did not seem true to her life or her family's life. She
encountered the book again when she was in graduate school at Harvard (she
earned her bachelor's degree at Swarthmore College).

"Ultimately, I felt that Frazier's was both a true and a false portrait," she
said. "What he revealed were really caricatures that didn't represent the full,
rich humanity and the extraordinary variety of the black middle class."

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot is sociologist as storyteller, a pioneer of what she
calls human archeology. In her book, she uses detailed interviews with six black
professionals to reveal the layers that make up an individual's experience and a
people's experience, providing sociological portraits that are a marriage of
arts and science, literature and empirical description. These, she said, give a
truer picture of a culture than does traditional phenomenological research.

Once considered a controversial methodology, storytelling is today an accepted
technique. Over the years, Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot, who is divorced but who uses
her married name, has won numerous prizes for her work, including a 1985
MacArthur Award, the so-called genius award.

"Race, gender and culture are much more dynamic than traditionally has been
presented," she said. "I'm interested in people's experiences in living those
categories."

Her storytelling method is reflected in the decor of her house. Several cubicles
lining a wall are filled with art from family and friends, each object prompting
a tale about how it came to be in this house.

A beautiful black-and-white Navajo bowl, for example, is the gift of one of her
graduate students, an American Indian. Across the room sits a large blue and
mauve vase, which she bought at age 25 with the first money she made from her
writing, $125, for an article on feminist perspectives in social science
research.

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot's portrait of the black middle class is likely to fuel an
intense debate among African-Americans over black culture and identity.

"In general, we have a very distorted view of who we are reflected at us," she
said. "Part of the focus of this work is really to bust through some of those
caricatures."

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot said her subjects have all the external trappings of
middle- and upper-middle-class life, recognize the ambivalence of their stature
in both black and white worlds, but also successfully live with the
contradictions. Indeed, most of Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot's subjects, like Charles
Ogletree, a Harvard Law School professor, and Katie Cannon, a theology professor
at Temple University in Philadelphia, made journeys from poverty to privilege
that appear to have given them a stronger sense of racial identity.

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot chose her subjects, three men and three women, after
scores of preliminary interviews. Some people declined to participate, concerned
about privacy, and others could not spare the time. She paired the men and
women, using themes of loss and gain, trauma and recovery, ambivalence and
ambition, then summed up the lessons learned from each set. Dr.
Lawrence-Lightfoot worked with her subjects for nearly two years, interviewing
each over several months.

Katie Cannon was initially reluctant to participate, believing that there were
better-known people in her field who could be profiled. But she decided that her
story would be helpful to young people who came from a similar background.

"Coming from the working-poor South, I didn't represent what I thought of as the
norm," said Dr. Cannon, who grew up in Kannopolis, N.C. But even though she is
now part of the middle class, "I haven't really changed class," she said,
adding: "I can move in that class, but I'm still working poor. Now I have a
Ph.D., but there are still too many gaps."

Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot asked her subjects to talk about their lives, to describe
the seminal experiences -- the relations with family and friends, with spouses
and siblings and with work -- that have brought them to middle age. Each
person's story touches on historical milestones: the civil rights era, the
Vietnam war, the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill hearings, the Rodney King trial.

"What Sara does is move from the caricature of what Frazier embodied to the
texture, the wholeness of the person, the duality of our existence," said
Professor Ogletree, who had agreed to be interviewed for "I've Known Rivers"
because he had been impressed with Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot's book about her
mother. "And there is a real duality. But we can be proud to bask in our
African-Americaness, yet be significant players in white society and yet not be
apologetic or defensive about who we are."

The title of Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot's book is from Langston Hughes's poem "The
Negro Speaks of Rivers." She said she chose it because her book deals with the
flow of generations and with questions of origin, identity and destination.

Some early reviews have charged that the book does not offer a true or complete
picture of the black middle class either, or even a glimpse of the typical
middle-class black. But that is exactly the author's point: there is no one
picture.

"I want to challenge caricatures and stereotypes and those typical static
categories used in the social sciences," she said.

The obvious audience for the book, Dr. Lawrence-Lightfoot said, is
African-Americans. But she also wanted the book to be "about the creativity and
resourcefulness, the emerging voice of middle age."

"It's a book about middle-aged folk, in their 40's or 50's, which I hope
resonates with people of all stripes and colors," she said.


NAME: Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot, author. (pg. C1); Blacks have a
"distorted view of who we are reflected at us," Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot said.
(Seth Resnick for The New York Times) (pg. C8)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Castro's Resilient Masses

BYLINE: By Pico Iyer;   Pico Iyer is author of the forthcoming novel "Cuba and
the Night."

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 938 words

DATELINE: SANTA BARBARA, Calif.


The 9-year-old Cuban boy with the cataract in his eye showed me the condoms he
had used as balloons at his birthday party. He pulled out the single stick of
gum he'd been chewing for a week. He brought over the two tattered photo albums
he'd stuffed with pieces of Carnation labels, stickers that said "Knorr's Soup"
and ads for Nescafe -- status symbols in the Havana fourth grade. His mother, a
policewoman and a staunch Fidelista who refused to accept gifts from a visitor,
proudly pointed out photos of her cousins' suburban home and Nissan in Miami.

Everyone in Cuba knows that the country is bankrupt; everyone knows that almost
anything must be better than the steady supply of nothing that the Government
offers. Everyone can see that the whole island is shuddering to a halt, like the
40-year-old Plymouths that line the streets of a city where gasoline is illegal.
Prostitution, which was scarcely visible (if only for security reasons) five
years ago, is pandemic now: the tourist hotels are filled with Cuban teen-agers
reddening their lips with children's crayons.

The Government billboards used to proclaim, "We Are Happy Here." Now they say
only, "We Are Here." The official currency is more or less the dollar. And while
more and more people turn to santeria, the Cuban equivalent of voodoo, as a
source of miracles, the offerings of food they leave out in the streets for the
gods are all too often filched by hungry neighbors.

It would not take an ironist to see that after 35 years of revolution, Fidel
Castro has succeeded in turning his land into precisely the kind of Babylon he
once came to scourge: a nest of brothels and drugs, dependent on foreign income,
where the greatest symbols of power are visiting capitalists.

Yet Cubans have been living off next to nothing for decades. On my annual visit
to the island in February, I was struck by the fact that the typical income was
down to $1.30 a month, and yet this still seemed enough to put food on the
table. Friends kept talking about the Golden Age -- before the collapse of the
East Bloc in 1989; I didn't remind them that they had been delivering much the
same elegies in 1987.

Sometimes it seems as if the country's psychological reserves may be emptying:
"Before, we could blame everything on the Soviets," one friend told me. "But now
the Soviets are gone, and things are worse than ever." But just as often, people
noted that at least there was nobody starving on the streets.

It is easy to forget, amid the dramatic images of people risking their lives to
flee in makeshift boats, that Cubans have had a crash course in suffering and
sacrifice for decades now. They have developed reserves of resourcefulness and
patience that would put the rest of us to shame.

Nearly all of them are seasoned experts at making do and finding ways around the
system: trading a little tomato sauce for the promise of some rum, fixing a TV
in exchange for a kiss.  A tourist hustler I know once invited me to his flat
for a dinner of lobster and Champagne. (Now he's serving a year's sentence in a
labor camp for trading dollars. It wasn't so bad, he told me with a smile when I
visited -- food was guaranteed there, and he was allowed to go home every six
weeks.)

All of us know -- and every Cuban knows -- the ironies of a country with
well-trained doctors and no medicine, with a highly educated population and no
books. Yet what such miseries obscure is that for many Cubans, the alternatives
to their all-too-familiar leader are not bright. More than half of all Cubans
have known no other president, causing many to prefer the devil they know to the
devil they don't.

They look at his lieutenants, and see all of his severity and little of his
intelligence; they look across the water to Miami, and see the people who held
them down before, they feel, waiting to reclaim their mansions. They note with
bitterness that gusanos -- the "traitors" who fled, many of them in the Mariel
boat lift -- can now return to the island and be treated as royalty (foreigners
with money!).

But they also acknowledge that their leader has made their tiny island, half as
populous as Mexico City, a forceful player on the world stage. As in Vietnam,
impatience with Marxism is mixed with a genuine, and often fervent, nationalism.
There are many who would still prefer a self-ruled Cuba to one that's tarted up.

Most Cubans realize that those who flee the country know almost nothing of what
they're going to, beyond what they've seen in foreign magazines. And those who
arrive in the land of "Dynasty" dreams with little English and no training in a
carrot-and-stick economy often end up in the poorest areas of Miami or New York,
hustling drugs or joining gangs. One friend I know who made it here as a
political refugee quickly wrote back to his equally restless friends in Havana
to stay put: America was not for the weak, he said, and -- believe it or not --
the reports of homelessness and poverty were true!

The most recent letter I got from Cuba, last week, said, "I would like to see
the end of this bad dream: no food, no medicine, no transportation, no
electricity, no water . . . ." Yet the writer, an actress, concluded, "My
country is in crisis, but I am not."

Americans are wise to see the thousands of Cubans taking to the seas as
exemplars of a widespread dissatisfaction with a country that asks everything of
its people and gives almost nothing in return; but we would be wiser still to
recall the many millions more who, through inertia or trepidation or even a kind
of qualifiedpatriotism, choose to sit things out.

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 1, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Following the Star Of a Winsome Idiot

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1513 words


Winston Groom says he doesn't mind what they did to his novel "Forrest Gump." He
envisioned John Goodman in the title role, since Forrest, his dim-witted,
kind-hearted hero, stands 6 feet 6 inches tall and weighs 240 pounds. He also
concedes that the film "took the rough edges off the character," earthy and
exuberantly profane in the book, and that several layers of sentiment were
brushed on, like sticky varnish. But that's O.K., too.

Actually, Mr. Groom has only one tiny complaint, and that's directed at the
hundreds of thousands of readers who are picking up his 1986 novel for the first
time. "Where were you eight years ago?" he asked over a drink at the Rainbow
Room in Manhattan on Tuesday. "It's the same damn book."

Well, sort of. Something funny happened in the interim. Paramount made the film,
and the film became the celluloid equivalent of "The Bridges of Madison County."
Millions of Americans saw wisdom in Gumpisms like "Stupid is as stupid does,"
"Life is like a box of chocolates" and "Sometimes there aren't enough stones."
More important for Mr. Groom, they left the theater wanting more Gump. As a
result, Mr. Groom has two books sitting on top of the best-seller lists.

"Forrest Gump," which sold a pretty respectable 30,000 copies in hardback, is
now in its 15th paperback printing, with 1.4 million copies in bookstores,
supermarkets, drugstores and Kmarts. Sharp-eyed readers will spot Mr. Groom's
name in minuscule type just below the poster-style letters "Tom Hanks Is Forrest
Gump."

The novel has a tiny companion volume, the hastily produced "Gumpisms: The Wit
and Wisdom of Forrest Gump." At 1,600 words, it has more white space on its 88
pages pages than there is between Forrest Gump's ears. Yet nuggets like "Don't
lick nothin' that sticks to your tongue" will make it No. 1 in the "advice and
how-to" category on Sunday, with 500,000 copies in print. Surely readers will
not mind that Mr. Groom, under a tight deadline, did not have time to write all
the Gumpisms himself and had to press his editors into service.

Son of Forrest Gump

Pocket Books, the publisher of both books, plans to reissue three of Mr. Groom's
other novels and has signed him up to write a Gump sequel, to be published next
year. "It will be about Forrest and Forrest Jr.," said Mr. Groom. "I'm
interested in the relationship between this certifiable idiot and his son, who
is very smart. And since the first book ends in 1980, that leaves me about 15
years' worth of stuff to make fun of."

As Mr. Groom tells it, pretty much everything about the Gump phenomenon has been
a surprise to him, including the writing of the novel. The germ of the book came
to him when his father, a lawyer in Mobile, Ala., began reminiscing one day
about his childhood, and about a slow-witted boy in the neigborhood whose mother
taught him to play the piano. At about the same time, Mr. Groom said, he saw a
segment on "60 Minutes" about idiot savants.

"I thought that was a good idea for a character," he said. "By midnight the
first chapter was already written." Six weeks later, the novel was done. "It
wrote itself," said Mr. Groom. "It's almost like the lizard part of my brain
went into gear and bypassed the brain up here." Mr. Groom pointed to his
forehead. "It will never happen to me again."

The result was an unusual blend of farce, satire and the picaresque, told in
Forrest's voice. Fans of the movie may be surprised to find out that in addition
to being a champion Ping-Pong player, the Forrest of the novel is a professional
wrestler, a chess grandmaster and an astronaut. He smokes marijuana and makes
friends with an orangutan in New Guinea. In Hollywood, he lands the title role
in a remake of "The Creature From the Black Lagoon," starring Raquel Welch.

From Respectful to Raves

Although some critics thought the comic momentum of the book flagged in the
second half, the reviews ranged from respectful to raves. Nearly every reviewer
praised Mr. Groom's handling of Forrest's voice, a juicy Southern vernacular,
with a creative approach to grammar and spelling that Mr. Groom more or less
modeled on an old friend, Jimbo Meader. "You hang around shrimpers or duck
hunters on the Alabama waterfront, and you'll hear that voice," said Mr. Groom.
"They don't throw the ball, they tho it."

Like his most famous character, Mr. Groom is tall -- a lanky 6 foot 6 -- and
he's a talker. "All my stories are long," he admitted. When he hits full
narrative stride, he's tilted back a bit in his chair, his eyes are fixed on the
middle distance and his face, cocked to one side, is illuminated with the glow
of a man who is following the plot development of his own tale with total
enjoyment. A superthin cigarette burns in one hand, and when Mr. Groom waves it
a bit, the effect is uncanny, because, at 51, he bears more than a passing
resemblance to Franklin Delano Roosevelt in his prime. The only thing missing is
an amber cigarette holder.

Destiny intended Mr. Groom to be a lawyer, like his father before him. He
entered the University of Alabama with every expectation of doing just that, but
somehow wound up contributing to the school's humor magazine and eventually
editing it.

Instead of going to law school, Mr. Groom went to Vietnam in 1966 as a second
lieutenant in the infantry. He returned 13 months later with a bitter taste in
his mouth and rich material for his fiction.

A Washington Reporter

At first, Mr. Groom pounded the pavement looking for work at Esquire, Time and
Newsweek. Rebuffed, he found work of sorts back in Alabama. "Here, I'd been a
captain leading 160 men around, and I ended up working in a paper box factory
earning a dollar an hour," he said.

One day, luck placed him at a wedding where the uncle of the bride happened to
be the managing editor of The Washington Star, who hired Mr. Groom as a
reporter.

In his eight years at The Star, Mr. Groom worked the police beat, covered the
courts and wrote features. "I covered Watergate," he said with a laugh. "I knew
Bernstein from way back, and Woodward I knew from the courts. I looked into the
story and I came up with the conclusion that these two guys were making the
whole thing up."

Mr. Groom's entree into the literary world came through Adam Shaw, a court
reporter for The Washington Post and the son of the novelist Irwin Shaw. Through
his friend, Mr. Groom fell in with Shaw, James Jones and Willie Morris. He
discovered the literary salon at Elaine's restaurant. And he turned his notes on
Vietnam into a novel, "Better Times Than These," which was published to critical
acclaim in 1978.

An Eclectic Collection

In the ensuing years, Mr. Groom turned out several books that make for an
eclectic oeuvre. "As Summers Die," his second novel, recounted a struggle over
oil rights between the poor blacks of Creoletown and two predatory rich
brothers. Then Mr. Groom turned right around and, with Duncan Spencer, wrote a
nonfiction book, "Conversations With the Enemy," about Robert Garwood, the
American seviceman who spent 14 years as a Vietnamese prisoner of war and was
charged with treason by the United States Government.

Mr. Groom recently completed the manuscript of another nonfiction book, "Shrouds
of Glory," about the western campaign in the Civil War, which Grove Atlantic
will publish next year. "I write what I damn well please," said Mr. Groom, who
recently moved from New York to Point Clear, Ala., near Mobile.

Writing what he pleased earned Mr. Groom standing room in the twilight world of
authors who produce books, receive respectful reviews and learn to live with
near-anonymity. Then came "Forrest Gump."

Even before the book was published, the word had reached Hollywood that
something unusual was in the offing. A blind bidding war ensued. In the end
Wendy Finerman, a producer for Steven Tisch, found herself pitted against Warner
Brothers, where her husband, Mark Canton, was president of production. "My
theory is that one morning they woke up and finally figured out that they were
bidding against each other," said Mr. Groom.

Quick Action at Paramount

Ms. Finerman and Mr. Canton jointly bought the film rights, and Mr. Groom set to
work turning out the first of three screenplays for Warner Brothers, which
gradually lost interest in the project, particularly after "Rain Man" appeared,
with Dustin Hoffman playing an idiot savant.

Ms. Finerman took the project to Paramount, which quickly signed up Mr. Hanks
and the director Robert Zemeckis. "I've never seen a movie get made so fast in
my life," said Mr. Groom, who had no involvement in the screenplay. "They kept
the character pretty much as I intended, though. As I see it, it's a story about
human dignity, and the fact that you don't have to be smart or rich to maintain
your dignity even when some pretty undignified things are happening all around
you."

When asked whether it is the book he is most pleased with, Mr. Groom leaned
across the table and smiled wickedly."It's getting close," he said. "Getting
real close."

NAME: Winston Groom

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Winston Groom, the novelist who created Forrest Gump, signing
copies of his book. Mr. Groom and his publisher are already planning a sequel.
(Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Margaret O. Strahl, Psychiatrist, 77, Dies

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


Dr. Margaret Olds Strahl, a retired New York psychiatrist and analyst known for
her research on the clinical treatment of schizophrenia, died on Monday at the
William Hill Health Care Center in Easton, Md. She was 77.

The cause was Alzheimer's disease, her family said.

Dr. Strahl was born in New York City, received her medical degree from Long
Island College of Medicine in 1943 and completed her training in psychoanalysis
at Columbia University in 1948. She was an associate in psychiatry at Columbia
until 1966.

From 1968 to 1991, she worked at the New York Medical College and Metropolitan
Hospital Center, while also keeping a private practice as a psychoanalyst,
preparative psychotherapist and diagnostic consultant.

In the 1980's, she also worked for the Veterans Administration, specializing in
the treatment of post-traumatic stress disorders among Vietnam veterans.

She was the author, co-author or editor of several volumes, including "Masked
Schizophrenia: Diagnosis and a Unified Method of Treatment" (1980),
"Differential Diagnosis in Clinical Psychiatry" (1972) and "The Complete
Psychiatrist: The Achievements of Paul H. Hoch, M.D." (1968). An
environmentalist, she donated a 400-acre family farm to the Chesapeake Audubon
Society for an educational center in Easton.

Her husband, William E., died in 1974.

She is survived by two sons, Eric R., of Prescott, Ariz., and Dr. Stuart D., of
Easton, and two granddaughters.


LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 2, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Police Say Murder Suspect Thinks TV Networks Spied on Him

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1517 words


The North Carolina man who shot and killed an NBC stagehand with an assault
rifle on a crowded sidewalk in Rockefeller Center on Wednesday told
investigators that he had come to New York to wreak vengeance on the major
television networks for what he called decades of spying and persecution, from
taps on his telephones to zappings by mysterious rays.

As authorities traced the suspect's background and recent movements -- his
ownership of yarn-and-dye and motorcycle sales firms, his minor police record,
his purchase of the weapon and a car and his journey from the South --
investigators portrayed a man driven by paranoia to carry out a murderous plan
with step-by-step deliberation.

Meantime, acquaintances in North Carolina described the suspect, William Emanuel
Tager, 46, of Charlotte, as a menacing figure given to unpredictable behavior
and violent outbursts, who was once accused of threatening and stalking a woman.
By contrast, his victim, Campbell Theron Montgomery, 33, was recalled as a
generous, kind man who loved the theater, motorcycles and life in New York City,
where he grew up.

Mr. Tager told the police he intended no harm to celebrity performers or
audiences at NBC, CBS and ABC, and was merely on the lookout for any network
functionary when he shot the stagehand as he emerged from the "Today" program
studios on 49th Street and tried to alert police officers that the man had a
weapon.

Several video cameras -- the NBC security camera and others operated by tourists
and other passersby -- captured the fatal shooting, in which Mr. Montgomery was
struck by a single bullet in the back. He died five hours later at Bellevue
Hospital Center.

The tapes were turned over to the police and one -- showing Mr. Tager firing the
shot -- was broadcast yesterday on the "Today" program with an explanation that
included an expression of sympathy by NBC to Mr. Montgomery's family. Large
crowds thronged the shooting scene yesterday as New Yorkers and tourists lunched
in and around flag-decked Rockefeller Plaza under clear blue skies.

Mr. Tager, who was seized at the scene minutes after the shooting and charged
with murder and weapons possession, gave his bizarre, seemingly irrational tale
of network sophistry and burning revenge in five hours of questioning Wednesday
night, during which investigators said he rambled, spoke cordially, lashed out
at the networks, fell silent and stared into space.

"He says that the networks were watching him for 20 years," Assistant Chief John
J. Hill, commander of Manhattan detectives, told a midtown news conference. "He
claims that they've been bugging him for 20 years. He claims that they tap his
phone, they send rays on top of him, vibrations come out of the television.
These are the terms he uses."

Chief Hill said Mr. Tager, who has homes and businesses in Charlotte and
Lincolnton, N.C., bought the weapon, a Chinese-made AK-47, on Aug. 17 at a shop
in North Carolina. They said a receipt for the weapon had been found in Mr.
Tager's possession, but they did not identify the shop or give any details of
the purchase.

Mr. Tager bought a red 1986 Ford Taurus for $1,400 in cash in Charlotte on
Monday, Chief Hill said, and began his journey north that same day. In addition
to the .762-caliber rifle, Mr. Tager had a semiautomatic .22-caliber Beretta
pistol that he had owned, under a license, for about 20 years. He also had four
banana clips of ammunition for the rifle -- each loaded with 30 rounds -- and
248 more rounds of rifle ammunition in boxes, as well as 28 bullets for the
pistol, Chief Hill said.

On Monday and Tuesday, Mr. Tager stopped in Scranton, Pa., where he visited the
Steamtown U.S.A. train museum, got a haircut, purchased some auto supplies and,
in an Army-Navy store, bought a blue trench coat nearly long enough to hide his
rifle, the chief said.

NBC Becomes Target

On Wednesday, he said, Mr. Tager drove into New York City and apparently chose
NBC as his first target because he knew its "Today" program was broadcast from
Rockefeller Center. The show was moved into a street-level studio -- one
enclosed by bulletproof glass -- in June to boost ratings by allowing passersby
to get up close and on camera in the background of the co-hosts, Bryant Gumble
and Katie Couric.

"He was not going there to get anybody who was in the audience or any
celebrities, but he was out to get the networks, meaning the people who put out
these shows and broadcasts," Chief Hill said. "He was not out to get any
specific person. When we asked him specifically why he shot this individual, he
said, 'He works for the network.' "

Mr. Tager parked on 49th Street, got out and knocked on an NBC employee entrance
-- a pair of locked, windowless, brass doors flanked by poster-sized pictures of
Mr. Gumble and Ms. Couric -- shortly after 5 P.M. Wednesday. A guard opened the
door and saw a large man in a dark blue coat; he also saw part of a rifle under
the coat and slammed the door shut.

The police were called. Mr. Tager left and sat in his car at the curb. A few
minutes later, he got out and again approached the door. As he did so, Mr.
Montgomery emerged, spotted Officers Patrick Cassidy and Mark Lanigan, gestured
at them and pointed out the suspect. When Mr. Montgomery turned back toward the
doorway, he was struck in the right back by one bullet fired by Mr. Tager from
40 feet away, the police said.

As bystanders scattered and pandemonium erupted, the gunman got back in his car
and tried to drive in reverse, but was captured at gunpoint by the two officers
without a struggle. Besides the weapons and ammunition in the car, the police
also found $7,400 in cash and 15 license plates, which may have been used in the
suspect's motorcycle-sales business.

'Looking Off into Space'

Investigators said they knew of no threatening calls to the networks by Mr.
Tager and no other incidents in which he had sought revenge against them. He was
questioned from 5:45 to 11 P.M., apparently until a call from a lawyer halted
the process.

"He spent a lot of time not speaking to us, just looking off into space," Chief
Hill said. "He said specifically that he was not out to get the police. In fact,
he was very cordial to us." But the suspect was adamant against NBC, CBS and
ABC.

"He kept saying networks," the chief said. "He never mentioned who he was after.
He said his house and car had been bugged by the networks. He was giving out all
kinds of statements like that."

Chief Hill said investigators had reconstructed Mr. Tager's recent movements
from receipts found in his possession. He said the police were trying to learn
if Mr. Tager had any history of psychiatric illnesses; he noted that members of
the suspect's family had been contacted but refused to answer any questions.

North Carolina authorities said Mr. Tager was arrested in Charlotte in 1976 on a
charge of failing to appear at a hearing on a parking ticket, and again in 1988
on charges of hit-and-run driving and making threats against a woman with whom
he had been involved in an accident.

In Charlotte, people familiar with the 1988 incident recalled yesterday that Mr.
Tager had run a textile company, Apex Dying Company, at the time and had had a
run-in with employees of a neighboring business when one of them parked a car
and blocked a driveway.

An official of the other business, Filmworks, a film processing company, said
Mr. Tager rammed his Jeep Cherokee into the woman's car. "He flew into a rage
and pushed her car down the street," he said. "We saw it and called police and
when they arrived he screamed that we were lying and that none of it ever
happened. He was furious and threatened us."

Later, associates of the woman said, he apologized, offered to have the car
repaired and began asking her out on dates. When she refused, he began following
her. A friend of the woman said: "He started coming around regularly over
several months trying to date her, and she told me he would show up places where
she was. She felt like he was stalking her."

Filmworks employees said they regarded Mr. Tager as unpredictable and perhaps
even dangerous. He once told some of them that he had been a Navy Seal, and he
seemed to have the rugged looks and manner that made it seem plausible. The New
York City police said he told them he was a Vietnam War veteran.

The police in Charlotte said yesterday that they had no record of the
disposition of the 1988 charges against Mr. Tager. A year or two after the
reported harassment, the Filmworks official said, Mr. Tager sold his business
and did not return to the area.

In Charlotte, Mr. Tager lives in Myrtle Square, a garden apartment complex of
yellow brick buildings. David R. Walters, an architect and instructor at the
University of North Carolina at Charlotte, who lives below Mr. Tager, said he
was not a close friend but added: "He always seemed nice and normal to me. Quite
affable. I'm shocked and surprised." He said a woman he took to be Mr. Tager's
wife was active in the complex's residents association, but Mr. Tager was not.

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 3, 1994, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about a fatal shooting on Wednesday in Rockefeller Center
misspelled the name of a co-host of the "Today" program. He is Bryant Gumbel.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Diana Pizzuti, center, deputy inspector and commander of the
Midtown North Precinct, speaking with John Fretsche, production manager of
"Today," left, and Jack Bergersen, with glasses, head of security at NBC,
outside the network's studios in Rockefeller Center. (C. M. Hardt for The New
York Times)(pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 4, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 555 words



                                                                    Weeks
This Last                                                              On
Week Week                                                            List Fic
                                                                          tio
                                                                          n

 1    2   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom.
          (Pocket, $5.) Witticisms by a fictional slow-witted wanderer
          through history.

 2   181  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
          Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 3    43  WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
          Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
          Advice for parents-to-be.

 4    14  RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS. (Rand McNally, $8.95.) The 1994
          edition of a guide to the United States, Canada and Mexico.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Aug. 20, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


   Weeks This Last On Week Week> List Nonfiction    1 7 FORREST GUMP, by Winston
Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
American history.     2 10 WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
John Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.     3 3 NIGHTMARES &
DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Stories (mostly about the
macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.     4 21 CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by
Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in
Colombia.     5 29 THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) An
11-year-old boy has a deadly secret.     6 2 GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip
Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen
disappear.     7 3 LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by
a woman on a Mexican ranch.     8 12 THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx.
(Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.     9
11 A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson. (Signet,
$6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's daughter.     10 2 THE
WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) In Regency England, a
demanding earl and a serene duchess cope with life together.     11 1 SMILLA'S
SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a
woman investigates a child's mysterious death.     12 1 THUNDER POINT, by Jack
Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) The discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War
II scandals that could embarrass the British.     13 6 POT OF GOLD, by Judith
Michael. (Pocket, $6.99.) A mother and daughter win $60 million.     14 104 A
TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface
during a murder trial in rural Mississippi.     15 1 GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann
Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) Romance between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a
large hotel chain.    Weeks This Last On Week Week> List Advice, How-to and
Miscellaneous    1 34 CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial,
$12.) A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.     2 565 THE
ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Inspiration.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


BLOW: How a Small-Town Boy Made $100 Million With the Medellin Cocaine Cartel
and Lost It All
By Bruce Porter. Harper, $5.99.
George Jung was a low-level American marijuana dealer when he met a Colombian
drug lord in prison in 1974. This book chronicles his rise as the Medellin
cartel's ambassador to the United States criminal market and his eventual fall:
he's now an ex-con delivering fresh fish instead of cocaine. Last year our
reviewer, Joe Queenan, said the author "has done an excellent job telling the
tale of a very unusual entrepreneur."


 BUTTERFLY STORIES: A Novel
By William T. Vollmann. Grove, $11.
These interconnected short fictions relate the adventures of a journalist who
travels to the Far East, where he immerses himself in the company of
prostitutes. His complicated relationships with these women unfold against a
backdrop of political turmoil. "The book is very well written," Geoff Ryman said
here last year. Grove has also reissued Mr. Vollmann's THIRTEEN STORIES AND
THIRTEEN EPITAPHS ($12), a collection of fictional journeys and brief scenes
detailing life -- often at its most desperate and depraved -- in locations
ranging from the United States to Afghanistan. Last year our reviewer, Catherine
Bush, said, "When Mr. Vollmann turns his hallucinogenic yet documentary eye on
the landscapes that he travels through, streets can quiver on the page."
21ST CENTURY CAPITALISM
By Robert Heilbroner. Norton, $10.
A noted economist examines the state of the free market in the wake of
Communism's collapse, arguing for increased public investment to help support
capitalism. His perceptions are offered "in a style largely penetrable and
pleasing to ordinary mortals," Robert Eisner said here last year. Postwar
capitalism's failure to fulfill its promise to the baby-boom generation is the
subject of DECLINING FORTUNES: The Withering of the American Dream, by Katherine
S. Newman (Basic Books, $12). Last year our reviewer, Robin Toner, called the
book, which focuses on a pseudonymous New Jersey suburb, "a poignant portrait of
how broad economic trends affect individual lives."
CRAZY IN ALABAMA
By Mark Childress. Ballantine, $11.
Twelve-year-old Peejoe has a lot to handle in the summer of 1965: his aunt has
just beheaded his uncle and lit out for Hollywood, and the civil rights movement
is disturbing the complacency of his Southern town. This comic novel "seems not
only fresh and original but also positively inspired," Robert Plunket said here
last year.
BLACK WOMEN IN AMERICA: An Historical Encyclopedia
Edited by Darlene Clark Hine, Elsa Barkley Brown and Rosalyn Terborg-Penn.
Indiana University, $49.95.
This huge two-volume reference work includes biographical information on
historical figures from Josephine Baker to Sojourner Truth, as well as sections
on professions, organizations and political movements. Last year our reviewer,
Lena Williams, called it "an exhaustive effort . . . long overdue." One of the
women celebrated in its pages, the feminist poet Audre Lorde, is the author of
THE MARVELOUS ARITHMETICS OF DISTANCE: Poems 1987-1992 (Norton, $8.95), a volume
issued after her death in 1992. Nominated for a National Book Critics Circle
Award, it includes poetry dealing with her battle with cancer and her identity
as a black lesbian. The collection offers "arresting and often unabashedly
political imagery," one critic said last year. There is more on the experience
of black Americans in UP SOUTH: Stories, Studies, and Letters of African
American Migrations, edited by Malaika Adero (New Press, $12.95), which captures
the waves of resettlement from the rural South to the industrial North in the
first half of this century. Last year the reviewer for The New York Times,
Herbert Mitgang, praised its "fascinating stories of the frustrations,
achievements and dreams of migrating families."
SIMPLE PASSION
By Annie Ernaux. Translated by Tanya Leslie.
Ballantine, $8.50.
This slim, autobiographical novel is the painstaking history of an obsessive
two-year love affair between the narrator, a French writer and teacher, and an
Eastern European businessman. It is "irresistibly readable," Caryn James said
here last year.
AMERICAN DAUGHTER GONE TO WAR:
On the Front Lines With an Army Nurse in Vietnam
By Winnie Smith. Pocket Books, $12.
This memoir recounts the author's harrowing experiences trying to save lives in
a Saigon field hospital nearly 30 years ago -- and her equally desperate attempt
to regain her equilibrium after returning to the United States. In 1992 our
reviewer, Linda Bird Francke, said, "Vivid and unrelentingly painful, it is a
book you want to put down -- but can't." A male soldier's difficult re-entry is
detailed in CHICKENHAWK: BACK IN THE WORLD. Life After Vietnam, by Robert Mason
(Penguin, $10.95). A sequel to Mr. Mason's 1983 memoir, "Chickenhawk," the book
reveals his disastrous attempt at marijuana smuggling. He "is still in command
of his ripsaw prose," Tom Graves said here last year. Vietnam is also depicted
in DREAM BABY, by Bruce McAllister (Orb/Tom Doherty, $13.95), the story of an
Army nurse who becomes a C.I.A. pawn after she develops clairvoyant powers. It
is an expansion of a 1987 novella, which our reviewer, David Bradley, described
as "good fiction . . . powerfully metaphoric."
SPIDERTOWN
By Abraham Rodriguez Jr. Penguin, $9.95.
Miguel, a teen-age drug hustler on the streets of the South Bronx, struggles to
escape the criminal world that threatens to rob him of his soul -- and his life.
This first novel is "a redemptive and absorbing work," Peter Finn said here last
year.   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PARIAH AS PATRIOT;
RATKO MLADIC

BYLINE: By David Binder;   David Binder is a New York Times correspondent who
has covered the Balkans since 1963.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3086 words


HE IS A CHILD OF WAR AND now a man of war. His eyes are a piercing light blue,
his hair close cropped and steel gray, his face as wide as a shovel. Seated at a
conference table, Gen. Ratko Mladic talks in a husky baritone about the war in
Bosnia and Herzegovina that has left several hundred thousand dead or missing
and driven a million people from their homes.

We are in a small stuccoed building in the ski resort town of Pale. Perched on a
bluff amid red pines, the building commands a spectacular view of the mountains
above Sarajevo. Here the Bosnian Serbs have established the presidency of their
self-proclaimed rebel state, the Republika Srpska, or Republic of Serbians. In
peacetime the building was a psychiatric sanitarium.

Mladic (pronounced MLAH-ditch) commands the Bosnian Serbs who seized, and for
the last two years have held, more than 70 percent of a disputed territory about
the size of West Virginia. Although atrocities have been committed by all sides
in the Bosnian conflict, the Serbs have been held accountable for widespread
systematic barbarities, including death camps, on a scale not seen in Europe
since the Nazi era. Two years ago Lawrence S. Eagleburger, then Secretary of
State, included Mladic in a list of Serb leaders with "political and command
responsibility for crimes against humanity" who should be held to account "under
international law." Last year, Senator Dennis DeConcini, co-chairman of the
Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, said that troops under
Mladic's control "are responsible for many of the atrocities we hear about in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the continuing siege of Sarajevo, which
isolates and strangles the city's more than 300,000 remaining residents."

Asked point-blank about Serb atrocities committed against Muslims, Mladic
responds: "I don't see it that way. I did what everyone else has done, to defend
my own people. That is our patriotic duty." Unruffled, he continues: "It would
be true to say of me that I had horns on my head if I had invaded Vietnam,
Cambodia or the Falkland Islands. I did not go to the gulf or Somalia. I was
defending my own home. In fact, my house was one of the first to be burned
down." In May 1992, a month after Serb rebels declared war on the Bosnian
Government by shelling Sarajevo, Mladic watched the house he shared with his
brother in the Sarajevo borough of Pofalici go up in flames.

Questioned about the two-year pounding of Sarajevo by heavy Serb guns and other
acts of brute aggression against Bosnian civilians by Serb forces, Mladic lists
brutalities committed by the other side. "Croats in March 1992 began a war of
terror against Serb civilians from the Kupres Plateau up to Doboj," he says.
(War in Croatia between the Serbs and the Croats broke out in 1991.) "They began
a policy of genocide against Serbs in Samac, Modrica and Derventa, the Neretva
valley up to Mostar. In June and July, Muslims burned down more than 100 Serbian
villages along the Drina."

By the time Mladic was made commander of the Serbian army in Bosnia in May 1992,
Serbian militias -- capitalizing on their overwhelming military superiority --
had already conducted a vast "ethnic cleansing" campaign, driving hundreds of
thousands of Muslims from their homelands over a seven-week period. Mladic was
not given full authority over the widely scattered militias until a year ago,
but the "cleansing" operations have gone on. His role in the subsequent actions
is not clear.

An officer who served with Mladic at the front recalls that Mladic prevented his
soldiers from executing Muslim prisoners of war, once during Serb offensives on
Mount Igman, south of Sarajevo, in the summer of 1993, and again at Majevica,
near Tuzla, last spring. According to a recently released Croat P.O.W., after
Mladic's visit to a prison in a Serb-held area of Sarajevo last March,
conditions for the 430 Muslim and Croat prisoners of war "improved greatly."

Of late, Mladic has been under attack not only in Washington but also in
Belgrade. The latest international peace plan for Bosnia calls on Mladic and the
other Bosnian Serb leaders to give up control of a third of the territory they
have seized. The plan has been accepted by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian
Government and Bosnia's Croats, but the Bosnian Serbs have rejected it. In
response, the international community early last month issued renewed threats of
harsher economic sanctions against Yugoslavia (now comprising Serbia and
Montenegro), until then the Bosnian Serbs' sole supporter. Faced with such
threats against Belgrade, Slobodan Milosevic, President of Serbia, warned Mladic
and the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic that rejection of the peace plan
would result in a severing of political and economic ties. The general's retort
was to the point: "If you do that, I'll bring the war to your doorstep!"
Announcing the cutoff of links to the rebels on Aug. 4, Milosevic described the
Bosnian Serb leaders as "war profiteers" who were "insane with political
ambitions and greed."

MLADIC'S FIRST NAME, Ratko, is a diminutive of Ratimir (War or Peace) or
Ratislav (War of Slavs). Ratko is a name typically given a male baby in wartime.
The general, 51, refuses to be identified in any way with the Republic of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, created in April 1992 as an independent and multi-ethnic state
and recognized by the United States and the European Community.

"I was born in what was called Old Herzegovina," he says, referring to a strip
of mostly mountainous territory that was an ancient Serbian dukedom. "Bosnia and
Herzegovina was an artificial creation of the Communist system and before that
in the Austrian Empire. We Serbs reject the term 'Bosnia.' We are Serbs and we
know who we are."

Yet being a Serb did not play a critical role in Mladic's life until he was 48.
In the 1991 Yugoslav census, the last before the old federation collapsed, he
listed his nationality as Yugoslav, not Serb. He was in many respects a
quintessential Yugoslav, born of parents who had joined the Communist-led
partisans to fight German invaders and their Croatian henchmen, the Ustasa.

The mottoes of the partisans of Josip Broz Tito were "Death to Fascism! Freedom
to the People!" and "Brotherhood and Unity!" Mladic's father, Nedja, died
fighting the Fascist Croatian Ustasa in 1945. Other Serbian partisans died in
combat against Muslim Ustasa, still others against Serbian royalists called
Chetniks. Of the 1.7 million Yugoslavs killed during World War II, 1 million
were victims of the civil war that raged within the larger conflict.

Tito constructed his Yugoslavia as a delicately balanced mechanism designed to
prevent a resumption of the ethnic slaughter among the South Slavs. Until his
death in 1980, his party, the League of Communists of Yugoslavia, and the
Yugoslav People's Army held the federation together. In its ability to be
independent of the Soviet Union, its relative openness and material wealth (made
possible by generous Western loans), Yugoslavia was the envy of Eastern Europe.
But after Tito's death the country gradually unraveled. The party disintegrated
in 1990, the army in 1991.

At 15, Ratko Mladic completed studies at an army school on the outskirts of
Belgrade. He graduated from the nation's military academy in 1965 and joined the
Communist Party. His initial postings in Europe's fourth largest army were in
Macedonia, where he commanded a platoon, then a tank battalion, then a brigade.
In January 1991, with the clouds of civil war already gathering, he was promoted
to deputy commander of the army corps in the province of Kosovo, where the
population is more than 90 percent ethnic Albanian.

Six months later, as the federation of six republics crumbled amid the
secessions of Croatia and Slovenia, Mladic received a call from the high command
in Belgrade. Could he make his way north to Croatia, where fighting had broken
out between Croatian militias and the Yugoslav army? "They asked what I
thought," he recalls. "I said I didn't have to think about it -- just about the
means to do it." He left three days later by helicopter for Knin, the center of
a Serbian uprising in the Krajina region against the breakaway Croatian
nationalist authority. There he was soon given command of the army corps, with
the rank of colonel.

Like many of his fellow officers, Mladic was still devoted to the preservation
of a federal and multi-ethnic Yugoslavia. Both Croatia and Slovenia had declared
but not yet achieved independence. Bosnia and Herzegovina -- a miniature
Yugoslavia in its mixture of Slavic Muslims, Serbs and Croats -- teetered
between continued association with the federation and some degree of
independence. "At the time, I never considered that we couldn't have a common
life," Mladic says. "We were all still captivated by that united life. But a man
is formed by the events he undergoes."

A gradual transformation of Mladic's vocabulary can be seen in a seven-part
interview that appeared early this year in the Belgrade weekly Nin. In the early
sections, he speaks of Croats as Croats. But when he talks about his battles
with the Croats in 1991-92 he refers atavistically to them as Ustasa.

What Mladic found in Krajina was a military man's nightmare. Army command was
breaking down as senior officers suddenly reverted to their Croatian or
Slovenian origin, wavered or went over to the other side. A hastily formed
Croatian national guard fought a hastily assembled Serbian militia. Civilians
were uprooted amid atrocities in villages of mixed populations. Army garrisons
were blockaded.

Mladic's first question was: "Who is the enemy?" His answer to himself and his
troops: "First, the enemy is anyone who shoots at our soldiers, cuts off their
water and electricity, provokes, blockades."

IN THE CROAT-SERB FIGHTING of 1991, Mladic moved with a combination of audacity
and guile that astonished his opponents. Before new uniforms and insignia made
the various sides distinguishable, he traveled across the lines in mufti, using
identification papers of Croat officers he had known. Once, when he was posing
as Col. Stjepan Fazlijan, a Croatian militiaman spotted his large ring and
stopped him, saying, "You're not Stjepan. You're Col. Ratko Mladic. You're
dangerous. We should liquidate you."

"I was uncomfortable," Mladic recalls. He flashed an identity card belonging to
Fazlijan and persuaded the militiaman he was the Croat. "I told him Mladic was
really dangerous and ought to be liquidated."

Then, in August 1991, Mladic led troops to liberate a Serb army barracks near
Vrlika. The road was blocked by a bus rigged with more than 70 pounds of
explosives. An engineering unit was unable to defuse the bombs. But Mladic,
watched by reporters and cameramen, entered the bus and cut the detonator wires.

He was promoted to general in April 1992 after he successfully -- and
ruthlessly, say his critics -- consolidated Serbian positions in Krajina. Soon
thereafter, Bosnia and Herzegovina declared its independence and Bosnian Serb
leaders searched for a commander to prosecute their war aims. Nikola Koljevic,
the Shakespeare scholar turned politician who is vice president of the
self-declared Bosnian Serb republic, remembers: "We didn't know Mladic. But then
we read about him in a Croatian newspaper that said, 'Mladic is no social
worker.' We decided, That's the guy we need." In May 1992, Mladic was
transferred from the Yugoslav army to the newly constituted Bosnian Serb forces.

By his own account, Ratko Mladic is a student of Hannibal, Alexander the Great
and Carl von Clausewitz. But over the last three years, in battle after battle,
he has shown his belief in the doctrine of concentrated force espoused by Heinz
Guderian, the German panzer general: Klotzen, nicht Kleckern! -- "Smash! Don't
sprinkle!" Mladic's commands to his artillery units around Sarajevo included:
"Roast!" "Pound them senseless!" (Some would argue that what the Bosnian Serbs
have been doing from the hills around Sarajevo hardly involves military skill
and is tantamount to shooting at sitting ducks.)

"The dominant shape of armed conflict for me is attack," says Mladic. "I have an
offensive character, and that's acceptable to the high command of the army of
the Republic of Serbians." In mid-June, a Bosnian Government offensive cracked
Serbian lines on the southern slopes of Mount Ozren. It was an effort by Bosnian
forces to secure a vital road link between Sarajevo and Tuzla, a Muslim-majority
enclave. But in a sudden pincer movement the Serbs retook the salient, killing
-- according to United Nations officials -- close to 1,000 Government troops.

Mladic eats and sleeps among his soldiers, whom he often leads into battle in an
armored vehicle. Initially he toured his nearly 800 miles of front lines by
helicopter, but that stopped last year in compliance with a flight ban imposed
by the United Nations. "I like to go on foot," he says. "On foot, soldiers are
at their best." In his underground headquarters about 40 miles northeast of
Sarajevo, he sleeps on an army cot.

Mladic can be hotheaded. Last year, when the United States and the European
Community proposed air strikes against Serbian positions, he threatened to
unleash terrorist bombers on Washington and London. Radovan Karadzic, president
of the self-proclaimed Srpska Republic, sharply reprimanded him for his "idiotic
and irresponsible statement."

On March 11, Gajo Petkovic, the retired editor of the monthly magazine People's
Army, wrote a blistering attack on Mladic in a Belgrade magazine. Calling the
general "conceited," a "cynic and a sadist," and accusing him of being "carried
away by rage and brutality," Petkovic asserted Mladic had "undoubted
responsibility for the crimes of members of the army he led." That night,
Petkovic wrote in a subsequent article, Mladic called him from Pale and
threatened him: "You'll get yours soon. You'll remember who Ratko Mladic is."
Mladic denies having made the threat.

That was not the end of that episode. On March 24, Mladic's daughter, Ana, a
23-year-old medical student, committed suicide in Belgrade. Her friends said it
was because she had become distraught after reading the Petkovic attack on her
father.

With his wife, Bozana, and their son -- both of whom live in Pale -- Mladic went
to Belgrade to attend the funeral at the Serbian Orthodox Church in the Topcider
Cemetery. Brought up a Communist and atheist, Mladic placed coins in front of an
icon; at graveside, he kissed a candle, lit it and crossed himself.

RATKO MLADIC IS SERVING a self-proclaimed state that aims eventually to merge
with a larger Serbia. Until Aug. 4, when Milosevic imposed his embargo against
the Bosnian Serbs, Pale drew oil and gasoline from Serbia. (Officials in Pale
now say they have enough fuel reserves to wage a full-scale war for four
months.) Bosnian Serb army uniforms have a Velcro patch on the breast pocket so
that the Srpska Republic coat of arms can be attached or removed.

Whether or not their self-styled republic is transitory, the Bosnian Serbs are
determined to have their way in the Bosnian conflict. On a recent day, fighters
along the front lines facing Gorazde, Sarajevo and the region north of Tuzla
were openly defiant. In a log-lined bunker called Little Paradise, a
machine-gunner named Dule echoed Mladic when he gave his reason for going to
battle: "We're defending our homes."

Every few minutes dum-dum bullets from Muslim snipers popped in the elm branches
above the bunker -- high-velocity 5.56-millimeter rounds that are the latest in
infantry warfare. This day, the Serbs did not fire back. Then came a shout from
a Muslim trench: "Hey, Cedo!" -- a diminutive for Serb nationalists. Dule yelled
back: "What do you want, Komsija?" Komsija means "little neighbor." This is,
after all, a war of neighbors.

There are other surprises at the front. Women are part of the combat units, as
are volunteers from Russia, Greece, the United States and Canada. And the
Bosnian Serbs have developed new weapons, they say. Mladic calls one of them
"the needle" -- a state-of-the-art adaptation of a surface-to-air missile that
lets the heat-seeking guidance system distinguish between an attack plane's jet
engines and the flares it drops as decoys. The missile was used to down a
British fighter-bomber during the heavy fighting around Gorazde in April.

More often than not, Mladic has accepted the political lines laid down initially
by his superiors in Belgrade and subsequently by his superiors in Pale. In 1991
he was ordered not to seize the coastal cities of Zadar and Sibenik, which would
have split Croatia, although he claims his forces could have done it in a matter
of hours then and "in a day or two" now. Similarly, in spring 1993, he bowed to
higher authorities fearful of Western military intervention and refrained from
seizing the Muslim enclaves of Srebrenica and Zepa along the Drina valley. He
stepped back again from Gorazde in April.

But cede to the Muslims land his 80,000 troops conquered? "I would never order
my units to retreat," he says emphatically. "I wouldn't do it if I had had one
million lives and had to lose them all. Only an army that is defeated retreats."

That same conviction motivated him to defy Karadzic and the entire international
community in May 1993 when he opposed the Vance-Owen peace plan for ending the
Bosnian conflict. The general's 45-minute speech persuaded the Bosnian Serbs'
assembly in Pale to reject that plan. Now, with Pale politicians unable to
accept the latest peace plan, with President Clinton giving them until Oct. 15
to accept it or face a lifting of the arms embargo against the Bosnian
Government, which is eager to regain more territory, prolonged war is virtually
guaranteed.

This would almost certainly mean renewed fighting by the Bosnian Serbs and
possibly a full-scale attack on Sarajevo. (The Serbian bombardment of the
capital ended in February when a NATO ultimatum forced the withdrawal of heavy
weaponry to points beyond a 12.4 mile radius of the city.) Heavy fighting could
prompt large-scale air strikes by NATO planes, a lifting of the arms embargo on
the Bosnian Muslim forces and the withdrawal of United Nations peacekeepers from
Bosnia.

"Our commitment to peace is not a sign of weakness," says Mladic. "We have shown
who we are and what we are. We take measures not to be surprised. I'm ready for
them anywhere."

NAME: Ratko Mladic

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The general talks to reporters shortly after taking Mount Igman
in August 1993. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WESLEY BOCXE/J. B. PICTURES)(pg. 29)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China's Rush to Riches

BYLINE: By Sheryl WuDunn

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 38;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5091 words


Before many more years go by, China is likely to surpass the United States as
the world's biggest economy. It already is the fastest-growing economy, one of
the consequences of a new Chinese revolution. Sheryl WuDunn and Nicholas D.
Kristof watched that revolution from the inside as The Times's correspondents in
Beijing from 1988 to 1993 and won a Pulitzer Prize for journalism in 1990.

In a new book, "China Wakes" (Times Books), they describe a society that is at
once politically repressive and economically freewheeling. The regime still
allows a prisoner to be asphyxiated by the fumes from his own uncollected
excrement, turns the family members of imprisoned human rights campaigners out
on the streets, forces young women to undergo sterilization and abortion. At the
same time, the Government is overseeing a breathtaking transformation of
individual lives and institutions that is rapidly making China richer than ever
before. The following excerpts, written like their book in alternate chapters by
the two authors, portray today's moneymaking frenzy -- and China's future as a
global economic giant.

THE STATE SecurIty Ministry secretly runs a dry-cleaning establishment that
caters to foreigners in Beijing. Initially I was suspicious, thinking that this
was a way to plant bugs in the suits of foreign diplomats and journalists. My
Chinese friends laughed at my suspicions.

"Of course not," one said. "State Security just wants to make money."

For the same reason, State Security also ran a bakery, and the national police
went into hotel management. The Army General Staff Department became part owner
of one of China's best hotels, the Palace. For a time, a local army unit ran a
travel service that operated a brothel. The army also runs scores of factories
that make televisions, refrigerators, clocks and other products. The Public
Security Ministry runs a fascinating pair of shops selling night sticks and
electric cattle prods.

What happened is that Government offices felt that they had been left out of the
money game. So they decided to go into business, often taking advantage of extra
land, well-placed contacts or special skills. Even schools began to run their
own factories or farm yards to raise extra money for chairs and textbooks and
teacher salaries.

There's a downside to all this, of course. Many school principals seem to devote
more energy to their sideline businesses than to the curriculum. And when a
liquor bureau runs a bar on the side, rival taverns may have reason to complain
about the fairness of the regulations. Yet there's also a benefit: These
companies give the bureaucrats a stake in the market economy. Officials at every
level now depend for their personal incomes and benefits on the progress of the
reforms and the economic system. Only a thriving market can satisfy their
hunger.

Everyone in China, it seems, has gone into business or is moonlighting:
waitressing at night, writing articles for popular magazines, teaching English
or aerobics, consulting on computer programs or giving seminars on stocks and
bonds. If they don't already have an evening job, Chinese intellectuals and
officials are taking night classes to train for a second career. This way, they
are able to triple or quadruple their salaries and, at the same time, keep their
"iron rice bowl" -- with its job security, housing and health insurance.

China today is something of a cross between Dodge City and Dickensian England.
It's a lawless place motivated by a strange mix of greed and apprehension that
this wonderful money-making opportunity could end at any moment. China may not
use little boys as chimney sweeps, but the textile and garment industries work
children 14 hours a day, seven days a week, and often they sleep by their looms.
If you lose your arm in the loom, you're fired. That may sound grim, but
19th-century capitalism is a big improvement over 18th-century feudalism.

Some people say China is not really moving toward Western-style capitalism
because the capital still belongs to state-owned banks that assign it for
noneconomic reasons. In other words, the price of capital in China isn't
interest. It's a bribe. Or it's the work that has gone into cultivating guanxi,
or connections, with the bankers and local officials. They are right, to some
degree, but then again 19th-century capitalism didn't operate exactly by the
book, either. Some of the vast fortunes were collected through monopolies, which
in turn were frequently awarded because of bribes or connections in Washington
or the state capitals.

The same kind of manipulation of economics and politics is happening today in
China, and there is a strong sense throughout the country that now is the time
in which the great financial empires will be made, before the system becomes
more rigid and the opportunities fewer.

The analogy with the industrializing United States is also a reminder that a
country can endure enormous shocks and turbulence at the same time it is
enjoying economic growth. In the 19th century, Americans saw appalling inequity,
gross manipulations of the political system, lynchings, bank collapses, brutal
repression of labor and leftist activism.

A visitor to the United States in the 19th century might easily have been
overwhelmed by the injustice and disorder. He could have interviewed penniless
immigrants in the crime-plagued slums of Boss Tweed's New York, chatted with
dispossessed farmers in the Great Plains during one of the several depressions,
toured the cotton plantations of the South and the manufacturing cities of the
Northeast and listened to the rage. And he could well have concluded that the
center would never hold, that America would be swept by war and revolution.
Instead, the history of the United States underscores how much abuse a country
can absorb when it is growing economically.

China now enjoys that kind of economic growth, and perhaps it too will
demonstrate this kind of resiliency. There is, however, one big difference. The
United States had established a civil society and enjoyed a far more flexible
political system, one that could respond to popular pressure without exploding.
A free press had always flourished, and elections were regularly held
everywhere, even if they were sometimes rigged. However inadequate the political
and legal system was in the 19th century, it was far more responsive than
China's is today. In China, the question remains: Will this era's emperors allow
their system to evolve in similar ways?

AH CHANG IS A MAN IN his early 30's, 5 foot 2, with thinning hair, a wrinkling
smile and a thickening waistline. Nick and I met him through friends, and I
looked him up whenever I visited his hometown of Guangzhou (Canton). Each time I
dropped by, he was engaged in a different line of business. Each time he was
richer.

Ah Chang, a nickname used by his Cantonese friends, never went to college. After
he finished high school, he spent a year sawing boards and soldering wires in an
electronics shop. From there, he was transferred to a job stoking a coal-burning
furnace, where he shoveled coal all day long, breathing the moist dust each time
he inhaled. When he came home, his hair and face clouded by a veil of black
soot, his mother would look at him and cry.

He made his first fortune in the late 1980's as a restaurant owner. But he
worried that the environment might change after Deng Xiaoping's death, and so he
was looking for a way to move abroad. Then the 1989 Tiananmen movement gave him
a chance. He was simply one of the millions of passive supporters of the
Tiananmen movement, and he was in no danger of being arrested. Nevertheless, he
had heard through the grapevine that America was giving political asylum to
anyone who claimed involvement in the movement.

He sold his business and bought a false American passport for $20,000. The
passport was a good forgery, but even so Ah Chang was worried about being
caught. Instead of flying directly to the United States, he flew throughout
Asia, stopping in Hong Kong, Singapore and Tokyo, where he stayed a few days
before he made his way to San Francisco. Once he arrived in California, he
thought he had made it. He destroyed his passport, because he was afraid of
being caught with a forgery, and turned himself into the immigration
authorities. He claimed political asylum.

The Immigration Service detained him for several months and then determined that
he was not a genuine political refugee. It returned him to China. Once there, Ah
Chang bribed and ingratiated his way out of trouble, but his money was gone --
he had spent $30,000 on his passport, air tickets, bribes and other costs -- and
he had no business.

He started again from scratch, opening a small restaurant and bar in Guangdong,
paying off the authorities so that he could run a cable from a satellite dish on
a nearby roof. That enabled him to show Hong Kong television in his bar, and
business improved. Even so, he wasn't making as much money as he wanted. His big
break came when a major foreign developer wanted to buy out his restaurant and
demolish it as part of a large construction project. The foreigners handed over
$40,000 to Ah Chang.

"It wasn't a very good restaurant," he told me over dinner one evening. "I
didn't manage it very well. I had all my friends over and they ate cheaply. But
I had a good location. In a flash, I had $40,000."

Ah Chang took the money and bought a large apartment, which he furnished
lavishly. His total assets were now about $70,000. He hardly cared about
politics but he did like his freedom and he did want to travel. He had hooked up
with a Hong Kong Da Laoban, or Big Boss, and was helping him hunt for property
deals. He had also begun trading in shoes, contracting with factories and
selling the shoes in other cities in China. He had his eye on a car and he had
plunked down nearly $45,000 to buy a lakeside summer home.

Ah Chang was always devising ways of making money, like selling medicines. He
happened to befriend the factory manager of a large pharmaceutical manufacturer,
and the manager agreed to supply him with one of the latest kinds of intravenous
solutions.

"I've known the guy for an entire year," Ah Chang explained. "He calls me
practically every day and I accompany him wherever he wants to go. I eat meals
with him and run around and have fun with him. So he trusts me and I trust him.
Then I took the purchaser at a hospital out to lunch, and he says he'll buy the
medicine from me. I'll slip a little to him on the side."

"How much will you give him?" I asked.

"I'll give him 50 percent."

"How much will you give the factory manager?" I asked.

"I'll give him about 20 percent."

"But then all you have left is 30 percent," I said.

"But 30 percent isn't so bad. If I get 30 percent here, 30 percent there and 30
percent somewhere else, that's not so bad. There's really no other way. I have
to give them a cut to make them happy. At least I make something. After all, the
law doesn't allow individuals to trade in medicine, so I need a way to hook up
with someone who has a license."

Ah Chang's newest moneymaking scheme is smuggling dogs into China. He is
bringing in dogs as pets, not as food, which is how Cantonese traditionally
viewed dogs. "In fact, this is good for society," he said. Chinese should stop
looking at dogs as dishes and should start looking at them as companions, he
added. There was a great demand for pets, but there was a rule against importing
dogs: you simply couldn't bring them in for sale.

"Everyone smuggles, and I'm just a pea in the business," Ah Chang explained. "It
may be against the law, but the law is ridiculous. You see, I'm not cheating
anyone, really. I'm cheating the Government, but that's nothing. The Government
has cheated the ordinary people for years, and it still cheats us because it
doesn't let us import many things. Anyhow, I'm not smuggling drugs."

I was always curious how these smugglers operated. Were they the Chinese mafia?
Were they an organized network of people who carried cellular phones and wore
black suits? Ah Chang explained that a friend had introduced him to a maritime
smuggler, a man who lives in a large multistoried brick house with lots of
privacy. Most farmers use their land to grow rice or dig fish ponds. This man,
an uneducated peasant who knew the sea but couldn't even write his name, had
converted his plot of land into a nice lawn. His entire family had quit farming
to work in the family smuggling business. No big networks. This guy fended for
himself. His family owned two big boats that they kept hidden by the coast. Even
Ah Chang didn't dare ask where the boats were.

"How does he actually smuggle the stuff into China?" I asked.

"I tell him what I want, where to get it, who to pick it up from in Hong Kong,"
Ah Chang said. "Then I give him a deposit, and when he brings the merchandise to
me, I pay him the rest."

The whole family invited Ah Chang over to the house and then treated him to a
fancy meal at a dimly lit restaurant with beautiful, and available, women.

"Each time we go out, he pays several thousand yuan," or hundreds of dollars, Ah
Chang said. "He needs to find customers, too. Is this the underground mafia?
Hmph! I don't know what this mafia is that everyone refers to. You call my
small-time peasant fisherman the mafia? I don't think so. He just wants to make
some money. Would you say I'm dealing with the mafia? I don't think so. What's
the mafia, then? Maybe it's the people who smuggle heroin, maybe it's the pimps
and prostitutes, the weapons dealers. Maybe that's it. In America, you know
what's illegal. Your laws are clear. Not in China. In fact, in China, the
police, they're the worst of them all. They're linked to the smugglers, too.
China is a crazy country now."

ORGANIZED CRIME SEEMED, IN part, organized by the state. Everyone knew that the
police and the customs officials were involved in smuggling and other illicit
practices. There was Fangcheng, for instance.

Fangcheng, a small port in Guangxi Province, suddenly became one of the most
popular harbors in China. The reason was that the local customs officials were
involved in small sideline broker companies that offered to handle all the paper
work for importing goods. These broker companies set up offices along a street
near the port, and the importer simply handed shipping documents to the company,
which then filled out all the customs forms, obtained the import licenses and
ushered the goods through customs. For this the officials took a fat commission,
but the buyer didn't feel the pinch. The customs officers never assessed the
true substantial duties on goods handled by the sideline companies, so importers
saved large sums on duties and the brokers could then skim some for themselves.

The central Government realized that something was up when cargoes destined for
all parts of China lined up to use this one small port in Guangxi. There were
huge delays for ships to get into the port, and hardly any duty was being paid.
So the authorities investigated and temporarily closed the port in mid-1993.

The Government has had occasional successes like Fangcheng, but on a broader
scale it is unable to come to grips with the country's rampant corruption.
Rather, money and resources have gone into feeding the national obsession -- the
expansion of the economy. And this frenetic growth may be brokering a true
revolution in China.

WHEN THE historians of the world gather 100 years from now, they may well
conclude that the dominant trend of our age was the rise of China.

From the vantage point of someone with a long view, the ascendancy of the West
is a recent phenomenon -- dating from about 500 years ago. For much of history
Chinese philosophy, poetry, science and government were more sophisticated than
those of Europe, and China's standard of living may have been higher. If China
can raise its standard of living and education, if it can squeeze out of its
present ideological straitjacket, then -- who knows what it may have in store
for the world?

China's economic revolution is more significant than the Maoist revolution of
the 1940's and 50's, and the best way to appreciate its magnitude is to squat in
the fields in rural villages, chatting with peasants. The World Bank calculates
that since the reform era began in 1978 a total of 170 million Chinese have
risen from absolute poverty. That marks a 60 percent decline in the number of
the destitute in China -- impressive by any standard. In the Philippines, the
number of absolutely poor people in 1990, 13 million, is the same as in 1970.

Xing Yisheng's life offers a window into the scope of the change for the poorest
Chinese. I met him in a mud-brick village on the edge of the Gobi Desert in
northwestern Gansu Province. Xing, 74, was wearing a much-patched and faded Mao
suit. He was hobbling down a rutted dirt path, and he invited me into his shack
a few doors away.

The shack had two rooms, each dominated by a kang, a platform bed with a
fireplace underneath. The dirt floor was swept clean and the furniture consisted
of three rickety wooden chairs set around a crude wooden table. The mud walls
were papered with newspapers, with pictures from old calendars providing a bit
of color. Xing grandly commanded a daughter-in-law to bring tea, which she
carefully poured into a couple of cracked cups.

"Before Liberation," he recalled, referring to the Communist takeover in 1949,
"I was just a farmhand, working for the landlords, because I didn't have any
land. I had two sons then, but I had to sell them because I didn't have any
money. I was ill with typhoid. So I sold my two boys for 400 pounds of rice
each. I never saw them again.

"There's a huge difference between life now and the way it was then," Xing
added. A grown son -- one of four children born after 1949 -- sat quietly a few
feet away, looking bored, as if he had heard it all before. "Our life today is
better than a landlord's life in the past. But I tell this to young people and
they don't want to hear. They say, Go away! They don't know about the old life."

Xing pointed reproachfully at his son, who appeared to be in his late 30's.
"Young man," Xing declared, his voice rising, "now you're living in heaven! You
dress well, you eat well." Xing turned back to me and waved dismissively at his
son. "Why, last year this young man wanted to buy a stereo cassette recorder for
700 yuan [about $80 at the unofficial exchange rate]. I said: 'No, that's too
much. We should buy a mule.' A mule can work. It's useful. A stereo isn't. And a
mule is so big, while a stereo is so small."

It was clear who had won the argument. A nice stereo occupied the place of honor
in the middle of the room. Despite Xing's misgivings, the family was doing more
than subsist; it was beginning to enjoy a bit of leisure. A similar change is
unfolding in most of the million-odd villages in China.

SINCE DENG XIAOPING took over in 1978, the Chinese economy has enjoyed an annual
average growth rate of a bit more than 9 percent. That is triple the average
growth rate of the United States in that period, and about 70 percent more than
the growth rate in India or Indonesia.

China is now the biggest producer in the world of coal, cement, grain, cotton,
meat and fish. It ranks third in steel production, after Japan and the United
States and fifth in crude oil output, after the United States, Saudi Arabia,
Russia and Iran.

To get a sense of the giddy pace of change in China, just consider the process
of industrialization around the world. Britain was the first country to enjoy an
industrial revolution, beginning in the late 18th century, and it then took 58
years for per capita British gross domestic product to double. The American
industrial revolution was a bit faster, with per capita output doubling in 47
years from 1839. Beginning in 1885, Japan doubled its per capita gross domestic
product in 34 years.

Now, in the late 20th century, China is roaring along with its own industrial
revolution, doubling its per capita output every 10 years. The "Four Dragons" --
Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea -- managed similar growth rates, or
even slightly higher ones, in peak periods of their development, but together
they are no more than the size of a Chinese province. For such growth rates in
such a huge country as China, there's been nothing like it in history.

Last year, the World Bank published a major study on East Asia, concluding that
there was only one chance in 10,000 that so many economic miracles would be
located so close to one another. There are some important common threads among
the region's success stories, and they may shed some light on China's prospects.

Like its neighbors, China began its reform program with an effort to boost
agricultural incentives. Japan, Taiwan and South Korea also underwent a land
redistribution in the aftermath of World War II, and the relative equality seems
to have been a factor in their growth. Again, like its neighbors, China has
opened itself up to foreign investment and management, and its export drive in
the coastal provinces has forced it to compete with other manufacturers around
the world.

The high saving rate in today's East Asia is particularly striking. China has a
personal saving rate that ranges between 35 and 40 percent, compared with about
5 percent in the United States. These savings generate the capital for new
factories, roads and shops that, in turn, boost economic growth.

The other kind of capital necessary for sustained growth is human capital -- a
healthy, educated work force that can run assembly lines and figure out how to
do things better and faster. The Communists have done well in primary education,
and nearly all children get at least a few years of elementary school. Perhaps
95 percent of all children start school and more than 80 percent graduate from
elementary school. Because of the Communist Party's traditional suspicion of
intellectuals, China has a low university enrollment, only 1.7 percent. But even
there China manages to focus its training on the specialties it needs; every
year it manages to graduate more than 200,000 engineers, nearly twice as many as
the United States.

Literacy is still low, but it is much higher than ever before. Wang Chigang, a
76-year-old peasant in central Anhui Province, typifies the country's many
illiterates. He grew up as a landless peasant and beggar, never went to school
and still cannot write his name. "I don't like the city," he said, sipping a cup
of dark tea in his shack. "Too crowded. Nobody has time for you. And it's
embarrassing when I have to go to the toilet -- I don't know which is which.
Since I don't know the characters for 'man' and 'woman,' I have to ask for help
finding the right one." Yet Wang's children and his grandchildren have all gone
to school. Pointing to a grandson who finished high school, Wang boasted, "He
can write really well."

While some local governments ignore the illiteracy problem, others are actively
campaigning to teach people to read and write. In the villages of Xiping County
in Henan Province in central China, students stop visitors and ask them to read
a few characters on a blackboard. Any visitor who cannot read the characters is
not allowed to enter the village. This means that illiterates are effectively
grounded, and in frustration many have joined the special reading classes
offered in each village. Now in Xiping County, according to local officials,
only 1.7 percent of those between the ages of 20 and 40 are illiterate.

The other crucial kind of human capital in which the Communists have invested is
public health care. The Chinese medical system is in many ways a model for
developing countries. While China spends less than 4 percent of gross national
product on medical care (compared with 15 percent in the United States), its
health statistics are comparable to those of much richer nations. And in the
cities, health statistics are as good as those of American urban areas. In
Shanghai, for example, the most recent figure shows that 9.9 out of every 1,000
infants die in their first year of life.  In New York City the infant mortality
rate is 10.2 per 1,000. A baby in Shanghai can expect to live 76 years, while
average life expectancy in New York is 73.8 years.

To get a better sense of how Chinese doctors achieve such health statistics, I
spent a day with the perpetually sorrowful Dr. Su Ke in the villages of
Xishuangbanna District, a tropical region near Vietnam. A 46-year-old with a
graying crew cut, Dr. Su works out of a rural clinic but regularly hikes with
the other doctors into the mountains to see the peasants who don't believe in
doctors. As we drove into the mountains in my hired car, he explained the
difficulties.

"When we go out and try to inoculate babies, some of the peasants are very
frightened and hide their kids," Dr. Su said. "Or they turn their dogs on us to
bite us and drive us away." Even if Dr. Su manages to get his needle into the
derriere of a local child -- a task made easier because none of them wear pants
-- he is likely to get in trouble. "We give them injections against measles, and
then the kid gets a cold. So the parents come and complain. They say, 'You
promised that my child wouldn't get sick!' "

We stopped the car by a roadside one-room clinic operated by an 18-year-old
peasant who had just opened up shop as a doctor. The peasant was trying to pull
the abscessed tooth of a teen-age girl, but he wasn't making much headway. Blood
was all over, and knives and pliers were scattered about, and both the doctor
and the patient looked a bit discouraged. There was no Novocain, but the young
woman was using some Chinese medicine that seemed to deaden the pain pretty
well. Dr. Su took over the pair of pliers, rapped away with a chisel, and after
about five minutes the tooth came out.

Instead of allocating resources for dental offices or complex procedures like
coronary operations or dialysis, China has channeled its money to basic care --
an approach that is far more cost-effective. For example, basic treatment for
leukemia costs about $5,000 and on average adds a bit more than a month to a
patient's life. The same $5,000, used to buy vitamin A supplements for children,
adds a total of 10,000 years of life expectancy.

WHAT DO THESE improvements in health, education and living standards add up to?
For all the brutality of the Chinese regime, it is presiding over an economic
revolution that is scarcely fathomable. Never before in human history have so
many people -- or even such a large share of humanity -- risen from poverty so
rapidly.

China's economic gains are mirrored in a broader phenomenon: the rise of a
"Greater China" as an increasingly integrated economic entity. Greater China
consists of China, Hong Kong and Taiwan; despite their political differences,
their economies are being melded into one. Taiwanese companies have moved entire
assembly lines across the Taiwan Strait into southern China. Most of the Taiwan
shoemaking industry has relocated to Guangdong and Fujian Provinces; much of the
garment and sportswear industries have moved as well. Once Taiwan allows direct
flights across the strait, that air route from China to Taiwan may well become
one of the busiest in the world, the Asian equivalent of the Boston-New
York-Washington corridor.

The global economy is sometimes said to be tripolar, revolving around the United
States, Japan and the European Community. But Greater China is rapidly becoming
a fourth pole, a new pillar of the international economy. According to World
Bank projections using comparable international prices, Greater China in the
year 2002 is projected to have a gross domestic product of $9.8 trillion,
compared with $9.7 trillion in the same year for the United States. If those
forecasts hold, Greater China would not just be another economic pole. It would
be the biggest of them all.

IT IS POSSIBLE THAT CHINA will fall apart during the succession struggles after
the death of Deng Xiaoping. But, for all the risks, there is a strong chance
China will succeed over the coming decades in sustaining an economic boom. If
so, the ramifications would not only be economic; the global diplomatic,
political and military balance may also have to be recalibrated.

Continued economic growth also means that China will demand far more of the
world's energy resources. It will add substantially to the world's problems with
acid rain, chlorofluorocarbons and other environmental hazards. China may come
to dominate a number of sports and sweep the medals chart in every Olympics.
Already China has the largest army in the world and the most rapidly increasing
military budget.

Some would argue that China's Government cannot sustain its economic revolution
because it is so despotic. But that is probably faulty thinking. In determining
economic growth, repression may matter, but savings rates matter more. There is
a historical parallel that underscores how one can harbor hopes for China while
retaining an antipathy for the present leadership.

The dynasty in Chinese history most like the present one is the Qin, founded in
221 B.C. by an emperor who was a brilliant military leader and a cruel tyrant.
The Qin emperor burned books and buried scholars alive, but he also unified the
country and linked border fortifications to create the Great Wall. Mao Zedong
himself acknowledged (and was flattered by) the similarities in vision and
ruthlessness between him and the Qin emperor.

Partly because the Qin emperor was so harsh, his dynasty lasted just a few years
after his death. Yet the Qin emperor laid a foundation that served China well.
The next dynasty was the Han, which lasted more than four centuries and was a
golden era -- a flourishing age for the arts and scholarship as well as for the
economy.

The Communist dynasty, like the Qin, may well have inadvertently laid a
foundation for the next dynasty. The Communists' brutality and incompetence
killed tens of millions of Chinese, and torture continues today in prisons
around the country. But the party also united China, redistributed land and
wealth, and destroyed the special interests that were stifling economic growth.
China now has a chance to grow and prosper and become a major international
power, perhaps eventually a superpower such as the world has never known.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
William Hurt Resurfaces, as a Character Actor

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1289 words


JUST BEFORE "BODY HEAT" opened in 1981, the film's star William Hurt, then 31
years old, described himself to Judy Klemesrud of The New York Times as a
character actor trapped "in a leading man's body."

Reminded of the comment 13 years later, Mr. Hurt smiles and says, "Well, I'm not
so trapped anymore."

If it was Mr. Hurt's goal to become a character actor, he may have achieved it,
particularly in two new films. In "Trial by Jury," which opens on Friday, he
plays a decidedly unglamorous former police officer who chews gum, smokes cheap
cigars and knows he doesn't stand a chance with the film's heroine, played by
Joanne Whalley-Kilmer. He also takes fourth billing, below her, Armand Assante
and Gabriel Byrne.

Then, in "Second Best," opening Sept. 30, he stars as a 42-year-old small-town
Welsh postmaster who has never had a date, has always lived with his parents and
wants to adopt a child. The character's sexuality is something of an enigma. "I
assume that he's a sort of lost-soul heterosexual," says Chris Menges, the
film's British director. "It was important to David Cook that you were never
really sure about his sexuality. It's hard to feel that about Bill, I must say."
(Mr. Cook adapted his own novel for the screenplay.)

Off screen, Mr. Hurt, 44, seems stuck with a leading man's looks. Ensconced in a
suite at the Regency Hotel for interviews, he looks very much as he did in
"Broadcast News," except for the beard (grown for "Smoke," a film that he
completed in July in New York). He is wearing eyeglasses, a casual shirt and
pants, and tapestry sandals with gray socks. He is drinking a cup of tea, for
which he brought the teabags, along with yogurt and apples, from home.

"You have to create a track record of breaking your own mold," he says,
referring to the fight against typecasting, "or at least other people's idea of
that mold."

He believes, however, that he has been doing character parts since "Gorky Park"
(1983). Maybe it is a little odd that a man whose best-known roles have included
an academic who turns into an ape ("Altered States"), a drug dealer rendered
impotent in Vietnam ("The Big Chill"), a seriously repressed travel writer ("The
Accidental Tourist") and a transvestite window dresser ("Kiss of the Spider
Woman," for which he won an Academy Award as best actor) ever became a sex
symbol at all. But many fans of "Body Heat" and "Broadcast News" have good
memories (and rich fantasy lives).

If Mr. Hurt seems to have been absent from the screen for a while, it may have
been a combination of box-office chance and his attitude toward Hollywood. A New
Yorker since childhood, he never moved to the West Coast. "In the beginning, I
went with a job and a return ticket in my hand," he says. "Now I pretty much
don't get on the plane." The last time, he says, was for "The Doctor" (1991).

He did Wim Wenders's "Until the End of the World" (1991); "The Plague" (1993),
with Raul Julia, which went straight to video; and "Mr. Wonderful" (also 1993),
with Annabella Sciorra, which practically did.

Mr. Menges admits Mr. Hurt was not his first choice for the role in "Second
Best," but the screenwriter wanted him. "He thought that Bill Hurt was the man
with the energy for the part," he recalls. "Bill came down here, and he really
was incredibly convincing."

Heywood Gould, who directed "Trial by Jury," was first impressed by Mr. Hurt's
work in the 1987 film "Broadcast News." "The character is kind of a goofy pretty
boy, but knows that he's a goofy pretty boy and can explain his techniques for
being a goofy pretty boy," says Mr. Gould. "He's split right down the middle
with a certain kind of self-awareness and at the same time a total lack of
self-awareness. I remember being stunned by the fact that I was getting that."

It's difficult to say whether other factors, like Mr. Hurt's personal life or
reports that he is difficult to work with, have contributed to his low screen
profile in the 1990's so far. In the past, he was treated at a clinic
specializing in drug and alcohol addiction. A recent New Yorker article referred
to him as "notoriously temperamental." But Mr. Gould says: "I think what he does
to people is keep them alert and prepared. You feel when you begin a day's work
when you know Bill's going to be working that day, you'd better have your stuff
together." What happens if you don't? "I don't know," he says, laughing. "I was
too frightened to do it."

Mr. Menges says, "I only saw it very briefly once, and it was in a scene that
was supposed to be incredible anguish." In the scene, James (Chris Cleary
Miles), the boy that Graham (Mr. Hurt) hopes to adopt, tells him, among other
things, that nobody can ever replace his father. "The process of film making
means being prepared to leave yourself incredibly vulnerable. That's when the
shouting starts."

In person, Mr. Hurt doesn't seem hostile. He smiles, is polite and even gives an
occasional playful answer ("Where did I study? I went to P.S. 6. I went to
Collegiate, Middlesex, Tufts, Juilliard"). Only once does he seem annoyed, when
the subject of private life is broached. "Please don't," he says in a quiet but
extremely firm voice.

His private life is not his favorite subject. As a result, much of what the
public knows about him comes from court proceedings (the 1989 palimony and child
custody battle with Sandra Jennings, a dancer; his divorce from Heidi Henderson
last fall). His relationship with Marlee Matlin, his co-star in "Children of a
Lesser God," preceded both.

He now lives with a Frenchwoman, a fact that he acknowledges by accident while
discussing his fluency in French for "Confidence Inconnu," which he is now
filming in St. Petersburg, Russia. Although he declines to identify her, it
seems very likely that she is the actress Sandrine Bonnaire, a co-star in "The
Plague."

Mr. Hurt has a reputation for getting carried away with words -- or maybe with
his own thought process. "Elliptical? Philosophical? I can be that way," he
admits, after a discussion of materialism has suddenly switched to Spencer Tracy
and ended with the sentence "There is a difference between church and state."

Then it's on to the meaning of life. "There's fear or faith," he says. "If
you're living by fear, then you're always looking for security. If you're living
by faith, then you're always looking for freedom." But faith is easier named
than achieved. "You just keep at it," he says. "Defeating fear is not a light
switch. For most of us, it's daily work."

MR. HURT SEEMS happy to discuss a variety of subjects, like the state of movie
making ("Billions of dollars are wasted on these adolescent morality tales.
They're not about accepting life. They're about avoiding life") and society's
ills ("Post-adolescence reaches usually into the late 30's"). He even quotes
Bible verses ("In Romans, Paul says, he who searches the hearts of men will know
the mind of the spirit"). Well, he was a theology major.

But he is most animated when talking about acting, paying compliments to Meryl
Streep ("Meryl is important. She has claimed physiological differentiation as
part of an actor's talent"), Gary Oldman and his former Juilliard classmate
Mandy Patinkin. At one point he grabs a visitor's glass of water to act out the
concept of objectives and obstacles. Later he makes an example of a throw pillow
on the sofa, analyzing the difficulty of touching it "without making something
out of it, but just to experience that."

"Now the fact that I'm experiencing it can be written all over me without your
having to know what it is I'm specifically experiencing," he adds. "That's what
saves my private life. But you, at the same time, are invited into yours."

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chris Cleary Miles, left, and William Hurt in "Second Best" --
A lonely postmaster wants to adopt. (Clive Coote/Warner Brothers); Mr. Hurt as a
former police officer in "Trial by Jury," which opens Friday -- Decidedly
unglamorous, and he gets fourth billing. (Gael Harvey/Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
Why Two Soundtracks Are Music to Boomers' Ears

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


FORGET THE HIT ALBUMS BY the Rolling Stones, Stone Temple Pilots and Counting
Crows. In the pop-album sweepstakes of late summer, the runaway best sellers
have been the soundtracks for the movies "The Lion King" and "Forrest Gump." The
hearts of both these misty-eyed fables are in the music-driven youth culture of
the 1960's, when all things seemed possible.

"The Lion King," which includes songs by the baby-boomer idol Elton John, offers
gentle advice on how to prevent a divisive 1960's-style generation gap. "Forrest
Gump," awash in 60's and 70's oldies, is one long sigh for lost innocence.

The cartoon portrait of the African wild in "The Lion King" is rainbow colored
and eco-friendly, and so is its music. The only threats to this harmonious
environment where everyone is content with his place in the food chain are the
evil, upstart hyenas. The story is a therapy-hazed variation of the parable of
the prodigal son. But in this version, the disobedient child whose father died
while saving his life learns to accept his royal lineage by transcending his
guilt. A contemporary human parallel might be the hippie rebel growing up into
an enlightened yuppie millionaire.

Hans Zimmer's musical score for "The Lion King" is an upbeat, inspirational
pastiche of Hollywood symphonics and African chant. At moments, this music
becomes oppressively bombastic. But it upholds the movie's fuzzy-sweet vision of
harmony among all peoples and species.

It also helps camouflage the weaknesses of the nondescript original songs by Mr.
John and Tim Rice. While the teaming of a pop superstar (Mr. John) with an old
hand from Broadway (Mr. Rice) augured a promising fusion of two musical worlds,
their collaboration falls far below the high standards set by Alan Menken and
Howard Ashman in "Aladdin," "Beauty and the Beast" and "The Little Mermaid." The
fact that "The Lion King" has become the Disney studio's biggest hit, despite
its mediocre songs, is not a happy sign for the artistic future of the animated
musical.

It was just two decades ago that the success of "American Graffiti" jolted
Hollywood into recognizing the commercial potential of weaving rock-and-roll
classics into the fabric of a story. Since then, countless coming-of-age films
have used oldies to confer instant period authenticity.

"Forrest Gump" goes much further than any previous film in its reliance on
oldies to push emotional buttons. Where "American Graffiti" and that other
oldies-laced blockbuster, "The Big Chill," focused on a crucial transitional
moment in the life of a group of baby boomers, "Forrest Gump" telescopes the
history of a whole generation by compiling the traumatic flashpoints into an
anthology of singing postcards.

Surveying four decades of American life, the movie sees the procession of events
from the perspective of a 60's rock fan. Every loaded media image is captioned
with a vintage pop hit. The Vietnam scenes are underscored with Creedence
Clearwater Revival, Jimi Hendrix and the Doors. Hippies stream westward to the
strains of "California Dreamin' " and "San Francisco (Flowers in Your Hair)."
Later, when the title character becomes a runner crisscrossing America, the
soundtrack blares out "Running on Empty," "On the Road Again," "Against the
Wind" and "Go Your Own Way."

But all too often, the music takes the place of action, filling a dramatic
vacuum with instant nostalgia. At such moments, "Forrest Gump" begins to feel
like nothing so much as a musty "March of Time" newsreel revamped for the
postwar era and outfitted with a hip rock soundtrack.

"Forrest Gump" 's vision of American life is as sweetly sentimental as "The Lion
King" 's view of the African wild. "Forrest Gump" 's unabashedly nostalgic use
of classic rock has a lot to do with the movie's success at playing both ends
against the middle in an effort to offend no one.

Forrest, who succeeds in his every endeavor despite having an I.Q. of 75, is an
irresistibly likable figure whose mystique parallels that of the music that
accompanies his ascent. Much like rock-and-roll itself, Forrest reconciles
seemingly opposite views of the individual power in America. He is both a
helpless innocent at the mercy of history and a mover and shaker who shapes
events.

The myth of rock-and-roll is that it originated as a classless all-American
music sprung from the soul of the common people in reaction to a genteel
tradition imported from Europe. Paradoxically, rock-and-roll became profitable
beyond its pioneers' wildest expectations and a potent commercial tool.

With its cyber-cinematic jokes about Forrest's influence on pop culture, the
movie honors the mythic place of rock-and-roll in baby-boomer consciousness. In
an early sequence, Forrest teaches Elvis Presley how to shimmy. Later, he
unwittingly inspires John Lennon to write "Imagine."

These creative coups by an idiot savant reinforce the notion popular in the late
1960's that Lennon, Bob Dylan and other rock deities were fully sprung geniuses
whose every utterance was gospel simply because it came out of their mouths. One
of the most oft-repeated maxims of 60's pop culture held that "everybody is a
star." "Forrest Gump" presents an appealingly nostalgic 90's variation on that
fantasy.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sweet and Fuzzy -- Simba and his pal Nala during a musical
sequence in "The Lion King." (Walt Disney Productions); Laced With Oldies -- New
recruits Mykelti Williamson, left, and Tom Hanks in "Forrest Gump." (Phil
Caruso/Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Reaching for the Stars in the New Military

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1255 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN the 1960's, a hard-charging, freshly minted second lieutenant wanted to go to
Southeast Asia to experience combat in the Vietnam War. In 1990 and 1991,
commanders turned away many young officers who volunteered for action in the
Persian Gulf region.

For generations of American warriors, there has never been much of a question:
the essence of soldiering is fighting and winning. Officers have been willing,
even eager, to put themselves in harm's way, because the surest route to high
rank and regard has been to lead troops into battle. But today, in the absence
of old-fashioned wars with clearly defined front lines, soldiers who have toiled
largely in anonymity are coming to the fore to deal with many non-traditional
missions, from combatting drug dealers to pulling riot-control duty. People
mastering these skills can be well on their way to the general or admiral rank
once largely reserved for the battlefield veterans.

The end of the cold war and a spate of peacekeeping and humanitarian missions
have thrown open a new set of opportunity-filled fields in unlikely areas. The
gulf war made famous an obscure Army logistician named Gus Pagonis, a major
general who moved six million tons of equipment into the war zone. Logistics
wizards, like those now building tent cities for Cuban boat people at Guantanamo
Bay or hauling relief supplies to refugees in Rwanda, have been held in higher
regard ever since.

The warriors of the future will also include computer nerds and intelligence
geeks guiding troops on a digitized battlefield. Even the once-dreary
acquisition corps has acquired cachet as Defense Secretary William J. Perry
tries to streamline how the Pentagon buys $50 billion a year in weapons and
parts. Suddenly, buying blankets and combat boots is a lot sexier.

Less Room for Missteps

While opening doors in some fields, the cold war's demise has meant smaller
forces and fewer opportunities over all. Career paths are more competitive for
young officers who need to punch the right ticket at the right time in a system
that is less straightforward and far less forgiving than it was a decade ago.

For instance, some young Navy and Marine Corps officers who were investigated in
the Tailhook sexual-harassment scandal fell behind their peers, and even those
who were cleared now face an uphill struggle. And with America's nuclear arsenal
shrinking, officers who supervise missile silos under North Dakota wheat fields
-- a prestige-filled mission a few years ago -- may be looking for work. "If you
don't hit gates when they swing open, you may never get a chance to do it
again," said one Navy commander, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
(Almost everyone interviewed insisted on anonymity to avoid violating a cardinal
rule of rung-climbing: no self-aggrandizement in the press.)

Fast-trackers with their sights set on the Joint Chiefs of Staff will still come
from the combat arms branches: armor, infantry and artillery in the Army and
Marine Corps; submarines, carrier jets and warships in the Navy, and warplanes
in the Air Force.

But what's hot and what's not in the military mirrors which branch of each
service is on the cutting edge in war-fighting strategy. Because of the Battle
of Midway in June 1942, ambitious young Navy people wanted carrier duty -- and
indeed for decades carrier men rose to the top more than the brass from other
naval branches. In the 1980's, American submariners who waged silent underwater
duels with their Soviet counterparts rose to the top of the Navy's chain of
command.

Bomber pilots dominated the senior ranks of the Air Force until Vietnam, when
fighter jocks shoved them aside, seizing a stranglehold they still hold.

Since the Revolutionary War, the ticket to the top has been command of troops in
the field. And if the officer is lucky enough for a good war to come along, all
the better. "Command is still the ultimate test of an officer's abilities, and
it's as important a factor as it's ever been," said Rear Adm. Patricia Tracey,
the personnel director for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Leading troops in a popular war has always produced instant heroes. Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf was counting down his final days in the Army at the United
States Central Command in Tampa, Fla., a backwater post, when Iraq invaded
Kuwait in August 1990.

Soldier-Statesman Is Ideal

Now, for the first time since Navy gunboats plied the rivers of Vietnam, young
naval officers are getting a crack at early commands, this time in small patrol
boats like those now helping enforce the economic embargo against Haiti.

The raft of relief and peacekeeping operations has upped the ante for
soldier-statesmen. Lieut. Gen. Anthony Zinni of the Marine Corps has conducted
relief missions in Russia, Iraq and Somalia and is considered such a poster boy
for peacekeeping that he testified before a House committee on the Rwanda
operation.

In today's grudgingly politically correct military, an officer's record on
opening opportunities for women also counts toward promotion. The new emphasis
has opened new doors to women themselves -- ushering in female fighter pilots
and warship officers. The new Chief of Naval Operations, Adm. Jeremy M. Boorda,
notched his warrior stripes directing NATO operations in Bosnia.  But he also
won the top Navy job because of his progressive views on opening more combat
jobs for women.

This attitude has yet to reach the Marine Corps and Army, where crusty generals
perpetuate their self-selective club by freezing women out of the only three
branches of the service that produce commandants and chiefs of staff: armor,
artillery and infantry.

There is no magic formula to the top, a journey that typically alternates field
assignments with desk jobs and military schooling. But officers say a few tips
help to navigate the shoals of promotion boards.

Tip No. 1 -- Excel at the desk or in the field, but try to get field assignments
as often as possible, from anti-drug operations in the Caribbean to peacekeeping
duty in Macedonia, and earn command of troops early on. "With things so much
more competitive now, there's no real time to grow into a new job," said Capt.
Frank Dobrydney, the Navy's head of career-management policy.  "You have to hit
the deck running."

Tip No. 2 -- Angle for high-visibility staff jobs in major commands or at the
Pentagon, where senior civilians as well as the military brass can see your
work.  Build political connections, a la Brent Scowcroft and Alexander Haig. In
the Army and Navy, senior generals and admirals adopt promising young officers
as their "sons" and "daughters" and help manage their careers.  But avoid tying
yourself too closely to one mentor.

Tip No. 3 -- When the time is right, earn a graduate degree and jockey for a
position at one of the military colleges, preferably the National War College in
Washington. Winning a White House fellowship, as Colin L. Powell did as a young
lieutenant colonel, is a career booster. A tour on the military's Joint Staff,
the administrative arm of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, helps enormously.

By the time an officer reaches general or admiral, politics and talent figure
equally in promotions. It doesn't hurt to hitch your star to a top civilian.
Adm. Paul David Miller, the commander of American forces in the Atlantic,
leapfrogged over dozens of more senior admirals in the late 1980's when Navy
Secretary John F. Lehman Jr. tapped him as a favorite. It pays to have a little
luck.


LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
A Diplomatic Question: Embargo or Embrace?

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


NO wonder foreign policy debates these days seem so dull and muddled. "Hawks"
and "doves" are out. All anyone wants to know is whether you are an "embargoer"
or an "embracer" -- whether you think the way to deal with Bosnia, China, Haiti,
Iraq or Cuba is by embargoing them into better behavior or embracing them with
trade and tourism until they evolve into good citizens.

But let's face it, it's hard to get excited about denouncing your opponent as a
"lily-livered embracer," or as a "neo-conservative embargoer." When one school
in a foreign policy debate sounds like an aftershave and the other sounds like a
service offered by Fedex, you know you've got trouble.

Worse, nobody knows who's on anyone's side anymore. Each day the editorial pages
bring a new surpise as the most unexpected people line up in the embargoer and
embracer camps. Sigh. Whatever happened to the days when foreign policy was
primarily about titanic issues like the use of force and the clash of values,
and you could tell the players without badges reading: "Hi, My Name Is. . .and I
Stand For. . .?"

Sure, force is still an option today, but no one wants to use it because nothing
seems worth using it for, save possibly for nearby brushfires like Haiti. We now
have foreign policy by calculator. Hence the constant refrain from American
politicians: "How many American lives is Cuba worth?" "How many lives is North
Korea worth?"

It has almost become comical, as with Friday's headline: "Pentagon Estimates It
Will Cost $427 Million To Invade Haiti." There is no way anyone could know how
much an invasion of another country is going to cost with such exactitude. What
did they do, put it out for bid?

Such stories matter, though, when American interests in a region are so
ambiguous, and the justification for sacrifice so unclear, that people hope a
price tag will tell us what our strategists cannot: whether it's worth it. Also,
there is something about a spreadsheet that gives the illusion that the
uncertainties inherent in any invasion can really be controllable.

But the prospect of using force in Haiti is the exception. For now, American
foreign policy seems to have been reduced to the same two options on virtually
every issue. One is to impose economic sanctions -- as with Iraq, Serbia, Iran,
Haiti, North Korea and Cuba -- and hope that over time these embargoes produce
the sought-after political change, with little cost in American treasure and no
cost in American blood.

The other is to hold our noses, opt for the embrace, as with China or Vietnam,
and hope that by trading with these authoritarian countries, engaging them
diplomatically and luring them into political and economic reforms that they
will crumble from within.

Both sides point to the cold war as proof that they are right. The embargoers
argue that economic sanctions enabled the Jews to leave the Soviet Union, drove
the Soviets out of Afghanistan, forced the Vietnamese to adopt capitalism and
will eventually bring Fidel Castro to his knees.

The embracers argue that it was actually the web of diplomatic, touristic and
economic relations with the Communist world which set in motion reforms that
leaders like Mikhail S. Gorbachev thought they could control but eventually
consumed them. But policymakers advocating either approach have to know a lot
more about the world -- particularly the inner workings of different countries
and what happens when you connect the blue wires with the red wires. How would
economic sanctions affect political reform in China? In the old days it was easy
to be a lawyer or politician and become Secretary of State. The only question
you had to ask about the world half the time was "Whose side are they on, ours
or the Soviets'?"

It's All a Matter of Detail

To conduct foreign policy today requires a much keener sense of history, an
intuitive feel for the rhythms of certain societies and an instinct for what can
go wrong when engineering the politics of someone else's country.

This is doubly true now when the main challenge for American foreign policy in
many places is not to influence relations between states but rather to influence
events within states. To solve the crises in Rwanda or Bosnia or Cuba means
getting under the hoods of those countries and manipulating forces within them
to produce certain political outcomes. Not only do American diplomats often lack
the skill to do that, but they are woefully divided on what the outcomes should
be.

In the cold war, everyone agreed that the goal was either to prevent Communists
from winning or to oust them from power. Today, there is no agreed-upon purpose
in intervening. Should America intervene in Bosnia to produce one multicultural
state or a small collection of ethnically pure statelets? It is baffling
questions like this which explain why in three years America has gone from the
cold war to cold feet. Stanley Hoffmann, a professor of international affairs at
Harvard University, calls it the "new humility" of American foreign policy.

This new humility seems to have affected what the public wants from its leaders.
As the cold war was coming to a close there was a lot of talk about "the vision
thing." A 45-year era was ending and people wanted to know what the future held,
what it looked like on the other side of the hill. Well, now they know. It looks
messy.

People don't seem to want vision anymore, in large part because they sense that
no one has a vision that can encompass a contradictory world, a world that is
simultaneously fragmenting politically and consolidating economically. What
people seem to want most now is competence, or, more specifically, the ability
to protect American interests and prestige in a world where each problem is
uniquely difficult and requires a uniquely deft response.

Indeed, if one listens to the Republican critiques of the Clinton foreign
policy, it is clear that they have no particular global vision, either. All they
offer is a different style of pragmatism and the assertion that "we could manage
better."

So the American people find that they are no longer choosing between great
architects or ideologues on foreign policy. They are choosing between managers.
It is Dale Carnegie does diplomacy, and we are present at the downsizing.


LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Diplomats attend a peace conference, from "The Green Table,"
Kurt Jooss's antiwar dance, as performed by The Joffrey Ballet. (Herbert
Migdoll/Joffrey Ballet)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
The End of 'the Movement'

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


How much influence would the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. wield today had he
not been assassinated? Not much, I suspect. Dr. King's moral authority rested
upon the indisputable fact that African-Americans in the South were
disfranchised by a white power structure that stopped at nothing to keep its
power. The savagery was evident on the evening news, as when children were set
upon with dogs and water cannons in the streets of Birmingham.

The passing of racism's most visible forms -- and the corresponding rise of a
black elite -- would have required Dr. King to become more than just a champion
of the African-American oppressed. His condemnation of the Vietnam War
foreshadowed what might have become a broader strategy. So did his failed
fair-housing campaign in Chicago in 1966. There were no dogs and water cannons
in Chicago to inspire public outrage. Civil rights rhetoric by itself was no
match for a patronage machine that could appear in blackface when it needed to.
Dr. King's rallies were anemically attended. The machine, with black underbosses
like the legendary Congressman William Dawson, sent Dr. King home defeated.

African-American political empowerment nationally would have forced Dr. King to
transform himself from a roving savior without portfolio into something less
grand -- a Congressman, say, from Georgia. That same empowerment has rendered
traditional civil rights rhetoric implausible. African-Americans cannot sing "We
Shall Overcome" when so many of them already have.

The black middle class, barely evident in the 60's, is now thriving and clearly
visible. At the time of the "I Have A Dream" speech, African-Americans were
still struggling to secure the vote, and there were probably fewer than a
thousand black elected officials nationwide. Today there are more than eight
times that many, including a 40-member Congressional Black Caucus.

The poor have not disappeared. But what afflicts them is not remediable through
traditional civil rights strategies. Homicide, drug addiction, adolescent
pregnancy, illiteracy -- and the economic despair that drives them -- are not
"civil rights" problems per se. Marches and rallies and sit-ins can never reach
them. It is not surprising, then, that the civil rights establishment is losing
its influence or that the alphabet soup of civil rights organizations --
S.N.C.C., C.O.R.E., even Dr. King's S.C.L.C. -- have ceased to be important.

Enter the N.A.A.C.P., with a declining membership, the largest budget deficit in
its history and a growing identity crisis. The Rev. Benjamin Chavis deepened the
crisis with his spendthrift style and his bid for an alliance with the black
Muslim leader, Louis Farrakhan. But the crisis of purpose predates Mr. Chavis.
Consider the deficit. Nearly half -- $1.4 million -- results not from
scholarships for the poor or guidance to wayward boys, but from expenditures for
the annual N.A.A.C.P. Image Awards, essentially a televised celebrity party. The
organization that helped win Brown v. Board of Education has been reduced to
sponsoring social activity for the beautiful people.

Mr. Chavis also fell for the delusion that an alliance with Mr. Farrakhan would
spark a new, 60's-style movement. Mr. Chavis and Kweisi Mfume, the chairman of
the Congressional Black Caucus, apparently envied Mr. Farrakhan for the tens of
thousands of people who are said to appear at black Muslim stadium gatherings.
At work here was nostalgia for massive crowds like the one Dr. King addressed in
Washington 30 years ago. But nostalgia is a liability considering the job at
hand.

The N.A.A.C.P. and what is left of "the movement" need fresh direction. Some
sound suggestions were laid out in a speech last month by Hugh Price, the
incoming president and C.E.O. of the National Urban League. "We must not let
ourselves and, especially, our children fall into the paranoid trap of thinking
that racism accounts for all that plagues us," he said. Mr. Price proposed a
national Youth Development Fund, paid for partly by successful
African-Americans, that would broaden opportunities for children of the poor.
"We African Americans who have made it must tithe . . . to see to it that those
of our children whom the civil rights movement hasn't yet touched also have a
real chance to succeed."

The N.A.A.C.P.'s next executive director needs to take a close look at that
speech.   BRENT STAPLES

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Broadcasts Keep Cubans Posted in Crisis;
Far From a Failure

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 10;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


To the Editor:

"It should be clear after 35 years to Fidel Castro and his Government that the
way he has been managing the affairs of the island is a failure" -- Under
Secretary of State Peter Tarnoff (news article, Aug. 25).

In the last 35 years, Cuba has achieved universal health care, something the
United States has been unable, or unwilling, to do. It has a higher literacy
rate (near 100 percent) and a lower infant mortality rate than many places in
the United States. A larger percentage of its population graduates from college.
There is no problem of homelessness in Cuba. Until recently, everyone received
basic goods and services, although there have never been many luxuries. Now
everyone suffers the same hardships, although priority is given to the care of
infants and pregnant women, the elderly and the sick.

All this was achieved not because of aid from the Soviet Union, but despite the
economic embargo. Similar amounts of aid from the United States to El Salvador
during the 80's achieved no such progress -- if El Salvador had the same social
agenda as Cuba there would not have been a civil war. By any standards other
than the United States Government's, Cuba cannot be called a failure.

American foreign policy is not about democracy or humanitarian concerns; Cuba
policy is no exception. It is, however, usually in our perceived self-interest;
in this case Cuba is an exception.

There is a persuasive argument that the interests of the United States would be
better served by opening trade and allowing American companies to take advantage
of the opportunities as they are doing in Vietnam. But our Cuba policy serves no
one's interests -- it is simply the implacable vendetta of a schoolyard bully
toward the "weakling" who won't knuckle under.

EILEEN ECKERT
Stafford Springs, Conn., Aug. 29, 1994

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 10;  Column 4;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 983 words



Palisades Park Memories

SAD to say, there are people alive who never strolled the midways of the
Palisades Amusement Park, the state's premier amusement park for more than 70
years.

They never rode the carousels, screeched as the roller coasters negotiated
hairpin turns, swam in what was billed as "the world's largest outdoor
salt-water pool," threw softballs at fuzzy stuffed animals, gushed at star
entertainers like Frankie Avalon and Tony Bennett and unfailingly fell victim to
the aroma of sizzling french fries.

Now they can vicariously relive those days with "The Park on the Palisades," by
Vince Gargiulo, a 200-page history of the park from 1898 to 1971 -- when its 38
acres in Fort Lee and Cliffside Park virtually disappeared to make way for
high-rises. The book has more than 150 photos and re-creates a multitude of
exuberant images.

Mr. Gargiulo, the owner of Desktop Creations, a graphic arts firm, knows whereof
he writes. He grew up in Cliffside Park and said in an interview that the
amusement park "was our playground, our backyard."

As founding director of the Palisades Amusement Park Historical Society, he
collected information about the showmen-owners, rides, games, entertainers and
visitors. (The book can be ordered from the society, 24 Park Street, Little
Ferry, N.J. 07643. $24.95; soft cover, $16.95.)

"Park" is also a manual on the art of public relations, for when it came to
promotion, Palisades, with its water-skiing elephant stunt or contest for
"beautiful women wearing eyeglasses," never seemed to miss a trick.

Bits From Biography



A biography of a famous person often yields some new facet of New Jersey history
-- or perhaps just fodder for a game of trivia.

For example, go to "Master of the Game: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time
Warner," by Connie Bruck, for some of the above. Long before Steve Ross --
described here as "the most dazzling businessman and deal maker of his
generation" -- managed the merger of the Time Warner empire, he was, as Ms.
Bruck's book (Simon & Schuster, $25) says, "the master of solicitude" at the
Riverside Memorial Chapel, his wife's family-owned funeral business in New York.

Enter Caesar Kimmel of the Kinney System of Newark, a business of parking lots
that perhaps took its name from the city's Kinney Street. It was, according to
Ms. Bruck, Mr. Ross's marriage of the parking and funeral businesses in 1962
that propelled his phenomenal climb.

But the sketches of his partner Caesar Kimmel, son of Emanuel Kimmel, one of the
first operators in the numbers rackets in Newark in the 1920's and 30's, make
colorful reading. Caesar Kimmel appears again in the 1970's when, in league with
David J. Friedland, a one-time state senator later convicted of defrauding the
teamsters' pension fund, he organized a campaign to legalize jai alai here.

Dolly Sinatra, mother of Frank, gets space in the book for her attempts to get
her son to save money. Part of Mr. Ross's acquisition of Warner Brothers-Seven
Arts, on his way to the creation of Time Warner, involved a deal with Mr.
Sinatra, to be closed -- at the singer's suggestion -- at his mother's home in
Fort Lee.

"But he warned Ross not to let his mother see the check, or she'd grab it," Ms.
Bruck writes. On cue, after a "wonderful Italian dinner," Mr. Ross held out one
check for $1,000 -- "quickly grabbed by Mrs. Sinatra" -- and "then quietly
slipped Sinatra" a multimillion-dollar check.

Education for Girls

Many a single-sex school has closed in recent years, and many others are
battling for survival. So the 100-year birthday celebration next month of the
Kent Place School, a private girls' school in Summit, holds special
significance.

Kent Place is "the only nonsectarian girls' school in the state of New Jersey,"
writes Judith A. Hunter, the author of "A Centennial History of Kent Place
School: 1894-1994." She says the college preparatory school was started in
Summit after this one-time summer resort evolved into a "town for well-to-do
commuters."

The founding fathers wanted their daughters to have the same kind of preparatory
education that was available to their sons -- specifically, "the special
advantages which boys had for generations enjoyed in the best schools," writes
Dr. Hunter, herself an alumna of Kent. She is now an assistant professor of
history at the State University of New York in Geneseo.

The respectability of the school was heightened, the author of this unpublished
history says, when it took its name from the initial site, then part of the
estate of James Kent, an eminent professor of law at Columbia University and
chancellor of the State of New York in the early 19th century; here he had been
host to famous contemporaries, including Daniel Webster.

The history relates the somewhat tranquil development of Kent for itsfirst 50
years -- despite a constant struggle for financial stability -- and continues
with descriptions of the late 60's and 70's when Kent weathered social
turbulence over civil rights, drugs and Vietnam.

The author observes that in the 80's and 90's, Kent seems -- after years of
underplaying its status -- "to have become more and more comfortable" with its
feminism, even "stressing its role as an institution for women." Its noted
graduates include Assemblywoman Maureen Ogden, Republican of Millburn; Deborah
Wiley, vice chairwoman of John Wiley & Sons, and Amanda Urban, a powerful
literary agent.

A grand idea not ripe for the times is one way to describe the Kent-Pingry
episode, ensuing after 1970, when the Pingry School of Hillside, a boys' school,
approached Kent with a proposal for "some kind of relationship." Worried that it
might be "swallowed up and disappear" in the merger, Kent balked, and in 1974
the idea of coeducation was finally abandoned. Pingry later joined with the
Short Hills Country Day School to become coed.

LOAD-DATE: September 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A new book, "The Park on the Palisades," tells the history of
the Palisades Amusement Park from 1898 to 1971, when it closed. Boat rides were
among the park's many diversions. (Palisades Amusement Park Historical
Society/Cliffside Park Free Public Library)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

President Begins a Campaign to Avoid Losses for the Democratic Party in November

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: BATH, Me., Sept. 5


President Clinton opened a campaign today to fend off heavy losses in the
November elections with a Labor Day address that called attention to what the
White House hopes will save Democrats: the creation of jobs.

At the huge shipyard here that is Maine's largest employer, Mr. Clinton pointed
to the 4.1 million jobs by which the nation's economy has grown since he became
President and called that a measure of a vitality that his critics have
overlooked.

Speaking to hundreds of workers and their families, who huddled under umbrellas
in a cold, driving rain, Mr. Clinton jabbed his finger repeatedly for emphasis
as he declared that his Administration was "not promising you miracles, but
promising you progress."

In traveling here from his vacation on Martha's Vineyard, Mass., Mr. Clinton was
in part conducting a rescue mission for the Senate seat being relinquished by
George J. Mitchell, the Democratic leader. Representative Thomas H. Andrews, the
Democrat who hopes to succeed Mr. Mitchell, is trailing Representative Olympia
J. Snowe in the polls, and on a podium heavy with Democratic candidates and
labor leaders, Mr. Clinton sought to give Mr. Andrews's campaign a much-needed
boost.

Seeking a Second Look

But the thrust of the President's remarks looked ahead to what promises to be an
autumn-long bid to shore up other foundering allies. Mr. Clinton hopes to
persuade dissatisfied voters to take a second look at just how much he and his
fellow Democrats have achieved.

In remarks drafted by the White House, Senator Mitchell began today's rally with
a reminder that Mr. Clinton had confounded the Republican critics who warned
last summer that his package of tax increases and spending cuts could cripple
the economy. In fact, Mr. Mitchell declared, the budget deficit has declined,
economic growth has soared and more jobs have been generated than under "the two
previous Republican Presidents put together."

And Mr. Clinton himself called that steady job creation the signal product of
what he portrayed as his battle "against some very, very powerful enemies of
change."

"For the first time," he shouted, wearing a baseball cap and a machinists' union
windbreaker in the downpour, "manufacturing jobs in America have increased now
for eight month in a row." He said he would look beyond Labor Day by renewing
his dedication "to keep this economic recovery going."

Visiting 6 States

Mr. Clinton, of course, will not face a re-election fight for two more years.
But the White House is already bracing for Republicans to score major midterm
gains in the House and the Senate, and Mr. Clinton's visit here was the first
stop on a heavy autumn schedule as he tries, despite his own dwindling
popularity, to use whatever influence he can muster to prevent Democratic losses
from becoming disastrous.

With some Democrats trying to distance themselves from Mr. Clinton, it is an
open question whether he can make much difference. But after returning to
Washington on Wednesday, Mr. Clinton is scheduled to travel to Louisiana,
California, Illinois, Minnesota, Missouri and New York in the coming three weeks
to raise money for his allies and campaign on their behalf. Before Mr. Clinton's
speech today, some advisers of Mr. Andrews had expressed some anger about the
President's visit and a possible scheuduling conflict, but Mr. Andrews was here
with Mr. Clinton.

The shipyard he chose as his setting today, Bath Iron Works, has built vessels
for the United States Navy for 110 years. Cutbacks in defense spending have
reduced employment there to 9,000 from a peak of 12,500, but the yard has been
kept alive by contracts to build Aegis guided-missile destroyers, a project that
Mr. Clinton championed.

At the same time, the workers, who are members of the International Machinists'
Union, and management have now settled on a contract intended to give the
shipyard new flexibility as it begins to seek the nonmilitary business on which
it will soon be forced to rely. Calling that step a model for the ones many
other American enterprises must now take, Mr. Clinton suggested that the
shipyard's efforts to complete its post-cold-war conversion should be seen as
evidence that "we can build the economy on the strength of your example."

Finishing His Vacation

Before delivering his speech this morning, Mr. Clinton toured the Aegis
destroyer Laboon, which was named for a Vietnam War-era chaplain with the
Marines and is still under construction. He then stood by as showers worsened
while the shipyard's owners, labor leaders and Senator Mitchell took turns
extolling him and his Administration.

By the time the President reached the microphone, the wind and rain kicked up by
a northeaster that blew into the region overnight had turned so heavy that he
was shouting to be heard. He spoke for only 10 minutes before telling the crowd
that it was time to leave "or we're going to raise health care costs by staying
in the rain too long."

By midafternoon, Mr. Clinton was back on Martha's Vineyard, hoping to take
advantage of the last few days of a vacation that was busy through the weekend
with golf, book shopping and a dinner Sunday night with Maurice Tempelsman, the
late Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis' longtime companion. Mrs. Onassis' children,
John F. Kennedy Jr. and Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, joined the President for
dinner at the house they inherited from their mother.

This afternoon, Mr. Clinton bade farewell to his 14-year-old daughter, Chelsea,
who was returning to Washington to prepare for the first day of school, and he
then celebrated that new independence by inviting his wife, Hillary, to join him
on the golf course -- gusty wind, driving rain and all.

"This is good weather compared to what we play in at home," Mr. Clinton insisted
as he teed off in a blue jogging suit to begin his sixth round in the last 10
days.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Barbara Avedon, TV Screenwriter, 64

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 5


Barbara Avedon, a screenwriter who was a co-creator of the "Cagney and Lacey"
television series, died here on Wednesday. She was 64.

The cause was cancer, The Associated Press reported.

Ms. Avedon began her screenwriting career with episodes of "The Donna Reed
Show," "Father Knows Best" and "Bewitched."

Later she worked with Barney Rosenzweig and Barbara Corday to create "Cagney and
Lacey." The show, which starred Tyne Daly and Sharon Gless as policewomen, ran
on CBS from 1982 to 1988.

In the Vietnam War, Ms. Avedon helped found Another Mother for Peace.

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 9, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Remains May Be Marine's

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 142 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Sept. 8


American search teams have recovered remains believed to be those of a marine
who died in captivity during the Vietnam War, a United States official said
today. The discovery was greeted as a breakthrough by United States officials in
Hanoi, who are investigating 84 cases of Americans missing in action from the
war.

Investigators were led to the grave site, in Quang Ngai Province, by a former
American soldier who had buried the body. The soldier, Thomas Davis, of Eufala,
Ala., was released from the camp in 1973 when all American forces withdrew from
Vietnam.

Washington described 84 "special remains cases" to Hanoi a year ago; today's was
the first discovery.

Mr. Davis said as many as 10 Americans died in the camp. One was killed trying
to escape, he said; others, like the marine, died from malnutrition and lack of
medical care.

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              204 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 44;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


THE BUTCHER BOY
By Patrick McCabe. Cutting Edge/Delta, $9.95.
This novel depicts the transformation of a disturbed and abused young boy into a
brutal killer. Francie Brady, resident of an Irish town in the 1960's, becomes
progressively unhinged by the deaths of his beleaguered parents and the presence
of smug middle-class neighbors who are everything the Bradys are not. It is "a
stunning picture of the desperation of the unloved," Rosemary Mahoney said here
last year.
THIS I CANNOT FORGET:
The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow
By Anna Larina. Translated by Gary Kern. Norton, $15.
The couple at the center of this story were children of the Russian Revolution:
Anna Larina, daughter of one of the original Bolsheviks, and Nikolai Bukharin, a
protege of Lenin and later of Stalin. But in 1937, only three years after their
marriage, Bukharin was arrested on trumped-up charges; he was executed the
following year. Ms. Larina, separated from their son, endured more than two
decades of persecution before she was able to help redeem her husband's memory.
Last year our reviewer, Harlow Robinson, said, "Surprisingly lyrical and free of
bitterness, her tale belongs to the unfortunately rich and long tradition of
Russian prison literature."


REBEL POWERS
By Richard Bausch. Vintage Contemporaries, $12.
A family becomes one of Vietnam's nonviolent casualties. Daniel Boudreaux, a
veteran and war hero, is sent to military prison for a petty crime; his son,
Thomas, relates the misery that follows. This novel's originality "lies in its
unapologetic devotion to the process of perception," Elizabeth Tallent said here
last year.
THE MINER'S CANARY:
Unraveling the Mysteries of Extinction
By Niles Eldredge. Princeton University, $12.95.
Human beings may one day go the way of the dinosaurs, and this book examines
why. Such mass extinctions, the author argues, are probably due more to
environmental causes than meteor blasts. In 1991 our reviewer, Malcolm W.
Browne, said the work "rings with integrity."
OBABAKOAK
By Bernardo Atxaga. Translated by Margaret Jull Costa. Vintage International,
$12.
These linked short fictions dealing with life in a Basque village are as much
about language and storytelling as they are about individual characters and
events. The tales' disparate elements "are wonderfully blended in what can truly
be described as a delicious literary paella," Eugenio Suarez-Galban said here
last year.
THE LANCE AND THE SHIELD:
The Life and Times of Sitting Bull
By Robert M. Utley. Ballantine, $14.
The formidable Sioux chief who symbolized 19th-century Indian resistance is
portrayed here as a spiritual and moral leader as well as a warrior. Last year
our reviewer, Patricia Nelson Limerick, said the author's "narrative is
gripping." More recent Sioux struggles are the subject of LAKOTA WOMAN, by Mary
Crow Dog and Richard Erdoes (Harper Perennial, $12), the memoir of a participant
in the American Indian Movement's 1973 siege of Wounded Knee, S.D. Her story "is
simply told -- and, at times, simply horrifying," Patricia Guthrie said here in
1990. The author, now Mary Brave Bird, continues her autobiography in OHITIKA
WOMAN (Harper Perennial, $12), also written with Richard Erdoes. Last year one
critic said it "provides a walk through the darkest pages of Indian-white
history." Harper Perennial has also reissued BLOODLINES: Odyssey of a Native
Daughter, by Janet Campbell Hale ($11), in which the author, a novelist,
combines reminiscences of her troubled early life with an examination of her
mixed ancestry. "Her essays are mesmerizing," Andrea Higbie said here last year.
In a lighter vein, THE MOCCASIN TELEGRAPH: And Other Indian Tales, by W. P.
Kinsella (Nonpareil/Godine, $12.95), presents the denizens of a Canadian
reservation where ingenuity often takes a humorous turn. In 1984 our reviewer,
Jodi Daynard, said it includes "possibly some of the most funny writing of
recent times."
WAS HUCK BLACK?
Mark Twain and African-American Voices
By Shelley Fisher Fishkin. Oxford University, $10.95.
The author explores the intriguing possibility that the speech of Twain's famous
character may have been modeled after black vernacular -- and, indeed, that Huck
himself may have been patterned on a 10-year-old black boy. The book contains "a
sharp and important argument," James R. Kincaid said here last year.
THE CRYING HEART TATTOO
By David Martin. Chronicle, $12.95.
This novel centers on an affair between a 14-year-old boy and a 34-year-old
woman, who are bound by their mutual passion and the woman's storytelling until
she dies at age 70. In 1982 our reviewer, Johanna Kaplan, praised the "fresh,
crisp, spontaneous language."
SCISSORS, PAPER, ROCK
By Fenton Johnson.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.
The Hardin family of rural Kentucky encounters love and loss in these
interconnected stories, whose subjects include failed relationships and a son's
battle with AIDS. Together, they "form a powerfully moving novel," Lauren Picker
said here last year.
THE PORCELAIN DOVE: Or, Constancy's Reward
By Delia Sherman. Plume, $11.95.
This novel's narrator is an 18th-century French chambermaid, who is witness to
her noble employer's attempts to ward off a beggar's curse. Last year our
reviewer, Scott Veale, said, "The author has gone to great lengths to capture
the manners and mores of the Age of Reason."   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 11, 1994, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an entry in the New & Noteworthy Pa perbacks column
of The Times Book Review on Aug. 28, about the novel "Bittersweet," misspelled
the au thor's surname. She is Leslie Li, not Lee.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Jobs Issue And the Primaries

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1303 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS


WHEN the singer James Taylor came to Westchester last Monday to help Hamilton
Fish Jr. raise funds for his bid to win the 19th Congressional District seat, he
chose a song he had composed to commemorate the return of free elections in
Brazil in 1985.

"I thought it was appropriate," Mr. Taylor said, "for such a hopeful time."
Presented originally before an audience of 300,000 in a Rio de Janeiro soccer
stadium, the song, "Only a Dream in Rio," was also warmly received by the nearly
100 Democrats who filled the courtyard of the Bedford home of Irving Farber, a
lawyer, and his wife, Jean.

That was because Mr. Fish and the two other Democrats running for the seat being
vacated by Mr. Fish's Republican father, Representative Hamilton Fish, are
seeking a change of similar proportions -- transforming the long-held Republican
redoubt into a Democratic district.

There are also seven Republican candidates vying to keep the Hudson Valley
district, which extends from Poughkeepsie to North White Plains, in Republican
control. The choices will be made on Tuesday, Primary Day, after an often
frantic campaign that saw spending and campaigning reach general-election
proportions.

More than $2 million will have been spent by the candidates in the primaries,
the largest amount, $500,000 to $600,000, by Dennis Mehiel of Armonk, founder of
the Four M Corporation in Valhalla, which makes corrugated boxes and partitions
and employs 1,700 workers in 20 plants.

Mr. Mehiel, who was Westchester County Democratic chairman until he quit to run
for Congress, has used his business experience and his personal wealth to press
his campaign, spending $325,000 of his own money to carry his "Mehiel ticket"
theme of economic recovery to voters through local and regional television.

He has taken aim at Mr. Fish, whom he considers his chief rival, by accusing him
of misusing earlier campaign financing -- the two candidates lost to
Representative Nita M. Lowey in an earlier three-way primary for the 20th
Congressional District seat -- and saying that Mr. Fish, a Garrison resident,
published anti-Semitic articles when he presided over The Nation magazine.

Mr. Fish, who denies the charges, is senior adviser at Human Rights Watch, a
United States-based monitoring organization, and a consultant to Doctors of the
World, a relief organization. He has spent $210,000 in the campaign. He says the
"single dominating need in the Hudson Valley district is job creation" in the
wake of massive layoffs, especially among white collar workers.

He is the grandson of Hamilton Fish, who was elected to Congress from the same
district in 1920, and he traces his lineage through two other Representatives
named Hamilton Fish. Earlier family members served in the Revolutionary War and
one descendant was Governor of New York.

The third Democrat in the primary race is Neil McCarthy of Lewisboro, a lawyer
who ran against the incumbent Representative Fish in 1992, but lost by a 60-40
margin, closer than previous opponents. This was partly because of the remapping
of the district, which cut into the Republican plurality in registration.

Mr. McCarthy, like his opponents, sees the downsizing of major companies such as
International Business Machines as the principal issue in the district. "We need
more jobs, more investment and re-education of unemployed workers," Mr. McCarthy
said.  He has spent $80,000 in the campaign to overcome "Fish's name and
Mehiel's fortune."

On the Republican side, the biggest spender by far has been Paul W. Bucha of
Somers, a real estate developer who has raised $465,000, $250,000 of it his own
money, to address what he says are the major issues in the district: "jobs,
taxes, the economy and crime and safety."

He says "the economic well-being" of a once fiscally comfortable district has
been undermined by the disruption caused by downsizing of major corporations,
"and those who still have jobs are worried about taxes."

A former two-term member of Congress, Joseph J. DioGuardi, who represented the
Long Island Sound communities of the 20th Congressional District from 1985 to
1988, is now in the race for the 19th Congressional District. He says 200,000 of
his original constituents have been placed, through redistricting, in the
district he is seeking to represent.

Mr. DioGuardi, who is moving from New Rochelle, where he represented the 20th
Congressional District, to Mount Pleasant in the 19th Congressional District,
has spent $200,000 in an effort to return to Congress from a district that he
says is hindered by a weakened economy and the fear of crime. He says he was the
only certified public accountant in Congress when he served there and that
fiscal reforms are still needed.

One Incumbent in the Race

Mr. DioGuardi, also running on the Right-to-Life Party line, is one of three
Republicans in the primary who are seeking Conservative Party endorsement. The
others are Mr. Bucha and Guy Parisi of Chappaqua, a lawyer and former village
justice.

Mr. Parisi was the original choice of the Westchester County Republican
Chairman, Anthony J. Colavita, but the decision was left to a primary when the
multiplicity of interested office seekers became apparent. Mr. Parisi has spent
about $200,000 seeking the nomination.

The only officeholder among the candidates is Assemblyman Glenn Warren of
Fishkill, who has represented a Dutchess County Assembly District for 18 years.
He says he has a clear record of "conservative leadership" and finds "crime and
the economy" the main issues in his district. His spending has totaled $120,000.

Sue W. Kelly of Katonah, the only woman in the race, has spent $200,000
promoting fiscal reform, such as "cutting taxes and spending," as a major item
on Washington's legislative agenda. She said she would cut entitlement programs,
sparing only Social Security and veteran's benefits.

Selections for County Court

Another Republican, John Flanagan Jr. of Brewster, is a brigadier general in the
Air Force Reserve who sees crime and taxes as major issues, particularly among
elderly and retired people. He has spent about $25,000 pursuing the nomination.

Still another candidate, Joseph M. Corrigan of Kent, a Nynex employee, has
emphasized what he says is the still unresolved issue of servicemen missing in
action in Vietnam, where he served and has since played a role seeking to
resolve the matter. He could not be reached to discuss how much he has spent on
his campaign.

Democrats voting in the Westchester primary will also be asked to select four of
six candidates for County Court judge. Two of those seeking the bench are now
serving as judges: Asher Katz, who has been a Greenburgh Town Judge for 19
years, and Brenda L. Dowery, City Court Judge in Mount Vernon since 1987.

Others seeking the county judicial posts are Robert DiBella, Paul W. Pickelle,
Ron Stokes and Ronald J. Koerner.

Appointment Unconfirmed

Mr. DiBella has been the law clerk to State Supreme Court Justice Anthony A.
Scarpino Jr. since 1989 and before that served in a similar capacity for the
Yonkers City Court.

Mr. Pickelle was Corporation Counsel in Yonkers for a year during the crisis
over federally mandated integrated housing. Earlier, he was a special assistant
district attorney investigating the Donald Manes corruption case in Queens.

Mr. Stokes has practiced criminal law for 16 years, much of it representing
indigent defendants. He was twice appointed to the County Court by Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo, but the Republican-controlled State Senate has failed in recent years to
convene to endorse such appointments.

Mr. Koerner has had 32 years of trial experience, practicing in Federal and
state courts in New York City and Westchester, specializing in white-collar
crimes and constitutional issues.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Schools Pay For Diversity In Languages of Students

BYLINE: By WILLIAM CELIS 3d,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 37;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: BLOOMFIELD, N.J., Sept. 8


It is the first week of classes at the middle school in this middle-class suburb
outside Newark, and Devra Weingart, who teaches English as a second language,
has never seen so many students from so many countries.

There is Tsvetana, a 12-year-old eighth grader from Ukraine. And Thinh Vu, a
14-year-old from Vietnam. There is Jessica, 13, from Guatemala, and Nita, 12,
from India. One by one, they entered a conference room where Ms. Winegart
questioned them to see how much English they knew.

"Did you practice your English?" she asked Jessica, who moved here just a year
ago.

"Yes," the student said, adding that she did not think she was going to enjoy
her math, science or history classes. "It's difficult."

Looking at her history book and Jessica's first reading assignment on who
settled the Americas, Ms. Weingart said: "You're studying something completely
new and it's going to be difficult, because you're learning English, too. It
will get easier."

Jessica managed a smile.

Suburban schools across the country are enrolling more and more immigrant
children who bring with them a kaleidoscope of languages. Since many of these
districts had few recent immigrants as recently as a decade ago -- and usually
from only one or two countries -- they are now often hard-pressed to meet the
needs of their continually changing student enrollments.

"It's difficult," said Mel Klein, the interim Superintendent of Schools in
Bloomfield, with 5,300 students. This year, the district expects to enroll about
200 immigrant students, almost double the enrollment in the mid-1980's.
Moreover, these children speak 20 to 25 languages. "If they are very young, they
will pick up the language quickly," he said. "But it is tough for middle school
and high school students."

Urban school systems, like New York City's, have long dealt with the issue of
immigration. This year, the New York City public schools alone are expected to
enroll 18,000 immigrant students, representing most of the estimated growth in
its estimated 1994-95 enrollment of 1,036,000 students. This year's gain from
immigration is on top of the 138,000 immigrants the nation's largest system has
already enrolled in the last four years.

There are no definitive national data on the growth of immigrant school
enrollment in the suburbs, but more immigrant families are finding their way to
the suburbs, school officials said, as families pursue affordable housing and
safer environments in suburban enclaves like Anaheim, Calif., south of Los
Angeles. There, the number of languages spoken by students is expected to jump
to 67 in the new school year from 50 just five years ago, said school officials.


Enrichment at a Price

In the Boston suburb of Brookline, the district enrolled 531 Russian students in
"English as a second language" classes this fall in what officials there said
was a steadily growing immigrant enrollment. In 1983, there was one staff member
in the district's department of bilingual education and English as a second
language. Today, it has a staff of 34 administrators, teachers and aides who
oversee programs for students from 46 countries speaking 37 languages.

"These students have enriched our school system academically and culturally,"
said James Walsh, the Superintendent of Schools in Brookline. "At the same time,
their numbers have presented a significant budget challenge."

Finances have been strained, despite budget increases from the Federal
Government for bilingual and immigrant education. In the 1994 fiscal year ending
Sept. 30, the Education Department budgeted $227.4 million for bilingual and
immigrant education, up from $213.1 million in the 1993 fiscal year. For the
1995 year, the Education Department requested $254 million, a 12 percent
increase from 1994 spending, for programs that help students learn English.

But the Federal assistance, often supplemented by local tax dollars, is falling
short, school officials said. Bilingual education programs are vastly
oversubscribed in some locales. In other districts, such programs are not
offered at all or their quality is so poor that some state officials have moved
against school districts for failing to do better.

$180,000 for Four Teachers

In New Jersey this week, for example, the Attorney General's office said 241
bilingual programs in 94 of the state's 595 school systems violated state law
because the districts do not offer state-mandated services for students whose
English is limited. The existing programs will be offered this school year, but
the Attorney General said all schools must satisfy state law by the 1995-96
school year.

Bloomfield's program did not make the Attorney General's list because of its
more extensive programs. But this all comes at a cost. The district is spending
$180,000 on salaries alone for four teachers of English as a second language.
Mr. Klein, the interim superintendent, said community support for increases in
education spending -- including increases for Federal and state-mandated
programs like bilingual and immigrant education -- was growing thin.

"You hear a lot of complaints everywhere, across the country," he said. "I don't
care how wealthy the district is."

Beyond the cost, there are the growing numbers of students who speak languages
that can stagger a teacher's energy.

Four Filipino Dialects

In the hallways of Bloomfield Middle School, which has 820 seventh and eighth
graders, the number of immigrant students has climbed steadily to 27 students,
turning Ms. Weingart's part-time position in the school last year to full-time
this year.

The first three days of school were spent talking to her students, who speak
nine languages including an Indian dialect, Russian, Spanish, four Filipino
dialects and a smorgasbord of other languages. She checked their command of the
English language through conversation and testing. Ever patient, Ms. Weingart
talked slowly to each of her young charges, many of whom came directly to this
community from their homelands.

"It is so difficult for them," she said on the second day of school before
beginning a day of testing. "They cannot speak well but they have all these
feelings. That puts a tremendous strain on the students and the teachers."

Most of the immigrant children at Bloomfield Middle School, at least, learn
English quickly, in Ms. Weingart's 42-minute class, or by talking with friends
or student mentors who are in the National Junior Honor Society or the Student
Council.

'Some Made Fun of Us'

But the immigrant students themselves said the transition is not easy. Adopting
the American teen-ager's school uniform of blue jeans and T-shirts and book
bags, they said in unison how frightened they were when they first enrolled last
year and how they still feel a bit out of sorts in their American environment.

Tsvetana, the 12-year-old Ukrainian girl, who is starting her second and final
year at the middle school as an eighth grader, said: "Most people have been
nice. But some made fun of us last year because we did not speak English."

No one, she said, makes fun of her now.

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thinh Vu, 14, from Vietnam, last week at the middle school in
Bloomfield, N.J. Suburban schools across the country are enrolling more and more
immigrant children, who bring with them a kaleidoscope of languages. (William E.
Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Perot Bidding to Influence Congressional Elections

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: DENVER, Sept. 10


Ross Perot is out on the campaign trail again, his short-term goal to influence
the 1994 Congressional and state elections, his long-term goal still a tightly
wrapped secret.

After lying low politically for the better part of a year after a precipitous
drop in the polls and a high-profile failure to defeat the North American Free
Trade Agreement, he thundered noisily back into public view this weekend,
beginning here on Friday night with the first of 10 rallies leading up to the
Nov. 8 elections.

Preaching to a crowd that, like most Perot audiences, was made up mainly of
partisans, he loosed one of his most acidic attacks ever on President Clinton,
accusing him of stupid and dishonest handling of government.

Then he warned: "The people are deeply interested in being the owners of the
greatest nation in the history of man."

Comeback Isn't Certain

Today, he followed with a second rally in St. Louis. Other rallies will be held
in California, Florida, Georgia, Michigan, New Hampshire, New York and
Washington State, followed by a series of several dozen call-in broadcasts on
radio stations scattered coast to coast.

Given Mr. Perot's drop in the polls since he won 18.8 percent of the vote in the
1992 Presidential election, and given recent insistent bickering within his
organization, United We Stand America, his comeback is by no means assured. But
the cocky Texan was the very picture of confidence as he strode the stage of the
Civic Auditorium here for an hour on Friday night.

"You and I together," he told 1,500 whooping supporters in his reedy twang, "can
slow down the race to big government in 1994 if we commit ourselves to do it. We
can do even more in 1996. We are not going to go away. We are alive and well."

He did not elaborate on his reference to 1996, thereby leaving still
tantalizingly unanswered what Presidential plans he might have and how much more
of his huge personal fortune he might be willing to commit to politics. He spent
more than $60 million in 1992.

Swing-Vote Role

Nor did he make clear exactly which candidates he wanted United We Stand America
to back this fall or whether he might eventually transform the loosely knit and
sometimes unruly group into a full-fledged third party, a move that would cost
the organization its tax-free status.

Rather, he spoke only of playing a swing-vote role, boasting that the Perot vote
already had been the deciding factor in a number of contests in Georgia, New
Jersey and Texas.

"We're going to stir things up and be the swing vote in '94," he said, "to see
that in every single race the best candidate wins."

The swing vote role has seemed Mr. Perot's best political bet, especially after
he ran a strong third in the 1992 Presidential contest. But many political
experts have begun to wonder, as the saying goes in Texas, whether Mr. Perot is
now all hat and no cattle.

Certainly the herd, however large, is widely dispersed, and the trail boss has
big troubles.

And while the polls show 20 percent or more of all voters still support the
populist, reform-oriented goals he espoused, many of those now express doubts
about his ability to serve as President.

"I voted for him in '92 and like and support everything he stands for," Kay
Jakowich, a Denver bookkeeper, said during the rally here. "But I've concluded
he's not personally the man to be President. He's good at being a businessman
and speaking out. But political leadership and stability are not his strong
suit. That's become clear."

The ideological and leadership bickering within many state and local chapters of
United We Stand America has also hurt the Perot cause.

Mr. Perot dismisses the bickering in United We Stand America as "just growing
pains" in a new organization.

And just how much growth has there been in the group? How many members has he
recruited to his cause? He steadfastly refuses to release the figures.

While Mr. Perot left this and many other questions unanswered in his speech
here, he made one thing clear: President Clinton has risen to the top of his
political enemies list.

Scorn for Clinton

The President's political aides have always argued that the best way to negate
the Perot swing vote would be to find common political ground on as many issues
as possible. But to hear Mr. Perot tell it, that has not happened.

In his speech, he rattled off his usual list of populist demands for a balanced
budget, a line-item veto, Congressional change and tough restrictions on
lobbyists. Then he struck out at the President, perhaps more harshly than ever
before in a public setting, abandoning his usual leavening of humor.

He called the Clinton crime bill "stupid," labeled the Clinton health care
package "a heart attack" and accused the Administration of "lying" about
shortcomings in Nafta. Then Mr. Perot asserted that Mr. Clinton should abandon
any plans for invading Haiti "since as a young man during Vietnam he refused to
risk his life."

At that, some Perot partisans bounded to their feet, shouting and cheering. He
went on to suggest that Mr. Clinton was considering an invasion as part of a
"rotten" plan to boost his image before the fall election, adding that if the
President decided to use military force, the military should use saturation
bombing for several days before sending any troops ashore. He conceded that
would destroy the tiny Caribbean nation. The Associated Press reported that Mr.
Perot repeated the attack on Mr. Clinton's Haiti policy in his address in St.
Louis.

It was clear, too, in Mr. Perot's speech that the defeat he suffered in the
fight over Nafta still rankles.

"Stop lying," he demanded of the President, asserting that the treaty had indeed
resulted in a loss of jobs and factories to Mexico, the "giant sucking sound"
that Mr. Perot had predicted.

"We've lost a factory a day going to Mexico and 30,000 jobs overall, just in the
first eight months," he declared. "Why don't they tell us that? That's a giant
sucking sound. It ain't working, and it's going to get worse."

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Has Authority He Needs To Invade Haiti, Top Aides Say

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1242 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 11


Joining a two-century-old debate over who has the power to make war, the
Administration asserted today that it has no obligation to seek Congressional
approval for an invasion of Haiti.

Two senior officials, Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Madeleine K.
Albright, the United States representative to the United Nations, responded to
growing calls to put the issue to a vote in Congress by saying that no vote was
required.

When asked today why Congressional approval was not being sought, Mr.
Christopher told a television interviewer that Mr. Clinton had "a constitutional
prerogative" allowing him to deploy forces quickly.

"We can't tie the hands of the President," Mr. Christopher said on the NBC News
program "Meet the Press." "The President may have to act in a situation very
quickly and on his own constitutional authority."

Ms. Albright, speaking on the ABC News program "This Week," said an invasion of
Haiti would not be a war but a "police action," a term policymakers commonly
used to describe the Korean War because there was no declaration of war by
Congress.

She also said the Haiti situation was much like the invasion of Grenada under
President Reagan and the invasion of Panama under President Bush, for which
there were also no declarations of war.

"It's not anything like the gulf," she said, referring to the Persian Gulf war
in 1991, for which there was a Congressional vote.

The unequivocal comments from the two officials were the most explicit
statements to date about whether Mr. Clinton would seek Congressional approval,
and they came as the Administration seems increasingly committed to an invasion
of Haiti.

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader, said today that he might
introduce an amendment that would try to force the Administration to seek
Congressional authorization for an invasion.

Speaking on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr. Dole acknowledged the
political reality that if Mr. Clinton went ahead with an invasion, Congress
would have little choice but to support the troops.

Although the Constitution explicitly grants Congress the power to declare war,
Mr. Christopher noted that it also makes the President the Commander in Chief of
the armed forces. "He is responsible for the armed forces, and he is responsible
to take these actions when they are in the interest of the United States," he
said.

The highly visible buildup to possible military action in Haiti is providing the
latest test of an issue that has vexed United States leaders since the founding
of the nation. The issue of who has the authority to wage war has been bound up
in the Constitution, in the nation's history of dozens of military engagements
abroad and, of course, in the politics of the moment.

The Persian Gulf Precedent

As American troops massed in Saudi Arabia in November 1990, the Democratic
leaders of Congress went to the White House to tell President Bush, a
Republican, that they firmly believed that he was prohibited from using military
force against Iraq without explicit Congressional approval. In the end, Mr. Bush
sought and obtained Congressional approval, but he portrayed his action as a
courtesy to Congress, not something he was required to do.

Now, as President Clinton moves closer to ordering an invasion of Haiti, the
Democrats are not challenging the President. They are, instead, talking largely
about the need for Mr. Clinton, a Democrat, simply to "consult" with Congress.

In 1990 the three Democratic leaders in Congress -- Senator George J. Mitchell
of Maine, the majority leader; Representative Thomas S. Foley of Washington, the
Speaker, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the Democratic
leader in the House -- insisted that a President must ask Congress for approval
to go to war, especially if there is no need to act urgently.

"The President has no authority, acting alone, to commit the United States to
war," Senator Mitchell said in 1990. Mr. Foley and Mr. Gephardt each said it was
incumbent on President Bush to seek a declaration of war before sending American
troops into combat.

But regarding Haiti, a spokesman for Mr. Foley said on Friday that while the
Speaker had urged Mr. Clinton to consult with Congress, "he has not addressed
the question of whether the President needs authorization."

Senator Mitchell said today that while he thought a President should seek
Congressional support for sending troops abroad, "it's not legal or necessary."

Mr. Gephardt's office declined to respond to requests for his views.

According to tallies by historians, Presidents have sent forces abroad more than
100 times since the founding of the Republic. Yet Congress has explicitly
declared war on only five occasions: the War of 1812, the Mexican War, the
Spanish-American War and the two World Wars.

The Middle Path

In addition to those formal declarations, Congress in a few instances enacted
resolutions, as in January 1991 for the Persian Gulf war, authorizing war. For
the Vietnam war, President Johnson cited the Gulf of Tonkin resolution of 1964
as the equivalent of a declaration of war. Even after Congress repealed the
resolution, Federal courts ruled that the war could not be challenged as long as
Congress was financing the military.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat who is a member of
the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said today that he was disappointed that
the Administration did not feel it needed Congressional approval. "It was the
right policy when we had a Republican President, and it's still the right policy
with a Democratic President," he said.

Chiding many of his colleagues for seeming inconsistency, Mr. Torricelli said,
"There is some extraordinary political gymnastics going on."

As the Vietnam War wound down, Congress enacted the War Powers Resolution, in an
effort to reconcile its authority with a President's need to act quickly. The
law requires a President to notify Congress in a timely fashion when American
troops are being sent abroad with a strong probability they will engage in
combat. The troops must be withdrawn within 90 days unless Congress explicitly
approves their mission.

But the law has proved largely ineffective because of Presidential resistance,
and also because Congress is usually willing to allow the White House to assume
the political risk of sending troops abroad.

The Constitution Argument

The more common argument for Congressional authority is the Constitution itself.
William Van Alstyne, a law professor at Duke University, is one of 10 of the
nation's most prominent constitutional scholars who have signed a letter of
protest to Mr. Clinton. They assert that as a former Constitutional law
professor at the University of Arkansas, Mr. Clinton should know that he must
seek Congressional approval.

"No one claims that in the case of Haiti, we have to move suddenly," Professor
Van Alstyne said. "No one claims that Americans are in peril."

Senator Richard Lugar, an Indiana Republican and a member of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, criticized the Democrats for insisting that President Bush
seek approval while seemingly side-stepping the issue for Mr. Clinton.

"It appears that this is a classic case where the Administration must come to
Congress to ask for a declaration of war or an explicit action like President
Bush obtained before Operation Desert Storm," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Washington argued over the power to make war, violence went
on in Haiti. Ambulance workers on Sunday carried the body of a man who was shot
dead Saturday night. The motive was unknown. (Associated Press)(pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words



International A3-8

SOUTH AFRICA'S BINDING FORCE

Watching Nelson Mandela in action for a day leaves little question that his
unique patriarchal authority is the main force binding the diverse country
together. A1


OFFICIALS ASSERT POWERS ON HAITI

Senior administration officials contended that the Administration has no
obligation to seek congressional approval for an invasion of Haiti, in response
to the growing pressure to put the proposal to a vote. A1

BOTTOM LINE ON POPULATION

Despite the wrangles at the United Nations population conference, the real issue
is whether the poor nations will spend the resources they have to solve their
problems. A6

CUBA MOVES TO STOP EXODUS

Cuba cracked down on people attempting to leave, under the terms of its
agreement with the United States, but Cubans continued to leave from points east
and west of Havana. A3

POPE URGES STRONGER BALKAN TIES

Pope John Paul II, visiting the Croatian capital of Zagreb, came close to
suggesting the rebuilding of Yugosaia in urging attention to Balkan ties as a
bridge to peace.  A3

ISRAEL UPBEAT ON SYRIA

Israeli officials, in a more optimistic assessment than previously, said they
thought Syria was serious about wanting peace as long as it got back the Golan
Heights. A5

SPA VACATION, RUSSIAN STYLE

Zheleznodorozhny Journal: With Russia's state industries bankrupt, workers are
still reluctant to give up some of the services that went with them, such as spa
vacations. A4

Secessionist Crimea's leader imposed emergency rule. A4

BIG LABOR'S STRATEGIC RAID

Having failed to persuade Congress that the free trade pact would shift American
jobs to lower-paid Mexican workers, unions are trying to organize Mexican
plants. D1

SAFETY NET FOR THE PESO

Mexico's trading partners assembled a $6 billion plan to back the peso in case
trouble followed last month's presidential election. D2

Brazil's tariffs are to be cut by almost one-third. D3

National A10-13, B8-11

AN EBBING RECOVERY

For the first time in three years, fall is not bringing a burst of growth for
the U.S. economy, a sign the strongest days of the recovery may have passed.
That has renewed the debate over how much growth is possible without sparking
inflation. A1

SCRUTINY ABSENT AT IMMIGRATION

An investigation of major corruption cases at the I.N.S. found continued failure
to shore up security weaknesses, even when they have been exposed repeatedly.
A1

HEALTH LEGISLATION STRUGGLES ON

Senate optimists are still working to pass a measure that would insure about
half the Americans who lack health coverage.  A1

FOCUS ON RIGHT ENGINE

Investigators studying why Flight 427 crashed have found new but inconclusive
evidence that a braking mechanism on the right engine may have partly deployed.
A10

EXAMINING THE SCENE OF A CRASH

The first public glimpse of the USAir jetliner's crash site revealed both the
ferocity of the crash and the difficulties of searching for clues in the
wreckage.  A10

LOOKING HOMEWARD TO BIG SAIGON

The Vietnamese community in Little Saigon, south of Los Angeles, is turning its
eyes back toward Vietnam, hoping to find new business outlets and new investors.
A10

QUESTIONING AIDS DRUG PROCESS

Some of the people who argued for the relaxation of the approval process for new
AIDS drugs three years ago now say it is not working.  A13

SEARCHING FOR A STAND ON GUNS

With many voters ambivalent, confused and cynical about the crime bill, some
Congressional campaigns are still sorting out how to position themselves.  B8

A CONSERVATIVE IN MINNESOTA

Though the polls predict his defeat, Allen Quist's conservative Christian
campaign for governor has found unexpected support in a state known for its
liberal politics.  B8

VIRTUAL LIBRARY OF CONGRESS?

The Library of Congress plans to announce an ambitious effort to convert its
most important materials into digital form that could be transmitted by
computer.  B11

President Clinton honored the first Americorps volunteers.  A12

Metro Digest B1

ODD BEDFELLOWS IN NEW YORK

Mayor Giuliani is remaining cozy with Governor Cuomo even as Mr. Cuomo, a
Democrat, runs for re-election. That has angered some of Mr. Giuliani's fellow
Republicans, and many chalk it up to practical politics by the Mayor.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Emmy Awards.  C11

"Quiz Show" and more recent scandals.  C11

Theater: "First Night." C12

Music: "Prince Igor." C11

The Fall, in form.  C13

City Opera's "Magic Flute." C12

Boz Scaggs.  C14

Dance: Choreography from India.  C13

Books: Baseball nostalgia.  C16

Television: The Met's "Elektra." C14

The Soviet struggle to build the bomb.  C14

Sports C1-9

Baseball: Sport heads for final inning of 1994.  C1

Columns: Vecsey on baseball.  C2

Anderson on Jets.  C7

On Tennis C3

Football: Jets win in overtime.  C1

Giants hold off Cardinals.  C4

Montana outduels old rival.  C5

Giants' rookie seeks action.  C4

Tennis: Unseeded Agassi wins United States Open.  C1

Obituaries D10-11

JESSICA TANDY DIES

The actress who created the role of Blanche Dubois in "A Streetcar Named Desire"
and won an Academy Award at 80 for "Driving Miss Daisy" was 85.  A1

Raymond C. Firestone, family tire company's former chairman.  D10

Amy Clampitt, poet.  D10

James T. Aubrey Jr., television and film executive.  D10

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Soon, a serious governor's race.

Bosnia: Ease both embargoes.

The high cost of sex harassment.

Auf Wiedersehen to Berlin.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: 'Not in a single man.'

William Safire: Clinton's voodoo intervention.

Charles Peters: Paralysis, thanks to the G.O.P.

Bob Dole: We'll obstruct what needs obstructing.

Chronicle D12

Bridge C14

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Flawed Characters In the Public Eye, Past and Present

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1564 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Sept. 11


Paul Attanasio was born in 1959, the same year the quiz show scandal on
television stunned and outraged the nation. But Mr. Attanasio, who wrote the
script for the film "Quiz Show," speaks of the scandal as if it happened hours
ago.

"Films only work if they're about us today," said Mr. Attanasio, a
Harvard-trained lawyer and former film critic for The Washington Post. "And I
thought where we all are today is the product of this national loss of
innocence, which began with the quiz show scandals and continued on to Vietnam,
Watergate, Oliver North, even O. J. Simpson."

Directed by Robert Redford, the film opens Wednesday with powerful advance
reviews but uncertain commercial prospects. "There's no violence, no sex, no
love story, no car chases," said Mr. Attanasio, who has rapidly emerged as one
of the more formidable screenwriters in Hollywood. "The characters in it are
flawed, and all the stuff in it is really subtle. And subtlety has gone out of
the culture."

A Real-Life Plot

The movie deals with three men whose lives were irrevocably changed by the
scandal surrounding one of the most popular shows on television in the late
1950's, "Twenty-One."

The scandal broke when a former contestant accused the show's most popular
guest, Charles Van Doren, of knowing the answers to questions beforehand and
participating in a fraud. Mr. Van Doren, a Columbia University English
instructor and a member of one of the nation's most renowned literary families,
had emerged before the scandal as a charming American folk hero whose picture
had appeared on the covers of Time and Newsweek. He admitted his complicity in
the rigged show and now lives a reclusive life as a writer in Connecticut.

The show's three main actors are Ralph Fiennes, who played the psychotic Nazi
commandant in "Schindler's List," as Mr. Van Doren; John Turturro as Herb
Stempel, the disenchanted quiz show contestant who blew the whistle on Mr. Van
Doren, NBC (the network) and Geritol (the sponsor), and Rob Morrow as Richard N.
Goodwin, then a young Washington lawyer, who initiated a Congressional
investigation. It was a chapter in Mr. Goodwin's 1988 book, "Remembering
America: A Voice From the 60's," that served as the basis for the film.

From Anger and Experience

Seated in a restaurant near Beverly Hills, Mr. Attanasio seemed a bit more
self-possessed, confident and candid than most successful writers. "I've had a
charmed life," he admitted. "I'm in a very privileged position."

His next film, "Disclosure," based on the Michael Crichton best seller about
sexual harassment, has been completed with a cast that includes Michael Douglas
and Demi Moore. The film was directed by Barry Levinson, whose company was one
of the producers of "Quiz Show." Mr. Levinson and Mr. Redford are two of Mr.
Attanasio's mentors.

"We were in sync right from the beginning," Mr. Redford said over the phone.
"First of all, he's got a very keen mind. And like most writers, there's a lot
of anger down there. And he handles that with humor and a sense of irony and a
kind of savage incisiveness. He has a natural sense of dramatic rhythm. And he
doesn't overwrite; he edits as he goes. That's from his experience as a
journalist."

Mr. Attanasio grew up in the Bronx, in Pelham Bay, and his family later moved to
Teaneck, N.J. (His father, Joseph, a businessman, had speaking parts in "Quiz
Show" and "Disclosure.")

After graduating from Harvard in 1981, and then Harvard Law School in 1984, he
was hired at the law firm Cravath, Swaine & Moore. At the time a senior partner
met the law school graduates and told them how to succeed.

"He said he'd rather be sitting in a vault in Omaha doing a document discovery
in the middle of the summer than playing golf or spending time with his family,"
Mr. Attanasio said. "He was very sincere about it. And I felt I should find
something I love to do, too. And this was not it."

Writing Reviews, Then Screenplays

Mr. Attanasio sought an internship on The Washington Post. Coincidentally, he
said, the newspaper was struggling to hire a film critic. "Everyone turned it
down because they didn't want to move to Washington," he said. "They were
desperate."

Because Mr. Attanasio had written film reviews and criticisms for The Boston
Phoenix, Rolling Stone, The New Republic and other publications, the newspaper
gave him a trial run as a critic and then hired him. He worked as a critic from
1984 to early 1987, when he left to move to New York to try writing screenplays.

He recalls his years as a film critic with a certain distaste, for the job as
well as his attitude toward it. "I was like the snotty boy critic," he said. "It
was the time of the teen-age comedies, and just seeing one after another was
wearing me out. I remember my last review was for 'Over the Top,' a Sylvester
Stallone arm-wrestling movie. I had already used my Sylvester Stallone insult
jokes in my 'Rambo' review. I had nothing new to say. It was probably the
shortest review of all time. Two paragraphs."

Mr. Attanasio's film career was charmed. His first screenplay was about the
Mafia. "It was a terrible screenplay, but it had very good dialogue," he said.
"On the basis of that I got an agent and an assignment to do a screenplay at
Paramount about the C.I.A. After that I was off to the races."

That screenplay went unproduced, but a third one, "Donnie Brasco," about a
real-life agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation who had infiltrated the
Mafia, caught Mr. Levinson's attention. With Mr. Levinson, Mr. Attanasio created
an acclaimed NBC television series, "Homicide: Life on the Streets." Mr.
Attanasio, who moved to Los Angeles in 1987, lives in the Hollywood Hills with
his wife, Katie Jacobs, a producer, and their daughter, Annie, 15 months old.

The Role of Ethnic Tensions

For "Quiz Show," Mr. Attanasio watched television clips of "Twenty-One," read
newspaper and magazine accounts, and spent time talking to Mr. Goodwin, who is
one of the film's numerous producers. The film itself followed a tortuous path
in Hollywood, with every studio in town except Walt Disney rejecting it as too
commercially risky.

"You just have to see the movies today to know why they turned this one down,"
he said. "They'd rather make 'Speed.' "

Surprisingly, Mr. Attanasio said that the movie, which went through more than a
dozen drafts in three years, has a deeply personal resonance. "The quiz show
story is just the background to the landscape," he said. "It's really about the
loss of innocence of these three men."

Mr. Attanasio said he was especially immersed in the story's ethnic
undercurrents. As a writer with Italian roots, Mr. Attanasio said, he recalled
the constant outrage among his parents and relatives at the depiction of
Italians on television in the 1960's, when he was growing up. "They were always
depicted as gangsters or loudmouths, sort of obnoxious suntanned guys with gold
chains," he said.

In the film, Mr. Attanasio said, he used that sense of ethic tension to depict
the relationship between Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Stempel, who are both Jewish. But
Mr. Goodwin was a Harvard lawyer who sought to move into the white-shoe worlds
of Wall Street and Washington, while Mr. Stempel, who lived in Astoria, Queens,
had no such aspirations and lived at the other end of the class and cultural
divide.

"I grew up with Italians and Jews," he said. "There was a very similar dynamic
within groups. The Bronx Italians looked down on the Brooklyn Italians. There
was always this internecine jockeying."

Mr. Attanasio also views the film as nothing less than an allegory about the
movie business, a world about which he's quite ambivalent.

"A lot of the sensibility of the movie in terms of what we're saying about show
business comes from my experience and certainly Redford's," he said. "What's
interesting about living here is that it's so different from the East. In the
East you find people with cynical attitudes who are, deep down, naive, innocent,
not cynical at all. Sort of like Humphrey Bogart in 'Casablanca.' It sort of
astonishes me that I came out with that attitude."

"But out here you find people who are, on the surface, impeccably nice and adopt
this kind of faux naive attitude," he said. "They seem like perpetual
adolescents who play their video games and wear baseball caps and talk about
their families. But they're killers. Incredibly cynical. That was a real shock
to me. And that sensibility informs the movie."

Mr. Attanasio said his sometimes scathing film reviews had not entirely caught
up with him -- although Mr. Stallone was actually interested in one of his
scripts.

But then there was the case of Tom Hanks. "Hanks had some project, and he told a
friend of mine, who was sitting on the beach with him, that he was looking for a
writer," Mr. Attanasio recalled with a smile. "My friend said, 'You should hire
Paul Attanasio.' "

"Hanks said the name was very familiar," said Mr. Attanasio. "My friend said
that I did a lot of work for Barry Levinson and I used to be a critic."

"That's it!" shouted Mr. Hanks, the screenwriter said.

Mr. Attanasio said, "Hanks then proceeded to repeat my review, word for word, of
'Nothing in Common,' which I had completely forgotten."

But Mr. Hanks had obviously not forgotten the unkind 1986 review. Mr. Attanasio
did not get the job.

NAME: Paul Attanasio

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul Attanasio (Marissa Roth for The New York Times) (pg. C16)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

California Vietnamese Off to Hanoi

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Sept. 8


It took him eight tries and cost him nearly two years in prison, but a decade
ago Philip Nguyen succeeded in fleeing Vietnam with his wife and children,
though with little else.

This month, to the outrage of some fellow refugees here in the community known
as Little Saigon, he will return as a member of a delegation from the Vietnamese
Chamber of Commerce in Westminster to establish business links with the
Communist leaders in Hanoi.

"I am going as a businessman," said Mr. Nguyen, who is 49 and is now a partner
in a company that manufactures water-filtration systems. "But also I would like
it if my relatives in Vietnam, if 73 million citizens there, can enjoy the same
standard of living I enjoy here."

The trip adds an official stamp to the increasing flow of Vietnamese-American
entrepreneurs back to their homeland since President Clinton lifted the trade
embargo earlier this year. For the refugees who live here, it is emblematic of a
certain normalization, of the ascendancy of economics over politics.

A Black Market Economy

And as the economy of Little Saigon has begun to sag in recent months, the
people here find themselves looking back to the country they fled for business
gains.

The lifting of the embargo has hurt the busy underground economy that helped
support Little Saigon, where about 60,000 Vietnamese-Americans cluster in a
bustling enclave 30 miles south of Los Angeles. Many of the 1,500 businesses in
the community thrived on the black-market transfer of dollars and goods to
Vietnam, mostly through third countries like Thailand and Taiwan.

Business boomed with sales of everything from pharmaceutical products to
computers, shipped to Vietnam by various routes. Even with much of its economy
underground, Little Saigon was paying $1 million a year in taxes to Westminster,
said Dr. Co Pham, the president of the Chamber of Commerce and the leader of
this month's delegation to Vietnam.

But now, he said, many of its pristine malls and shopping centers do little
business. Turnover is high as shops open, stand nearly empty for a few months,
then close down, not only because of the collapse of the underground market but
also because of the general economic malaise.

Looking for Outlets

So the community that fled Vietnam in fear and desperation is turning its eyes
back toward "big Saigon," hoping to find new business outlets and new investors.

"We want Little Saigon to be the Hong Kong of Vietnam in the future," said Dr.
Co, a gynecologist who heads the thriving Bolsa Medical Center here.

The Vietnamese community here can be the middleman for exports, travel and
banking as well as the recipient of investment by a growing wealthy class of
Vietnamese officials, he said.

Hien Phan, the executive director of the chamber and another member of the
delegation, said, "People will get wealthier and ideologies will vanish once
they have a taste of money."

But the passions of the 20 years of fighting have been slow to die.

Plans for the trip have fired the opposition of the anti-Communist right wing in
the fractured overseas Vietnamese community, where until recently people were
afraid to let it be known that they were going home for a visit. In past years,
a newspaper editor was killed for advocating contacts with the Hanoi Government,
and a travel agency that organized visits was firebombed.

Even today, one local Vietnamese politician finds it imprudent to have anything
to say publicly on the issue.  "If I speak truly from my heart then I will anger
some group or another," he said. "But I believe strongly -- don't quote me --
that this trip is a positive thing."

Every day except Sunday, a half dozen demonstrators carrying the yellow-and-red
flag of South Vietnam sit outside Dr. Co's newly opened medical center with its
California-style pink-stucco walls and Vietnamese-style curved red-tile roof.

Large yellow banners stretched between the trees read, "To foster Communism for
dollars is a crime against humanity." Some patients entering his clinic have
been harassed, Dr. Co said, and some have stopped coming.

"These guys keep annoying me," Dr. Co said, sitting inside his air-conditioned
office as assistants ushered patients down the carpeted hallway. "They threaten
my life all the time. I'm tired of them."

An organizer of the protests, Diem Do, said: "Without foreign money, without
foreign capital, without financial resources, the chances are they will collapse
much sooner."

But the political byplay is only a sideshow to the new economic imperatives of
the overseas Vietnamese community, a vestige of a long-dead war, said Yen Do,
editor of the country's largest Vietnamese-language newspaper, Nguoi Viet Daily
News.

"Politics is just a sport here," Mr. Yen said. "People talk politics but they
don't believe what they say. The true motivations around here are all business.
Even the people who are against Dr. Co, a lot of them are doctors who are afraid
he and his people will take over the H.M.O. here. That's not politics. It's
purely business."

Seeking Broader Horizons

For Mr. Nguyen, the Chamber of Commerce delegation is smart business. His
company, Environmental Group Products International, with $200 million in annual
sales, already has a customer in Vietnam. But he said Government contacts open
the possibility of much broader horizons in a mostly centralized economy.

The 10-day trip in late September will visit both Ho Chi Minh City -- the former
Saigon -- and the capital, Hanoi, where Dr. Co has scheduled meetings with the
four top members of the Vietnamese Government. Even if only one or two of those
top-level meetings actually take place, he said, an important connection will
have been made.

Connections are everything, Mr. Nguyen said. Water quality is very poor in
Vietnam, with its antiquated plumbing systems, he said. "If we can make the
Government aware of the problem, it can pass an ordinance, new rules and
regulations, so that hotels and restaurants would need to purify their water."

The prospects for Environmental Group Products International would be almost
limitless.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Co Pham, a gynecologist from the Little Saigon section of
Westminster, Calif., will lead a delegation on a 10-day trip to Vietnam during
the last part of September. (Ed Carreon for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Equity Issues This Week

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:

Aquagenix Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla., an initial public offering of 1.2 million
units, each unit representing one share and one warrant. Whale Securities.

MS Group Inc. TMX Perqs, 1.6 million shares of performance equity linked
redeemable quarterly pay securities, due in 1997, A-1/A+. Morgan Stanley & Co.
Issue price-principal repayments based on the price of Telefonos de Mexico
American depository shares.

Prismasystems Corp., Rome, N.Y., an initial public offering of 2.6 million
shares. Monness, Crespi, Hardt & Co.

Specialty Teleconstructors Inc., Cedar Crest, N.M., one million shares.
Dillon-Gage Securities Inc.

Templeton Vietnam Opportunities Fund, New York, an initial public offering of
four million shares. Kidder, Peabody & Co.

Source: MCM CorporateWatch.

Ratings: Moody's/ Standard & Poor's.

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vernon Boggs, 55, Music Expert, Dies

SECTION: Section D;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


Vernon Boggs, a sociologist and expert on Afro-Caribbean music and American
rhythm-and-blues, died on Sept. 3 at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan. He was 55
and lived in New Jersey.

The cause was acute pneumonia, said a friend, Bill Kornblum.

Mr. Boggs, who taught social science at York College of the City University of
New York, had interests that ranged widely, from the experiences of black
servicemen in Sweden during the Vietnam period to the relationship between
Afro-Cuban music and early rhythm-and-blues and rock-and-roll.

He was a regular contributor to Latin Beat, the most informed magazine covering
Latin music. His book "Salsiology," which was published in 1992 by Greenwood
Press, is considered among the more important books on salsa, covering its
origins and Mr. Boggs's relationship to Latin culture. A self-effacing man, Mr.
Boggs originally wrote a number of the essays in the book under pseudonyms. He
also translated many of the previously unpublished articles of the Cuban
musicologist Carlos Ortiz from Spanish to English.

He is survived by two sons, Vernon W. Boggs Jr. of Pleasantville, N.J., and Dan
Rubenstain of Malmo, Sweden, and a daughter, Johanna Cromer of Stockholm.


LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Amy Clampitt, 74, Late Bloomer Who Rose to Heights of Poetry

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section D;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 630 words


Amy Clampitt, known for her dense, ornate and allusive poetry, died on Saturday
at her home in Lenox, Mass. She was 74 and also had a home in Manhattan.

The cause was ovarian cancer, said Anne Close, her editor at Alfred A. Knopf.

Ms. Clampitt published her first full-length book of poetry, "The Kingfisher,"
when she was 63. It was a delayed but auspicious beginning. Richard Tillinghast,
in The New York Times Book Review, wrote that the author "immediately merits
consideration as one of our most distinguished contemporary poets." The work,
which challenged readers with long strings of dependent clauses, an often
obscure vocabulary and arcane literary allusions, ran counter to the prevailing
taste for pared-down, plain speech. Instead, she offered "baroque profusion, the
romance of the adjective, labyrinthine syntax, a festival lexicon," the poet
Alfred Corn wrote in a review.

Ms. Clampitt was born in New Providence, Iowa, and grew up on a 125-acre farm.
After earning a bachelor's degree with honors in English at Grinnell College in
Grinnell, Iowa, in 1941 she studied at Columbia University and the New School
for Social Research.

She worked as a secretary and a writer at Oxford University Press from 1943 to
1951 and as reference librarian at the National Audubon Society from 1952 to
1959. Through the 1960's and most of the 70's, she was a freelance writer,
editor and researcher. From 1977 to 1982 she was an editor at E. P. Dutton.

Initially Self-Published

In college, Ms. Clampitt succumbed to the spell of Gerard Manley Hopkins, but
she wrote little poetry at the time. In the 1950's, she made unsuccessful stabs
at novel writing. It was not until the 60's that she began writing poetry in
earnest, initially without success. In 1974, at her own expense, she published a
poetry chapbook, "Multitudes, Multitudes." The work caught the eye of Howard
Moss, the poetry editor of The New Yorker, who began publishing Ms. Clampitt
regularly. In 1981, a second small collection, "The Isthmus," was published.

"The Kingfisher," published in 1983 by Alfred A. Knopf, immediately pushed its
author to the front ranks of American poets. Organized around the elements
earth, air, fire and water, it treated subjects as various as the plants and
marine life of New England, John Lennon's murder, the Holocaust and the Vietnam
War.

Comparing Ms. Clampitt to Hopkins, Marianne Moore and Elizabeth Bishop, critics
noted her pinpoint descriptions of the natural world that led to unexpected
metaphysical insights and conclusions. She once referred to herself as "a poet
of place," a characterization that she later revised to "a poet of
displacement."

From Life and Myth

"What the Light Was Like" (1985, Knopf) solidified its author's reputation. Like
"The Kingfisher," it began with several poems about the New England coast,
notably the book's title poem, an elegy for a drowned lobsterman.

In "Archaic Figure" (1987, Knopf), inspired in part by the author's travels in
Greece, Ms. Clampitt used Greek myth to explore what Virginia Woolf called "the
ancient consciousness of women." Her other major collections were "Westward"
(1990, Knopf) and "A Silence Opens" (1994, Knopf).

She also published an essay collection, "Predecessors, et Cetera" (1991,
University of Michigan Press) and edited "The Essential Donne" (1988, Ecco
Press).

Ms. Clampitt received a fellowship award for distinguished poetic achievement
from the Academy of American Poets in 1982 and a MacArthur Fellowship in 1992.
She was a member of the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters.

She is survived by her husband, Harold L. Korn; two brothers, Lawrence, of
Brunswick, Me., and Philip, of Auburn Hills, Mich., and a sister, Beth, of
Carlisle, Iowa.

NAME: Amy Clampitt

LOAD-DATE: September 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Amy Clampitt (Dorothy Alexander, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vernon Houk, Crucial Figure In Dioxin Issue, Is Dead at 64

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12


Dr. Vernon N. Houk, one of the Government's top environmental health
specialists, who raised a scientific and political furor by declaring three
years ago that it had been a mistake to evacuate Times Beach., Mo., in 1982
after fears were raised about the chemical dioxin, died on Sunday in Atlanta. He
was 64 and lived in Atlanta.

The cause was tracheal cancer, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention in Atlanta, where Dr. Houk had worked since 1968.

An internationally known authority on the effects of toxic substances on human
health, who rose to become Assistant Surgeon General, Dr. Houk was regarded by
both critics and supporters alike as a fiercely independent researcher and
public health administrator.

In the 1970's, researchers in the centers' division of Environmental Health
Services, which Dr. Houk directed at the time, were among the first to discover
that lead in paint and gasoline posed a significant threat to the health of
children. Dr. Houk was a pivotal figure in compelling the Government to begin
removing lead from gasoline in 1982.

Attacks From Industry

In 1983 he was appointed director of the National Center for Environmental
Health, a division of the centers, and almost immediately came under attack by
the military and the nuclear industry. The reason was his support for a study
done by one of his researchers, which found that World War II veterans who had
participated in an atomic weapons test in Nevada in the 1950's developed
higher-than-expected levels of cancer. It was the first time a Government health
agency had publicly confirmed that radiation from the American nuclear weapons
industry had caused cancer among some participants.

In the last years of his career at the centers, the very groups that had long
supported his work, environmentalists and public health advocates, became his
severest critics. The issue generating the animosity was the potential effect on
human health from dioxin, a toxic chemical byproduct of heating compounds
containing chlorine, and from other manufacturing processes.

Dr. Houk became deeply involved in the debate when he was appointed to lead a
study on Vietnam veterans who asserted that their exposure to Agent Orange, a
defoliant containing dioxin, had produced unusual numbers of cancers as well as
higher-than-normal levels of birth defects in their children.

As the study was getting under way, in the late fall of 1982, a flood hit Times
Beach, a Meramec River community southwest of St. Louis, where the Government
was already studying dioxin contamination that had been found in the town's
soil. Spurred by the Reagan Administration, and basing his decision on the
result of laboratory tests that indicated dioxin caused cancer in rodents, Dr.
Houk and other physicians from the centers recommended that the town's 2,240
residents be evacuated.

Both the veterans study and the evacuation of Times Beach would come to dominate
the last years of his career. In 1987, the Agent Orange study was halted. In an
interview with The New York Times, Dr. Houk said the veterans study could not be
conducted because records were incomplete and researchers were unable to
determine how many veterans had been exposed and the levels of the chemical that
they had come into contact with. Veterans groups and environmentalists accused
him of being narrow-minded.

In 1991, he came under further criticism from environmentalists, as well as from
some prominent scientists, when he declared in a speech in St. Louis that the
evacuation of Times Beach had been a mistake.

He said in an interview with The Times the same year that he had begun to doubt
dioxin's hazards, particularly at the tiny levels that the vast majority of
people are regularly exposed. "Beginning in about 1986, the information was
beginning to accumulate that dioxin's effect on human health was probably not as
bad as we had feared in the early 1980's," he said.

Congressional Inquiry

In 1990, Dr. Houk was investigated by Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of
Manhattan, for allegations that he had improperly aided the paper industry's
campaign to loosen restrictions on dioxin in water. Republicans and some
Democrats defended Dr. Houk, calling Mr. Weiss's investigation a politically
motivated scientific witch hunt.

Dr. Houk's death came two days before the public release of a 2,000-page report
on dioxin by the Environmental Protection Agency, which some scientists say
confirms some of his views on dioxin. [Article, page A14.]

Vernon Houk was born in Dos Palos, Calif. He graduated from the University of
California at Berkeley in 1950 and earned his medical degree from George
Washington University in 1954. He was a specialist in pulmonary disease and
spent the first part of his career as a physician in the Navy.

Among the many honors he received was the Distinguished Service Medal, the
highest recognition of the Public Health Service.

Survivors include his parents, Mr. and Mrs. Guy Houk of Firebaugh, Calif.

NAME: Vernon N. Houk

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Vernon N. Houk (Michael Geissinger, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Congress Must Vote on Haiti

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 571 words


To invade Haiti without prior Congressional approval would short-circuit the
United States Constitution. It would also leave the President with sole
political responsibility if the operation turns sour. Yet that is just what the
Clinton Administration now suggests it might do.

Neither of the situations usually cited as justifying independent action by the
Commander in Chief -- military crisis or unexpected threat to national security
-- exists in this case. To the contrary, Congressional deliberation is both
practical and desirable, and there is plenty of time for it.

The Constitution vests the power to declare war in Congress while giving the
President command of the armed forces. Those overlapping responsibilities have
fueled generations of controversy.

Beyond indulging a natural tendency to press against a vaguely defined
constitutional boundary, recent Presidents have invoked practical arguments for
bypassing Congress, like the need for speedy response or tactical surprise.
Under the threat of a missile-launched nuclear Armageddon on 20 minutes'
warning, the idea of protracted Congressional deliberation could be made to look
like an absurd 18th-century anachronism.

Cold-war Presidents also argued that military actions taken under the authority
of treaty commitments or U.N. resolutions were not really wars, but "police
actions" or "troop redeployments," and thereby exempt from constitutional
requirements.

For years Congress was happy to avoid responsibility. But Presidential excesses
in Vietnam drove Congress to reclaim some of its authority in the War Powers
Resolution of 1973. This required Presidents to get timely Congressional
approval whenever they placed U.S. troops at risk. Since then, Presidents have
disputed the resolution's authority but sometimes fulfilled its provisions.

In 1991, Democrats in both houses insisted that President Bush get prior
Congressional approval for Operation Desert Storm. Now, misplaced fealty drives
many of those same Democrats to relieve President Clinton of the same
responsibility.

That is poor governance and poor partisanship too. Democrats would do better to
protect Mr. Clinton from enmeshing himself in a military action where most
Americans see no compelling national interests at stake and in which the first
casualties are likely to bring bitter recrimination.

President Jean-Bertrand Aristide still represents Haiti's legitimate government.
But sending the Marines to restore him to power makes no sense even if, as some
military experts predict, that turns out to be an afternoon's work.

A century of Latin interventions should have taught Washington that it cannot
enforce democracy at gunpoint. Haitians elected Father Aristide and still
support him, but even his legitimacy may not survive being installed by foreign
troops.

It is frustrating to watch Haiti's generals sneer at sanctions, play games with
the U.N. and systematically shoot down democratic leaders in cold blood. Their
conduct warrants international ostracism and economic sanctions until they yield
power, then generous and muscular support for the elected government that
replaces them.

But the conditions that warrant an American invasion -- conditions that include
broad public support and Congressional agreement -- are not in place at this
time. Mr. Clinton should not abuse his powers and risk damage to his Presidency
by plunging ahead.


LOAD-DATE: September 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN;
The Primary: Highlights of Major Races in New York State. . .

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2117 words


GOVERNOR

THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES

MARIO M. CUOMO, 64. Governor since 1983. A lawyer, he was appointed Secretary of
State by Gov. Hugh Carey in 1975. He lost to Edward I. Koch in the 1977 New York
City mayoral race but was elected lieutenant governor with Mr. Carey in 1978. He
has raised over $6 million for the campaign. LENORA B. FULANI, 44. A
developmental psychologist in New York City and chairwoman of the New Alliance
Party. Over the past 12 years she has run for New York City mayor, lieutenant
governor, governor and President, never garnering more than 1 percent of the
vote. She has raised more than $93,000.

THE ISSUES: At the heart of Ms. Fulani's campaign is the premise that she is an
alternative to Mr. Cuomo. Beyond that, she has called for easier ballot access
for statewide candidates, term limits for state officials, and initiative and
referendum. Mr. Cuomo, who has largely ignored the primary challenge, supports
improving ballot access, but opposes term limits and initiative and referendum,
saying all those issues should be debated at a constitutional convention.


ANALYSIS: Mr. Cuomo is expected to win big, but the question is how big. A less
than overwhelming victory in the primary could signal trouble for November.
Analysts also say the race will provide a measure of how well Mr. Cuomo is
faring with black voters. Ms. Fulani, who is black, has campaigned heavily in
black neighborhoods, while Mr. Cuomo is thought to have lost support among New
York City blacks who blame him for Mayor David N. Dinkins's loss last year.

THE REPUBLICAN CANDIDATES

GEORGE E. PATAKI, 49. A State Senator from Putnam County. A lawyer, major of
Peekskill from 1981, member of the state Assembly from 1985-91, when he was
elected to the Senate. Chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee. He has raised
more than $5.2 million. RICHARD M. ROSEBAUM, 63. A lawyer from Penfield, near
Rochester, a member of the Monroe County Legislature from 1966-68, justice of
the State Supreme Court from 1970-72. Appointed chairman of the state Republican
Party of Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller in 1973, holding the position until 1977.
Republican national committeeman from 1977-92. He has raised more than $2.2
million.

THE ISSUES: Mr. Rosenbaum, who won a place on the ballot by circulating
petitions, has accused Mr. Pataki, the party's endorsed candidate, of being
controlled by United States Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato. Though both men call
themselves "pro-choice," Mr. Rosenbaum opposes any restrictions on abortion,
while Mr. Pataki favors mandatory waiting periods, parental notification for
minors and counseling for women seeking Medicaid-financed abortions.

ANALYSIS: Mr. Pataki, who has also been endorsed by the Conservative Party, is
heavily favored because of his strong organizational support and because
Republican primary voters are thought to favor more conservative candidates. Mr.
Rosenbaum has a small organization, is widely identified with the party's more
liberal Rockefeller wing and is depending on a final-week advertising blitz.

SENATE

THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES

DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, 67. Senator since 1977; cabinet or subcabinet member
for four Presidents from Kennedy to Ford; Ambassador to India; Harvard
Professor; author or editor of 16 books. Now chairman of Senate Finance
Committee and one of the most powerful men in Washington. Has raised more than
$3 million. AL SHARPTON, 39, preacher and street protester, ordained at age 10
by a Pentecostal minister in Brooklyn, active in civil rights causes for 20
years, former Federal informant. Made surprisingly strong run for Senate
nomination two years ago. He has raised $88,079.

THE ISSUES: Mr. Moynihan, one of the most prolific writers and thinkers in
American public life for more than a quarter century on issues from traffic
safety to family stability, has also long been a lightning rod for controversy.
Sometimes scorned by fellow Democrats as too conservative, never fully embraced
by Republican administrations he served, his ideas defy easy classification.
Since he warned of the collapose of the black family in the 1960's, he has had
especially wary relations with black officials, who accused him of blaming the
victim. Mr. Sharpton has sought to exploit such strains, and accused Mr.
Moynihan of losing touch with the average voters.

ANALYSIS: Mr. Moynihan has held overwhelming leads in all polls to date, and Mr.
Sharpton concedes he has virtually no chance of winning. But he hopes to use his
candidacy in his continuing quest for political legitimacy. If he draws
significant support from black voters, he will be a broker in statewide
politics.

THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

EIGHTH DISTRICT CANDIDATES

JERROLD L. NADLER, 47. Incumbent, elected 1992; state assemblyman, 1976-92;
graduate of Columbia College, Fordham Law School; advocate for rail freight.
Raised on a poultry farm in New Jersey, cut political teeth protesting Vietnam
war; lives on Upper West Side. Has raised more than $650,000. THOMAS K. DUANE,
39. City Councilman, elected 1991; former stockbroker, community board member,
Democratic district leader and Manhattan coordinator for former City Comptroller
Elizabeth Holtzman; graduate of Lehigh University, lives in Chelsea. Has raised
more than $227,000.

THE DISTRICT: This district stretches from Grant's Tomb to Coney Island,
encompassing neighborhoods on the Upper West Side that are among the most
liberal in the nation and the conservative Satmar Hasidic enclave of Borough
Park, Brooklyn. It is about 80 percent white, 9 percent black, 6 percent Asian,
12 percent are of Hispanic origin.

THE ISSUES: The candidates have tried to best each other for the title of most
pure and liberal on a host of issues on which they would both be badly out of
sync with much of the country, from gay rights (which both support) to the death
penalty (which both oppose). Mr. Nadler has a strong record of support for gay
rights, for example, but Mr. Duane who is openly gay and has the virus that
causes AIDS, contends he could be a more effective advocate for those causes and
others in a district with a substantial gay population.

ANALYSIS: Mr. Nadler is an accidental incumbent, having won the Democratic
nomination that is tantamount to election here in a vote by the county
Democratic Committee two years ago, after Representative Ted Weiss died on the
eve of the primary. Mr. Duane has won early prominence in the Council and sought
to challenge Mr. Nadler as too much of an insider, but the charge fell somewhat
flat in light of Mr. Duane's own past as a district leader, and Mr. Nadler has
significantly outpaced him in fundraising.

15TH DISTRICT CANDIDATES

CHARLES B. RANGEL, 64. Congressman, elected 1970, former state assemblyman,
graduate of New York University and St. John's Law School. Lives in Harlem. Has
raised nearly $1 million. ADAM CLAYTON POWELL 4TH, 32. City Councilman, elected
1991; graduate of Howard University and Fordham Law School. Lives in East
Harlem. Has failed to file contribution reports in violation of Federal law.

THE DISTRICT: The heart of Harlem, one of the spiritual and intellectual centers
of black urban America, but suffering from decades of poverty and crime. It is
47 percent black, 14 percent white, and 45 percent of Hispanic origin.

THE ISSUES: Mr. Powell, the son of the legendary Congressman and minister whom
Mr. Rangel defeated in 1970, argues that Mr. Rangel is old and out of touch with
the needs of his district and has not managed to turn seniority in Congress into
tangible rewards for Harlem. Mr. Rangel, one of the highest-ranking members of
the House Ways and Means Committee, argues that he was a staunch advocate for
the urban poor through two Republican Administrations and is now poised to
deliver new benefits like Federal funds for economic development.

ANALYSIS: Mr. Powell, whose mother is Puerto Rican, has traded on his family
name and a face eerily like his father's to appeal both to older voters'
nostalgia and to anti-incumbent sentiment among younger black and Hispanic
residents. But he has won virtually no support from established politicians or
community leaders, and Mr. Rangel argues that it would be foolhardy to turn him
out of office now that he has gained legislative power.

17TH DISTRICT CANDIDATES

ELIOT L. ENGEL, 47. Congressman, elected in 1988. Former state assemblyman,
teacher, guidance counselor; graduate of Lehman College and New York Law School,
member of Education and Labor Committee. Apartment in Co-Op City. WILLIE COLON,
44. International salsa music star, bandleader, and community advocate, making
initial foray into elective politics.

THE DISTRICT: One of the most diverse districts in the nation. Blacks make up
more than two-fifths of the district and are the largest single plurality, but
non-Hispanic whites and people of Hispanic origin are just behind, with about
one-third each.

THE ISSUES: Rather than disagreeing over substantive issues -- on which their
liberal positions are quite similar -- the candidates have sparred over
geography (Mr. Colon notes that Mr. Engel moved his family to suburban Maryland:
Mr. Engel that Mr. Colon lives acorss the Westchester County Line) and ethnic
succession (Mr. Colon contends it is time to have a representative of Hispanic
origin).

ANALYSIS: Mr. Engel won this seat after the longtime incumbent, Representative
Mario Biaggi, was convicted on corruption charges, and he comfortably staved off
a comeback attempt by Mr. Biaggi two years ago. But the district's polyglot
makeup is attractive to a minority candidate.

ATTORNEY GENERAL

THE CANDIDATES

KAREN S. BURNSTEIN, 52. Lawyer, resigned in April as judge in Brooklyn Family
Court, a position she held since 1990. Elected state Senator in 1972
representing Long Island and southeastern Queens. Served as executive director
of the State Consumer Protection Board, president of the state Civil Service
Commission and Auditor General of the City of New York. Will appear on general
election ballot in November on Liberal Party line. CHARLES J. HYNES, 59. Lawyer,
elected Brooklyn District Attorney in 1989. Began career as a Legal Aid lawyer
in 1963, then became a prosecutor in Brooklyn, heading the rackets bureau in
1970. Served as special state prosecutor, starting in 1975, to prosecute
Medicaid fraud cases. Served for two years as New York City Fire Commissioner.
Named in 1987 as special state prosecutor investigating the slaying of Michael
Griffith in Howard Beach. G. OLIVER KOPPEL, 53. Lawyer, appointed Attorney
General by his colleagues in the New York State Legislature after Robert Abrams
resigned in December. Elected in 1970 to the Assembly, representing the
Riverdale section of the Bronx. Former partner in law firm, Koppell, Drachler &
Lipofsky. ELIOT L. SPITZER, 35. Lawyer, former prosecutor in Manhattan District
Attorney's Office, which he joined in 1985. Headed the office's labor
racketeering unit. Served as counsel to the Governor's Commission on Youth Crime
and Violence. Resigned this spring from the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate,
Meagher & Flom, where he had worked since 1992.

THE ISSUES: The four candidates are moderate to liberal Democrats from New York
City who differ little on the major issues. The biggest exception is Mr.
Spitzer's support of the death penalty, which the other three oppose. Thus, much
of the debate has focused on the candidates qualifications and their view of the
office's role in fighting crime. Mr. Hynes and Mr. Spitzer say the office should
be redefined as the state's overseer of criminal justice issues. Mr. Koppell and
Ms. Burstein do not discount such a role, but say the other two are pandering
because the office traditionally focuses on other duties: defending state
agencies, consumer affairs, the environment and civil rights.

ANALYSIS: Polls show the race is far too close to call. Mr. Koppell, who
received the blessing of the Democratic convention, is considered to have an
edge on traditional organizational support. Ms. Burstein is the only woman and
is considered the most progressive in a primary with a heavy female turnout and
where the party's more liberal wing turns out. Mr. Hynes is considered to have a
lock on Brooklyn, a plus because the New York City vote is so important. Mr.
Spitzer is a long shot, but his support of the death penalty might play well
upstate and among more conservative Democrats. Moreover, he has had the most
consistent presence on television and could capitalize on any anti-politician
sentiment.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pataki; Rosenbaum; Moynihan; Sharpton; Nadler; Duane; Engel;
Colon; Burstein; Hynes; Koppell; Spitzer

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Rare Success at the Border Brought Scant Official Praise

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2472 words

DATELINE: El PASO


Silvestre Reyes, chief of the Border Patrol here, accomplished something no
other officer of the Immigration and Naturalization Service ever had. He got the
border in his sector under control. Not just for a brief, flashy demonstration,
but permanently.

El Paso had been the nation's second-busiest border crossing for illegal aliens.
Every day, 8,000 or more people waded across the Rio Grande, then melted into
the city's Hispanic neighborhoods. But in September 1993, Mr. Reyes devised a
new border-control tactic. He positioned 400 of his officers right on the
border, forming a blockade of sorts. It brought illegal immigration to a virtual
halt.

The strategy has been in effect for a year now, and the border here remains
generally quiet. With that, Mr. Reyes is dispelling the widely held belief that
the nation's borders cannot be controlled without Draconian, police-state
tactics.

His tactic may not work as effectively everywhere, but to the residents of El
Paso, Chief Reyes is a hero. And in other immigration service offices around the
country, employees who despair of a lack of leadership at headquarters see Mr.
Reyes as a glimmer of hope.

"There's no strategic vision coming out of Washington, but that fellow in El
Paso, he kind of revolutionized the thinking," said an assistant district
director in the Los Angeles office. "He showed Washington that you can control
the border."

But as the success of Mr. Reyes's strategy became clear a year ago, his
superiors in Washington did not seem to see it that way. Rather than encourage
or congratulate him, they greeted Mr. Reyes's achievement with skepticism at
best, hostility at worst, depending on whose version is believed.

"We got caught behind the curve," grumbled James A. Puleo, who, as an executive
associate commissioner in Washington, was one of Mr. Reyes's supervisors. The
operation's surprising success raised questions by others in Government --
irritating Mr. Puleo and others at I.N.S. headquarters because they were not
immediately able to answer them.

Mr. Reyes said: "Their general attitude was, they were uncomfortable about being
put in this position. It was like a Laurel and Hardy movie: 'This is a fine mess
you've gotten us into, Ollie.' "

Chris Sale, the Deputy Commissioner, demurs. "That was not a message we
deliberately sent," she said, "but I can see how that would occur."

Ms. Sale was acting commissioner at the time because the Clinton Administration
had not yet appointed someone to lead the agency. During the first days of Mr.
Reyes's operation, she said, "those of us in Washington, frankly politically
leaderless, needed to make sure that we didn't end up in a situation that anyone
at a policy level would regret."

Casting Doubt on the Old Way

There were other considerations. Mr. Reyes's approach threw into question the
fundamental Border Patrol strategy of the last several decades: Let aliens cross
the border, then try to catch them. That way, the Patrol could demonstrate to
Congress that it was catching more and more aliens every year and request ever
larger budgets.

The Mexican Government, meanwhile, had long been contending that anything
impinging on the free migration of Mexican laborers was an affront to the
nation's sovereignty. Now Mexican political commentators were calling the El
Paso operation another example of American "xenophobia."

Soon, Mexico filed a diplomatic protest, and that upset the State Department. As
a result of that and other complaints, "I still have pockmarks on my rear end
from being chewed out," said Doug Kruhm, acting chief of the Border Patrol.

Several I.N.S. officials said some of the service's leaders had tried to
persuade Mr. Reyes to call off the operation. "When it came right down to it," a
senior official said, "they were uncomfortable with the idea of controlling the
border."

Ms. Sale and Mr. Kruhm deny that.

"There were a lot of questions," Mr. Kruhm said. "It could have been a real
mess. But I don't personally remember anyone saying, Let's back off of this."

Still, he added, at one point Washington, trying to save money, told Mr. Reyes,
" 'Maybe you'll have to pull it in some -- not do so much.' "

Applause for a 'Celebrity'

Today, almost a year later, Mr. Reyes is a celebrity of sorts among immigration
experts, who see his work as a model for the service. And officials from other
border states, some of them angry because illegal immigration increased in their
areas after the border in El Paso was closed, are demanding that the I.N.S.
apply his strategy in their districts, too.

The Border Patrol maintains offices all along the border, administratively
separate from the immigration service's district offices but co-equal with them.
And now Congress is giving the I.N.S. money for new Border Patrol agents so the
service can replicate Mr. Reyes's "extremely effective border patrol model" in
other areas, as a House report puts it. In fact, several Government officials
said they saw the El Paso operation as the immigration service's only real
success in recent years.

Now some officials at I.N.S. headquarters are taking credit for the operation.

"All Silvestre Reyes did was put into effect what was already being discussed in
concept here," Mr. Puleo said with a dismissive tone.

"Puleo said that?" Mr. Reyes responded. "That's an irony. I'm really surprised,
especially since I kept getting hammered at the time."

The Idea
Stopping Trouble Before It Starts

Mr. Reyes, 49, is the grandchild of Mexican immigrants who fled the war and
violence in Mexico 80 years ago. Silver, as he is known, grew up the eldest of
10 children in a suburb of El Paso. After college, he served in Vietnam, and
when he returned home, he took several Civil Service exams. As he tells it now,
the Border Patrol was the first Federal agency to call.

He rose through the patrol's ranks and was named head of the McAllen sector in
1984, becoming the Border Patrol's first Hispanic sector chief. And it was in
McAllen, in the lower Rio Grande Valley, that Mr. Reyes got the idea for his new
border strategy.

There, as elsewhere, Mexicans poured across the border every day. Border Patrol
officers caught as many as they could and logged the apprehensions. After that,
they packed the Mexicans onto buses and drove them back across the border. Many
returned the next day.

But in about 1988, Mr. Reyes started noticing that many of the aliens were
coming from Central America, and they had to be sent home by plane. That quickly
grew expensive. So instead of seizing the illegal aliens, Mr. Reyes decided to
keep them out of the country in the first place.

A Wall of Officers

To do that he redeployed his men right on the border -- "the line," in Border
Patrol parlance.

"I figured that if we blocked the line," Mr. Reyes explained, "it would back up
the aliens on the Mexican side and start causing them problems over there."

He named his operation "Hold the Line," and it worked. "But I didn't have the
resources to keep it up," he said.

The normal strategy, grabbing people after they crossed the border, allowed Mr.
Reyes to keep as many, or as few, agents on duty at one time as the budget
permitted. But "Hold the Line" required a constant presence of hundreds of
agents, so the overtime expenses grew ruinous. He called the operation off after
six weeks.

Then a year ago, Mr. Reyes was reassigned to El Paso, and he found the Border
Patrol office there running out of control. Thousands of illegal aliens were
streaming across the Rio Grande without constraint. Border Patrol officers were
chasing them through the streets, backyards and parking lots. Often the officers
grabbed El Paso residents by mistake and demanded proof that they were citizens.

There had been brawls and shootings, accusations of abuse, and loud public
protests. The city had risen up in outrage, and a Federal judge had ordered the
patrol to stop questioning people based solely on their appearance.

"The sector was in trouble," Mr. Reyes said. Officials in Washington said they
had asked him to calm things. He decided a radical new approach was needed. Just
as he had in McAllen, the new chief planned to redeploy his men along the river
-- close the border for 30 days, except at the legal crossing points. This time
he called it "Operation Blockade."

The Pitch
'They Thought I Was Crazy

Mr. Reyes sent a proposal for "Operation Blockade" to Mr. Kruhm in Washington,
along with a request for $525,000 to pay for the expected overtime and for fence
repairs.

"They turned me down flat," Mr. Reyes said.

Mr. Kruhm said: "We had no funding for that in the program. We'd started that
year with a $10 million deficit."

Another senior I.N.S. officer who spoke on the condition that his name not be
used recalled the thinking among officials in Washington this way: "They were
saying: 'Why in the hell does he want to do this? We don't have any money.' "

"As far as I was concerned," the official said, "nothing was going to happen."

Stories differ about what happened next. A senior official said Mr. Reyes had
then called an officer he knew in the immigration service's financial office to
see if he could come up with the money on his own. The financial officer offered
him about $300,000 in end-of-the-budget-year money that had to be spent.

Mr. Reyes said that account was "factual and accurate," and he added that Mr.
Kruhm was openly irritated when he heard about it. '

But Mr. Kruhm says that's not true. "I got the money for him," he insisted.

Whatever the truth, after the money arrived, Mr. Reyes briefed his officers, and
they made it clear that they did not like their new orders.

"They thought I was crazy," Mr. Reyes said. "But I told them: 'I'm not
interested in apprehensions. I'm not interested in generating numbers. I'm
interested in controlling the border.' "

Mr. Reyes said he had also made headquarters "promise that I would not be
penalized if I didn't have big apprehension numbers."

The Blockade
A Sunday Surprise Sets Off Ripples

The new strategy went into effect last year on Sunday morning, Sept. 19. Every
Sunday, more than 10,000 Mexicans waded across the river to El Paso so they
could show up for work the next morning. But when the Mexicans looked across the
river that Sunday, they saw a Border Patrol vehicle stationed every 100 yards or
so along the entire border. More than 400 agents were waiting for them,
stretching from one end of the town to the other and beyond.

They couldn't get through. The border was closed and would stay closed.

The next day, merchants in downtown El Paso began complaining that sales were
down; the Mexicans were not coming in to shop. Many other city residents were
upset because their employees had not shown up for work.

But within a few days the residents of El Paso began to see other effects. The
police reported that the number of auto thefts and petty crimes had fallen.
Merchants reported that shoplifting had dropped off. And everyone noted that
city streets were largely free of beggars and windshield washers.

At the same time, many of the Mexican workers who had been crossing the border
illegally because it was so easy started applying for border-crossing permits.
As the permits were granted, the Mexicans -- most of them maids and gardeners
and in other service jobs -- began returning to work, and merchants said sales
started to pick up again.

"By the end of the week," said Al Giugni, district director for the I.N.S. in El
Paso, "it had grown bigger than life itself. Radio and television and newspaper
people were talking about nothing else. And they did polls." Though
unscientific, the results were consistent: all of the polls showed public
approval of 80 percent to 95 percent.

'Mexico Was Calling'

But to the Border Patrol in El Paso, Washington seemed unimpressed.

"The embassy in Mexico was calling," Ms. Sale, the Deputy Commissioner, said.
"We got beaten up for not consulting the Mexican Government first. The Mexicans
didn't like the name Operation Blockade, and certainly there were persons in the
State Department who'd have been happier if it didn't happen."

At the time, the Administration was trying to win Congressional approval of the
North American Free Trade Agreement, and the State Department was trying to be
especially considerate of Mexican interests.

As a result, "we were asking a lot of questions" of Mr. Reyes, Mr. Kruhm added,
"and I'm sure the people in El Paso felt we were not supporting them."

In calls to Mr. Reyes, officials familiar with the conversations said, his
supervisors told him the operation was jeopardizing the trade agreement and
causing other problems as well. During one conference call, two officials said,
Mr. Reyes finally became exasperated and asked, Are you telling me to call this
off?

If so, he went on to say, then he was going to hold a news conference and give
out the name of the official at headquarters who had ordered him to do it.

Mr. Kruhm said: "He could have said that, but he was under a lot of pressure
then. We were all under a lot of pressure."

The Aftermath
Changing a Name, And Some Minds

Even though he was getting little support from headquarters, when the 30 days
were up Mr. Reyes decided to maintain the new border deployment permanently. He
did make one concession. Since the Mexicans disliked the name Operation
Blockade, he adopted another one, the one he had used for that first operation
in McAllen: "Hold the Line."

Whatever their feelings in the early days, the officials at headquarters have
given Mr. Reyes some new personnel this year to help him maintain the operation.
And no matter how the service's leaders felt about Operation Blockade a year
ago, it is clear that Mr. Reyes has brought changes in thinking at headquarters
today.

"The operation was initiated by the chief," Mr. Kruhm says, "but now we have
initiated similar operations in other areas, in South Texas. There was no
fanfare, but they worked. They were very effective."

There has been another change, too.

"We are now trying to get away from using apprehensions as a measure of
effectiveness," Mr. Kruhm said. "We really aren't getting anywhere when we go to
Congress and say we made a million apprehensions last year.

"I think we should be saying how many people we prevented from coming in."

Chaos at the Gates

TODAY -- A Border Patrol success story fell on deaf ears in Washington.

SUNDAY -- Immigration agency is mismanaged; its ranks, demoralized.

MONDAY -- The corruption virus: It spread through the Washington office.

YESTERDAY -- The most wanted: A poor record of deporting criminal aliens.

TOMORROW --

Cold, rude and insensitive: The agency ill serves its clients.

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Chaos at the Gates -- Fourth of five articles.

GRAPHIC: Photos: About 8,000 aliens used to wade across the Rio Grande every day
at El Paso. The flow was shut off a year ago with a sort of blockade of Border
Patrol officers. Agent James E. Gorman scanned the river near the city; When the
Border Patrol chief in El Paso shut off the flow of illegal aliens across his
district, it created a problem for his bosses in Washington: They could not
easily explain his success. The chief, Silvestre Reyes, sat at his El Paso desk.
(Photographs by JIM WILSON/The New York Times) (pg A14)

Map/Graph: "KEEPING TRACK: At the Border" describes new Border Control tactics
and their effect. It shows the locations of the Border Control sectors of the
Southwest, along with figures representing the apprehensions of illegal aliens
in El Paso and the total of all others over the last two years. A graph tracks
the total number of annual, nationwide apprehensions at the border since 1982.
(Sources: Border Patrols, Immigration and Naturalization Service) (pg. A14)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 15, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BASEBALL: THE TEAMS;
Mets' Season of Promise Comes Up Empty

BYLINE: By JENNIFER FREY

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 2;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words


Yesterday afternoon, while major league baseball owners decided to cancel the
remainder of the season, John Franco -- one of the Mets' union representatives
-- went to Macy's to buy new underwear. He saw no reason to sit home and wait
for a phone call that would tell him what he already knew.

Franco and his teammates will not be returning to Shea Stadium this season. The
owners' decision left Franco angry and frustrated. But it did not come as a
surprise.

"I guess I started giving up hope almost three weeks into it," said Franco, who
will finish the season as the National League leader with 30 saves. "Sitting in
on the meetings and seeing the way both sides went at each other, I had the gut
feeling nothing was going to get done.

"Hitler couldn't stop the World Series, Vietnam couldn't stop the World Series,
other disasters -- the earthquake -- that couldn't stop the World Series. But a
couple of owners led by Richard Ravitch, they got together and they stopped the
World Series."

For the Mets, the 1994 season ended at a most unfortunate time. After two
seasons of humiliation -- both on and off the field -- the franchise had begun
to lure back its fans and win respect throughout the league. They were an
overacheiving bunch. Their third-place standing in the N.L. East was better than
most would have predicted. Although they did not reach Manager Dallas Green's
goal of finishing .500 -- the record will stand at 55-58 -- they did finish with
a better record than 16 of the other 27 major league teams.

"A third-place finish with an asterisk in 1994 -- it's not where we wanted to
be," Green said in a statement released yesterday by the club. "But it's better
than 1993 and hopefully we will be able to continue to build from what we
started on the field this season."

What the Mets started was a resurgence, one sparked by the surprising debuts of
players like Rico Brogna, the talented young first baseman, and Jason Jacome,
the rookie left-handed pitcher. It was underscored by the rebirth of several
veterans -- particularly Franco and the 30-year-old Bret Saberhagen, who was
pitching better than he had since 1989, the year he won his second Cy Young
award.

"I wish it was last year," said Franco, who had more saves this season than he
did the previous two combined (25). "The kind of year I'd had, I'd be packing
the bus for everybody."

Like Dwight Gooden, Pete Smith and several other Mets, Franco is supposed to
become a free agent this winter. His future will remain uncertain until the
owners and the union decide what players with free-agent status can do about
contract negotiations. That situation also ties the hands of General Manager Joe
McIlvaine, who plans to meet with Green and several coaches tomorrow to discuss
future plans.

"The only comfort in that is that the 27 other teams are in the same boat," said
McIlvaine, who has yet to have any concrete discussions with Franco or his agent
and has not spoken to Gooden, who is in the midst of a 60-day suspension.
"Nobody's going to get too much jump on anybody else."

For most Mets, the news came days -- even weeks -- after they had begun to treat
the strike as the start of the off season, rather than a brief interruption of
the game. David Segui was in the basement of his new house in Kansas City,
working out in his weight room, when the baseball season died.

"I don't know if it was so much hope as just keeping myself in shape," said
Segui, who was happy to be on strike earlier this month, when his wife gave
birth to their daughter Haley.

Ryan Thompson has been taking his 2-year-old daughter, Taylor, to the playground
at McDonald's as often as he has been heading to the gym. At first, Thompson
went to the batting cages every day, then every few days. The trips dwindled to
once a week at best.

"I've been golfing with Todd a lot," said Thompson, who remained in his Queens
apartment, which is in the same complex as catcher Todd Hundley, for the
duration of the strike. "I think I kind of figured it was over the first week of
September."

With only a few months of major league pay to save, Brogna did not rent an
apartment in his hometown of Watertown, Conn., until the strike rolled into
September. He's serving as the assistant defensive coordinator for the high
school football team at Taft prep school, where his father teaches. But from
Brogna, who makes the league minimum -- $109,000 for a full season -- to Franco,
who would have made $3.5 million in a complete season, none of the Mets had
complaints about their finances or believed that the union was in any danger of
breaking over the winter.

"It's not about cracking, it's about getting it done," Bobby Bonilla said
yesterday from Los Angeles. "We don't want a salary cap. Period. We like
baseball the way it is."

From his home in Staten Island, Franco said: "Basically, I'm going to gear up
and get ready for next season -- if there is a next season. If not, I'll keep in
shape playing in a beer league. There's an over-30 league out here, I think."


INSIDE PITCH

Three Mets are expected to undergo arthroscopic surgery during the next week:
RYAN THOMPSON will have minor repairs done to his right knee, which has bothered
him since May, TODD HUNDLEY will have his throwing shoulder and elbow cleaned
out and ERIC HILLMAN will have surgery on his left elbow. None of the injuries
are serious. The Mets had planned to have the medical work done following the
season. . . . Team owner FRED WILPON issued a statement for himself and fellow
owner NELSON DOUBLEDAY in which they expressed sadness and said that "the entire
Mets organization shares the agony and the pain that is felt by so many because
of the loss of the game we all love so much." . . . Several members of the
organization are expected to participate in winter leagues, with Thompson slated
to rehab his knee in Puerto Rico. RICO BROGNA said he planned to skip winter
ball this year -- DALLAS GREEN had suggested it -- but DAVID SEGUI might play in
the Dominican Republic.


LOAD-DATE: September 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Just when Mets fans were starting to believe again, their team
and their seats at Shea Stadium were taken away from them for the rest of 1994.
(Rebecca Cooney for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SHOWDOWN IN HAITI: IN CONGRESS;
Few Opinions, Pro or Con, Seem to Change in Congress

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 11;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 564 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 15


President Clinton's speech tonight left many in Congress unconvinced that a
military invasion of Haiti was necessary, and even appeared to strengthen the
resolve on Capitol Hill not to approve any such action.

Democrats were as adamant as Republicans that Mr. Clinton had simply not made
his case.

"There was no rationale before the speech, and there was no rationale after the
speech," said Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey. Like
others, he said there was nothing the President could have said to justify an
invasion.

"He could have given the most magnificent speech since Pericles," said
Representative Bill Richardson, a New Mexico Democrat, "but the case is not
strong enough to require an invasion. I think he'll pick up some national
support in the electorate, but not enough to change the minds of many in
Congress."

Mr. Richardson praised the President for sticking by his convictions, but said
it would be difficult to head off a vote in Congress against him. "Congress has
a lot of skepticism of the invasion," he said.

The President did not mention Congress in his speech, but he has been acutely
aware that members oppose military action to return the elected President, the
Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

Republicans were equally unimpressed.

"The President did not make a convincing case that an invasion to return
Aristide to power is worth the risk of any American lives," said Senator Bob
Dole, the Republican leader.

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said, "It's a lesson of the Vietnam
War we cannot forget, which is: we cannot involve ourselves militarily without
the support of the American people."

Senator Richard Lugar, a moderate Indiana Republican and member of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said the President's suggestion that human rights
violations in Haiti necessitated an invasion ignored similar atrocities in
Bosnia. And the President's argument that Haiti's proximity to the United States
was crucial seemed to be an attempt to absolve himself of a weak foreign policy,
he said.

Representative Porter Goss, a Florida Republican, said he thought particularly
inappropriate that the President warned that without an invasion, 300,000
Haitians would be descending on American shores.

What little support Mr. Clinton has in Congress comes from the Congressional
Black Caucus. Representative John Conyers, a Michigan Democrat and senior member
of the Congressional Black Caucus, who led a delegation to Haiti, said, "All
other alternatives have failed, while the repression, torture and
anti-democratic activities have continued."

Representative Maxine Waters, Democrat of California and another member of the
Black Caucus, said she supported the President "1,000 percent" in his attempt to
"stop the killing, secure our own borders and restore democracy to our
neighbor."

Another supporter was Representative Joseph Kennedy 2d, Democrat of
Massachusetts, who said, "We have important interests in ending the reign of
terror that has killed, tortured and maimed thousands of innocent people and
sent tens of thousands of refugees to our shores."

But more typical was Representative David Skaggs, Democrat of Colorado, who
said, "There's just a gut-level sense in this country that the interests of the
United States in this matter are not serious enough to justify the use of our
military."

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Guilty Verdict in Slaying Linked to Racial Hatred

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Sept. 15


As a boy, Sam Nang Nhem had witnessed hatred and learned to survive. He saw war
in Cambodia, lived under the heel of the Khmer Rouge, escaped to Thailand and
languished for five years in a refugee camp.

But he did not survive an outburst of racial hatred in Fall River, Mass., and a
jury today convicted a 25-year-old white man in the death, agreeing with
prosecutors that Mr. Nhem was slain because he was Cambodian.

The killing occurred on the night of Aug. 14, 1993. As a family clambake was
winding down, Mr. Nhem happened onto a brawl among a group of young men in the
courtyard of the housing project where the Nhem family lived. Mr. Nhem quickly
became a target. Called a "gook," prosecutors said, he was kicked and beaten to
death.

Mr. Nhem was 21 at the time, engaged to be married and the father of a boy born
a month before.

Today, in Bristol County Superior Court in New Bedford, the defendant, Harold
Robert Latour, was found guilty of second-degree murder and assault and battery
with the intent to intimidate based on race. He was sentenced to life in prison,
the mandatory sentence for second-degree murder. He will be eligible for parole
in 15 years.

The murder saddened, angered and frightened members of Fall River's small but
growing Cambodian community, which is struggling to establish itself among the
city's older ethnic groups from Canada and the Azores. There have been tensions.

Mr. Nhem's father, Khun Nhem, said his car was firebombed a few weeks after the
murder. But he refuses to leave Fall River, an old factory town in southeastern
Massachusetts near the Rhode Island state line.

"I don't like it here, but I don't want to move," Mr. Nhem, 47, said through an
interpreter. "I miss my son so much that I don't want to leave the place where
he last lived. We are the victims. Why should we move? We are just a nice
family. The people in charge of the project should kick the bad people out."

The last time Mr. Nhem saw his son alive was on that Saturday night in August,
at a family clambake outside their house in Watuppa Heights, a housing
development of two- and three-family homes, the yellow paint on them peeling in
spots. Sam Nang Nhem, whose name means "lucky" in the Khmer language, had
gathered the clam shells in a trash bag and taken them to a garbage bin with his
friend, Sophy Soeng.

A fight had just broken up in a concrete courtyard near the bin. When Mr. Nhem
and Mr. Soeng went to see what had happened, the prosecutors say, one brawler,
Mr. Latour, shouted a racial epithet at them.

"I'm gonna knock that gook out!" Mr. Latour said, according to trial testimony.
Mr. Latour, who had finished his shift with a moving company earlier that day,
punched Mr. Nhem, knocked him to the ground and kicked him in the head. Mr. Nhem
was pronounced dead at a nearby hospital.

Mr. Latour's lawyer had argued that the assault was not racially motivated and
that his client had not intended to murder Mr. Nhem.

For the Nhem family, the death was the crowning sorrow of a life of hardship.
Sam Nang Nhem's father, Khun Nhem, was a soldier in the Cambodian Army before
the Government fell on April 17, 1975. When the Khmer Rouge took power, the Nhem
family, like many others, was forced to move to the countryside to work long
hours on a farm.

After Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, Mr. Nhem decided to try to take
advantage of the chaos to escape. Sam Nang was just 7 when his family fled to
Thailand. "All my children were little kids," Mr. Nhem said through an
interpreter. "And we had to walk day and night through mine fields."

The Nhems spent five years in a refugee camp in Thailand before the United
States granted them asylum. After moving around southern New England for six
years, they settled in Fall River.

Of Fall River's 90,000 people, more than 4,000 are Cambodian, according to Sam
Bath Rim, the executive director of the Cambodian Community of Greater Fall
River. The first Cambodian to come to Fall River, many people here say, was
Sophin Uon, whose immigration was sponsored by a local church. Other refugee
resettlement programs began sending Cambodians there, and the growing Cambodian
community soon attracted more arrivals. Mr. Uon, the pioneer, now owns a sewing
company. He came to the Latour trial every day.

The history of Fall River is told by the old factory building that now serves as
its new Cambodian community center. Like many of the city's abandoned mill
buildings, it was later converted into an outlet store. But the store, Spindle
City Outlets, closed down and Mr. Rim's group was able to buy the building for a
fraction of what it was once worth.

The building, a long structure of gray stone, is now called Angkor Plaza, after
Angkor Wat, the massive, elaborately carved 12th-century stone temple outside
the city of Siem Reap, Cambodia. Angkor Plaza contains a grocery store that
sells pickled banana blossoms, lotus rootlets and rice noodles; the New Phnom
Penh Restaurant, known for its chicken with lemon grass, and a video store with
movies from India, China, Thailand and Cambodia.

There are classes to teach the Khmer language to children who were born here,
and classes to teach English to their Cambodian parents. Children are taught the
traditional dances of the asparas, the dancing goddesses of Cambodian lore.
Adults are given job training; a course on how to become a certified nurse's
assistant just ended. A Buddhist monk visits twice a month from Lowell, a city
in northeastern Massachusetts with an even larger Cambodian population.

Before Mr. Latour was sentenced this afternoon, Mr. Nhem, the father, read a
victim-impact statement to the court. In it, he said: "I thought I could rely on
the United States for safety. I thought it would be a safe place for my family."


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sam Nang Nhem, 21, a Cambodian immigrant, was slain last year
after a brawl in Fall River, Mass; Khun Nhem, right, the father of Sam Nang
Nhem, the victim of a racial murder, left Bristol County Superior Court in New
Bedford, Mass., yesterday with his son's fiancee, Khuan Sok, left, and her son,
Tony. (Stephen Rose for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ART REVIEW;
Japan's Avant-Garde Makes Its Own Points

BYLINE: By HOLLAND COTTER

SECTION: Section C;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words


"Keep changing, connect with everything, continue forever." That's one young
Japanese artist's recipe for a creative life, and his words would make an apt
epigram for "Scream Against the Sky: Japanese Art After 1945" at the Guggenheim
Museum's SoHo branch. This is the largest gathering of Japanese avant-garde work
ever assembled in America, and with riveting things to look at and plenty to
think about, it gets the fall art season off to a challenging start.

In a sense, the show's major achievement is to shatter cliches. Anyone who
regards contemporary Japanese art as a watered-down version of Western modernism
has a surprise in store. Many of the artists included here have been pioneers in
styles -- Conceptualism, performance art, body art -- that America and Europe
tend to claim as their own; and Japan's adaptation of such movements as Abstract
Expressionism and Minimalism is not only done with a highly selective eye that
gives their models new meanings.

Even the idea of an avant-garde art has a distinctive form in Japan. Rather than
being seen as a string of successive breaks with the prevailing status quo, it
follows a pattern of thrusts and feints. Tradition is flouted at one moment,
revived at another. Western influence is alternately embraced and rejected.
Extreme distortions of image and material are less often used to gain distance
from a culture than to more thoroughly mine its core.

The show begins with examples of the early, ground-breaking Gutai group, founded
in 1954 by artists declaring their liberation from the repressive government of
the war years. Apolitical and anarchic, they melded Western and Eastern thinking
and set both gently askew. Kazue Shiraga called upon both Zen notions of chance
and New York School "action painting" when he created big de Kooningesque
abstractions with his pigment-smeared feet. And Atsuko Tanaka's "Electric Dress"
(1956), a kind of ceremonial kimono made of colored electric lights, is a witty
emblem of both the lure and danger of technology. The wearer looks fantastic but
risks electrocution.

The show's curator, Alexandra Munroe, made a smart decision in following the
Gutai section with a contemporaneous but very different kind of "progressive"
art, one which blended traditional and modernist forms in an effort to
synthesize a new international style. Artists like Shiryu Morita gracefully
explored the fine line between calligraphy and abstract painting while others,
like Kazuo Yagi, turned ceramics to expressive sculptural ends. The organic
folds and furrows of his unglazed frieze titled "Wall," for example, have a
startling anatomical immediacy.

This intestinal image touches on one of the show's recurrent themes: physical
vulnerability and decay under the shadow of the atomic bomb. Collective anger
over the devastation it caused seems to have fully emerged in Japan only in the
1960's. One senses it instantly on the museum's second floor in Shomei Tomatsu's
photographs of radiation-scarred flesh, in Mokuma Kikuhata's fragmented "junk
art" assemblages, and in documentation related to a performance piece titled
"Shelter Plan," created by the neo-Dada group named Hi Red Center. Together they
offer proof, if proof is needed, of Japan's long tradition of political art.

A member of that group, Natsuyuki Nakanishi, produced an early version of body
art when he clipped dozens of metal clothespins to his skin and to canvases; his
presence serves as a bridge to the fascinating rooms devoted to so-called
obsessional art. The work ranges from Yayoi Kusama's armchair bristling with
stuffed cloth phalluses, to Keiko Asaoka's hallucinatory pencil drawings of a
severed ear, to Eikoh Hosoe's homoerotic photographs of the novelist Yukio
Mishima.

Mishima's sadomasochistic glamour turns memorably outlandish in the person of
Tatsumi Hijikata (1928-1986), the creator of the radical dance movement called
Butoh. He is represented here by a few props and costumes, a flounced scarlet
dress among them, and a grainy video of a 1968 performance in which a kind of
coy mincing alternates with hypnotic dramatic gesture. All of the artists in
this group come across better in a closer, more claustrophobic environment than
the Guggenheim's white-box spaces provide, but they still cast a spell here.

The show shifts into lower gear with Fluxus. Although several Japanese members
of this international movement -- Shigeko Kubota, Ay-O and Yoko Ono (the show's
title is borrowed from one of her text pieces) -- relocated to America, other
Conceptualists, who remain in Japan, particularly those whom Ms. Munroe
designates the School of Metaphysics, are at least as interesting. Among their
works, Tatsuo Kawaguchi's lotus blossom cast in lead, Hiroshi Sugimoto's
near-black photographs of seascapes and Tatsuo Miyajima's wall of tiny digitized
numbers ceaselessly repeating themselves all derive from Buddhist concepts of
eternal recurrence and stasis.

The sculptures of the highly influential Mono-ha movement have roots in similar
modes of thought, ones to which contemporary Western art seems largely immune.
Mono-ha's use of natural materials and its whimsical, gravity-defying
arrangements amount to a deliberate rebuke to systematic Minimalism. For all
their casualness, they can look absolutely monumental in the right circumstances
(who could forget Minoru Kawabata's pileup of planks and beams on Roosevelt
Island a year ago?), though they seem somewhat dispirited and diminished here.

Far more museum-friendly is the art of the 90's, with which the show ends. In
true post-modern fashion, this is hothouse stuff, formally polished, critical in
intent, packed with art history and topical references from Madonna to AIDS. Of
the younger artists, Yasumasa Morimura is the star, and in surprising ways his
work sums up what has preceded it, from the theatrical tradition of
cross-dressing exploited by Hijikata, to Mishima's intoxication with martyrdom,
to Buddhism in the form of a wooden altar enshrining a famous Vietnam-era news
photo of a military execution, which Mr. Morimura has restaged -- eternal
recurrence indeed -- with himself playing the victim's part.

Like Mr. Morimura's work, "Scream Against the Sky" raises at least as many
questions as it answers, but it confirms beyond doubt that any reading of
contemporary Japanese art in purely Western terms will not do. If it is an art
of assimilation, as it is often said to be, it is also one of transformation
based on philosophical positions distinctly its own. The historian Kakuzo
Okakura (1862-1913) once wrote that Westerners love to "search out the means,
not the end, of life." In "Scream Against the Sky" it is the end -- awful,
serene or ineffably empty -- that is explored over and over and by means that
are often marvelous.

"Scream Against the Sky: Japanese Art After 1945" remains at the Guggenheim
Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street, through Jan. 8.


LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A photograph by Eikoh Hosoe from his 1963 series "Ordeal by
Roses," at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo. (Guggenheim Museum)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 16, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
The Fear Of Refugees

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 31;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


Three years after World War II, most governments of the world had realized that
the issues of refugees and asylum were critical to the safety of nations, the
purposes of the war and to what had come to be called human rights.

In Europe were camps still filled with persons "displaced" by German devastation
or fear of falling into the hands of the Soviet Army. In Asia millions of Hindus
and Muslims were killing and being killed crossing through India and Pakistan,
sliced apart by partition.

On Dec. 10, 1948, the 56 members of the U.N. met in Flushing, Queens, shivering
in a mangy former skating rink while the organization hunted frantically for a
permanent American headquarters.

In those days, presidents and kings picked important fruit to represent them at
the U.N. General Assembly. Secretary of State George Marshall headed the U.S.
delegation; near him was John Foster Dulles. The delegate who spoke to the issue
was Mrs. Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Stalin sent Andrei Y. Vyshinsky, his personal people-scythe. Jawaharlal Nehru
sent his sister, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit, graceful as bamboo, twice as strong.

The document before them was the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. All who
voted for it said that to violate it would forever be like violating the U.N.
charter.

After Article 13 was passed -- declaring everyone's right to leave his country
at will -- Article 14 was approved:

"Everyone has the right to seek and enjoy in other countries asylum from
persecution."

The article excepted those who committed non-political crimes. For the overall
declaration all members voted aye except eight abstainers -- the Soviet bloc and
South Africa.

For the U.S. it was not a problem. Separated from refugees by oceans and
disinterest, Washington scanned the lists, reaching in for a few with
world-class physics achievements.

Later, U.S. administrations did show attention, political and compassionate.
They gave asylum to Soviet Jews, other Soviet dissidents and some allies from
South Vietnam.

But asylum was still something remote. We never really understood that most
asylum-seekers could not show up equipped with passports, visas, or affidavits
by police back home that said yes, they were indeed persecuting the refugees.

Annoying, paperless people like that still arrive from far away. Inscrutable
Chinese prefer sickening for months, even dying, in filthy cargo boats to
staying home having fun in the new Chinese Communist wonderland. Instead of
using them as TV commercials for America, we slam them into jail, long and
tight.

And now, drenched, starving Caribbean refugees impolitely try to leap into our
own sunny neighborhoods -- right where we once loved to conga around carrying
signs saying: "Love you, Latin neighbor."

Fidel Castro taught us that over there is now over here. America stood straight:
Cubans who could get here were taken in. Look around: Cuban refugees, like so
many others, not only got jobs but created others.

But now there is a growing American antagonism toward immigrants, including
refugees: hordes of them will take our jobs. Refugees, of specified colors,
always are counted by the horde, sometimes the wave.

President Clinton played into that. He is no xenophobe or racist. But he has a
problem about refugees, as about some other human rights matters: constancy
deficiency.

This trait made for the weird performance in the Caribbean. When Mr. Castro
tested him by letting Cubans set out in rafts, Mr. Clinton "forced" Mr. Castro
to keep them home -- thus giving Fidel a terrific chuckle and simultaneously
tearing up Articles 13 and 14.

On Haitian refugees, one day Mr. Clinton said let them in, the next sent orders
to pick them up, send them back, or to Panama, or Guantanamo, anywhere, just
away.

If Mr. Clinton had remained constant on refugees, the Haitian "generals" might
have believed long ago that when he said something he meant that specific
something. And with a better Clinton constancy record more Americans might
understand that he has a good case for invasion as a last resort.

But no protests grip America about Washington's strange fear and minginess
toward boat people. Articles 13 and 14 are replaced by that grand old slogan:
Pull up the gangplank, Jack, I'm aboard. Is that the signal flag the President
wants America to fly on his tour?

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SHOWDOWN WITH HAITI: VIEWS;
Support for Troops But Policy in Dispute

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Sept. 16


When the Commander in Chief spoke to the nation on Thursday night about Haiti,
he at least succeeded in getting Americans who had been wondering about an
invasion to prepare for one.

Before there was any announcement of a diplomatic mission to Haiti today, people
all across the country were speaking of rallying behind the troops. As Melvin
Player, a 64-year-old car dealer in Houston, said: "If we're going in there,
let's do the job. If we're there to restore some democracy, well, let's restore
some democracy."

But President Clinton did not succeed in convincing all Americans that a
military mission to Haiti would be wise. He depicted the horror of "rape,
torture and mutilation" at the hands of the military regime in Haiti, and he
spoke of the endless waves of refugees on American shores if that regime
remained in power in Port-au-Prince. Still, expressions of doubt, cynicism and a
general sense that the operation would not be worth the risks were heard
throughout the land today.

"There is no good cause for this," said Mike Virani, the manager of a
delicatessen in Los Angeles. "Haiti is such a small country. It has no oil. It's
just not important."

Or, as Jeff Bail, a marketing consultant from Westchester County, N.Y., said:
"It's not an Iraq situation where our interests were involved. I don't see Haiti
harming any of our interests. I don't know what Haiti exports to our country but
it certainly isn't oil. And it's not like a Cuba with the threat of nuclear
weapons."

Haiti is certainly not the Persian Gulf. But, strikingly, many people who said
they opposed the 1991 operation to reclaim Kuwait from Saddam Hussein, precisely
because they believed it was only about oil and American business interests,
said that they supported an invasion of Haiti because they truly believed it
would be about something more noble: bringing democracy to an American neighbor.

And many blacks, in tones ranging from weary to angry, suggested that opposition
to sending the American military to Haiti was widespread simply because the
people to be helped there were black.

"They go into other countries," said Morris Flood, a black graduate student in
public administration at Northeastern University in Boston. "I think they should
go into a predominantly black country and do the same. If we can police everyone
else, we should go down there and police Haiti, too."

Albert Spruill, 45, a drilling specialist from Houston who served in Vietnam in
the late 1960's and who is black, supported an invasion. "I'd go tomorrow," he
said. "If I had to go anywhere in the world, I'd go to Haiti. I fought for a
cause in Vietnam I didn't know nothing about, but I believe in democracy. This
is what we're all about."

Almost inevitably, the subject of Haiti veered into a discussion of President
Clinton's bearing in the role of military leader. A few people described Mr.
Clinton's speech from the White House as his finest hour; a few acidly dismissed
him as a draft dodger who had no right to send soldiers into battle. But a great
many others were simply willing to give him the benefit of the doubt.

"We don't know if it's true about the atrocities," said Tony Ditta, a gun
licenser in the Bushwick section of Brooklyn. "But for Clinton to go forward
with these troops, he must know what's going on there. It's got to be bad for
them if they got to take to the sea in boats."

Others, recalling military operations led by Presidents Ronald Reagan and George
Bush, explicitly faulted Mr. Clinton for not being able to rally the nation as
convincingly as his predecessors did.

"I watched the speech, and it seemed like he was almost pleading with us to
support him," said Chris Prince, a copy machine repairman who was eating lunch
with some co-workers at Kim Son, a Vietnamese restaurant in Houston. "He's on a
whole different level from Reagan," Mr. Prince added derisively. "Reagan didn't
sit there and plead with you, 'Oh, please back me.' Reagan just said, 'Look,
this is what we're going to do.' "

Even in Houston's Third Ward, a predominantly black neighborhood where many
people said they supported the President's actions, there were approving
memories of Grenada and unhappy suggestions that Mr. Clinton had delayed too
long and should not have signaled his intentions.

"We caught them that time in Grenada," said Mr. Player, seated on the bumper of
a pickup truck and breaking into a grin as he recalled the American apprehension
of military leaders there in 1983. "That's the way to do it. We caught them dead
to rights. Same thing in Haiti. We should have just gone in there and caught
them by surprise, but that won't happen now."

Even as Americans almost uniformly spoke of pulling together for the troops if
an operation is begun, interviews with dozens of people around the country today
suggested a ferment of opinions about a Haitian invasion:

"I think it's crazy," announced Angela Zamora, 15, a student in Chicago. "We
have so many problems here like gangs and homelessness. We can use that money
here to help with that stuff, not for some other country who doesn't even want
our help anyway."

"Please, no," said Michael Soranno of Sheepshead Bay in Brooklyn. "It costs
money and lives. What do we get for it? Nothing."

Soraya Rios, a loan administrator in San Francisco, worried about the aftermath.
"Aristide may be overthrown again," she said. "The people may think he's just a
puppet. We'll be running the show. And why? What's the use?"

Gordon Hansen, a legal typist in San Francisco, had similar questions: "Are they
going to have better living conditions after we're done? Is Haiti going to be
our 51st state?"

Byron Jones, a bicycle messenger in Chicago, said: "This is not a matter of
national security. They got guns from 1915, and they're a threat to us?"

Some people insisted that Congressional approval of an invasion was necessary.
"Congress needs to vote on this so the blood isn't just on the President's
hands, but on all the Representatives," said Randy Look, an architect in Denver.

Loraine Thompson Thompson, a theology student at Emory University in Atlanta and
a native of Panama, opposed an invasion and took heart in prospects for a
peaceful end to the standoff. "People in Haiti have been suffering for many,
many years," she said. "An invasion would only hurt them more. I always feel
there is another chance to negotiate, another chance to avoid such drastic
measures."

Others worried that while Haiti might be easily brought under control, a
successful operation would only beg the question of what to do about Cuba.

"We're invading the wrong Caribbean island," said Jonathan Stevens, a
health-care administrator in suburban Chicago. "I'm not advocating that we
invade Cuba, but the focus is on Haiti because it's an easy P.R. move for the
President. The threat from Haiti is real but it's minuscule compared to larger
questions of Cuba and Cuban refugees."

And some people simply seemed to want the impossible: an invasion would be O.K.,
they said, if there was a guarantee that no blood would be shed.

"If it can be done in a quick operation where no one gets hurt, especially the
civilian population, then I would support intervention," said Mr. Hansen in San
Francisco.

Literally seconds after the President's speech on Thursday night, in which he
had accused the Haitian military regime of almost unspeakable atrocities, CBS-TV
cut away to a live interview with the country's military leader, Lieut. Gen.
Raoul Cedras. And many people, recalling that American troops went ashore in
Somalia last year only to be greeted by American camera crews, suggested that
the interview had added another bizarre touch to news organizations' coverage of
today's military hostilities.

"Here we were about to invade, and there was Dan standing downtown with Cedras,"
said a Jennifer Perry of San Francisco, referring to CBS anchor Dan Rather. "I
didn't like how the whole thing was presented."

"It was strange," added Mr. Prince, the copy-machine repairman in Houston.
"Clinton's getting us all primed to go up against this terrible guy and there's
Dan just talking to him, like, 'Hey, how do you feel about all this, Raoul?' "

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chris Prince, Houston Copier Technician: "Reagan didn't sit
there and plead with you, 'Oh, please back me.' Reagan just said, 'Look, this is
what we're going to do.' " (F. Carter Smith for The New York Times); Melvin
Player, Houston Car Dealer: "If we're going in there, let's do the job. If we're
there to restore some democracy, well, let's restore some democracy." (F. Carter
Smith for The New York Times); Byron Jones, Chicago Bicycle Messenger: "This is
not a matter of national security. They got guns from 1915, and they're a threat
to us?" (Yael Routtenberg for The New York Times); Loraine Thompson Thompson,
Atlanta College Student: "People in Haiti have been suffering for many, many
years. An invasion would only hurt them more." (Michael A. Schwarz for The New
York Times); Angela Zamora, Chicago High School Student: "We have so many
problems here like gangs and homelessness. We can use that money here to help
with that stuff." (Yael Routtenberg for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 17, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Veterans Honor Missing Comrades

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 28;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam veterans paid tribute to their colleagues still missing
in action yesterday at a ceremony at Roosevelt Park in Edison. In a 24-hour
vigil, they hung homemade dog tags, bearing the name of each man who is missing,
in a model bamboo cage to symbolize their suspected imprisonment.

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 18, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 854 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     9   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 2    12   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 3     4   GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam,
           $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen
           disappear.

 4    14   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5     5   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.)
           Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
           and a poem.

 6*    5   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Frustration, love, hope -- and
           recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7     3   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           mysterious death.

 8    31   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young
           boy learns a deadly secret.

 9    13   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 10   23   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.

 11    1   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 12    3   THUNDER POINT, by Jack Higgins. (Berkley, $5.99.) The
           discovery of a wrecked U-boat reveals World War II
           scandals.

 13    4   THE WYNDHAM LEGACY, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) A
           demanding earl and a serene duchess in Regency England.

 14    2   GRAND PASSION, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.)
           Romance between a small-inn keeper and the man behind a
           large hotel chain.

 15    1   LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $14.) The demon Lasher
           pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The
           Witching Hour."

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    36   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2     3   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six
           true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.

 3    567  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.

 4     3   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years in
           Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

 5    83   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 6    17   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.

 7*   36   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 8*   20   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade
           teacher.

 9     9   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past
           and present.

 10*  18   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 11   19   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           memoir of a young woman's mental illness.

 12*  46   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 13    1   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 14   67   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 15*  153  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    183  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 2     4   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           slow-witted wanderer through history.

 3    45   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel.

 4     1   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 3, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
Can't Anyone Say 'I'm Sorry,' With Feeling?

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 1;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


MY telephone rang. "McDonald's?"

This happens about once a month, although there are no McDonald's listed in my
telephone exchange, nor do any have my last four digits. I'm usually polite,
"Sorry, wrong number," although once a year or so, if the voice on the other end
offends me, I will accept a large advance order and very politely promise to
have it ready ASAP.

This time, the call woke me up hard, so I told the caller, in the local urban
patois, to wake up herself. I hung up.

She called right back, which meant she knew what she was doing or had redial.

"I made a human mistake," she said, aggrieved. "I didn't expect the F-word."

"Maybe," I replied, "you should think about the S-word. Whatever happened to
saying you're sorry?"

She gasped before she hung up.

Nothing like a heart-to-heart to wake one up. Whatever did happen to saying
you're sorry? Once upon a time, you did something wrong, you said you were
sorry. Sometimes it was hard because it was a genuine admission of having been
in the wrong. Men seemed to have particular problems with this (Duke Wayne and
Fonzi hardly ever said they were sorry, and Vietnam's sardonic "Sorry about
that" subverted that word, among other things), but by the sensitive 70's a man
who could say he was sorry might not have to.

But these are the 90's, and the streets are filled with people who croon, "I'm
sorry," beggars and hustlers and urban survivalists who apologize to people who
step on their feet and shoulder them out of the subway. It only means they feel
outgunned.

On the day I started thinking seriously about sorry, a checkout clerk at Met
Foods on Third Avenue overcharged me $1.23 on two cans of sale tuna fish and
then gave me a hard time when I brought it to her attention. "You sure it's
chunk white? How are you so sure?"

"I'm sure because it says so right here," I said politely through my teeth.

Huffily, she called the manager and they worked it out with a lot of eye-rolling
and lip-curling. I was surprised when neither of them gave me a "Sorry" along
with my $1.23.

I don't want someone's head on a stick, just affirmation that I'm not always
wrong or crazy. Hey, you made a mistake. You drove me five blocks out of my way
and it's all there on the meter. Can't you say you're sorry?

One recent morning, a man driving a postal truck swerved around a slow-moving
beige car on Third Avenue, waved me to move faster in the crosswalk and then
swerved around me to make a right turn on a red light onto 16th Street.

I followed the truck down 16th and turned right onto Rutherford Place, where it
was parked at the corner of 15th Street. By the time I got there, the driver was
peering at a car with a For Sale sign in the window. I was leaning against a
lamppost when the driver trotted up and told me in a friendly way that the car
was selling for a good price.

"Oh," I said, "that explains why you were in such a hurry you had to go through
a red light."

"I'm under pressure for time," he explained.

I was nice. I made no remarks about local mail delivery. I merely said, "You
went right through a red light and you're not even sorry about it."

He started shouting: "I been driving for years, I know what I'm doing. If I hit
you, then you'd have something to complain about."

Could he be right, I wondered? You wake me up, you overcharge me, you scare me
on the street, but no harm, no foul, no sorry. Maybe there has to be contact.

I was sitting in a plane that had just taxied to its gate at La Guardia. A man
pulled down his sample case from the overhead rack and banged my shoulder. I
glared at him.

"Sorry," he growled.

I said, "So am I," and just kept glaring.

"I said I was sorry," he snarled. He was revving up to fight. "You heard me? I
said I was sorry."

Two other passengers swept down the aisle and herded him off the plane.

Obviously, just saying you're sorry isn't enough. I want you to sound like you
mean it.

So, where do we go from here?

Last weekend, at the Washington Square Art Exhibit, I was studying some
surrealist collages when someone bumped softly against my back and said, "I'm
sorry."

I turned as a thirtyish man in shorts and a T-shirt, carrying fancy paper
shopping bags, passed me. I quickly frisked myself. Everything was there. I went
back to the collages, and heard, "Sorry, really sorry."

He had turned and was staring at me. A woman with matching shopping bags tugged
him down the block. "I said I was really, really, really sorry."

If he wasn't a pickpocket, I figured, he was just lunch drunk. All the way down
Washington Place, walking sideways, he kept smiling at me and crooning, "Sorry,
sorry, I'm really sorry, I said I was sorry."

I got it. I suddenly felt like an urban ethnolexicologist. I had just heard a
new way to say the F-word. So who's sorry now?

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Present Arms;
Clinton Corners Himself, Along With His Quarry

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1394 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEREVER he is, the late Lyndon Baines Johnson surely is shaking his head in
wonderment at the current plight of his onetime critic, Bill Clinton, who is now
President. No, Haiti is hardly Vietnam, not as a foe; not as a moral dilemma;
probably not as a military quagmire. Yet 26 years after Mr. Clinton took to the
streets to assail Mr. Johnson's war, he now finds himself, eerily, starring in
its revival on the small stage: the principled President, drawn ever deeper into
an unpopular battle by his own policies and a fear that retreat equals
humiliation.

So it was that a superpower threat to invade one of the world's weakest nations
ballooned last week into a do-or-die test of the President's political manhood
and diplomatic respect. It is not that Mr. Clinton lacks for intelligent
arguments that his course, morally and historically, is right. But even many of
those Democrats who believe Mr. Clinton is right to threaten military action
suspect that he has arrived at that choice not by design, but by default. After
repeated bluster in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti -- followed by repeated retreat in
each instance -- Mr. Clinton simply cannot afford to rattle another empty
scabbard if he is to maintain the status of a world leader, they say.


"Now they're faced with the stark reality that they have got to invade," a
Democrat on the Senate's Foreign Relations Committee said last week in an
interview. "They'll never be able to make a bluff anywhere in the world if they
threaten to invade Haiti and back down."

Few in Washington disagree with the President's broad goals: to end the
dictatorship of Lieut. Gen. Raoul Cedras, to halt the political torture and
murder, to restore to office Haiti's first democratically elected president, the
Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide. No one disputes his ultimate aim, to sweep back the
tide of refugees fleeing Haiti for economic or political salvation in the United
States. And Mr. Clinton could credibly argue that his ultimatum to Haiti's
dictators effectively continued a policy wielded against dictatorships in
Grenada and Panama by Ronald Reagan and George Bush.

Mr. Clinton's quagmire is not strategic, however, but acutely political. In
Port-au-Prince, the military appears to have concluded it could step over Mr.
Clinton's latest line in the sand because it had crossed others in the last 18
months with such impunity. The White House appears to have miscalculated General
Cedras's stamina -- and, as a result, to have drawn furious new demands for
tougher steps from hunger strikers, from blocs in Congress, from Florida
politicians, from Father Aristide.

And on Capitol Hill, Mr. Clinton is seen as having placed American credibility
on the line without bothering to bring voters or lawmakers along -- a key to
making any threat convincing.

Mr. Clinton seemed to make a bow to that argument Friday, sending Jimmy Carter,
Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia and retired Gen. Colin Powell to make a final pitch
for General Cedras' peaceful departure. They were sent after Mr. Clinton's
backers in the Capitol warned he was rushing into battle without having rallied
political support or exhausted all options.

Yet even his supporters allowed that Mr. Clinton had moved the crisis to such a
pitch that, should that last plea fail, he had no choice but to invade or lose
all credibility. "What we're trying to prove," said Representative Lee Hamilton,
of Indiana, "is that we mean what we say."

That has not always been so clear.

When General Cedras ousted Father Aristide in September 1991, President Bush
called it a threat to American security and vowed that the coup would not stand,
but did little else. When Mr. Bush ordered the military to intercept Haitian
refugees at sea and return them home, Presidential candidate Clinton vowed to
reverse it and return Father Aristide to power.

The Power-Sharing Solution

President Clinton quickly broke that pledge. For one thing, he realized -- as
had Mr. Bush -- that accepting the boat people would encourage a greater exodus.
For another, he adopted the early view of his aides that Haiti would never be
stable unless its ruling military and business elite were part of any political
settlement. So he began to bargain with General Cedras not for the restoration
of Father Aristide, but for a power-sharing accord. But for this to work the
generals had to be persuaded that they had no other choice. They had already
shown they could withstand sanctions almost indefinitely. Without a convincing
threat to oust them, they proved extraordinarily difficult to persuade.

For a while, Father Aristide lashed out at his erstwhile White House allies.
Then he proved sufficiently pliant about the need to reassure the wealthy that
the White House succeeded in brokering a United Nations accord in mid-1993 under
which General Cedras agreed to cede power. But there was a critical flaw: The
general faced no punishment if he reneged.

And he did. Then, when the White House sent the U.S.S. Harlan County that
October to enforce the deal, a gang of Cedras thugs met it at the Port-au-Prince
dock.

It was a crucial moment, perhaps the last opportunity to persuade General Cedras
that he, like Father Aristide, had no choice but to compromise. Instead, the
ship steamed away, and Mr. Clinton's credibility sank in its wake. So
negotiation had produced only a humiliation, and this strengthened the belief
that Washington, whatever its threats, would not move beyond economic punishment
to the use of force.

Then Came the Protests

There matters rested, until black lawmakers in Congress began suggesting last
spring that Mr. Clinton's apparent indifference to Haiti's travails was racist.
An activist, Randall Robinson, began a 27-day hunger strike to underscore the
point. Astonishingly, Mr. Clinton publicly endorsed the strike, saying that "we
ought to change our policy." In May, Mr. Clinton did change it -- again --
persuading the United Nations to impose a total trade and travel embargo.

Since then Mr. Clinton has eased the ban on processing Haitian boat people,
tightened it again, won United Nations permission for an invasion, and moved
warships offshore. He declared on Wednesday that the time for negotiations had
passed. But on Friday, he elected to allow American emissaries to talk with
General Cedras.

In the end, the President appears to have returned to his position as a
Presidential candidate: that returning refugees to Haiti is inhumane, and that
the United States should return Father Aristide to power. But it is a course
that even allies judge to be tentative and wracked by indecision.

"The Clinton Administration has not made its case very well," said Robert White,
a former ambassador to El Salvador who is president of the generally liberal
Center for International Policy. "The lack of discipline inside the
Administration hasn't only been notable; it's sent all kinds of mixed messages,
conflicting messages to the military." Mr. White, who strongly favors military
action to oust General Cedras if need be, says the Administration is bereft of
an effective advocate for its position.

So is Mr. Clinton's party in Congress.

"There's no lack of consultation," said one Central America expert, an adviser
for decades to Senate Democrats. "What's missing is the kind of relationship in
which the Administration says, 'This is what we're going to do, and we need your
support.' What's missing is what, in the insurance business, they call a
closer."

Foreign policy is nominally bipartisan, but in this case, should any military
action go poorly, Mr. Clinton will be utterly alone.

There is a good likelihood that it will not go poorly, however. Mr. White, a
longtime scholar on Caribbean issues, suggests that Haiti's citizens will
welcome American liberation, making pacification an uncomplicated task. "We're
going to be surprised, if we don't tie Aristide's hands too tightly, at how
quickly Haiti starts to function," he said.

Perhaps so, with a wing and a prayer. But whatever happens on the ground, Mr.
Clinton's credibility gap on foreign policy seems destined to yawn wide as ever.
"Clinton could say tomorrow that he's decided not to invade Haiti," said another
aide to a senior senator on the Foreign Relations panel, "and you know what? Not
one senator would care."

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Members of the ill-equipped Haitian volunteer army, assembled
hastily under the threat of an American invasion, marching past the presidential
palace in Port-au-Prince last month in a show of force and resolve. (Angel
Franco/The New York Times)(pg.1); The carrier Eisenhower leaving for Haiti last
week. (Associated Press)(pg.1); A supporter of Jean-Bertrand Aristide is found
dead in the Cite Soleil section of Port-au-Prince. (Angel Franco/The New York
Times)(pg.4); Raoul Cedras, left, agreed to cede power, then reneged. The U.S.S.
Harlan County retreated when mobs swarmed the docks, above. Below, the
Eisenhower prepared to depart last week. (Associated Press)(pg.5)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRESENT ARMS;
Presidential Support and the Military Option

BYLINE: By ANNE CRONIN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 158 words


The debate may last for days or weeks and the polls may be overwhelmingly
against military intervention. But once troops are sent abroad in a crisis,
Americans almost invariably rally around their President.

This support is seen even when the use of force fails, as in the Bay of Pigs or
the attempt to free the hostages in Iran. And Presidential ratings improve even
after military actions the public said it opposed, as was the case before the
start of teh ground war in the Persian Gulf.

The one exception in recent years was Vietnam. By the 1970's, major military
assaults were seen as perpetuating the war, not ending it. In the post-Vietnam
era, Americans want quick resolutions in military actions.

The Presidential approval spike doesn't last long if the problem lingers. And
even a great victory can't generate a glow that lasts longer than a few months.
Problems at home are never swept waya by ticker tape.   ANNE CRONIN

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph shows percentage of Americans who approve of the way the
President is handling his job, from Gallup Polls between 1953 and 1994

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word: The Health Care Papers;
Now It Can Be Told: The Task Force Was Bold and Naive and Collegial

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


BILL CLINTON'S 20 months in the White House have been dominated by health care:
the Administration's secretive efforts to write a health plan, followed by the
agony of watching Congress tear it apart.

The urgency, boldness, creativity, political naivete, confusion and frustrations
of the Administration are revealed in rich detail in thousands of pages of
documents made public this month. The Administration fought for 18 months to
keep the records secret. But, rather than defend its position in court, the
White House voluntarily released the documents by turning them over to the
National Archives in College Park, Md.


The documents come from the staff of the President's Task Force on National
Health Care Reform, which included more than 500 experts on health policy,
medicine, insurance and taxes. Many of these experts never expected their
memorandums to become public. The memos that follow show that the policy-making
process was often like a big, free-wheeling college seminar which considered
dozens of policy options without reaching a clear consensus.   ROBERT PEAR

Anticipating Criticism

From a "preliminary work plan" sent on Jan. 26, 1993, by Ira C. Magaziner,
coordinator of the task force, to members of the panel. The White House
correctly anticipated criticism of the President's plan, but did too little to
satisfy or disprove the critics.

The United States is in the midst of a health care crisis.

Health care costs are high and growing rapidly (14 percent of G.D.P. in 1992,
expected to reach at least 18 percent by 2000). Rising health care costs are
placing a tremendous burden on individuals, businesses and governments and are
erasing gains in living standards. . . .

Likely Criticisms

Any comprehensive health reform plan will be controversial. Some criticisms
would apply to any plan; others are specific to the type of managed competition
with global budgets proposed by President Clinton. Criticisms are likely to
center on the following arguments:


1. Cost containment would be ineffective and have perverse results.

*Little evidence exists that managed care networks will produce efficiencies and
thus deliver the cost containment we require; the result will be reliance on
existing perverse behaviors (e.g., risk selection, claims denials) to meet
global ceilings.

*Limiting spending on health care through global budgets will lead to service
rationing, and interfere with quality improvements and consumers' traditional
freedom to spend.


2. Universal coverage would involve redistribution of income and disrupt
satisfactory arrangements for many Americans. The result would be to increase
rather than reduce many Americans' costs of care.

*Community rating of insurance premiums would raise costs for currently insured
populations who are young, male and healthy. . . .

*Requirements to purchase coverage would lower disposable incomes for
individuals who have gone without health insurance.


3. The plan would be cumbersome.

*Consumers would have to deal with new and unfamiliar agencies ("purchasing
cooperatives") and choose from among plans they feel ill-equipped to evaluate.

*Unanticipated barriers to service would be erected when people are sick.

*Unanticipated financial obligations would be imposed on people who wanted to
use providers not included in their plan.


4. Many small businesses may fiercely resist the proposal.

*Even with subsidies for low-wage or newly insuring employers, our plan would
impose premium requirements that small business groups and other critics will
challenge as:

-- A "payroll tax."

-- A threat to current jobs.

-- A threat to small business development and job creation.

In designing our reforms, we must take cognizance of these potential criticisms.
We need to allow states flexibility to use alternative models that may make
sense for them.

Treasury Concerns

From a confidential memorandum by James R. Ukockis, a senior economist at the
Treasury Department, to Alicia H. Munnell, Assistant Treasury Secretary for
Economic Policy, and Marina Weiss, her deputy, on Feb. 23, 1993.

In short, the primary focus is now definitely on budget savings. Total savings
to the economy is only a distant second, and improving total social benefits
from the health sector is not even a consideration. . . .

It appears the worst fears about the short-term cost containment efforts are
coming true. The process is being driven by a narrow focus on the need for
budgetary savings. The imperative for such savings is viewed as so strong it is
used to justify risking major dislocations in the health care system. Those
risks are dismissed with a vague assurance any problems caused will be taken
care of by the phasing in of the (as yet undefined) long-term reform program. .
. .

If, in fact, we go forward with a price control program justified by, and
designed to obtain, maximum budgetary savings, we may well find ourselves in the
position of the general in Vietnam who declared with a straight face, "We had to
destroy the village in order to save it." It was not a successful formula in
Vietnam, and it will not be a successful formula in health care.


From a memorandum by Mr. Ukockis to Ms. Munnell and Ms. Weiss on March 10, 1993.

My reading of the matter is we have a massive case of policy constipation. We
are halfway through the 100-day period, and I am unaware of any policy choices
having been made to narrow the focus of the work. Issues of increasingly
peripheral character are still being targeted for further study, with the output
doing little but postponing and clogging up the policy decision process.

It may be the problem is the presence of too many academics, whose intellectual
interest in the policy issues far exceeds their understanding of the needs of a
successful policy-making process.

'Not Good Policy'

From a memorandum to Mr. Magaziner by Leonard Abramson, chief executive of U.S.
Healthcare, which operates health maintenance organizations, on May 10, 1993.
Mr. Abramson served on one of several "audit teams" that reviewed the task
force's work.

After some additional reflection on the elements of the reform proposal which
our auditing group considered last week, I want to reiterate the following:

The proposal needs a focus and identity that is presently missing. It tries to
straddle the line between free-market competition and governmental bureaucratic
regulation, but does neither one well. This is not good policy, nor will the
merits of such a plan be easy to communicate to the American people or Congress.

The bureaucratic route is not a desirable course. The additional bureaucracies
now envisioned will take time to set up and even more time to function
adequately, will be fraught with the problems that beset any bureaucracy, and
will only add another layer of expense and inefficiency to the health care
system. The health alliance concept, if it is to be successful, should aim for
structuring competition, not stifling it.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A meeting of the health reform task force in Washington, D.C.
(Phil Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

France's James Bond Gets the Scoop on the Hunt for Carlos

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words

DATELINE: PARIS


While French newspapers have been competing for scoops on how the terrorist
known as Carlos was arrested in the Sudan and extradited to France, many readers
have been patiently awaiting the inside story on what really happened.

For that, they will be looking not in the daily press but in fiction,
specifically in "S.A.S.: Hunting Carlos," the latest spy novel by Gerard de
Villiers, whose mastery of political intrigue has made him France's most widely
read author. The book will be published on Wednesday.

Mr. de Villiers has published 115 books recounting the breathless exploits of
Malko Linge, a polyglot Austrian prince who freelances for the Central
Intelligence Agency to pay for the upkeep of his rambling family chateau. Total
sales of Mr. de Villiers's books run into the millions.

While laden with sex and violence, the apparent appeal of the S.A.S. series,
named for Prince Malko's title of Son Altesse Serenissime or His Most Serene
Highness, is their political authenticity. They have a record to prove it.
Whether through prescience or good luck, several S.A.S. books have anticipated
tumultuous events, including the assassinations of President Anwar el-Sadat of
Egypt and Prime Minister Indira Gandhi of India. With Carlos, Mr. de Villiers
was again ahead of the game. Tipped off by friendly spies that the long-dormant
case was beginning to stir, he spent May and June in Berlin researching the
book. And he had almost finished writing it when Carlos, whose real name is
Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, was delivered to French agents in Khartoum, the Sudanese
capital, on Aug. 14.

For the novelist, the arrest of Carlos was just a postscript. His story is about
how East German intelligence files confirmed Carlos's ties to Syria and how they
were used to blackmail President Hafez al-Assad into expelling the terrorist.

"I knew the affair would be resolved one way or another by the end of this
year," Mr. de Villiers said. "I finished my book with Carlos chased from Syria.
After that, I just added one page. But I still don't understand why Syria let
him go without killing him because he knows so much."

In "Hunting Carlos," of course, the facts are bent to give Prince Malko his
customary heroic role, but the author insisted that his basic story line is
true. "I get no pleasure out of inventing," he said in an interview. "I work
with reality. It's what Americans call 'faction.' "

Mr. de Villiers's career as a novelist was born of his life as a journalist,
including a stint as the correspondent for France-Soir in the United States and
assignments covering the Vietnam War. But it with was the death in 1964 of Ian
Fleming -- and, it was thought, of James Bond -- that he turned to writing spy
novels.

"A publisher friend of mine suggested I try to take Fleming's place," the
64-year-old author recalled. "So I crossed three friends -- an Austrian
aristocrat, an Austrian arms dealer and a French intelligence agent -- to create
Malko." Since 1965, four S.A.S. books a year have been published.

But why, he was asked, does Malko work for the C.I.A.? "There have only been two
great intelligence services -- the C.I.A. and the K.G.B. -- in terms of
resources and global reach," he explained. "France has good services, but
they're limited. Then there's the aura of the C.I.A."

So when "S.A.S.: Hunting Carlos" is published, Mr. de Villiers will nonetheless
be in the news once again, interviewed less as the author of a new book and more
for what he knows about Carlos. In the meantime, he can count on most of the
400,000 copies in the first printing selling within weeks.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

President Doesn't Need Approval of Congress for Haiti Action

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


To the Editor:

"Congress Must Vote on Haiti" (editorial, Sept. 13) makes the worthy point that
for President Clinton to go forward with an invasion of Haiti without
Congressional approval could endanger both the mission and his Presidency. But
the contention that such an action would "short-circuit the United States
Constitution" is unfounded and repeats self-serving Congressional claims.


You correctly note that the Constitution does not directly address the wide
range of situations that fall between the exercises of Presidential power as
Commander in Chief and Congressional power to declare war. While it is
attractive to appeal to various special characteristics (exigency, nuclear
threat, "police action") to assign an operation to one or the other category,
these are only political arguments, and they do not have any basis in the law.

The War Powers Resolution of 1973 attempts to require Congressional
authorization for military operations that put United States forces at risk. No
President has ever conceded the validity of this provision, which has mostly
been honored in the breach. Court challenges to military deployments, including
those by members of Congress, have regularly been rejected on the ground that
Congress must first exert its constitutional authority.

While the President is often placed into a situation in which he must decide
whether or not to commit forces overseas, Congress has seldom stepped forward
until the results (and the ratings) of an operation have emerged. As a
half-million United States troops massed in the Persian Gulf over a period of
months, Congress took no action until days before the commencement of Operation
Desert Storm under a firm United Nations ultimatum.

Far from reclaiming some of its authority from Presidential excesses in Vietnam,
Congress through the War Powers Resolution merely gave itself another out -- not
to mention another convenient argument in case things go badly.

While Congressional approval of impending military operations is much to be
desired, it is difficult to obtain. The danger of Congressional second-guessing
has sometimes led to poorly designed operations that risk the lives of United
States forces.
DANIEL P. FINN
Annapolis, Md., Sept. 14, 1994
The writer, a public affairs consultant, was chief counsel of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

SHOWDOWN WITH HAITI: AMERICANS;
Georgia Military Town Expresses Its Doubts

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 12;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words

DATELINE: MARIETTA, Ga., Sept. 17


If and when the shooting starts in Haiti, they will support the troops as they
always have.

But at the shops and other businesses down the road from Dobbins Air Reserve
Base in this conservative Atlanta suburb, where support for the military runs as
solid as a vein of iron ore, the voices of a divided, edgy era are a lot louder
than the sounds of traditional flag-and-country patriotism.

"I don't know why we should be risking American lives to take care of someone
else's problems," said Gay Earls, the 28-year-old buyer for her family's Hodge
Army-Navy Store. Fighter jets roared overhead from Dobbins, which bills itself
as the busiest reserve base in the world and the home to more than 100 military
aircraft. "You have a President who's a draft dodger, and he's ordering others
to go and fight? It just doesn't seem right."

There are some voices of support for President Clinton and for the invasion of
Haiti. In random interviews, blacks in particular were more likely than not to
support military action. But even supporters of the President tend to sound like
tryouts for "The McLaughlin Group," advancing their own pet theories and
analyses rather than simple out-and-out backing.

"It's a political thing," said Elgin Doss, 22, owner of It's a Man's World, a
barbershop where black customers watch hip-hop videos on the two color
television sets hanging from the ceiling. "They don't give a damn about the
Haitians. They didn't care about Aristide until he got help from the black
leaders in the United States. But the Democrats need the black vote. Otherwise,
they'd never help a third-world country like Haiti."

Doubts also predominate down South Cobb Parkway at the Marietta Lanes, where the
crowd is mostly white. Glo Ruiz, Linda McLean and Alberta Binns, who were
watching their children bowl, expressed feelings more mixed than passionate. But
none supported a Haiti invasion, which they saw as lacking a national interest
and likely to be more messy and protracted than the President contends.

More passionate is Ruth Graham, a retired teacher, who saw her husband off to
World War II and a son to Vietnam and who does not want to see anyone else's
children fighting in Haiti. She is afraid that Mr. Clinton finds himself on the
brink of a war no one wants and cannot step back because he does not want once
again to be seen as weak, vacillating or overly conciliatory.

"Someone's son gets sent to war just to make a point for himself?" she said.
"Forget it. We elect people to solve problems like this, not to wait until the
last minute and send boys to fight because they don't know what else to do."

Indeed, much of the reservation about the war fuses with distrust of Mr.
Clinton, whose drooping popularity is sagging lowest in the South. At Hodge's,
the best-selling item is a $3 bill labeled a "queer reserve note," with Mr.
Clinton's picture on the front and, on the back, the words "In Bill We Trust.
NOT!"

"If it was Bush who asked us to invade Haiti, I'd be for it," Jim Curtis, a
34-year-old technical sergeant stationed at Dobbins, said as he browsed among
the ammunition at Hodge's. "But if a man who hired Les Aspin to lead the armed
forces, a man who's willing to put men in a position where their lives are in
danger, a man who does not support the military, orders us, I can't trust
Clinton on this. I've got things like Whitewater and Troopergate in the back of
my head."

Yet an invasion does find some support.

"We should invade, because it's the responsibility of the U.S. to help all
countries that are struggling," said Wayne Smith, a 22-year-old employee at
Hodge's.

Clarence Williamson, who had driven over from Anniston, Ala., for the day,
thought the intervention could be quick and successful.  "Those people aren't
crazy," he said. "I can't see them resisting the American troops. If a trooper
tells you you're speeding, you're speeding. Anything we can do there will be an
improvement."

Anthony Williams, a 29-year-old black veteran, ate some barbecue at a
street-corner snack shop as he said: "The Persian Gulf, a war for oil, I don't
know about that. But this is a case where someone has to do something for those
people."

Others responded with old-fashioned military machismo.

"I think we should go to Haiti, but go in and do the right job, not fool
around," said Kert Finkenbinder, 30, a wrecker driver who was trying out a saber
at Hodge's. "Make 'em the 52d state," he said. Asked what the 51st state was, he
replied, "Puerto Rico."


LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 22, 1994, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, two picture captions on Sunday with an article
about Americans' opinions on plans for a United States military invasion of
Haiti were reversed in some copies. Gay Earls was shown in the top photo and Glo
Ruiz in the bottom one.


GRAPHIC: Photo: At a bowling alley in Marietta, Ga., yesterday, Glo Ruiz voiced
ambivalence about an invasion; "I don't know why we should be risking American
lives," said Gay Earls, who assailed the President. (Photographs by Ken Hawkins
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Trials of William Kunstler

BYLINE: By Jeffrey Rosen;   Jeffrey Rosen is the legal affairs editor of The New
Republic. He is writing a book about the Supreme Court and constitutional
politics.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words



MY LIFE AS A RADICAL LAWYER
By William M. Kunstler with Sheila Isenberg.
Illustrated. 414 pp. New York:
Birch Lane Press/
Carol Publishing Group. $22.50.

IN an age when liberals and conservatives have largely weaned themselves of the
hope that courts will serve as instruments of social change, William M. Kunstler
continues to insist that law should be inseparable from politics. From 1969,
when he flamboyantly defended the Chicago Seven, accused of conspiring to riot
at the Democratic National Convention, to 1994, when he argues that "black rage"
drove Colin Ferguson to murder six passengers on the Long Island Rail Road, Mr.
Kunstler has represented a series of highly unpopular clients by questioning the
integrity of the American legal system itself. At the age of 75, he has dictated
his memoirs, "My Life as a Radical Lawyer," in which he calls himself, without
apologies or false modesty, a defense attorney for the 60's generation.

It is hard not to be impressed by Mr. Kunstler's knack for making cameo
appearances in some of the most politically combustible cases of the last 30
years. He defended the Freedom Riders in the 1960's, and he says that he was on
his way to the airport to represent Lee Harvey Oswald when Oswald was
assassinated by Jack Ruby. Mr. Kunstler then took up Ruby's case on appeal. He
was a special trial counsel to Martin Luther King Jr., and after evolving from a
liberal to a self-styled radical, he defended a number of Black Panthers charged
with violent crimes, as well as Stokely Carmichael and H. Rap Brown. More
recently he has defended Islamic revolutionaries like El Sayyid A. Nosair,
acquitted in 1991 of the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane, and three of the suspects
in the World Trade Center bombing (Mr. Kunstler has since been disqualified from
the bombing case for conflict of interest). He argued both flag-burning cases
before the Supreme Court and defended Yusef Salaam, who was convicted of rape in
the Central Park jogger case.

All of these cases, according to Mr. Kunstler, are political, but his definition
of a political case turns out to be exceptionally broad: "Any time a black
person is charged with a crime against a white law enforcement officer, I
consider it political." The principle that has guided Mr. Kunstler's choice of
clients, in other words, is not so much radicalism as racialism. And it is only
a small step from his premise -- that "cases in which defendants are black are
political" -- to his unsettling conclusion that all violent crimes committed by
black defendants are inherently political crimes.

Mr. Kunstler makes no attempt to defend this theory in any detail: he simply
asserts that "black rage," in the case of Colin Ferguson (who has yet to go to
trial), "was a mental condition no different from the battered-wife syndrome,
post-traumatic stress disorder or the child-abuse-accommodation syndrome in
that, in conjunction with mental illness, it gave rise to terrible acts of
violence." The fact that the law has traditionally limited defenses of
mitigation to immediate provocation suffered by individuals, rather than chronic
oppression suffered by groups, does not interest Mr. Kunstler. But even as a
racialist, Mr. Kunstler is hardly consistent. In 1991, for example, he helped to
persuade an appellate court to retry two former Black Panthers who had been
convicted of killing two policemen in New York City. The prosecution, he argued
successfully, had relied on racial stereotypes in excluding blacks from the
jury. Several pages later, Mr. Kunstler boasts that he relies on racial
stereotypes in selecting his own juries.

Perhaps one misses the point of Mr. Kunstler's career by trying to discern a
coherent philosophy. For his book suggests that he sees himself more as a legal
performance artist, or a professional controversialist, than a civil rights
lawyer in the conventional sense. During the Chicago Seven trial he refined what
he calls the "political-legal defense" that he has continued to practice through
his career. Its salient features include a tendency to wing it in the courtroom
(Mr. Kunstler reveals that he "never found the time to study the Chicago case"
before the trial began), a willingness to risk contempt charges by theatrically
attacking the impartiality of prosecutors and judges ("Your Honor . . . I think
what you have just said is about the most outrageous statement I have ever heard
from a bench"), and a weakness for burlesque (on the witness stand in Chicago,
Allen Ginsberg chanted "Om" for the defense).

Whether Mr. Kunstler has, on balance, helped or hurt his clients by his
performances is hard to say. But he has clearly been stung by what he calls "the
caricature of me which persisted for many years, that I was all bluster and not
lawyerlike." And he repeatedly complains about colleagues who refused to trust
him with important briefs or arguments because they considered him more of a
showman than a rigorous advocate.

Mr. Kunstler's book is a loosely organized oral history of some of the most
provocative trials of the last three decades, interspersed with gossip about his
friends and enemies. At its best, it can be entertaining, but the challenge for
a reader is to separate fact from fiction. In a remarkable disclaimer, Mr.
Kunstler's collaborator, Sheila Isenberg, a journalist, confesses that "he
sometimes adheres to a truth that is deeper than a factual one . . . if it
serves a political purpose to gloss over or fudge a little." She adds that
"purists are welcome to pick on the factual errors in these pages."

Some of the factual errors seem to be inadvertent. Mr. Kunstler remembers a
Supreme Court oral argument, for example, in which "Justice Antonin Scalia went
into a long discussion of the music he enjoyed as a Princeton student." But
Justice Scalia never attended Princeton. The transcripts of the Chicago Seven
trial also reveal that Mr. Kunstler's quotations are not always precisely
recalled.

Some of the liberties Mr. Kunstler takes with the facts, however, are far less
benign. In an especially reckless passage, he speculates that in 1972, William
Rehnquist, then an Associate Justice, leaked a Supreme Court decision about
wiretapping to President Richard Nixon days before it was officially released,
leading Nixon to order the Watergate break-in to remove wiretaps that he knew
would no longer be protected. Mr. Kunstler presents no evidence at all for this
wild conspiracy, or for other, similarly implausible notions, like his theory
that Meir Kahane was killed by a disgruntled follower to cover up a financial
scandal. At several points in the book, in fact, he concedes that he is willing
to fabricate in the service of his ideological agenda -- as he did at the Attica
prison riots in 1971, when he impulsively, and falsely, told the prisoners that
they would be given amnesty by North Vietnam. The cumulative effect of Mr.
Kunstler's cavalier attitude toward facts and evidence is to make him an
unreliable narrator.

Mr. Kunstler is refreshingly candid about his hunger for publicity. "You always
want to be in the media, no matter what gets you there," he confesses. And
compared to the current generation of self-promoting celebrity advocates, at
least he has never been mercenary. He has devoted dark and lonely hours, many of
them without pay, to the most difficult and unpopular cases. But there is
something sad and emblematic about his evolution from the charismatic civil
libertarian of the Lyndon Johnson era to the racial provocateur of today. His
career is a metaphor for the polarization of racial politics in the United
States over the last 30 years. And despite Mr. Kunstler's hyperbole ("Our
society is always racist," he declares), the fact that his antics have been
given a respectful hearing in courtrooms and newspapers for so many years is a
tribute to the patience of the legal system he assails.

NAME: William M. Kunstler

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William M. Kunstler. (EDWARD KEATING/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Heart Like a Coiled Serpent

BYLINE: By Ann Hulbert;   Ann Hulbert is a senior editor at The New Republic and
the author of "The Interior Castle: The Art and Life of Jean Stafford."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2038 words



SHELTER
By Jayne Anne Phillips.
279 pp. Boston:
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.

JAYNE ANNE PHILLIPS, fixated on the family and yet also drawn to the open road,
has made homesickness her literary specialty. It is a distinctively American
theme, not surprising in a nation of immigrants always on the move. In Ms.
Phillips's imagination, as in plenty of her predecessors', a sense of place is
inseparable from a feeling of dislocation. Each haunts the other, as she knows
well, for she is an unusual hybrid, a rooted regional writer as well as a
rootless minimalist. Ms. Phillips began with impressionistic scenes of American
anomie and then embarked on thickly drawn portraiture of small-town Appalachia.
Without losing her balance, she has managed in both to be a notably
unsentimental guide to the anxiety of exile from the past, from parents, from
American promise. Now, in her new novel, "Shelter," she reaches further,
injecting a fundamentalist fervor into the vision of paradise lost.

Ms. Phillips's career to this point can be neatly mapped. The unsettling
minimalist made her mark with short stories. Her fragmented, barely plotted
fiction circulated in small press editions and surfaced to much acclaim in
"Black Tickets" (1979) and "Fast Lanes" (1987). Her subject in the collections,
as she has put it, is "displacement, deracination and movement -- and the kind
of distortions that happen when this movement is going on." The most memorable
characters are not just drifting but truly warped: a serial killer, a teen-age
prostitute who seduces virgin boys, a girl whose newborn child -- sired by her
brother -- is mangled by dogs. The grotesquerie can become merely mannered, but
at her best Ms. Phillips conveys an eerie blend of anger and yearning. And the
spareness of her style, appropriate to the seething mood, is not fashionably
deadpan but poetically condensed.

Ms. Phillips the regionalist emerged full-blown in her fledgling effort as a
novelist. "Machine Dreams" (1984) is set in a town called Bellington, in West
Virginia, and spans more than four decades and three generations of a local
family. Here Ms. Phillips the explorer of marginal terrain has been supplanted
by a more conventional chronicler of domesticity in mainstream America. A
transparent, introspective prose matches a mellower tone of sorrowful rumination
on American loss.

A saga meant to speak to late-century concerns, "Machine Dreams" winds down in
the early 1970's, bearing the weight of too much timely significance. Ms.
Phillips ends with the maladies of the day: divorce for the parents, Vietnam for
the son and disaffection and dread for the main character, the daughter. But
here, too, she summons up energy to resist mere voguish enervation. Just as the
drifters in her stories can have a demonic drive, so the disillusioned
protagonist in "Machine Dreams" shows a kind of tenacious innocence. "If I hated
my government, shouldn't I go and live in some other country?" the daughter asks
herself near the end, only to be caught up short by the ambivalent claims of
nostalgia. "But my parents are my country, my divided country," she realizes,
and though she wants distance from it, she also needs to emphasize the
impossibility of escape: "I'd never leave my country. I never will."

"Shelter," Ms. Phillips's second novel, challenges just such a declaration of
family loyalty. In the process, it muddies the boundaries that have defined the
divided country of Ms. Phillips's fiction. Here her discursive regionalism and
her disorienting symbolism blend in a spiritually charged parable of innocence
betrayed. The novel is set in a girls' summer camp on a remote mountainside in
backwoods Appalachia. Children are in retreat here from their parents' country
and they are plunged into a wilderness adventure.

The place itself was plainly Ms. Phillips's initial inspiration; the steamy West
Virginia forest has such intensity that the book's pages almost seem limp and
dappled. In this ominous garden, she carefully plots a fall, a confrontation
with evil and with the desolation of family estrangement. But along the way to
her characters' disenchantment, Ms. Phillips loses some faith in her own footing
on the overripe and shifting ground.

Foreboding is the mood from the start, as a group of confused daughters is
brought into proximity with crazed drifters in the hallucinatory heat of July
1963 at Camp Shelter. This novel has in abundance what Ms. Phillips's
blunt-edged stories and "Machine Dreams," with its ambling pace, barely noticed
they were missing: suspense. Once again she works by juxtaposition, narrating
her story through alternating vignettes told from the perspective of four main
characters -- two sisters, an unkempt intruder and a barefoot local boy. But
instead of evoking a sweep of time, she has radically compressed the action. The
wilderness crisis takes place over a few days, with references to the
characters' small-town pasts fitted into the unfolding drama. And this time the
collage of voices and visions isn't the purposely scrappy jumble of "Machine
Dreams." Ms. Phillips intends her four perspectives to be symmetrically played
off against one another, the symbolic significances to be anything but subtle.

The novel's aura of mystery is centered on 15-year-old Lenny Swenson, who is in
an adolescent daze in her tent high up on the hill, and Parson, a
spirit-obsessed ex-convict new to the area, who is lurking in a shack down by
Turtle Hole. Both are on quests, and Ms. Phillips plants clues that they are
fated to come together. Lenny has lost any secure connection to the one parent
she felt close to, her father. Prodded by her restless friend, Cap, she is ready
to explore feelings and thoughts, mostly sexually charged, that confuse her.

Parson is hot on the trail of a fellow inmate named Carmody, a true menace who
has returned home to the town of Shelter. But that specific mission is only part
of a great spiritual ordeal that consumes this snake-handling fundamentalist.
Parson is struggling with evil, which appears to him in very palpable form:
"That face of the Devil pulled and sucked at Parson, weeping. Wasn't the Devil a
fallen child, too hungry to eat, starving, ravenous, alone so long he didn't
remember who'd first cast him out, a boy child, abandoned, lost?" Ms. Phillips
is very good at keeping the reader guessing about whether Parson will prove
malevolent or beneficent. She is also very good at instilling a dread certainty
that there will be some violent resolution of the sexual and spiritual mysteries
that haunt him and Lenny.

Ms. Phillips's two other presiding figures are Alma, Lenny's younger sister, and
8-year-old Buddy, the stepson of Parson's nemesis, Carmody. Through them she
introduces a realm of awful clarity. These children aren't seekers; they have
already made their discoveries of evil and vulnerability, much too soon and too
vividly. The terms of their knowledge are complementary: Buddy has a freakish
natural sagacity, Alma a precocious psychological acuity, and neither has much
energy left over for the symbolically loaded visions of Lenny and Parson. In
Buddy, a nearly feral boy who scampers in and around the camp, Ms. Phillips has
successfully created a mutant version of one of William Golding's marooned boys
in "Lord of the Flies." Unlike them, Buddy has found peace in the woods and is
devastated by the return of an adult. His idyll has been destroyed by his
stepfather, back from prison, who sexually abuses him and threatens to kidnap
him. Buddy knows what he needs is physical salvation.

ALMA, a sensitive and bookish preadolescent, has been mistreated too, though her
violation has been verbal. She has been her mother's confidante throughout her
adulterous affair with the father of Alma's best friend, which ended with his
suicide. Alma, burdened by her awareness of betrayal and her sense of
complicity, can't help thinking endlessly (and often a little obviously) about
the loss of innocence. But she can't say anything out loud, not to her best
friend, who has been sent to camp with her, and not to Lenny, who has always
been estranged from their mother. Alma knows what she needs is a great
unburdening. She "wanted a series of screams that opened out until the earth
shook."

In the serpent-infested wild, Ms. Phillips has laid the ground for a cathartic
convergence of physical, Freudian and fanatical visions of corruption. And in a
number of scenes, she manages marvels of cross-cutting. Down by Turtle Hole in
the hot dense woods, Lenny's first fated meeting with Parson, who bears a coiled
blacksnake in his arms, is like a riddling dream in which different forms and
meanings melt into one another. Parson's surreal experience of the event conveys
both a soul yearning after grace and a frightening psyche damaged by guilt.
Lenny, too, succumbs to a mesmerized state that blends the clinical and the
spiritual. As she approaches Parson's shack, she's suddenly on the verge of
recovering a traumatic early memory of her father, and yet she's also
transported in Parson's possessed presence. Throughout the encounter Ms.
Phillips keeps a horrifying question open: Is a murder, or a rape, taking place?

Suspense is sustained through the narrative, which climaxes in another
symbolically laden encounter at Turtle Hole. But as "Shelter" proceeds, the
characters and the overarching conception prove less gripping than the action.
In Ms. Phillips's two "uncivilized" figures, the sensibility honed in "Black
Tickets" shows itself under impressive control: in their scenes, Parson and
Buddy often manage to strike the right uncanny balance of the human and the
alien. The girls, though, lack comparable power. Lenny's supposed charisma is
elusive, and Alma, with all her sympathetic, therapeutic insight, can seem too
much like a grown-up's mouthpiece.

More important, the psychosexual outline and details of the sisters' experiences
of lost innocence begin to seem schematic, and to dominate. At the inception of
"Shelter," Ms. Phillips has said, she wondered "whether evil really exists." By
the end, the alternative view seems to prevail: "It is just a function of
damage," and a particularly trendy and untranscendent form of sexual damage at
that. Parson's early vision of the Devil as a victimized child looks, in
retrospect, like an obvious portent of the novel's guiding notion of evil: child
abuse, the malady of the moment, is the key to all corruption.

To be sure, Ms. Phillips plays skillfully with the rich metaphoric implications
of violated children -- the religious overtones of creatures being cast out, the
mythic dimensions of generational rivalry and decay. But she also insists
repeatedly on the most literal meaning of violation: Carmody and Parson have
been
molested in their youth, Buddy suffers before our eyes, and Lenny's hidden
memory seems an unmistakably incestuous one. Ms. Phillips's diagnosis of
everyone's predicament seems the same, yet no less sensational for that. The
recurrent horror threatens to become almost a gruesome gimmick as the novel
proceeds, and it tempts a sentimental denouement. "Recovery," toward which Ms.
Phillips wants at least to point, all too easily becomes a therapeutic nostrum,
especially when the crisis least invites anything so reassuring as a "cure." She
invokes freighted symbols of spiritual turmoil, but by the close of "Shelter,"
she herself is struggling hard to surmount facile nostalgia for a romantic,
protected past.

Ever an astute chronicler of American preoccupations, Ms. Phillips has again put
her finger on the collective (and racing) pulse. Much as the incest taboo has
served as a marker of social health, now an incest totem has emerged as a
symptom of communal decay. The specter of child abuse by parents has moved from
the realm of Freudian fantasy to center-stage reality. Evidently the swing to
alarmist empiricism has proved helpful for many "survivors." Not surprisingly,
such an insistently unmetaphorical vision of homesickness is likely to be less
fruitful for writers -- especially for a writer like Jayne Anne Phillips, who
relies on a daring, divided imagination.

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 19, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Haiti: Much Ado About Something

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


President Clinton's expressed intention to use force in deposing the junta in
Haiti -- despite the long-count ultimatum -- was good for the cause of freedom
in the world.

The export of democracy was not the primary reason for his brinkmanship. Mr.
Clinton expressed his central motivation as "to secure our borders," a way to
avoid saying "to stop the flow of dirt-poor, often sick, mostly uneducated and
definitely persecuted black people into the U.S."

Because we do not want Haitian refugees here, we threatened the use of force to
make it better for them there. That ignoble but practical purpose is the hard
truth of the matter, driving the intervention threat by a too-tortured President
who says force is "almost always not necessary."

No national security argument could be made; this is not Panama or the Persian
Gulf, choke points of global commerce. Nor is it Grenada, where American lives
may have been in danger.

Tony Lake, the national security adviser, ("The Unidentified Man" to caption
writers) falls back on the argument that American credibility demands making
good on our threats. True -- a President must never draw a gun without being
ready to pull the trigger -- but it looks bad to have to risk lives to overcome
an image of softness.

Nor could consistency be claimed. We do not invade Mexico to stop the flow of
illegals; we do not threaten force in Cuba to turn back refugees -- on the
contrary, we appease Castro with a deal to take in 25,000 a year. How then to
justify the threat in Haiti?

Because it had a good chance of working. Because force would not have caused too
great a loss of life. Because failure of democracy-export half a world away in
Somalia does not preordain failure in the Caribbean.

Letting Haitians drown or idle in camps is not an option. It won't cost more to
feed them in Haiti than it will to feed them in Florida.

I focus on this practicality because reminders of our responsibility to promote
freedom don't sell these days, and because too many non-isolationist
conservatives fail to back the basic idea of intervention to insure local human
rights -- especially when it's doable and nearby.

The Haiti experience drives two points home:

1. America needs a covert capability and not just a C.I.A. army of
eavesdroppers. Somewhere between the extremes of wringing our hands helplessly
and dispatching almost 20,000 troops in vast, cumbrous, publicized array, we
should be able to organize and support a small revolution to knock over or buy
out would-be despots. With no assassinations and plenty of Congressional
oversight, we should build a C.I.A. Department of Clean Tricks.

2. The hype about multilateral force is getting out of hand. With his ludicrous
enlistment of cooks and bottle washers from every country on our foreign-aid
list, Mr. Clinton fooled nobody but himself about this being an international
operation. To pretend it is not our show to solve our refugee problem invites
smirks around the world.

Worse, he put the Presidency in the impossible position of asking the U.N. for
permission to invade without asking the Congress for permission to wage war.

I think the President has a constitutional power to use force swiftly in limited
situations even when no war fever has been built up to satisfy Vietnam-wary
Pentagonians.

But by making an international case out of the Haitian junta's takeover; by
stretching the squishy ultimatums over a year; by his own body language of
apology and agonized reluctance in making his case to Americans, Mr. Clinton
gave up some of his own Presidential war power to Congress while constricting
the United States' freedom of action in hemispheric affairs.

The enforcement of the first stirring of democracy in Haiti is worthwhile on a
practical level, and noble on the level occupied by Woodrow Wilson. It is not
"much ado about nothing" because majority rule is not nothing.

But next time democracy is challenged nearby, let's intervene with less ado and
more decisiveness.

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clarence Long, 85, Ex-Representative

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 214 words

DATELINE: COCKEYSVILLE, Md., Sept. 19


Clarence D. Long, a Democrat who represented a suburban Baltimore district in
Congress for 22 years, died after a lengthy illness. He was 85.

Mr. Long, who was elected to the House in 1962, died on Sunday at a nursing
home. The nature of his illness was not disclosed.

In his 11 terms, he became chairman of the foreign appropriations subcommittee
of the House Appropriations Committee. He lost his seat in 1984 to Helen Delich
Bentley.

"My Towson office to this day receives calls from constituents who remind us
that Congressman Long helped them with a Social Security problem, or fixed a
pothole on their street," Mrs. Bentley said today.

He was proud of his opposition to the Vietnam War and to committing American
troops to El Salvador, said his former chief of staff, Tim Kernan.

But Democratic leaders said he was most remembered for his openness to voters.

"He was a legend in terms of his constituent service," said the Maryland
Democratic Party chairwoman, Vera Hall. "No matter where you went in the
district, people talked about his availability to them and his outreach."

Mr. Long is survived by his wife, Patricia; a son and daughter from his first
marriage; seven grandchildren, and four step-grandchildren. His first wife,
Susanna Long, died in 1985.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Unlikely Home for Ginsberg's Archive

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 19


Allen Ginsberg went to Columbia University and still lives in New York. On its
streets, and on the streets of San Francisco and Berkeley and Paris, he wrote
many of his most famous poems, filled with gritty city imagery. But in the
latest twist in his extraordinary life, Mr. Ginsberg's personal archives --
journals, tapes, letters, poems in progress, newspaper and beard clippings, even
dried-up pieces of hallucinogenic vines and a pair of old tennis shoes -- will
land at a place the Beats bypassed, a place so exurban it is called "the farm":
balmy, palmy Stanford University.

For much of his 68 years, Mr. Ginsberg has been a pack rat. He began keeping a
journal when he was 12, and, as he came to believe his life embodied the
struggle for sexual, social and political liberation in the 1950's and 60's, he
was soon saving everything. The compulsive collecting took on new urgency in the
Vietnam era as he saw counterrevolution and oppression approaching.

Ultimately he amassed 300,000 items. Some he kept in his East Village apartment
in New York, others in lockers, but most sat for the last 25 years in Butler
Library at Columbia. But last year, when Mr. Ginsberg put the materials on the
market, his alma mater did not bid. Worse, the air conditioning in its library
broke down, threatening the hundreds of tapes he had amassed: readings,
telephone chats with William S. Burroughs, jam sessions with Bob Dylan. When
Stanford made its offer, for around $1 million, Mr. Ginsberg grabbed it.

At first blush, Stanford's squeaky-clean, country club-like Palo Alto campus is
the oddest of Ginsberg repositories. When Mr. Ginsberg and Beat buddies like Mr.
Burroughs, Jack Kerouac and Lawrence Ferlinghetti became fixtures at many major
American colleges in the late 1950's, Stanford never came calling.

"Stanford was dominated by a very conservative, formalist poetry that very much
rebelled against the kind of ecstatic, apocalyptic, William Carlos
Williams-based naturalistic poetry we wrote," Mr. Ginsberg said last week over
fried dumplings and shrimp with lobster sauce in San Francisco's Chinatown, just
up the street from City Lights Books, publisher of his early miniature books
with their famous black-and-white covers. "I gave readings for 10 years or so,
at every university up and down the coast, and the one place that never invited
me was Stanford."

In some ways, not much has changed. "If he came down tomorrow, nine-tenths of
the English department wouldn't turn out for him," said Marjorie Perloff, an
English professor at Stanford who, with Profs. Diane Middlebrook and Gilbert
Sorrentino, spurred on the purchase.

But the Stanford library has recently begun collecting the papers of other
avant-garde figures, including the poets Denise Levertov and Robert Creeley, and
it considers Mr. Ginsberg even more important -- and durable.

"Allen Ginsberg is one of the most important figures in postwar culture,
literature and politics," said Tony Angiletta, the director of library
collections for Stanford, who negotiated the deal with Mr. Ginsberg's agent,
Andrew Wylie of New York. The papers, appraised in 1985 at $1.2 million, went
for a bit less.

"It was tough business, but we think we did quite well," Mr. Angiletta said. Mr.
Ginsberg agreed. "They're getting it at bargain-basement rates," he said. What
with cataloguing and secretarial costs over the last several years, he said he
was losing money on the deal and complained that he had not cleared enough to
buy a new apartment or loft in the East Village, complete with elevator, for
himself and his 88-year-old stepmother.

He would have been happier, Mr. Ginsberg confessed, had the papers ended up in
New York, if not at Columbia, then in the Berg Collection of the New York Public
Library, which also passed on the purchase. But his first priority, he said, was
to find a place that would take loving care of his collection. That it was
Stanford, home of the conservative Hoover Institution, was actually a plus.

"It's fine by me, better maybe that they be in a bastion of conservatism," he
said. "It will have a kind of osmotic influence. And people from the Hoover
Institution can go through my files on the C.I.A.'s involvement with opium
trafficking in Indochina." Mr. Ginsberg said he was not bothered by the
unwillingness of Columbia -- which already owns an original typescript of "Howl"
and assorted other Ginsberg papers -- to buy the rest. "It did about 10 years
ago when I offered it to them, but that lasted about two days," he said.

Mr. Ginsberg's early journals contain passages about his mother's mental illness
and his growing awareness of his homosexuality. His correspondence includes
letters of advice from Williams, Kenneth Rexroth ("With persistence and postage
anybody can get published, and you're pretty good") and Marianne Moore. "Patient
or impatient repudiating of life just repudiates itself," she chided him in
1952. "What can be exciting to others is one's struggle with what is too hard."

There is mail from an admiring high school student named Abbie Hoffman, the
sneakers Mr. Ginsberg was wearing when he was kicked out of Czechoslovakia in
1965, and backstage passes from Mr. Dylan's 1975 Rolling Thunder Revue tour. The
Ginsberg papers, which are to begin arriving at Stanford later this month, also
include report cards from East Side High School in Paterson, N.J., electric
bills and restaurant receipts, many with Mr. Ginsberg's annotations.

"Allen always wrote on everything, so it would be 'I had lunch with Bob Dylan
and we had rice and beans,' " said Bill Morgan, an archivist in New York who has
spent the last 15 years cataloging the collection and lamented that no matter
how hard he worked, he was always 15 years behind.

Mr. Ginsberg, who suffers from diabetes and a heart ailment, appeared frail and
tired during his visit here, a far cry from his formerly burly, bushy-bearded
self. His fatigue also stemmed, no doubt, from a whirlwind of readings,
interviews and signings coinciding with the recent release of "Holy Soul Jelly
Roll," a set of four compact disks of poems and songs, including early readings
of "Howl" and "Kaddish."

The visit was his second here in recent months; in June he chanted an anti-war
poem called "Hum Bom" from the pitcher's mound at Candlestick Park. It was one
of many signs that the Beats have become disconcertingly mainstream in San
Francisco; a local map now shows Via Ferlinghetti and Jack Kerouac Alley. "Don
your beret and dark glasses -- Beat legend Allen Ginsberg is coming to Barnes &
Noble," stated an advertisement in The San Francisco Bay Guardian for a book
signing last week in Berkeley.

That signing attracted a throng of admirers -- and a few old-timers, Mr.
Ginsberg noted, using the Yiddish phrase for fuddy-duddies -- but mostly the
latest crop of teen-agers and college students to whom his protest poems speak.
He read two of them -- "A Supermarket in California" and "Death to van Gogh's
Ear!" -- and then they lined up for autographs, snaking through the store past
college-admissions and science fiction/fantasy sections and into poetry,
carrying copies of "Kaddish," "Hydrogen Jukebox" and "The Portable Beat Reader."

Mr. Ginsberg signed them all, as well as the advertisement he had done recently
for the Gap clothing stores. "Allen Ginsberg wore khakis," it stated. (And he
still does.) Only one autograph per customer, though, and he would not sign the
Bible or "Lady Chatterley's Lover." On each he also wrote "AH," the mantra given
to him by his principal Tibetan teacher, Chogyam Trungpa, Rinpoche. Some
students brought him their poems or term papers. Another swore to him she had
just seen the reincarnation of Neal Cassady, Mr. Ginsberg's muse, who died in
1968.

To Mr. Ginsberg, his continuing appeal is simple. "I think for the younger
generation there is a sense of disenfranchisement, or, as they call it nowadays,
diminishing expectations," he said afterward. "There's a kind of spiritual
hunger. In a sense, the nation is Beat."

NAME: Allen Ginsberg

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Allen Ginsberg as he appeared in the late 1960's. (Frec
McDarrah/Rhino Word Beat)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 20, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO HAITI;
Marines See Tough Task

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 396 words

DATELINE: ABOARD THE U.S.S. WASP, off Northern Haiti, Sept. 19


Marine commanders warned that the last-minute agreement to avert an American
invasion of Haiti would put more pressure on American troops to distinguish
between friend and foe as they went ashore to maintain civil order.

About 1,900 marines on this and two other ships were four hours from staging an
airborne and amphibious assault on Cap Haitien, Haiti's second-largest city, on
the country's northern coast when Washington called it off on Sunday. The
marines practiced mock invasions for six weeks, so they are now are frustrated
while awaiting new orders.

If they do go ashore, perhaps as early as Tuesday, commanders said they would
have to balance helping city residents with guarding against sniper attacks,
ambushes and possible mob violence. Early signs today indicated that security
forces in Cap Haitien were honoring the 11th-hour deal.

"This will be a greater challenge," said Capt. Rich Diddams, 32, the commander
of E Company, Second Marine Battalion, whose 140-man unit will now perform more
of a peacekeeping role than a combat mission.

"This will require a higher state of discipline on the part of the marines," the
captain said. "Let's hope our Government knows what it's doing."

The marines here had not expected much initial opposition from the 700 to 800
Haitian troops, police officers and militiamen in Cap Haitien, a port city of
65,000. Even with the agreement, the military faces hurdles.

"We'll still have a difficult time recognizing who the good, the bad and the
ugly are," said Col. Tom Jones, commander of the Marine air-ground task force.

Army and Marine intelligence analysts have compiled lists of politicians and
militia and police leaders in Cap Haitien who could help or threaten United
States troops. The marines will rely on about 35 Creole-speaking translators to
deal with local residents. "We want to win the hearts and minds of the folks,"
said Colonel Jones, a veteran of the wars in Vietnam and the Persian Gulf.

One task for the coalition force is to provide basic civil order in towns across
Haiti, but several marines said their orders were not to interfere in attacks by
Haitians on other Haitians unless they directly threatened American troops.

"I don't care what they do to themselves as long as they leave my men alone,"
said Sgt. Gus Sturrock, a squad leader with F Company, Second Battalion.

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Silent March' on Guns Talks Loudly: 40,000 Pairs of Shoes, and All Empty

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 20


There were baseball spikes. There were babies' first white walkers. There were
businessmen's black leather wing tips and women's formal high-heel pumps.

The shoes sat empty today, row on row, more than 40,000 pairs arranged around
the Reflecting Pool at the base of the Capitol, mute reminders of the tens of
thousands of Americans killed every year by guns.

They were part of a "silent march," a demonstration whose organizers, promoting
stronger gun control, hope to act as a counterweight to the National Rifle
Association.

"I am angry, I will not be silenced, and I will not go away," said Carol Ann
Taylor, whose 19-year-old son, Willie, was killed in Los Angeles last year when
two men fired 34 shots from AK-47 assault rifles into a crowd of youths.

Ms. Taylor, who had brought Willie's favorite yellow suede shoes, held them up
before a gathering of perhaps a thousand people. "Here are Willie's shoes," she
said, her voice breaking. "They are empty. We should have the right as human
beings not to be killed by guns."

Some of the shoes, like Willie's, were those of murder victims. Others belonged
to participants who simply wanted to make a statement against gun-related
violence.

The idea of using shoes to make real the human toll wrought by gunfire
originated with a small group from New York City led by Katina Mantis Johnstone.
Mrs. Johnstone's husband, David, an editor with Macmillan, was shot to death by
three youths in San Francisco in 1992 while walking back to his hotel through
the fashionable Nob Hill section.

Since her husband's killing, Mrs. Johnstone says, she has tried to understand
why Americans do not react more strongly to the large number of people killed by
guns. In 1991, the last year for which statistics are available, 38,317 people
in the United States died by gunfire in murders, suicides or accidents,
according to the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in Atlanta.
By comparison, it took more than a decade for 58,000 American soldiers to die in
the Vietnam War.

Trying to raise support for gun control, Mrs. Johnstone says, she and other
proponents thought of using flags, letters, footprints and then shoes. "Shoes,
we thought, would cut across all ages, all sexes, all races," she said.
"Everyone dies from guns."

Still, she was surprised when hundreds of people came to Washington to join
today's demonstration as a way to speak their anguish.

Some of the shoes were those of schoolchildren who had expressed worry at the
violence they saw around them. Others contained notes telling the stories of
their owners: the dirty white sneakers of Jeffrey Michael Bull, for example, a
taxicab driver from the Lake Erie town of Dunkirk, N.Y. They were donated by his
mother, who wrote, "Gun violence affected my life on Dec. 25, 1993, when I
received a phone call that my son's cab was missing." Mr. Bull's body was found
two months later in a snowy field. A robber had shot him in the back of the
head.

All the shoes will be moved Wednesday to the lawn in front of the Capitol. Some
of the families of gunshot victims said they planned to present shoes to members
of Congress who voted against the Brady bill -- the since-enacted measure
requiring a waiting period for handgun purchases -- and the assault rifle ban in
President Clinton's anti-crime legislation.

It is far from certain that today's demonstration will sway many votes in
Congress, where further gun control legislation is awaiting action.
Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn and Senator Bill Bradley of New
Jersey, for example, have introduced a bill that would require Federal licenses
for everyone buying a gun.

But many protest participants said the sheer number of shoes today gave them
hope. "I have been working on this issue feverishly for two years, but I didn't
have this sense of the scale of the numbers until I saw all these shoes today,"
said Richard Haymaker. Mr. Haymaker, a physics professor at Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge, was the host to Yoshihiro Hattori, the 16-year-old
Japanese exchange student who was shot and killed when he approached a suburban
homeowner's door in a Halloween costume in 1992.

The shoes were arranged by state. To the New Mexico section, Annette Valerio had
brought a pair of white sneakers that belonged to her 9-year-old daughter,
Venessa. Mrs. Valerio recalled the day last September when she drove Venessa
home from school. As they entered the house, a burglar shot at them. Mrs.
Valerio was wounded; Venessa died in her arms with the words "mommy, mommy."

The man who killed her was supposed to have been in court that day.  He had been
charged with stealing guns and selling them illegally.



LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Many of the shoes had belonged to victims of fatal shootings, their
stories told in notes scrawled by relatives on the soles and in photos;
Organizers of a gun-control demonstration at the Reflecting Pool near the
Capitol yesterday assembled 40,000 pairs of shoes, symbols of the tens of
thousands of Americans who are killed every year by gunfire. (Photographs by
Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 21, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Military Censorship Lives

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 664 words


One of the important but little-noticed meetings in the run-up to the Haiti
invasion had nothing to do with the fates of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide
and Lieut. Gen. Raoul Cedras or the deliberations of President Clinton. Rather,
it governed when and how much Americans would find out about the activities and
welfare of their troops if Haiti was invaded.

White House and Pentagon officials, in a meeting with representatives of the
television networks, asked for a broadcast blackout of eight hours. The
Administration also wanted to restrict reporters to their hotels until military
commanders gave them permission to go to the fighting.

Since the invasion was canceled in favor of the kind of peaceful landing that
the Department of Defense likes to have televised, even the networks' agreement
to a one-hour delay had no practical effect. But journalists and citizens who
believe in the free flow of information should take note of this effort to
blindfold the press and the public.

It shows that the news-management policies that took root in the Reagan-Bush
years and reached their full propagandistic flower during Operation Desert Storm
are still in place at the Pentagon. Those policies represent a long-term danger
to American troops and to the ability of voters to judge the wisdom of elected
officials who order military attacks.

No matter what officials say, the attempt to restrict news coverage is not
really about necessary military secrets or what the Pentagon calls "operational
security." The military knows that American journalists have a good record of
delaying broadcasts or publication when lives are at stake. (The networks
voluntarily withheld news that the troop planes had left Fort Bragg, N.C., on
Sunday night.) Even so, in the aftermath of Vietnam, the Pentagon and several
Administrations have tried repeatedly to restrict or prevent battlefield
reporting whenever possible.

The record is clear-cut. On the 1983 invasion of Grenada, the press was excluded
entirely. In the 1989 Panama landing, the Pentagon press pool was brought in
four hours after the fighting started and held in restricted circumstances for
another six hours.

In the Persian Gulf, there was a news blackout during the invasion of Iraq.
Also, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf and Defense Secretary Dick Cheney devised a
policy of holding battlefield correspondents under surveillance, restricting
their access to combatants and censoring their reports. This policy continued
long after there was any question of operational security, and its clear goal
was to shape American political opinion about the war.

Out of a sense of misguided patriotism, many citizens applaud such restrictions.
But most are wise enough to know that without independent reporters and
photographers on the battlefield, there is no way to determine whether their
sons and daughters are being led competently and whether elected officials have
set policies that are worth the loss of lives. Indeed, it was information
gleaned by reporters from enlisted men and field-grade officers that proved to
the American people that Lyndon Johnson and Gen. William Westmoreland were wrong
about both the goal and tactics in Vietnam.

With luck, the operation in Haiti will produce nothing worth hiding. But someday
there will be a conflict that does. Professional journalists have an obligation
to resist Government efforts to control their notebooks and cameras.

That truth was illustrated in the bland briefing conducted yesterday by Col.
Barry Willey in Port-au-Prince. Colonel Willey started out by offering free
helicopter rides, but wound up dodging legitimate questions about the rules of
engagement by saying "you just have to trust me that our soldiers will know what
to do in the right circumstance."

President Reagan had a saying -- "Trust, but verify." That is good advice for
journalists as long as this Administration continues the inherited policy of
unwarranted military censorship.

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 22, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan, Fighter For Peace and Rights, Dies at 93

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: SANTA BARBARA, CALIF


The Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan, an Episcopal bishop whose long career was marked by
campaigns for peace and human rights, died yesterday at his home in Santa
Barbara, Calif. He was 93 years old.

The cause of death was internal bleeding after a fall at home last week, said
Timothy Corrigan, a grandson.

Bishop Corrigan supported the right of women to be ordained priests,
demonstrated against the war in Vietnam, marched with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. on Washington and sat with him when Dr. King delivered his "I have a
dream" speech in 1963.

Beginning in the 1930's, Bishop Corrigan worked with the Minnesota Council of
Human Relations on behalf of American Indians. In the 1970's he was one of the
first priests to speak out at the general convention of the Episcopal Church in
advocating gay rights and the ordination of homosexuals.

"He was willing to put his reputation and his office and his body and his very
person on the line for the things he believed in," said one of his sons, the
Rev. Michael Corrigan of Brookline, Mass. "He had a great sense of fighting for
things, for issues of justice and peace and against injustice."

Bishop Corrigan was born Oct. 25, 1990, in Rochester, Minn. The son of Herbert
Corrigan, an engineer, and the former Catherine Burns, a professional harpist,
he grew up mostly in California and Mexico.

He graduated from Los Angeles High School in 1917 and promptly enlisted in the
Navy, seeing action in the North Atlantic in the submarine service in World War
I.

When the war ended, he joined the merchant marine and traveled around the world
for several years before coming to Boston. There he married Miriam Wallace, who
died giving birth to Mr. Corrigan's son David.

At about that time, Mr. Corrigan developed an interest in the ministry, and
entered Nashotah House, a seminary in Nashotah, Wis., in 1922. He was ordained a
deacon in 1924 and a priest in 1925.

Discussing Mr. Corrigan's decision to enter the priesthood, his son Michael
said: "I suspect it had a great deal to do with his time in the service. He
showed a lot of pastoral concern for the people he encountered in the service.
He wrote letters for illiterate shipmates. I think he always wanted to go into
the ministry."

Early in his career, Mr. Corrigan served as pastor in Portage, Wis., Oconomoc,
Wis., Baltimore and St. Paul.

In 1958, at age 60, he was offered two bishoprics on the same day: Suffragan
Bishop of Colorado and Bishop of the Diocese of Quincy at Peoria, Ill.

He took the post in Colorado. Two years later, he became director of the Home
Department of the executive council of the Episcopal Church. In that position,
he directed its three divisions: domestic mission, college work and Christian
ministries.

In 1963, when he was urging the church to quicken the pace of its political and
social action, he was one of 283 civil rights demonstrators arrested at the
segregated Gwynn Oak Amusement Park near Baltimore.

In 1969, he was part of a group of clergymen opposed to the war in Vietnam who
opened a drive to raise money for American deserters and draft resisters in
Canada.

In 1970, he was among a number of Jewish and Protestant clergyman who asked
Federal prison authorities to permit Daniel and Philip Berrigan, two Roman
Catholic priests imprisoned for destroying draft records, to be permitted to
prepare sermons for use outside prison.

That same year, he was part of a peace fellowship group that conducted a Mass on
the steps of the Pentagon in Washington.

He was censured by the House of Bishops of the Episcopal Church in 1974 after he
participated in the ordination of 11 women deacons to the priesthood. At the
time, the church did not allow women to become priests as it does now.

In 1969 Bishop Corrigan became philosopher in residence and minister to Amherst
College. Beginning in 1970, he served for two years as dean of Bexley Hall, part
of the Colgate-Rochester Divinity School in Rochester, N.Y.

He retired in 1970 and moved to Santa Barbara but remained active within the
church. In his later years, he assisted the Bishop of Los Angeles with
confirmations, ordinations and other church rituals and remained involved with
the church until five or six years ago.

In many of the campaigns he waged, he was accompanied by his wife, the former
Elizabeth Waters, whom he married in 1926.

In addition to his widow, Bishop Corrigan is survived by four sons, Daniel of
Chapel Hill, N.C., Patrick of Minneapolis, John of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and
Michael; 18 grandchildren, and nine great-grandchildren.


NAME: Daniel N. Corrigan

LOAD-DATE: September 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan. (The New York Times, 1966)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO HAITI: IN HAITI
U.S. Soldiers Begin Dismantling Elite Haitian Military Company;
Marines Tighten Security

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 272 words

DATELINE: CAP-HAITIEN, Haiti, Sept. 22


American marines tightened security in Haiti's second largest city today after
Haitian police officers late Wednesday clubbed and fired into a jubilant crowd
of civilians trailing two American trucks. Witnesses said as many as two people
were killed but Marine officers said the bodies were dragged away before they
could confirm the casualties.

In a show of force to intimidate the police and comfort civilians, the Marine
commander, Col. Tom Jones, ordered light armored tanks to roll through the
streets and Cobra helicopter gun ships to fly overhead. About 200 marines were
assigned to guard more than a dozen police precincts tonight to keep order.

The marines expressed concern that the local Haitian commander, Lieut. Col.
Claude Josaphat, has lost control of his forces and that the situation could
soon turn explosive.

"This isn't a calculated action, he's just lost control," Colonel Jones said. "I
told him on Wednesday that if he couldn't control his people we would."

Colonel Jones, a square-jawed veteran of Vietnam and Saudi Arabia campaigns,
warned that despite tighter security it may be "just a matter of time" before
civilian mobs try to avenge nearly three years of police brutality.

Colonel Jones angrily summoned Colonel Josaphat to his compound early this
morning to have him explain why four Haitian police officers beat and then fired
into a crowd after two Marine trucks broadcast messages in Creole explaining
America's role here.

But the Haitian commander could not be found, and later was reported to have
driven to Port-au-Prince for the day to confer with senior officers there.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


The Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan, an Episcopal bishop whose long career was marked by
campaigns for peace and human rights, died on Wednesday at his home in Santa
Barbara, Calif. He was 93 years old.

The cause of death was internal bleeding after a fall at home last week, said
Timothy Corrigan, a grandson.

Bishop Corrigan supported the ordination of women, demonstrated against the war
in Vietnam, marched with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. on Washington and
sat with him when Dr. King delivered his "I have a dream" speech in 1963.

Beginning in the 1930's, Bishop Corrigan worked with the Minnesota Council of
Human Relations on behalf of American Indians. In the 1970's he was one of the
first priests to speak out at the general convention of the Episcopal Church in
advocating gay rights and the ordination of homosexuals.

"He was willing to put his reputation and his office and his body and his very
person on the line for the things he believed in," said one of his sons, the
Rev. Michael Corrigan of Brookline, Mass. "He had a great sense of fighting for
things, for issues of justice and peace and against injustice."

Daniel Corrigan was born Oct. 25, 1900, in Rochester, Minn. The son of Herbert
Corrigan, an engineer, and the former Catherine Burns, a professional harpist,
he grew up mostly in California and Mexico.

He graduated from Los Angeles High School in 1917 and promptly enlisted in the
Navy, seeing action in the North Atlantic in the submarine service in World War
I.

When the war ended, he joined the merchant marine and traveled around the world
for several years before coming to Boston. There he married Miriam Wallace, who
died giving birth to Mr. Corrigan's son David.

At about that time, Mr. Corrigan developed an interest in the ministry, and
entered Nashotah House, a seminary in Nashotah, Wis., in 1922. He was ordained a
deacon in 1924 and a priest in 1925.

Discussing Mr. Corrigan's decision to enter the priesthood, his son Michael
said: "I suspect it had a great deal to do with his time in the service. He
showed a lot of pastoral concern for the people he encountered in the service.
He wrote letters for illiterate shipmates. I think he always wanted to go into
the ministry."

Early in his career, Mr. Corrigan served as pastor in Portage, Wis., Oconomoc,
Wis., Baltimore and St. Paul.

In 1958, at age 60, he was offered two bishoprics on the same day: Suffragan
Bishop of Colorado and Bishop of the Diocese of Quincy at Peoria, Ill.

He took the post in Colorado. Two years later, he became director of the Home
Department of the executive council of the Episcopal Church. In that position,
he directed its three divisions: domestic mission, college work and Christian
ministries.

In 1963, when he was urging the church to quicken the pace of its political and
social action, he was one of 283 civil rights demonstrators arrested at the
segregated Gwynn Oak Amusement Park near Baltimore.

In 1969, he was part of a group of clergymen opposed to the war in Vietnam who
opened a drive to raise money for American deserters and draft resisters in
Canada.

In 1970, he was among a number of Jewish and Protestant clergymen who asked
Federal prison authorities to permit Daniel and Philip Berrigan, two Roman
Catholic priests imprisoned for destroying draft records, to be permitted to
prepare sermons for use outside prison.

That same year, he was part of a peace fellowship group that conducted a Mass on
the steps of the Pentagon in Washington.

He was censured by the House of Bishops of the Episcopal Church in 1974 after he
participated in the ordination of 11 female deacons to the priesthood. At the
time, the church did not allow women to become priests as it does now.

In 1969 Bishop Corrigan became philosopher in residence and minister to Amherst
College. Beginning in 1970, he served for two years as dean of Bexley Hall, part
of the Colgate-Rochester Divinity School in Rochester, N.Y.

He retired in 1970 and moved to Santa Barbara but remained active within the
church. In his later years, he assisted the Bishop of Los Angeles with
confirmations, ordinations and other church rituals and remained involved with
the church until five or six years ago.

In many of the campaigns he waged, he was accompanied by his wife, the former
Elizabeth Waters, whom he married in 1926.

In addition to his wife, Bishop Corrigan is survived by four sons, Daniel, of
Chapel Hill, N.C., Patrick, of Minneapolis, John, of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and
Michael; 18 grandchildren, and nine great-grandchildren.

NAME: Daniel N. Corrigan

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rev. Daniel N. Corrigan (The New York Times, 1966)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography
HEADLINE>Daniel N. Corrigan, Former Bishop, Dies at 93

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
An Elegy for Lost Youth, With Hurts but Few Tears

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 816 words



Who Will Run the Frog Hospital?
 By Lorrie Moore
 147 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $20.

From the very start, Lorrie Moore's generous gifts as a writer have been clear:
a wry, distinctive voice, a gift for the telling detail and supersonic radar for
the pretentious and the phony. Although her first two books, a short-story
collection called "Self-Help" (1985) and a slim elliptical novel called
"Anagrams" (1986), were somewhat detached works that relied heavily on jokes and
one-liners, her last collection, "Like Life" (1990), demonstrated a fresh new
emotional spontaneity, a willingness to probe beneath the jazzy surface of life
to the hurts and disappointments below.

Now, with her delightful new novel, "Who Will Run the Frog Hospital?," Ms. Moore
has fully come into her own as a writer. Leaping off from where her earlier
fiction began, the book not only uses the full spectrum of her revealed talents
but also uncovers new gifts of lyricism and tenderness at the same time. Though
often uproariously funny, the book is, at heart, an elegy, reminiscent at times
of Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited," for the passage of innocence and youth, and
the fading of expectations and dreams.

Like so many of Ms. Moore's heroines, the narrator of "Frog Hospital" is a
perpetual outsider, a woman who uses her blazing wit to make strings of
self-deprecating jokes, a woman who prays not for good things to come true, but
for bad things not to happen.

When we first meet Berie, she is visiting Paris with her husband, Daniel. She is
somewhere in her late 30's now, old enough to have become well acquainted with
life's disappointments. She and Daniel have not been able to have a child, and
their marriage seems to have settled into an uneasy alliance filled with
silences, subterfuges and defensive jokes.

It is from this vantage point that Berie looks back on her adolescence, looks
back on the years of her girlhood when "the only things possible were deferment
and make-believe," a time when anticipation played "in the heart like an
orchestra tuning and warning, the notes unwed and fabulous and crazed."

A latecomer to the social convulsions of the 60's -- she was 15 in 1972 -- Berie
grew up in a small town called Horsehearts, near the Canadian border. Here,
teen-agers were only dimly aware of Vietnam and Nixon; instead, they smoked
marijuana, listened to records and drank a lot of booze. As for Berie and her
best friend, Sils, they reveled in their pursuit of adventure, sneaking out at
night to go dancing at a local club, using fake ID's to get drunk and allowing
men they'd picked up to drive them home in the early hours of dawn. At the same
time, they managed to maintain reputations as "sensible girls" who scored high
on their Iowa Tests and could be relied upon as baby sitters.

Throughout their friendship, Sils was the beautiful one, whom boys sought out
and courted; Berie was the plain one, who wished she could be more like her
friend. When the two found after-school jobs at a local amusement park, Sils was
asked to dress up as Cinderella, while Berie was assigned the job of cashier.

For Berie, the friendship with Sils provided an escape from her family: her
judgmental, withholding father (like so many fathers in Ms. Moore's fiction) and
her distracted, neurotic mother. With Sils, she was free to dream about the
future, invent a self, live in a world defined by the popular songs they knew by
heart.

"When we were younger," Berie recalls, "Sils and I had always looked for caves
together, or some small undiscovered duck pond with ducks. We'd go to the Grand
Union and cheer on the lobsters who managed to break free of their rubber bands.
We'd build a half-tent out of three open umbrellas and we'd get underneath them
and play cards. We'd walk miles to the county dump to see the bears. By the time
we were 12, we'd bike to the head shop and buy wisteria incense. Or we'd go
downtown to the Orpheum, say we were 16 see an R-rated movie, occasionally a
foreign one, which would mesmerize and perplex us. We'd eat Junior Mints and
popcorn -- each candy a sweet pillow on the tongue; each popped corn as big and
complicated as a catalpa bloom."

Berie realizes, as she recounts the story of her youth, that she is
romanticizing events, allowing memory to colorize all the blacks and whites and
grays, but she relives the adventures she and Sils once shared with such brio
and such passion that we come to share her vision of the past. Indeed, Ms. Moore
gives us a portrait of Berie in stereo: the young Berie, spirited and insecure
and wildly expectant; and the older Berie, who has long since moved away from
Horsehearts and her family, lost touch with Sils and slipped, quietly and
unexpectedly, into the skepticism of middle age.

It's a double portrait that touches and dazzles and entertains. Ms. Moore has
written an enchanting novel.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Lorrie Moore. (Joyce Ravid)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 23, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

DIALOGUE: The Reach of Democracy;
Cold War Games Again

BYLINE: By Robert H. Johnson;   Robert H. Johnson is a fellow at the National
Planning Association, a research organization specializing in economic and
social issues, and is author of "Improbable Dangers: U.S. Conceptions of Threat
in the Cold War and After."

SECTION: Section A;  Page 35;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The intervention in Haiti is most disturbing for what it says about the
Administration's post-cold-war strategy as defined by Anthony Lake, President
Clinton's national security adviser.

To Mr. Lake, America is involved in an extension of the struggle for democracy
and against authoritarianism that began with World War II and continued in the
cold war. As in those conflicts, the struggle is Manichean: the forces of evil
(rogue states, terrorists, tribalists) against the forces of good (democracies,
tolerant societies).

From this perspective, Mr. Lake argued at the Council on Foreign Relations in
Washington this month that the world no longer appears chaotic and
incomprehensible -- that our enemies are easily identifiable. The threat is
still authoritarianism; our goal is still promoting democracy.

Stated this way, America's goal remains the one that the Truman Doctrine
established at the beginning of the cold war. That doctrine provided the
rationale for interventions all over the globe in defense of freedom.

Mr. Lake argues that we must be selective in our interventions, and the
President says the United States cannot be the world's policeman. But a policy
based on principle risks either ever-widening commitments or double standards
and growing cynicism. When our commitments are challenged, the willingness to
carry them out becomes a test of Presidential and national credibility.

Thus, Mr. Lake sees Haiti as a test of the U.S. commitment to the defense of
democracy, and views the demonstration of U.S. resolve to reinstate democracy
there as having broad international implications.

As in the cold war, defending our credibility becomes an interest and a goal in
itself, partly or wholly separable from the intrinsic value of the stakes in a
particular conflict.

Viewing the world through such a wide lens tends to create a sense that the
fates of related nations are connected -- that a country that "goes
authoritarian" will destabilize nations that are geographically or politically
related, and dominoes will fall.

Mr. Lake argues that if America fails to restore democracy in Haiti, a flood of
Haitian refugees could have destabilizing effects throughout the Caribbean. How
or why such events might occur is not explained. Despite constant fears of
dominoes throughout the cold war, there was never a case that clearly
demonstrated the validity of the domino theory.

The definition of democracy, as in the past, has become too elastic: one free
election in its 200-year history did not make Haiti a democracy, nor necessarily
make President Jean-Bertrand Aristide a democrat. In Somalia, Bosnia and Rwanda,
the principle of support for democracy provided no useful guidance for policy.

The fundamental problem with basing foreign policy on the defense of democracy
through intervention is that our Government lacks the means -- and will lack the
domestic political support -- to carry out such a policy. When other countries
lack the political and cultural roots of democracy, it is impossible for
outsiders to create them, and the use of force in support of democracy will be
unavailing.

Somalia provided an early post-cold-war lesson in the difficulties of using our
power to produce political change in a society we understand imperfectly and can
barely influence. The goal of nation-building, which came to symbolize American
hubris in Vietnam, was unexpectedly revived during the Clinton phase of U.S.
involvement in Somalia. Fortunately, its impracticality was quickly recognized.
But the problem of political change is even more daunting in Haiti.

The limits of our ability to act since the end of the cold war have also been
demonstrated in Bosnia, where neither politicians in the former Yugoslavia nor
America's allies have bent to America's will. Their resistance, and the limits
imposed by U.S. public opinion, have contributed to the unsteadiness of American
policy.

The lack of public support for intervention in Haiti and the strong reaction to
the relatively limited U.S. casualties in Somalia suggest that Americans are now
unlikely to pay a substantial price on behalf of vague causes like world order,
democracy or national credibility.

The incoherence of the Administration's foreign policy arises partly from its
tendency to take broad stances based on principles, like the support of
democracy against authoritarianism, that frequently conflict with other
interests and political reality. Backtracking, as in the case of the Clinton
policy toward human rights in China, creates an appearance of uncertainty and
incompetence.

Administration spokesmen have tended to hype threats, implying that if this
country does not take decisive action, American or global security will be put
at risk. But when it has faced the implications of its statements, it has pulled
back.

Thus, Secretary of Defense William Perry called the North Korean nuclear program
a threat to the "entire world" and Mr. Clinton implied the possibility of a
pre-emptive attack. But the Administration ultimately decided to negotiate.

While the U.S. must remain active in the world, it needs to undertake a much
less ambitious foreign policy agenda. If it seeks to lead a movement for a world
order based on democracy, it will exhaust itself in the effort. Its foreign
policy will become ever more incoherent as domestic and international
constraints limit its capacity to achieve its rhetorical goals. And its domestic
politics will be roiled by the clamor over its foreign policy failures,
diverting its leaders from more essential tasks at home and abroad.

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: September 25, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 858 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2     1   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a
           troubled twin sister.

 3    13   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 4    10   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 5    15   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 6     6   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.)
           Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
           and a poem.

 7     5   GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam,
           $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen
           disappear.

 8     6   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes --
           on a Mexican ranch.

 9*    4   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           mysterious death.

 10    1   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson.
           (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars"
           trilogy.

 11   24   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.)
           The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.

 12    1   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's
           mysterious disappearance.

 13*   1   BORN IN FIRE, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) The romance
           of a glassmaker and a gallery owner in western Ireland.

 14   14   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 15   32   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     1   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     2   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3*   37   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 4     4   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 5    568  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 6     4   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six
           true-crime cases reported by a veteran policewoman.

 7    37   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 8*   84   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 9    21   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 10   20   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           memoir of mental illness.

 11   19   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 12   18   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.

 13*  47   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 14   10   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past
           and present.

 15   68   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 16*  154  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     5   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           slow-witted wanderer through history.

 2    184  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 3    46   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel.

 4     2   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 10, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically
weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk
indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book
above.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Diplomatic Subcontracting's Fine If You Get Good Help

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Clinton Administration sent the Rev. Jesse Jackson to Lagos in an
unsuccessful effort to end a crippling, yearlong crisis in Nigeria.

A former senior diplomat, Michael H. Armacost, was asked to deliver a secret
message about the Clinton Administration's willingness to extend trade benefits
while he was on a private trip to Beijing. And when the Administration needed
Panama's help in setting up safe havens for Haitian refugees and had no
ambassador in place there, it turned to Sol Linowitz, the lawyer who helped
negotiate the Panama Canal Treaty.

The three missions, over the last six months, were very different. But all
represent the same phenomenon: the franchising of foreign policy, in which
outsiders become insiders and insiders are sometimes left out.

Since 1798, when Dr. George Logan, a friend of Thomas Jefferson, sailed to
France to negotiate an end to the undeclared sea war with France, outsiders have
tried to help American Presidents -- either officially or unofficially -- to
achieve breakthroughs in foreign policy crises. In 1962 John Kennedy secretly
sent a former Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, to meet with the French at the
height of the Cuban missile crisis; in 1967 Lyndon Johnson sent a Harvard
professor, Henry A. Kissinger, to explore whether Hanoi was inclined to
negotiate an end to the Vietnam War.

In this Administration the practice of citizen diplomacy has had its advantages.
It is politically useful to involve someone like Mr. Jackson as a player without
giving him a full-time job. And because of his reputation as a serious career
diplomat and ambassador, Mr. Armacost was able to deliver a straightforward and
believable message to the Chinese -- in secret.

Too Many Players?

But such an approach can be dangerous in an administration where there are so
many players already making foreign policy and the President still regards
global crises as an intrusion on his domestic agenda. Although he came into
office pledging to conduct a new kind of preventive diplomacy, there is still a
day-to-day approach to decision-making. That has dictated a reactive approach to
solving crises and opened the door to outsiders with fresh ideas eager to fill
vacuums.

With the Jimmy Carter missions to North Korea in June and Haiti last week,
citizen diplomacy may have spun out of control. In both cases, a series of
policy shifts, threats and ultimatums led the Administration into diplomatic
cul-de-sacs. Mr. Carter has now succeeded in doing what no former President in
the 20th century has done: shaping the policies of a successor. "He's become the
Scarlet Pimpernel of American foreign policy, popping up to solve impossible
crises," said Charles William Maynes, editor of Foreign Policy. "What's
extraordinary is that one person is doing so much of this kind of diplomacy, and
that the person who's doing it has an independent power base. When you send in a
Jimmy Carter, you are sending in someone of such standing that when he comes up
with what he thinks is a better policy, it resonates with a lot of the American
people."

But Mr. Carter's missions have also exposed other perils of using independent
contractors in resolving foreign policy crises. The North Korean and Haitian
missions reinforced one of diplomacy's basic adages: The ability to control an
emissary is inversely proportional to his prestige and visibility.

In North Korea Mr. Carter disobeyed his orders and told the North Korean
dictator Kim Il Sung that Washington had dropped its call for sanctions and its
demand to come clean about diversions of plutonium. In Haiti he entered
freewheeling negotiations that will allow the military leaders to remain and
even seek political office. At times the adversaries Mr. Carter was sent to
confront came to sound like friends.

In addition the foreign-policy apparatus that relies on desk officers,
ambassadors and inter-agency coordination was shunted aside. If foreign
Presidents can negotiate with a sympathetic ex-President simply by making a
long-distance phone call, why should they listen to what a mere ambassador has
to say?

Paradoxically, the process is complicated by Secretary of State Warren
Christopher's willingness to spread the portfolios and the limelight around. He
has allowed people outside the State Department to dominate other policies.
Mickey Kantor, the Administration's trade representative, largely runs Japan
policy, for example; Nancy Soderberg, the National Security Council's chief of
staff, has an exclusive on Northern Ireland.

Yet of all Mr. Clinton's top foreign policy advisers, it is Mr. Christopher who
has the best reason to be wary of losing control over a diplomatic undertaking.
As Mr. Carter's Deputy Secretary of State, he watched from the sidelines as a
parade of official emissaries and free-lancers complicated efforts to free the
American hostages captured in Iran in 1979. It took Mr. Christopher's
painstaking negotiations with the ayatollahs via Algeria to resolve the crisis,
and the Algiers Accord it produced remains an air-tight model of American
negotiating.

"The Iranian negotiations underscored the importance of persistence and
steadiness in foreign policy -- of being prepared to wait, if necessary, until
an issue is right for resolution," Mr. Christopher wrote in 1981. "The policy of
steady, methodical probing for a negotiated result is what brought this crisis
to an end." When the crisis was over, he wrote, "Those who took our hostages
gained none of their central goals."

That kind of agreement is insider's work.

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Era's Last P.O.W. Is Declared Dead by U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 29;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, Sept. 24


For 25 years Dorothy Marian Shelton traveled to faraway lands, seeking some
shred of proof that her husband, last seen as he was shot down over Laos, might
still be alive.

Four years ago she gave up hope and killed herself.

On Wednesday, her husband, Col. Charles E. Shelton, the last officially
designated Vietnam-era prisoner of war, was declared killed in action.

The status change by the Air Force was requested by the Sheltons' children, who
said it might help give them a sense of finality.

"I personally cannot imagine him being alive still," the couple's 38-year-old
son, John Shelton, said on Wednesday from his home in Los Angeles. "The family
needs some closure on the whole thing. We want to put it behind us. It's shaped
our lives, and we want to take control and shape our own lives."

On April 29, 1965, Charles Shelton, then a captain, was shot down in the
mountains of Laos. It was his 33d birthday.

American rescuers contacted him by radio on the ground and he indicated he was
in good condition. Villagers and defectors later told the authorities that he
had been taken prisoner by communist Laotian forces.

Over the years, Captain Shelton was promoted to colonel. His wife moved the
family from Louisville, Ky., to San Diego, where his five children grew up.

The authorities said his official status as the United States' only remaining
P.O.W. in Vietnam was symbolic of American determination to make sure every
person missing in action in Southeast Asia was accounted for.

The National League of American Families, founded in 1970 to push for the return
of Americans they believe are still alive there, says the change in Colonel
Shelton's status will not affect its efforts.

"We certainly could not question the judgment of the Shelton family," said Ann
Mills Griffiths, executive director of the League of American Families. "We've
been assured it would not lessen in any way the efforts of the U.S. Government
to provide accountability."

For Mrs. Shelton, the mental torture created by her husband's absence never
ended. Every alleged sighting kept her hopes alive.

She traveled from mountain villages in Laos to refugee camps in Afghanistan in
her search for him, taking her story to TV talk shows and podiums across the
United States.

In October 1980, a military hearing was held to determine whether her husband's
status should be changed to "presumed dead," as many other soldiers' were at
that time.

Mrs. Shelton had sued the Government seven years earlier for the right to
contest the change.

A panel voted to change Colonel Shelton's designation, but the Air Force
ultimately decided to retain his status as a symbolic reminder.

"To say that he's dead when they don't know for sure, I just don't think that's
right," Mrs. Shelton said at the time.

No evidence has ever been located indicating that Colonel Shelton is still
alive, said the family's lawyer, Thomas B. Reeve Jr.

That made it easier for the children to ask for the change.

The Sheltons met in Owensboro, Ky., in 1946 and were married in 1951.

On Oct. 4, the anniversary of Mrs. Shelton's suicide, a memorial service for
Colonel Shelton will be held at his wife's grave at Arlington National Cemetery.

"She basically held on to the belief that he was alive," John Shelton said. "But
she had some bad days where she didn't. She thought, 'There's no way he could be
alive.'

"There were so many things tugging at her. It just tore her apart. In some ways,
I wish she would have accepted that he was dead."

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Yossarian Redux

BYLINE: By William H. Pritchard;   William H. Pritchard, the Henry Clay Folger
Professor of English at Amherst College, is the author of "Playing It by Ear," a
collection of literary essays and reviews to be published this fall.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2118 words



CLOSING TIME
By Joseph Heller.
464 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $24.

SEQUELS can be a problem. If your first novel happens to have been "Catch-22" --
10 million copies sold and a phrase added to the language -- just about any
follow-up will be judged a letdown. Joseph Heller's fate was to have his four
successor novels invariably compared, usually unfavorably, to their mighty
predecessor. Now, 33 years after his literary debut, Mr. Heller has given us not
just a successor, but the sequel to "Catch-22." The move might seem foolhardy,
since the fingers on one hand are more than enough to count sequels that measure
up to -- to say nothing of improving on -- their originals. Yet, surprisingly
enough, he has more than got away with it. Although "Closing Time" won't
astonish readers with its inventive brilliance and surprise (after all, they've
read "Catch-22"), it contains a richness of narrative tone and of human feeling
lacking in the earlier book.

Best to admit, however, that I am far from the ideal reader of "Catch-22"; I
didn't and still don't find its black humor (as the phrase used to be) all that
humorous, compared, say, to that of Terry Southern or Thomas Pynchon or Philip
Roth or Lenny Bruce. Its length and relative shapelessness are also problems.
Norman Mailer wrote that you could cut "Catch-22" anywhere, like yard goods, and
that if you removed 100 pages from its middle not even Mr. Heller himself would
know they were gone. (Several academic essays have since been written, proving
the novel is full of "structure," but that's what English professors like to
do.) The book becomes powerful and disturbing when it focuses on the terrible
scene in the aircraft where Yossarian tries to save the fatally wounded radio
gunner Snowden, bandaging the wrong wound as Snowden dies. ("I'm cold," Snowden
whimpers, "I'm cold." "There, there," Yossarian says. "There, there.") Alfred
Kazin pointed out that this scene is given us "directly and piteously," thus
setting it off from the elaborate shenanigans and verbal foolery that fill so
much of "Catch-22."

The opening sentence of "Closing Time" is direct and unflashy, expressing
nothing more than a truth: "When people our age speak of the war it is not of
Vietnam but of the one that broke out more than half a century ago and swept in
almost all the world." The speaker is Sammy Singer, and if his name doesn't
evoke "Catch-22" it's because in that novel he wasn't given a name; he was
merely "the small tail gunner" who kept fainting away as Yossarian attempted to
save Snowden.

SAMMY, whose narrative begins and ends "Closing Time," is one of the dying
generation that remembers the war: "We wear glasses and are growing hard of
hearing, we sometimes talk too much, repeat ourselves, things grow on us, even
the most minor bruises take longer to heal and leave telltale traces." He grew
up in Coney Island, enlisted when the war came, and had his picture taken
sitting on a stack of unfused bombs on the Mediterranean isle of Pianosa, the
scene of "Catch-22." Also in that picture was "a rambunctious and impulsive
Armenian" named John Yossarian, a bombardier, with whom Sammy felt a sympathy:
"My feelings lay with Yossarian, who was humorous and quick, a bit wild but,
like me, a big-city boy, who would rather die than be killed . . . and had made
up his mind to live forever, or at least die trying."

Sammy, who has things in common with his creator (like Mr. Heller, he taught
English after the war in a Pennsylvania college and later worked for Time
magazine), is a widower whose wife died of ovarian cancer 30 days after it was
diagnosed, and whose best friend -- another Coney Islander named Lew Rabinowitz
-- is dying of Hodgkin's disease. (Lew fought in the infantry during the war,
thus was absent from "Catch-22.") Fifty years after those European escapades in
the air and on the ground, it seems to be closing time for those who remember.

Mr. Heller's narrative strategy, an interesting and lively one, is to pack the
first-person accounts of Sammy and Lew -- and, after Lew dies, of his wife,
Claire -- with sane reminiscences of things back then, as well as with
reflections on the state of things now. Coney Island, where Mr. Heller grew up
and which previously appeared in his fiction only in "Good as Gold," provides a
rich vein to mine. Sammy remembers what you could get with the deposits on
bottles of soda: "For two cents you could buy a nice-sized block of Nestle's or
Hershey's chocolate, a couple of pretzels or frozen twists, or, in the fall, a
good piece of the halvah we all went crazy about for a while. For a nickel you
could get a Milky Way or Coca-Cola, a Melorol or Eskimo Pie, a hot dog in
Rosenberg's delicatessen store on Mermaid Avenue or at Nathan's about a mile
down in the amusement area, or a ride on the carousel" -- that carousel whose
"indistinct, ghostlike music" Sammy can hear from the Singer apartment along
with "the breaking of waves and the gong from the bell buoy."

In this little world of Coney Island everyone worked, and America's promises to
them were large: "We had a Ford in our future, the manufacturer told us, and
there was no-knock gasoline at Gulf or at the sign of the flying red horse at
the filling stations for the automobiles with knee-action wheels we could not
yet afford to buy. Lucky Strike meant fine tobacco in those days of the
knee-action wheels, and people called for Philip Morris and would walk a mile
for a Camel and for the other cigarettes and cigars that gave my father the lung
cancer that spread to his liver and his brain and then very quickly killed him."

This world even contained a character named Joey Heller, who at age 16 got his
working papers and delivered telegrams for Western Union in the city for five
dollars a week. Such events as Sam and his friends enlisting at the Army
Induction Center in Grand Central Station, or Lew Rabinowitz's account of
working in his father's junk shop, give their narratives realistic solidity, but
a solidity infused with the poetic quality of times remembered.

Then there is the other more-than-half of "Closing Time," the zany part told in
the third person with Yossarian (as in "Catch-22," virtually the only sane
person on the scene) at its center. Now 68, twice divorced, his children married
or separated (except for his youngest, Michael, whose dependency on his father
is worrisome), sexually enamored of a nurse he meets in the hospital to which
he's gone in hopes they'll find something wrong with him, Yossarian very
definitely lives. The wildly complicated plot in which he figures, and which
culminates in apocalypse, throws up slews of characters, some of them old
friends like the black marketeer Milo Minderbinder, now a billionaire, wheeling
and dealing from offices in Rockefeller Center, his current project being the
selling of a "defensive second-strike offensive attack bomber" to the generals.
On Yossarian's suggestion, Milo's son and the daughter of another billionaire
are to be married in the Port Authority Bus Terminal, the usual crowd of
transients, drug dealers and homeless people there replaced for the evening by
actors, judged "more authentic and tolerable."

Meanwhile the chaplain from "Catch-22" weaves in and out of the plot. His
urinary tract now produces "heavy water," which, since it is radioactive, has
caused him to be arrested by the Government. In the first edition of "Catch-22"
he was called Robert Oliver Shipman, but in later editions Mr. Heller renamed
him Albert Taylor Tappman -- thus making possible in "Closing Time" the
following riff as the man identifies himself to Yossarian: " 'Chaplain, Tappman,
Chaplain Tappman, Albert Tappman, Chaplain?' chattered Chaplain Albert Tappman
garrulously."

AT one point Yossarian says, "I will resist the wisecrack," but he seldom does,
nor does Mr. Heller. Some of the jokes are very good indeed: the chaplain's
doctor has told him he's a candidate for "late-life depression" since at his age
he's "already too old to expect any better kind." When Milo explains to a
thick-headed general that light does indeed move, ex-Pfc. Wintergreen chips in
with "Light is just about the fastest thing there is." To which Milo adds, "And
one of the brightest too." At other moments we get the shamelessly puerile stuff
that threatened to sink "Catch-22." A law firm is named Atwater, Fitzwater,
Dishwater, Brown, Jordan, Quack & Capone, and a character named Noodles Cook
says to Yossarian, "It will soon be Thanksgiving, and we ought to talk turkey."
Dr. Johnson said that Shakespeare's inability to resist a pun was the fatal
Cleopatra for which he lost the world and was content to lose it. Mr. Heller
would do the same to make a joke, anywhere, anytime.

He lacks, or disclaims, the coolness of a Thomas Pynchon; his satire and parody
are loud, up-front, and its targets are familiar ones: the military-industrial
complex, of course, but also just about everyone in the city of New York,
especially the inhabitants of the Port Authority terminal. The novel's thematic
and symbolic texture is just as heavily laid on; a chapter titled "Dante" comes
as no surprise, since Yossarian has been taken many levels below the surface
hell of the terminal into realms where, along with other marvels, George C.
Tilyou and his once-famous Coney Island Steeplechase Park are ensconced.

In a powerfully phantasmagoric scene, Yossarian steps through the looking glass
at the underground "amusement" park, looks at an image of himself as a young
man, and, after viewing assorted worthies from William Saroyan to Gustav
Aschenbach (Thomas Mann's "Death in Venice" keeps surfacing) to his dead
parents, aunts and uncles, he knows he's going to die:

"It struck him all of a sudden that overnight everyone he'd known a long time
was old -- not getting old, not middle-aged, but old! The great entertainment
stars of his time were no longer stars, and the celebrated novelists and poets
in his day were of piddling significance in the new generation. Like RCA and
Time magazine, even I.B.M. and General Motors were of meager stature, and
Western Union had passed away. The gods were growing old again, and it was time
for another shake-up."

THE deeper note struck here dovetails satisfyingly with the "closing time"
perceptions of Sammy Singer and Lew Rabinowitz. Not only are we looking in on a
twilight of the gods, but it's not at all clear that the redemption-through-love
motif -- which ends Wagner's "Gotterdammerung" as well as the wedding of the two
billionaires at the Port Authority -- is anything more than a beautiful theme
whistled in the dark. What is clear is that Mr. Heller has invested a lot of
himself in a few of his characters, enough to give them the third dimension
usually absent from his fiction. One has the sense that, like Yossarian, he is
determined to live forever in his writing, or at least to die trying. So rather
than thinking of "Closing Time" as the sequel to "Catch-22," I'd call it instead
an independent creation in whose best parts the seriousness and the joking are
inseparable, as they should be in art.



YOU CAN TAKE IT WITH YOU

At a roll-top desk many levels below, Mr. George C. Tilyou, the Coney Island
entrepreneur, who'd been dead almost 80 years, counted his money and felt
himself sitting on top of the world. His total never decreased. Before his eyes
were the starting and finishing stations of the roller coaster he'd had brought
down after him from his Steeplechase amusement park. . . . Elsewhere he had his
Cave of the Winds, and at the entrance churned his Barrel of Fun. . . .

With a genius uncanny and persistent, he had defied and disproved the experts,
his lawyers and his bankers, and had succeeded in time in taking it all with
him, in holding on to everything he valued particularly and was intent on
retaining. His will made adequate provision for his widow and his children.
Deeds of ownership, cash instruments and currency in a large amount were sealed,
as directed, in a moistureproof box resistant to decay and interred with him in
his sepulcher in Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery, and his tombstone bore the
inscription:

MANY HOPES LIE BURIED HERE. . . .

He'd never trusted trusts or seen much foundation to foundations. John D.
Rockefeller came to him regularly now to beg for dimes and to cadge free rides,
and J. P. Morgan, who'd commended his soul to God with no doubt it would be
embraced, sought favors. With little to live on, they had not much to live for.
Their children sent nothing. Mr. Tilyou could have told them, he told them
often. Without money life could be hell.   From "Closing Time."

LOAD-DATE: September 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE IMAGE;
Image Makers Hard at Work In the Selling of a Candidate

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1895 words


Nearly 200 miles from the campaign's headquarters in Harrisburg, Pa., but just
next door to the recording studio of the pop singer Cyndi Lauper in midtown
Manhattan, media consultants gathered to shape the image of Tom Ridge, the
Republican candidate for governor of Pennsylvania.

Like Mr. Ridge, Ms. Lauper was using the most sophisticated editing equipment to
freshen up her persona -- she with a new music video, he with a new television
commercial.

But Mr. Ridge, whose advisers were serenaded by the strains of Ms. Lauper's 1984
anthem, "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun," wafting from next door, had the harder
sell. They had to convince more than half of the nearly six million voters of
Pennsylvania that a bland, largely unknown Congressman from Erie, Pa., should be
their next governor and succeed Gov. Robert P. Casey, a Democrat who is not
eligible to run for a third term. The Democratic candidate is Lieut. Gov. Mark
S. Singel.

The work of these image makers is serious business. Winning a statewide election
can have as much to do with the quality of the advertisement as the quality of
the candidate.

The goal of the blue jean-clad consultants, of course, was to present their
button-down candidate in the best light possible. That is why, after hours of
editing images of Mr. Ridge down to a 30-second spot, they would not tolerate
that his face was as red as a cherry and that he sounded even worse than he
looked.

"He sounds horrible, like he was talking in a cardboard box," said Art Vizthum,
a video editor. "You can hardly understand him. He has a lot of bass but no
treble."

So Mr. Vizthum twisted some knobs on a computer console and the voice improved.
"I manipulated it on the audio board," he said. Mr. Vizthum toyed with other
knobs to improve the candidate's appearance, explaining that "he seemed overly
ruddy, so I took a little of the red out and added green."

With his voice as crisp as Edward R. Murrow's and his complexion like egg cream,
Tom Ridge looked and sounded like a man who -- in the view of his consultants --
should be governor.

After several days of fiddling and manipulating, Mr. Ridge's advisers were ready
for his post-Labor Day debut, an advertisement of stand-up-and-cheer patriotism
that would be replayed about 1,000 times in Pennsylvania's four major television
markets.

The consultants could not be more pleased with their star. "If you called
central casting and said, 'Send me up a governor,' it would be Tom Ridge," said
Stuart Stevens, who heads the New York and Washington company that is making the
commercial. "He's this big, handsome guy."

Getting to Know The Candidate

Mr. Stevens' company created feel-good advertising that helped Mr. Ridge manage
an upset last May in the Republican primary. But now that Mr. Ridge is in a
contentious race with Lieutenant Governor Singel, Mr. Stevens says he again has
to define the 49-year-old Congressman.

Since Mr. Ridge won the primary with only 35 percent of the vote in a
five-candidate field, that race did little to help him overcome what Mr. Stevens
viewed as the lawmaker's most daunting obstacle. The Congressman is virtually
unknown outside his small district in northwestern Pennsylvania, which is closer
to Cleveland than to the state's largest media market, Philadelphia.

Another handicap is that while Mr. Ridge comes off as earnest, he is not
particularly stirring when he talks about his career. So in this first
commercial, Mr. Ridge's consultants sought to capture him in scenes that would
show him as an appealing leader who is compassionate as well as intelligent.

The best way to demonstrate that, and to set him apart from Mr. Singel, the
advisers decided, was to play up Mr. Ridge's record as a working-class youth who
went to Harvard on a scholarship and served as an infantry sergeant in Vietnam,
where he won a Bronze Star for valor. That way, they could later contrast him
with Mr. Singel, who has no war record and whom they would portray as an insider
in Harrisburg, serving for eight years as Lieutenant Governor. No matter that
Mr. Ridge, too, could be depicted as an insider after 12 years in Congress.

"We will set it up this way," Mr. Stevens said. "If you like the way things are
in Pennsylvania now, you have one guy who's basically running as an incumbent.
Or, this is a chance for Pennsylvania to elect a uniquely qualified leader, a
guy who's an American hero, with all the best characteristics, the Frank Capra
qualities."

Mr. Ridge said he believes Mr. Stevens has "the creative ability to communicate
a message about me." He plans to pour more than half of the $10 million he hopes
to raise for this year's campaign into buying broadcast time -- not including
the $400,000 fee for the consultants, a $20,000 bonus for winning the primary
and another $20,000 if Mr. Ridge is elected governor.

When Mr. Stevens and his colleagues met the week before Labor Day to
conceptualize the advertisement, they gathered around small screens, watching
hours of film that their photographer took of Mr. Ridge over two days on the
campaign trail, searching for snippets that could form the nucleus of the spot.

This free-form approach reflects the philosophy of the 40-year-old Mr. Stevens.
Unlike most political consultants who rose from campaign ranks, he went to film
school at the University of California at Los Angeles and has published fiction.

The clip that excited Mr. Stevens and his crew the most was at a Veterans Day
ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, where Mr. Ridge made a
speech about the war.

"That's a nice bit, I'd forgotten about it," remarked Russell Schriefer, who
teams with Mr. Stevens and Douglas McAuliffe to form the Stuart Stevens Group
partnership. "He kind of gets emotional."

The consultants insisted that the speech was not scripted for the commercial.
Yet, in a demonstration of how deeply media consultants can drive a candidate's
image, Mr. Stevens said he helped draft the speech.

"Very powerful stuff," he said as an image of Mr. Ridge at the memorial
flickered on the screen.

Another scene that jumped at the consultants was of Mr. Ridge crouching in front
of the memorial as his children, Tommy, 7, and Lesley, 8, tugged at his arms and
he gently explained to them its significance. Though Mr. Ridge was fitted with a
small "body mike," he insisted later that he did not realize he was on camera
and that the scene was totally natural.

That authenticity, Mr. Stevens said, made the scene. "If we had tried to script
that, we would have had to have some brilliant child actors," he said.

The scene allowed Mr. Stevens to fulfill one of his objectives: to show a warm,
private side of Mr. Ridge.Still, the consultants did not want the candidate to
appear too emotional. They discarded another part of the Vietnam speech in which
a tearful Mr. Ridge dabbed his eyes. "That would look manipulative," Mr. Stevens
said. "People would find it offensive. In the scene at the wall, Tom is very
emotional without drawing arrows."

Once they had settled on the scenes from the memorial, the consultants searched
for film to round out the advertisement, to connect Mr. Ridge to Pennsylvania.

Judging the Product: Will It Succeed?

For several hours over two days, the consultants fiddled with the scenes,
putting them in a video collage that told a story but that they hoped would not
look too jumpy. They trimmed it down to 30 seconds by condensing the sound
bites. They cut out, for instance, Mr. Ridge saying he was "proud to have worn
my country's uniform," but left the line, "Proud to have served with men who
fought for the cause of freedom."

The consultants decided against using a narrator because the images spoke for
themselves. Then they ended the spot by flashing a slogan they had used in the
primary and wanted to keep: "Tom Ridge. He Can Change Pennsylvania. Honestly."

Now it was time to give the advertisement a musical score. Mr. Stevens and Mr.
Schriefer brought the near-complete commercial to the studio of Bobby Giammarco,
a music and effects producer who mostly creates sound for advertisements for
products like MCI and Volvo.

Using a synthesizer, Mr. Giammarco came up with a half dozen possible scores.
Mr. Giammarco said he rejected one because it sounded "a little bit more
religious and a little bit less patriotic."

His favorite, and the one that the consultants signed off on, was a full
orchestral sound track, with trumpets, trombones, tubas, cellos, violins and
field drums. "It's warm but not too fuzzy," said a satisfied Mr. Giammarco.

Mr. Stevens agreed. "I love it, Bobby," he said."

The consultants shipped a videotape of the advertisement to Mr. Ridge by
overnight mail. Unlike many candidates, Mr. Ridge does not believe in assembling
focus groups to look at political advertisements and offer feedback. Instead,
Mr. Ridge popped the videotape into his home VCR and showed it to his wife,
Michele, and their best friends, Homer and Marlene Mosco. Mr. Mosco runs a
travel agency in Erie; Mrs. Mosco is vice president of a bank and was once a
marketing executive.

Mr. Ridge said his friends detected an unevenness in sound quality, which he had
corrected, but otherwise everyone was satisfied.

"We had some concerns about the sound," Mr. Ridge said. "And my initial concern
was that as you flipped through it and see these three- or four-second
vignettes, I was a little concerned about it fitting all together. But it sure
did. There's a lot of me in there. The first time I saw it I really had to catch
my breath. The moment when I'm at the podium talking about being a working-class
kid, that said it all."

But candidates are not the most reliable judges of commercials about themselves.
Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the
University of Pennsylvania, said it might have been a mistake for the Ridge
campaign not to consult a focus group. She commended the advertisement for its
high production values, but was not particularly impressed.

"The underlying theme of the ad is: 'Here he is, here he is, here he is. He's a
nice person and remember his name,' " she said. "It's trying to suggest that
he's not only a patriot but someone who's in touch with the people and is going
to accomplish great things for the state.

"But I don't think it's effective at all," she continued, "because it doesn't
have a single ongoing strong visual in it or use print to reinforce a central
message. In the clutter of television, a successful ad stands out. That ad
doesn't particularly stand out. I doubt that it's successful in raising his name
I.D."

Nor was Ms. Jamieson impressed with the scene of Mr. Ridge with his children.
"It's one of those required cliches," she said. "You have to establish that he
does have a family and that he is comfortable with them -- and that the dog
doesn't bite him."

The Singel campaign also tried to score points with the spot. On Sept. 13, the
day it was first broadcast, Mr. Singel's running mate, Tom Foley, attacked Mr.
Ridge for touting his war record when that same day he missed a vote on a House
bill to finance veterans' programs.

Still, Mr. Ridge was pleased with the advertisement. But he said it was too
early to judge its success. "You and I will find out on Nov. 8 whether it had
any political traction," he said.

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tom Ridge, selling himself to voters in his campaign for
Pennsylvania governor. Page B8.

Chart: "ANALYSIS
The Making of a TV Ad"

This is the text of the general-election debut commercial for Representative Tom
Ridge, a Republican running for Governor of Pennsylvania, along with
behind-the-scene analysis. The campaign is spending $300,000 for broadcast time
for the 30-second advertisement, which is titled, "American Hero."

Mr. Ridge's media consultant, Russell Schriefer, wanted this scene-setting shot
to read, "Memorial Day 1994." Then Stuart Stevens suggested something else, "
Vietnam Veterans Memorial." "I think that's obvious," Mr. Schriefer replied.
They toyed with using both titles, but the frame looked too cluttered. In the
end, Mr. Stevens got his way.

The consultants were concerned that they did not have a wide shot to establish
that this scene was at the Vietnam memorial. "It would have been nice to have
had two cameras," Mr. Schriefer said. "It would have been nice to have had a
helicopter!" Mr. Stevens quipped.

In the rough cut, the camera was panning up the names of the wall very rapidly.
"Did we speed up the names on the wall?" Mr. Stevens asked his assistants. "It
seems too fast. Could we slow it down?" In the final version, the pan is much
slower.

Paul Canney, the cameraman/producer who filmed this scene, cautioned the
consultants that this stature near the Vietnam Veterans Memorial was
controversial; critics said it detracted from the original memorial, a wall.
"It's very controversial," he said. "There are veterans groups that oppose it."
The consultants kept the scene anyway, figuring that not too many viewers would
recall the dispute.

Originally, the title at the bottom said, "Bronze Star for Valor, 1971." But
when Mr. Ridge saw the spot, he had it changed to 1970. There had been some
confusion over which date to use because Mr. Ridge was awarded the star for his
service in 1970, but he actually got it in 1971.

The consultants thought this scene of Mr. Ridge aggresively shaking hands in an
Italian market in Philadelphia established movement in the spot. Also, Mr.
Stevens said, "it conveys in a very straight-forward manner that he's running
for Governor."

Instead of the color guard as a transition here, the rough version of the
commercial had an artsy shot of a Ridge bumper sticker on a bus window. But the
consultants changed their mind. "The color guard gives you a feel for the
event," Mr. Schriefer said.

This scene is intended to link the candidate to the people of the state. "I love
the fact that people were sitting on the stoop," Mr. Canney observed during the
editing of this scene from south Philadelphia. "That's a real Philly thing,"
added Daniel Bernstein, a freelance editor.

This is in the steel valley outside a small resturant near Pittsburgh.
Initially, the consultants picked a wider shot, but decided it looked too much
like a beer garden and was inappropriate as Mr. Ridge tried to convey what he
would do for the state.

The close up of Mr. Ridge's hands was seen as more effective than just a head
shot of the candidate. "It gives us more movement in the spot; it conveys a
sense of mission," Mr. Schriefer said.

The consultants fiddled with different type styles for the closing title,
finally settling on Small Times bold. Originally, they had a rich beige
background with blue letters, but switched to plain white. "That's much better,"
Mr. Schriefer said. "It's just clean and simple."

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 26, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
Four Academics Doing What They Do Best

BYLINE: By BEN BRANTLEY

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


Equivocation is the first language of the characters in David Gilman's "Ghost in
the Machine," at the Perry Street Theater. A profoundly talky crew of academics,
they can turn even the simplest exchange into a debate on the relativity of
knowledge. The play often feels like a Kantian variation on the old "Who's on
first?" routine, with Ping-Pong volleys of lines like, "If I were to say the
proof is known, who knows?"

This annoying tendency is partly a matter of professionally conditioned reflex
for Mr. Gilman's characters. But it's also a convenient smoke screen for
deceptions ranging from adultery to computer sabotage. Or maybe not. Someone,
perhaps everyone, in the play is lying. And since knowledge is inevitably
limited by perspective, who's to know?

A short (80 minutes), thin and brisk mix of sex, mystery and introductory
metaphysics, "Ghost in the Machine" is a date play for weekend intellectuals.
The plot is built around two couples: Wes (Reade Kelly) and Nancy (Lee Brock),
Harvard professors of religion and musicology, and their house guests, Nancy's
colleague Matt (Stephen Singer) and his younger lover, Kim (Susan Floyd), a
computer whiz.

Kim has been assisting Matt on a paper about a Vietnamese-American composer, a
spiritual descendant of John Cage and the creator of a piece of music randomly
generated by computer. However, the discovery in the piece of five perfect
measures of a chorale melody from a hymn by Martin Luther suggests non-random
premeditation on someone's part.

There are other mysteries, like the $50 bill that belonged to either Wes or Kim
that disappears and reappears, and the possibility that Kim and Wes had sex on
the living room sofa while their partners were asleep. In accordingly
considering whom its characters trust and why, the play looks for moral
consequences among the cerebral parlor games.

Mr. Gilman has a good ear for the fatuity of university-speak. And the play,
first seen at the Steppenwolf Theater in Chicago, has been given an impeccable
production by the Barrow Group, with crisp, staccato direction by Seth Barrish
and polished ensemble work.

Unfortunately, the work is collegiate in more than its setting. Like its
characters, it doesn't stretch far beyond the province of Philosophy 101. Its
coda, which has the young composer (Ken Leung) ruminating on correspondences
between his career and America's involvement in Vietnam, is excruciating. And
the play is less fun, not to mention inventive, than similarly themed works by
Tom Stoppard or even David Ives.

Actually, for all its higher ambitions, "Ghost" suggests a miniature, more
anemic version of conventional sleight-of-hand mysteries like "Sleuth" and
"Deathtrap." That's minus the body count, of course, but with a considerably
higher percentage of weighty words.


GHOST IN THE MACHINE

By David Gilman; directed by Seth Barrish; set by Michael McGarty; costumes by
Markas Henry; lighting by Howard Werner; music by Mr. Barrish; production
supervisor, Laine Valentino; assistant director, Paul Rice; sound by One Dream;
stage manager, Christine Lemme. Presented by the Barrow Group, Mr. Barrish,
artistic director. At the Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, Greenwich
Village.

WITH: Reade Kelly (Wes), Lee Brock (Nancy), Stephen Singer (Matt), Susan Floyd
(Kim), Herbert Rubens (Harper) and Ken Leung (Minh Schumann).

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Reade Kelly and Susan Floyd in "Ghost in the Machine," at the
Perry Street Theater. (G. Paul Burnett for The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Berlin Journal;
The G.I.s' Legacy: Basketball and Sweet Memories

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 874 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Sept. 26


If it's a giant American-style basketball tournament, featuring tens of
thousands of spectators, and cheerleaders, and break dancers, and MTV stars --
it must be Berlin.

Such displays of American culture are commonplace here. Berliners have lived
closely with United States soldiers for nearly half a century, and although the
last troops withdrew from Berlin a few weeks ago, this remains the most
Americanized of European cities.

Official Berlin is paying its respects to the Western Allies in various ways,
including opening an Allied Museum at a former American base here. The museum's
inaugural exhibition, "They'll Always Have a Suitcase in Berlin," tells visitors
that the Allies, and especially the Americans, came as conquerors as World War
II ended but soon became protectors and friends.

For many museum visitors, especially younger people, affection for Americans
goes beyond gratitude for the protection provided by United States soldiers,
along with those of France and Britain. (The Soviet troops in East Berlin, who
have also departed, left behind few cultural traces and very little in the way
of warm feelings.)

One middle-aged visitor said she was eternally grateful to the United States for
its role in crises like the 1948-49 Berlin airlift and the 1961 Checkpoint
Charlie border standoff with East Germany. But her 16-year-old son, who was
preparing to leave for a year of high school in Massachusetts, had a different
viewpoint.

"Just about everything we have that's fun comes from the United States," he
said. "If it weren't for Americans, we wouldn't have baseball caps. We wouldn't
have malls or fast-food shops or skateboards. Life just wouldn't be as good."

Berlin has had more than 50 parades this year to thank the Allies, who left this
summer under terms of the treaty through which Germany was reunified. The most
emotional parades have been those in which American troops have marched. In the
borough of Steglitz, where Americans have been posted since the end of World War
II, 250,000 people turned out to cheer and shower the soldiers with confetti.
Many spectators shed tears, as did at least a few soldiers.

"There is a very close and special relationship between the American soldier and
the Berliners," said the last United States commander here, Maj. Gen. Walter
Yates. "It's really incredible."

Since the late 1940's, Berliners have been packing nightclubs where American
musicians and singers appear. The city's annual German-American Volksfest, a
giant carnival at which thousands of hamburgers and orders of spareribs are
served, is always packed. And until the American military radio station was shut
this year, many Berliners tuned in faithfully to hear the latest "Stateside"
hits and, not incidentally, to learn colloquial English.

It was no coincidence that Berlin was the host for national twist contests in
the 1960's, or that entertainers like Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald became
near-deities here after appearing at concerts.

When American troops entered the rubble of Berlin in 1945, they were forbidden
to have contact with residents. This "no fraternization" policy soon collapsed,
and countless romantic liaisons between soldiers and German women developed.
Thousands resulted in marriage.

"They not only saved our freedom, they saved our evenings," a commentator, Mai
Leffers, wrote recently in the Berlin daily Tageszeitung. "There will still be
'souvenirs d'amour' being born up to nine months after the last (un)known Allied
soldier has left town."

Not all Berliners were happy with the American presence. Protesters besieged the
American cultural center here during the Vietnam War, and there were angry
demonstrations against American troop maneuvers that were held in city parks.
But the protests themselves, and the way of life of many who took part in them,
were decisively influenced by American counterculture.

About 15,000 Americans remain in Berlin, among them many former soldiers. On one
mid-September weekend alone, the impact of their way of life was seen in several
events.

More than 850 amateur teams from across Europe and beyond converged for the
two-day basketball tournament, attracting tens of thousands of spectators, many
wearing T-shirts and jackets bearing American team logos. Newspapers promoted
the tournament with articles defining terms like "slam dunk" and "Yo, man!"

At the same time, the Berlin Eagles, the city's highly popular American-style
football team, was playing for the national championship, losing to the
Dusseldorf Panthers. And baseball teams from Europe and Latin America were
competing just outside city limits.

In sprawling Treptow Park, 700 vintage American autos and elaborately customized
Harley-Davidson motorcycles were entered into competition for the city's "best
American vehicle."

The Americans have left behind other tangible signs of their presence, including
a golf course, a yacht club, two school buildings and several officers' clubs.
But even without them, this city would have sweet memories of the men and women
known here affectionately as "Amis."

"It feels as if good neighbors are moving away," Mayor Eberhard Diepgen said. "A
piece of Berlin is leaving with them."

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American forces have left Berlin, but Americana probably never
will, a legacy of the 50 years the troops protected the city. Now American
artifacts have a place of honor at the Allied Museum, on a former U.S. base.
(Metin Yilmaz/Paparazzi, for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Eggs on Feet and Far From Shelter, Male Penguins Do a Shuffle

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words


EVER since explorers at the turn of the century surmised that the emperor
penguin must breed during the coldest part of Antarctica's deadly winter, this
charming but peculiar species has inspired wonder and curiosity. But after 83
years of penguin watching, scientists are still encountering surprises,
including a recent discovery made with a night-vision device that revealed
emperor penguins to be even hardier than had been supposed.

Knowledge of the winter behavior of emperor penguins has come slowly because it
is hard for human beings to survive under such conditions, much less conduct
scientific research. High winds, temperatures around minus 60 degrees
Fahrenheit, round-the-clock darkness and frequent sudden blizzards make the
Antarctic habitat of the emperors, the Ross Sea and McMurdo Sound, dangerous
places in winter.

In 1911 a trio of intrepid English explorers confirmed the theory that emperor
penguins, unlike other birds, do indeed lay and incubate their eggs during the
dead of the polar winter. Two of these brave investigators, Dr. Edward A. Wilson
and Henry Bowers, were doomed to die of starvation and exposure with Capt.
Robert F. Scott a year later while returning from their ill-fated expedition to
the South Pole.

Risking their lives in the darkness by climbing down a 200-foot cliff in a
bitterly cold wind, Dr. Wilson, Mr. Bowers and Apsley Cherry-Garrard succeeded
in reaching a midwinter emperor penguin rookery at Cape Crozier on Ross Island.
Collecting five penguin eggs with very young embryos for later studies of
biological development, the explorers noticed that the big birds had chosen a
spot offering substantial shelter from the wind.

Ever since then, scientists had assumed that all emperor penguin rookeries must
be similarly placed, so a recent discovery by Dr. Gerald Kooyman of the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography came as a surprise. During a nonstop jet flight last
June from New Zealand to the South Pole and back, Dr. Kooyman scanned the
darkened expanse of sea ice near Ross Island using an image intensifier of the
kind supplied to American forces in the Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars.

For human beings, Antarctica is closed to the outer world during the winter
months, from March through August, and only in dire emergencies do airplanes
from New Zealand or Chile attempt to land on the continent's treacherous ice
runways. But each winter the National Science Foundation arranges one flight
from New Zealand to airdrop fresh vegetables and mail to the inhabitants of
McMurdo and South Pole Stations. Dr. Kooyman took advantage of this winter's
13-hour flight to spy on the emperors.

From his perch aboard a KC-10 tanker aircraft 10,000 feet above the frozen sea,
Dr. Kooyman spotted a cluster of about 7,000 emperor penguins huddled together
on sea ice west of Ross Island, a considerable distance from the shelter of
cliffs. It was instantly clear that emperor penguins can breed even in the
absence of any kind of shelter.

"They were all males, of course," he said, "and each one was presumably
incubating an egg." Male emperor penguins are known to take over the incubation
of eggs for nine weeks, going without food the whole time while their mates
return to the open sea to fatten up on deep-dwelling fish.

The emperor penguins' strategy for keeping warm in winds of minus 60 degrees
Fahrenheit, Dr. Kooyman said, is to keep shuffling around and jostling their
neighbors, taking care to keep their big eggs wedged between the tops of their
feet and their warm, overhanging bellies. The penguins at the exposed periphery
of a cluster generally manage to work their way inside after a fairly brief
period acting as community windshields.

Scientists do not know how long an emperor usually remains at the exposed edge
of a community "huddle," or how rapidly the entire huddle moves. Weather
conditions and the stability and thickness of the sea ice on which they stand
are believed to be factors.

"So few of these birds have ever been tagged that we have little knowledge of
their individual movements," Dr. Kooyman said. "We suspect that movement is
weather-dependent; in mild weather with low winds, the huddle probably loosens
up, while high winds and low temperatures draw the birds together and increase
the speed of their movements. There may also be a learning curve. It may take
inexperienced birds a while to learn how to jockey for position."

Both male and female emperor penguins protect their eggs and newly hatched
chicks by enveloping them under a fold of body skin. During the first part of
the reproductive cycle the mothers must fast, but after eggs are laid, they
leave to fatten up. The males then take over, incubating the eggs and the newly
hatched chicks for the nine midwinter weeks. The part of the bird's belly in
contact with the egg is bare of feathers to facilitate the flow of heat from the
father to his offspring. At the end of their baby-sitting stint, the fathers
turn the chicks over to their returning mothers, and go back to sea.

If weather conditions become so severe that a parent's resources can no longer
cope with the cold, it abandons the egg to save itself, as it may do under
certain other circumstances. All penguin rookeries are littered with abandoned
eggs and dead chicks.

In many other ways as well the emperor penguin differs from about 16 other
penguin species, whose ranges extend from Antarctica to the equatorial Galapagos
Islands. Standing more than 3 feet high and weighing some 90 pounds, the
emperors are the largest of all penguins. Emperors and Adelie penguins are the
only two penguin species inhabiting the Antarctic continent proper, although
other species live among the northern islands of Antarctica.

Adelies breed in the Antarctic spring on densely populated rocky rookeries, and
before the summer sun sets in March, at the beginning of the long winter night,
the chicks are mature enough to look after themselves. But as early as 1911,
investigators realized that emperor penguins had to contend with an unusual
reproductive problem: their chicks mature too slowly to permit a normal avian
breeding cycle.

In his 1923 memoir, "The Worst Journey in the World," Mr. Cherry-Garrard
recounted the discovery that if emperor penguins had to begin breeding in
springtime like the Adelies, their chicks would still be immature and lacking
sufficient feathers and body fat by the time winter set in.

Emperors have some other characteristics that intrigue scientists, including
their ability to hunt for prey at great depths. "We've measured emperor dives to
depths as great as 630 meters," or 2,070 feet, Dr. Kooyman said. "They are
surely the deepest-diving birds in the world."

Dr. Kooyman plans to return to Antarctica next month to study the birds at close
hand during the summer. The penguins themselves seem to welcome human visitors.
Although they are frightened by helicopters flying overhead, a helicopter that
lands on the sea ice quickly draws crowds of the birds, all honking
enthusiastically and waddling up as fast as their feet can carry them.

Scientists regard Antarctica as a kind of gauge for measuring the health of the
global environment, and one of the indicators is the waxing or waning of animal
populations, including those of penguins. Among the potentially adverse affects
on the Antarctic environment is the impact of increasing tourism.

But Dr. William Fraser of Montana State University recently reported an anomaly
in penguin colonies that remains to be explained. Two islands near Palmer
Station on the Antarctic Peninsula, Torgerson and Litchfield, both have large
populations of Adelie penguins. Tourists are allowed to visit Torgerson, and
even nesting penguins have become accustomed to having people around. But
Litchfield is strictly off-limits. Although Litchfield and Torgerson are right
next to each other, the Adelie population of protected Litchfield has declined
43 percent since 1992, while the population of Torgerson fell only 19 percent.

The reason, Dr. Fraser said, apparently has nothing to do with tourists, but is
the result of weather. For the last 20 years, he said, the region near Palmer
Station has been steadily warming, and this has resulted in increased snowfall
every winter. But the snow does not accumulate evenly; the prevailing storm
winds sweeping the Antarctic Peninsula come from the northeast, and snow tends
to pile up on the lee side southwest of hills and rocks.

Torgerson Island is fairly flat and snow is quickly swept away, but Litchfield
has many rocky pinnacles and obstructions, behind which snow accumulates to
depths of three feet or so. Adelie penguins are programmed by nature to follow a
tight reproductive schedule, and the peak of their egg-laying period is 10 days
from Nov. 18 to 28. If snow deeply covers their rookery during that period, high
infant mortality results.

A continuous warming trend on the Antarctic Peninsula has been measured since
1974, but Dr. Fraser believes that the Adelie population has been declining for
as long as 50 years because of warming and consequent changes in weather
patterns. Few scientists believe there are enough data yet to prove that global
warming is responsible, but specialists are keeping a close watch on Antarctica.

"The answer requires the long-term data we're now collecting," Dr. Fraser said.

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Emperor penguins and their two-week-old chicks on Antarctic
ice. (Doug Allan/Animals Animals) (pg. C14)

Diagram: "Protective Huddle for a 9-Week Vigil"

Male emperor penguins are now known to incubate eggs in exposed terrain, huddled
together for warmth as they cradle the eggs between their upturned toes and
their warm, featherless belly flaps. After taking their turns as avian
windbreaks, the birds on the outside of the huddle seem to work their way into
the warm center of the crowd.

Map of Antarctica showing location of Ross Island. (pg. C14)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COLLEGE FOOTBALL;
Kutztown Player, 46, Is Learning to Tackle His Problems Head On

BYLINE: By JERE LONGMAN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: KUTZTOWN, Pa.


When Chuck Roseberry -- a 46-year-old grandfather, veteran of Vietnam and the
Persian Gulf War, former police and corrections officer, father of children
older than his teammates -- showed up for spring football practice at Kutztown
University, some of the younger players thought he was a coach. Many thought he
was a joke.

"People were thinking, should I take it easy on him or should I try to kill
him?" said Del Hufford, a sophomore offensive tackle who jousted daily with
Roseberry on the defensive line.

No one took it easy.

" 'This is crazy,' guys were thinking," Hufford said. " 'Let's kill him and get
him off the field.' "

To the surprise of his coaches and teammates, Roseberry kept picking himself off
the ground and, however gingerly, crouching into his stance at defensive tackle.
He returned for fall practice, made the squad and wept the day the team picture
was taken with him wearing jersey No. 72.

National Collegiate Athletic Association officials said, though no records are
kept, Roseberry is possibly the oldest player ever to participate in college
football.

Naturally, he is dismissive of the legendary George Blanda, who played
professionally until he was 48.

"He was a kicker," Roseberry said. "I'd play 'til I was 68 if I could kick."

The difference is that Blanda actually stepped onto the field for something more
than the national anthem. Roseberry, 6 feet 4 inches and 240 pounds, has yet to
play in either of Kutztown's first two games against fellow Division II
opponents. He didn't play in Kutztown's 46-21 victory over California of
Pennsylvania on Saturday.

While he has a teen-ager's enthusiasm, he has a middle-aged body, which creaks
like a wooden floor. He did not practice in pads last week, having aggravated a
previous shoulder injury, and needed a cortisone shot. His knees are chronically
sore with tendinitis, and since he returned from the Gulf War, Roseberry said,
he suffers occasionally from burning lungs, achy joints and a swollen stomach.

"He's got more doctors than O. J.'s got lawyers," said Matt Santos, the sports
publicity director at Kutztown.

Still, Roseberry hopes -- firmly believes -- he will play this season here among
the rippling fields of Pennsylvania Dutch country, affirming that he has finally
broken a ruinous cycle of failure: A failed academic career caused, in part, by
undiagnosed dyslexia that pre-empted any previous attempts at college and
college football. And three failed marriages that left him with three estranged
daughters and four grandchildren whom he rarely sees.

"He told me: 'Mom, I've had three bad marriages; I don't know what to do.' And I
told him, 'No one can help you but yourself,' " Roseberry's mother, Eleanor,
said in a telephone interview from her home in Washington, N.J.

"He's taken his life in his own hands," she said. "He's back in school. He's
playing football. Not many people get to live part of their lives over again.
He's showing people that life's not over at 40, that you just don't have to go
sit in a chair."

The last time Roseberry played football was Thanksgiving Day 1965. Twenty-nine
seasons ago. He was a linebacker and an end for Washington (N.J.) High School.

"A good player on a great team," Mike Flood, Roseberry's retired high school
coach, recalled.

Flood and Roseberry both said that recruiting questionnaires arrived from
several schools, but college was never an option.

"My academics were a mess," Roseberry said. "People said I wasn't applying
myself, but I tried as hard as I could. I just felt I was born stupid, and it
was something I'd have to carry my whole life. Every day I lived in fear of how
stupid I was."

By the summer of 1966, Roseberry had joined the Navy and was stationed aboard
the aircraft carrier U.S.S. Forrestal. Later, he served as a police officer in
New Jersey and a corrections officer in Pennsylvania, before joining the Army
Reserve in 1990, hoping to earn college tuition, instead earning a 1991 trip to
the Persian Gulf with the 402d Military Police.

While in the Gulf, confronted with mortality and regret, Roseberry told another
M.P. from his unit that he wished his life, like furniture, could be rearranged,
that he could learn algebra and study fine literature. The problem was,
Roseberry said, he saw words and numbers backward and had trouble comprehending
what he read.

"He thought he was just a dumb jock," said Daniel Guzie, a postal clerk from
Allentown, Pa., in whom Roseberry confided in the Gulf. "He said he saw words
backward, so I made a guess that maybe he had dyslexia."

His friend's guess turned out to be correct, Roseberry said. Returning to the
States, Roseberry said he sought treatment for dyslexia at a Veterans
Administration hospital.

By January 1994, he had enrolled at Kutztown University. He tapes each of his
lectures, and his fiancee, Abbie Klapac, an aerobics instructor and personal
trainer, provides him with audio cassettes of his textbook assignments. A
psychology major, he earned a 3.0 grade point average last spring.

In February, Roseberry walked into the office of Kutztown's football coach, Al
Leonzi, and said he wanted to play football. What was the worst thing that
Leonzi could say? No? If the football team had no interest, Roseberry told
Leonzi, he would go to the baseball coach, the lacrosse coach, the drama coach.

"I didn't want to go around the next four years kicking myself in the butt
because I didn't have the courage to ask," Roseberry said. "I was going to find
someplace where I could fit in. I was going to taste it all."

Leonzi looked at this student with the gray hair and fleshy face, and asked to
see some film. You don't understand, Roseberry said, "I'm 46 years old." There
was no film.

"As I recall, we lifted rocks for weights when I was in school," Roseberry said.
"Like the Flintstones."

If he had anything to recommend him, it was his size. Why not, Leonzi figured.
He was trying to rebuild a team that finished 2-9 last season. He had nothing to
lose.

Anyway, Leonzi, who is 52, had always dreamed of playing in a semipro game at
age 50. Roseberry would give him a vicarious pleasure. And maybe he would
inspire the younger kids. More than likely, he would be gone after a day or two.

A head-on collision at the first spring scrimmage left Roseberry's arthritic
neck twisted like saltwater taffy. He handed his helmet to a trainer and
lamented, "This might be it." He got a drink of water, let the bell quit ringing
in his head and decided to stay.

Still, his coaches and teammates were skeptical. Santos, the publicity director,
didn't bother to include Roseberry in the football media guide. But he came back
for fall practice, and he kept coming back, one day, then two, and after a week,
he was still there.

While several players quit, Roseberry hung in, and during conditioning drills,
Leonzi found himself screaming to his young laggards, "If a 46-year-old can run
these damn hills, I don't understand why 18,- 19- and 20-year-olds can't."

Roseberry is not particularly close to his teammates.

"They come to college to get away from their parents, not to hang around with a
guy who could be their father," he said.

Roseberry is old enough to have played in high school against the father of the
team's freshman nose guard, Matt Griffith. But if Roseberry's teammates aren't
awed by his skills, they respect his persistence.

"I'm very surprised he lasted this long," said linebacker John Mobley, a
National Football League prospect.

Hufford said, "Like one of my teammates said, he's the best 46-year-old player
we've got."

But will he ever play?

Probably, Leonzi said. If Roseberry gets healthy and Kutztown gets far enough
ahead.

"He deserves it," Leonzi said.

Roseberry said, "I'm going to prove that coach Leonzi didn't make a mistake,
that I'm not a weakness on this team, that I'm playing because I deserve to
play."

Leonzi has talked to Roseberry about playing for four seasons. One season should
fulfill his dream, Roseberry said. Then again, maybe not. He thought for a
moment and smiled.

"Next year, I could redshirt," he said.

NAME: Chuck Roseberry

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chuck Roseberry, center, listening to coaches along with
Kutztown teammates during practice. The tackle and grandfather has yet to play a
game. (Christopher Gardner for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: VIRGINIA;
2 Ex-Marines Refight War In Struggle For Senate

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 630 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


After months of unemotional campaigning, Senator Charles S. Robb returned today
to his former Marine barracks here to lash out at Oliver L. North, his
Republican challenger in the Virginia Senate race, and accuse him of lying and
deceit.

The dispute reflected the latest issue in the campaign: who was the better
marine.

In his most spirited remarks of the campaign, Mr. Robb said Mr. North, who is
also a former marine, had insulted him by describing Mr. Robb as an "Eighth and
I" marine, a sarcastic reference to the address of the post in southeast
Washington for marines who serve in ceremonial roles at the White House and
elsewhere.

Mr. North's remarks were made in an interview and quoted in The Wall Street
Journal on Tuesday. "I have a different opinion of his military service," Mr.
North said when asked about Mr. Robb's career in the Marine Corps.

During a nine-year military career, Mr. Robb served 13 months in Vietnam, where
he won medals leading an infantry company into firefights. He was stationed at
the Washington barracks from 1966 to 1968, serving as a White House aide. It was
during that time that he met and married Lynda Bird Johnson, the daughter of
President Lyndon B. Johnson.

In a 22-year military career, Mr. North also served in Vietnam, and received two
Purple Hearts and a Silver Star.

"Oliver North has admitted he lied to Congress, and he has had real problems
with the truth in other areas," Mr. Robb said sternly as he stood outside the
barracks. "I can only conclude, and I say this advisedly, that he lied about my
record in a deliberate attempt to deceive."

Unlike anything else Mr. North has said about Mr. Robb -- from calling him a
"water boy" for President Clinton to referring to accusations of extramarital
improprieties -- the remark provoked an almost visceral reaction from Mr. Robb.

The Senator's response was the harshest attack against his opponent in a tight
campaign that Mr. North is leading by a slim margin, according to most public
opinion polls. J. Marshall Coleman, a Republican running as an independent, is a
distant third.

Campaigning today in Newport News, Va., Mr. North dismissed Mr. Robb's remarks
as an effort to distract voters from the larger issue of Mr. Robb's performance
in the Senate.

"This isn't about Chuck Robb's faithful service in the Marines," Mr. North said
in a telephone interview. "This is all about Chuck Robb being a lousy Senator.
It's a strong effort to distract people about voting for Bill Clinton's policies
in the Senate. It's a wonderful effort to distract people, but I don't think
it's going to work."

In any case, Mr. Robb's comments marked a clear departure from his usual
campaign style; he generally speaks in an even tone, surprising many political
experts as well as allies who thought he would have turned up the volume by now.
Mr. North, by contrast, uses catchy oratory and emotional pleas for support in
attacking Mr. Robb, President Clinton and Democrats in general.

But today, Mr. Robb seemed to fulfill his often stated campaign assertion that
some day "I am going to run out of cheeks" to turn. At one point, he held up a
copy of his service record, a pile of papers several inches thick, and slammed
it on a lectern.

"I was prepared to begin to enjoin a number of important issues," he said. "But
this triggered a response that goes to my very core. Some could have differences
with me or problems with my policies or the way I have voted or attempt to
denigrate someone's private life.

"But when you attack my record, particularly a record I have so much pride in,
it's just more than I could take."

Mr. Robb noted that Mr. North was once assigned to the Washington barracks at
Eighth and I Streets, though the orders were later rescinded.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Julius Segal, 69, Psychologist And Expert on Prisoner Trauma

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 12;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 28


Dr. Julius Segal, a psychologist and author who for 12 years was the director of
the Office of Scientific Information at the National Institute of Mental Health,
died on Monday at his home in Bethesda, Md. He was 69.

The cause was cancer, said Dr. Robert Cohen, a family friend and the former
director of clinical and behavioral research at the institute.

Dr. Segal was an expert on the trauma faced by prisoners of war and hostages; he
studied and treated veterans from the Korean War and the Vietnam War and the
Americans taken hostage by Iran in 1979. Most recently, he focused on child
development issues.

He wrote a number of books, including a widely used textbook, "Psychology: An
Introduction," written with Jerome Kagan and Ernest Havemann, and "Sleep,"
written with Gay Gaer Luce. His most recent book was "Winning Life's Toughest
Battles: Roots of Human Resilience," published in 1986.

He wrote more than 100 government and research reports, including a 25-year
review of the mental health institute's activities, published in 1975. He also
wrote frequently for newspapers and magazines and was a contributing editor and
monthly columnist for Parents magazine.

He started at the mental health institute in 1959 as chief of program analysis,
became the information director in 1974 and retired in 1986. He was a research
scientist at the operations research office of George Washington University from
1951 to 1959 and a lecturer in psychology at the university. He also taught at
the University of Maryland and Montgomery College.

Dr. Segal was a member of the President's Commission on Mental Health in
1977-78.

Dr. Segal, a native of Scranton, Pa., received a bachelor's degree from the
University of Scranton in 1948, a master's degree in psychology from Fordham
University in 1951 and a Ph.D. in psychology from Catholic University in 1952.

He is survived by his wife, Zelda; a daughter, Rebecca Cooper, of North Potomac,
Md.; a son, Theodore, of Bethesda; a sister, Mildred Harris of Scranton; a
brother, Joseph, of Rockville, Md., and four grandchildren.


NAME: Julius Segal

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Julius Segal. (Doubleday, 1969)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 29, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Trade Exhibit By Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 21;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 28


For the first time since the 19-year United States trade embargo was lifted,
Vietnamese companies are exhibiting their products on American soil.

Viet Expo '94 opens officially on Thursday with more than 100 Vietnamese
companies participating. "They've got clothing, food, crafts, tourism, and all
the way to lumber, oil, and investment projects," Mark Chandler, an aide to
Mayor Frank Jordan of San Francisco, said.

The three-day exhibit is sponsored by the Mayor's office and the Vietnam Chamber
of Commerce and Industry.

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 259 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 30, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Simpson Trial To Have 304 In Jury Pool

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 29


The pool of potential jurors for the double murder trial of O. J. Simpson was
completed today, even as the former football star's defense team told Judge
Lance A. Ito why the jurors ultimately selected should not be sequestered during
the trial.

By all accounts, the pool of 304 jury candidates is nearly as diverse as Los
Angeles itself. But in a motion filed on Sept. 14 and made public today, Mr.
Simpson's lawyers argued that choosing a jury from among only those people
willing to remove themselves from friends and family for as long as six months
would skew that sample, depriving Mr. Simpson of a fair cross-section of the
community.

The resulting group, the lawyers said, would not only be wealthier but more more
likely to favor the prosecution. And their views were likely to become more
hostile as jurors were cooped up together for several months and blamed the
defense for their predicament. By the end of the trial, they warned, Mr. Simpson
could face "a jury who are like the proverbial 'scorpions in a bottle.' "

"A highly visible and closely watched trial creates the greatest need for a
truly representative jury, whose verdict will ultimately be accepted by the
community at large," said the brief, which was signed by five prominent lawyers
who make up the core of the defense team: Robert L. Shapiro, Johnnie L Cochran
Jr., F. Lee Bailey, Alan Dershowitz and Gerald F. Uelman. "To limit service to
those who can accept the burden of confinement under jail-like conditions for as
long as six months will unfairly exclude broad categories of the community."

Any sample is clearly skewed, the lawyers continued, if "limited to those
willing to give up the joy of holiday family reunions."

Earlier this month, prosecutors in the case asked Judge Ito to sequester the 12
jurors and 8 alternates from the moment they are selected, a process expected to
take another month or so. The isolation would be all-encompassing, including
censorship of mail, monitoring of phone calls, limited family visits with no
conjugal relations and court approval in advance for all recreational and social
activities.

They repeated that position Wednesday in a hearing. Sequestration, said Deputy
District Attorney William W. Hodgman, was "the best protection, the best
preservation of jury sanctity and integrity we can think of." Without it,
prosecutors have warned, jurors will inevitably be smothered by the avalanche of
publicity in the case. By the prosecution's computer tally, by Sept. 2 there had
been more than 15,310 articles on the case.

Along with all the other ills of sequestration, defense lawyers argued in their
16-page motion, it afforded the government a chance to curry favor with jurors.
The motion noted how in the 1968 prosecution of Dr. Benjamin Spock for anti-
Vietnam war activities, court officers furnished jurors with entertainment, food
from the best restaurants and martinis before dining. "The folklore that a
sequestered jury is a convicting jury finds ample historical support," the
defense team said.

The lawyers further maintained that less drastic alternatives to near-total
isolation were available, beginning with what they called "greater prosecutorial
controls over leaks from police sources." One such leak, they noted, was the
tape recording of Nicole Brown Simpson's distress call to a police operator.
Sequestering, they charged, "makes police and prosecutors the beneficiaries of
their own misconduct, and creates an incentive which will encourage
prosecutorial leaks as a strategic ploy."

Mr. Simpson's lawyers also urged Judge Ito not to keep the jurors anonymous,
something the prosecution has suggested it might request but has not formally
sought. Less drastic alternatives are available to protect the jurors from
"predatory" reporters, they said.

Judge Ito has said he will not decide the matter until after he can digest the
75-page questionnaires each jury candidate has filled out, a task that will
occupy lawyers and jury consultants on both sides of the case in the next two
weeks, and has asked them additional questions himself. But he is clearly
reluctant to impose a complete quarantine, calling it "something I wouldn't want
to do and no normal human being would want to do."

As a possible alternative, he has suggested partial sequestration, in which
jurors would be allowed periodic visits, even picnics, with their families.


LOAD-DATE: September 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
