



Download Request: All Documents: 1-322
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:05:12 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(04/01/1994) and leq(06/30/1994)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Philip Morris Blocked '83 Paper Showing Tobacco Is Addictive, Panel Finds

BYLINE: By PHILIP J. HILTS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 31


In 1983, five years before the Surgeon General declared that nicotine was an
addictive substance, researchers for a tobacco company drew the same conclusion.
Their paper was accepted for publication in a scientific journal, but the
company forced the author to withdraw it, the journal's editor said today.

The study, which tested addiction in rats, was done by Dr. Victor J. DeNoble,
who was working at the Philip Morris Companies, and his colleagues, and was to
be published in the journal Psychopharmacology. Experts on nicotine and
addiction said the paper would have been the first and best of its kind at the
time, an important addition to research on the addictive properties of nicotine.

Dr. Jack E. Henningfield, chief of clinical pharmacology research at the
National Institute on Drug Addiction, a Federal agency, said the withdrawal of
the paper from publication "set the field back six years at least before work
like it could be accomplished by Canadian researchers."

Panel Discloses Report

The research paper was released today at a hearing of the House Subcommittee on
Health and the Environment by its chairman, Representative Henry A. Waxman,
Democrat of California. It resulted from research at the Philip Morris Research
Center in Richmond. Not long after Dr. De Noble wrote the paper, and the company
forced him to withdraw it, he left the company and, Mr. Waxman said, the
research group that produced it was closed down.

Philip Morris executives issued a written statement saying that Dr. DeNoble's
research in general had not been censored, and some studies of nicotine by him
were published, but they would not comment on the specific paper released by Mr.
Waxman. They said they believed that Dr. DeNoble had concluded that cigarettes
were not addictive, but they offered no evidence for that assertion. Efforts to
reach Dr. DeNoble were unsuccessful.

Mr. Waxman said that because Philip Morris owned the laboratory and the
researchers were its employees, all the research was owned by the company. He
said there was probably no legal requirement that the company publish the study,
but there was a moral requirement to do so.

The editor of the journal at the time, Dr. Herbert Barry of the University of
Pittsburgh, said it was highly unusual for a paper to be accepted and then
withdrawn. He said he had not come forward before now because he considered it a
confidential matter, but he agreed to confirm the facts once approached by the
Food and Drug Administration and Mr. Waxman.

Meeting the Addiction Test

Tobacco companies still maintain that nicotine is not addictive, although
leading groups, including the Surgeon General's office, the American Psychiatric
Association and the American Psychological Association, have said that it meets
all the scientific tests for an addicting substance. Other substances that meet
the tests include heroin, cocaine and alcohol.

The standard test methods include determining that people and animals will seek
out the substance and imbibe it almost exclusively and periodically, even though
they are given other favored substances to ingest. Another test is whether
preventing an animal or human from getting the substance causes withdrawal.
Another is whether it produces some positive mental effect like intoxication.

Dr. Henningfield said that nicotine met all the tests to be called an addicting
substance, and met them as strongly as any drug. "There is frankly no scientific
basis for saying nicotine is not addictive," he said. "In fact, in three studies
of people addicted to other drugs, such as heroin, the addicts were equally
motivated to get nicotine as to get heroin. Their ability to quit, the strength
of the habit and their own rating of their need for nicotine were as strong as
for their addicting drug."

In 1983, when the study would have been published, Dr. Henningfield said, there
was no study that had done a good job of establishing a "rat model" for
addiction to nicotine; that is, none showed that rats would work hard to seek
the substance after being exposed to it. A major reason for the problem was that
the method of giving nicotine to rats in previous studies was unlike the ways
humans receive doses of nicotine in cigarettes -- in short, powerful bursts.

This study worked out a way for rats to get their dosage in similar manner.
"Lever-pressing by rats was established and maintained by intravenous nicotine
infusions," the paper said.

"The results," it said, "show that nicotine can be a positive reinforcer for
rats in the absence of other inducement."

Debate on Smoking Habit

Representatives of the tobacco companies have testified in Congress that they
believe nicotine is not addicting because more than 40 million American adults
have quit smoking.

Dr. Henningfield said that even using the figures of tobacco companies, the rate
of quitting is only 2.5 percent per year, which is less than the rate of
quitting by heroin addicts. For example, he said, soldiers returning from
Vietnam addicted to heroin were able to quit on their own at a rate of about 30
percent per year.

Dr. David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, uncovered the DeNoble
study and supplied it on request to Mr. Waxman. Dr. Kessler has indicated that
the Food and Drug Administration might for the first time be willing to regulate
the nicotine in cigarettes as an addicting drug if it could be shown that
nicotine was addictive.


LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Doctor Says He Falsified Cancer Data to Help Patients

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL, MARCH 31


Dr. Roger Poisson, a prominent Montreal surgeon who has admitted falsifying data
in a major North American breast cancer study, said today that he might have
broken some rules but did so out of devotion to patients whose inclusion in the
research qualified them for state-of-the-art treatment.

He berated his critics, chiefly in the United States, who he said wanted him to
blindly obey rigid research guidelines. He accused the critics of persecuting
him and "taking the same attitude towards me as the States had against Somalia
and Vietnam."

Dr. Poisson, 62, who had been hospitalized for the last 10 days in connection
with a stress-related ailment, met with reporters in the office of his lawyer,
William Brock. The doctor said he had antagonized the United States medical
establishment by advocating a lumpectomy rather than a mastectomy in treating
breast cancer before a lumpectomy, a less disfiguring operation, became accepted
practice. The establishment was now using him as a scapegoat, he said.

Shock to Canadian Doctors

Dr. Poisson, who was stripped of his post as head of cancer research at the
Saint-Luc Hospital, a teaching hospital of the University of Montreal, is
accused of supplying false data on 99 of the 1,511 patents he enrolled in the
study. The study is considered a highly important contribution to treatment of
breast cancer.

The disclosures of the false data have sent shockwaves through the Canadian
medical profession. American auditors are combing the records of two other
Montreal teaching hospitals that participated in the study -- Saint Mary's
Hospital and Jewish General Hospital -- looking for irregularities.

Dr. Poisson said his irregularities were of a technical nature and did not
affect the findings of the research. He acknowledged that there were 115
anomalies in his reporting during the 15 years he participated in the study.

One of the 22 rules in the research agreement was that women had to join the
study within 28 days of a breast cancer diagnosis. That was later changed to 56
days.

54 Diagnosis Dates Changed

In 54 of the 115 cases, he said, he altered the diagnosis dates to get patients
into the study in which they qualify for advanced treatment methods.

By standard ethical procedures, however, patients are given a choice of whether
to enter clinical trials. If they choose not to do so, they are expected to
receive state-of-the-art medical care. The goal of a trial is to determine
whether a new treatment is better or worse than the standard; if the new
treatment proved to be more advanced, there would be no need for a trial.

Dr. Dwight Kaufman, deputy director of cancer treatment at the National Cancer
Institute, which was one of the sponsors of the seminal study, called Dr.
Poisson's comments "farcical." He said the Montreal surgeon had shown that he
had "no understanding or respect for the scientific method in research."

He emphasized that Dr. Poisson "misses the point of the potential harm to women
around the world that could have come from tainted and fraudulent data."

Dr. Poisson said that in 30 years of treating breast cancer patients, his goal
had been to provide "the best treatment available with the least amount of
mutilation possible."

He asked not to be judged on the discrepancies in his research data but on his
larger contributions to patient well-being.

In an open letter published today in La Presse, one of the city's leading
newspapers, he said that Quebec had the lowest rate of mastectomies in all of
North America, one of the highest rates of chemotherapy in place of surgery, and
one of the best records of early detection of breast cancer tumors in the world.

Dr. Poisson has been barred from participating in any United States-financed
medical research, but apart from losing his title at Saint-Luc he has not been
reprimanded by the authorities in Canada.

$1 Million in Dispute

Dr. Poisson declined to answer questions related to any possible claims that the
National Cancer Institute might have against Saint-Luc's or himself. The
institute gave the hospital $1 million for the study, and United States
officials have taken steps to recover the money.

Mr. Brock, the lawyer, said: "I don't think we have any liability, but we don't
really want to comment. No claim is pending, and no claim has yet been made."

While maintaining that he had done nothing basically wrong and that "truth is
nuanced and not all black and white," Dr. Poisson did concede that an apology to
his profession might be in order.

Asked whether he wanted to apologize, he shook his head affirmatively and
replied, "In hindsight, knowing what I know now."

In conducting the studies, he said, he was "enthusiastic, perhaps a little too
enthusiastic."

Asked how he sees his future, he said that breast cancer "is my profession, and
my profession is my life." He recalled words that he attributed to Rudyard
Kipling: "Man is great once he has lost everything and is capable of rising
again."


NAME: Roger Poisson

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dr. Roger Poisson, who has admitted falsifying data in a major breast
cancer study, met with reporters yesterday in his lawyer's office. (Robert
Frechette for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Spielberg Wins a Peabody For TV Cartoon Series

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga., March 31


Steven Spielberg's television cartoon series, "Animaniacs" on the Fox network,
today won a Peabody Award, the prestigious prize for excellence in radio or
television.

Mr. Spielberg, whose film "Schindler's List" won best movie and best director
Oscars last week, won 1 of 29 Peabodys, which are administered by the Henry
Grady College of Journalism at the University of Georgia.

A national board selects the recipients on overall merit rather than in specific
categories.

These were the other winners:

ABC RADIO NEWS for "Vietnam Women's Memorial," cited by the judges as "a finely
drawn tribute to the women who served in the Vietnam conflict."

NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO for its coverage of health-care proposals.

WHYY RADIO in Philadelphia for "Fresh Air With Terry Gross," "a weekly magazine
of contemporary culture and public affairs marked by probing questions,
revelatory interviews and unusual insight."

WBZ RADIO in Boston for "Kid Company," "an outstanding radio program for
children which is engaging, inventive and educational."

BBC RADIO 4 in London for "Document: The Unspeakable Atrocity," "a riveting and
important self-examination of this venerable broadcast institution."

WWL-TV in New Orleans for "Facing Reality: Politics, Drugs and Waste,"
"investigative reporting of the highest caliber."

"DAY ONE," ABC News, for "Scarred for Life," "a descriptive and direct report of
a centuries-old ritual with critical health and political implications for
modern times."

WKRN-TV in Nashville for "Under the Influence," "an investigative report on
ethical malfeasance in local government which resulted in pending legislation."

ROBERT BAZELL, NBC News, for health and science reporting.

WCVB-TV in Boston for "Chuck Kraemer Reporting," "television essays and
commentaries that are at once informative, entertaining and poignant."

FASE PRODUCTIONS in Los Angeles for "Good Morning, Miss Toliver," "an inspiring
and revealing portrait of a teacher making a difference in New York's East
Harlem."

WTTW-TV in Chicago, and Kurtis Productions Ltd. for "The New Explorers," "which
makes science accessible and exciting to a young audience."

FOX CHILDREN'S NETWORK and Churchill Entertainment, Los Angeles, for "a public
service campaign about racial, gender and general differences which succeeds
both as information and as excellent television."

HBO and Video Verte Films, New York, for "I Am a Promise," an "inside glimpse of
one school which becomes a metaphor for the condition of public education in the
United States."

BBC SOUTH, Bristol, England, for "The Nineties," "an oral history marked by
humor, compassion and above all excellence."

P.O.V.-SILVERLAKE PRODUCTIONS, New York, for "Silverlake Life," "a gripping
account of the AIDS epidemic."

WTVM-TV in Birmingham, Ala., for "Angels of Change," a "follow-up report of the
bombing of Birmingham's 16th Street Baptist Church."

"60 MINUTES," CBS News, for "The C.I.A.'s Cocaine," "a timely and important
investigative report."

YORKSHIRE TELEVISION in Yorkshire, England, for "Kate and Eilish: Siamese
Twins," shown on the Discovery Channel, "a sensitive, revealing and tender
examination of a family dealing with a medical crisis."

NBC and Baltimore Pictures in association with Reeves Entertainment for
"Homicide," the police drama series.

A.M.L.  for "The Ernest Green Story," shown on the Disney Channel, "a story of
extraordinary courage and perseverance which reminds adults and teaches children
the important first steps taken toward the elimination of discrimination in
society."

CHANNEL 13/WNET in New York and MTM Enterprises Inc. in association with
EuroArts-Brilliant Media, for "American Masters: Paul Simon."

COMEDY CENTRAL, New York, and Best Brains Inc. for "Mystery Science Theater
3000," "a whimsical, enterprising and eclectic combination of cutting-edge
television comedy and B-grade movies."

GRANADA TELEVISION OF ENGLAND in association with WGBH-TV, Boston, for "Prime
Suspect," "a series marked by extraordinary writing, unmatched realism and
acting rarely seen in the television medium."

HBO and Brillstein-Grey Entertainment for "The Larry Sanders Show."

THE DISCOVERY NETWORKS , Bethesda, Md., an institutional award for "educating
and informing through the Discovery Channel and the Learning Channel."

CHRISTIANE AMANPOUR, a CNN correspondent, for coverage of "Bosnia and other
world crises."

PAUL HARVEY, a personal award in recognition of a lifetime of achievement in
radio news.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 20;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 264 words



Mitch Epstein
 Julie Saul Gallery
 560 Broadway (near Prince Street)
 SoHo
 Through April 9

The people in Mitch Epstein's new color photographs, taken in Vietnam, Cambodia
and Japan, seem always lost in reverie. For the most part, Mr. Epstein forgoes
attempts to explain life in that country in favor of images of people alone,
glimpsed on the street or in stores or homes.

At the Grand Hotel in Siem Reap, Cambodia, a bellhop in a crisp white jacket
hides behind a tall potted plant, while on a road in Vietnam a young woman
crouches by a wall, her face struck with light. Elsewhere in Vietnam, a man
standing beside a blue pool table, cue in hand, pulls the corners of his mouth
back in a grimace.

Occasionally, Mr. Epstein records details that suggest the flavor of the
countries he visits. In one such image, a mirror reflects the ornate decor of
the Hanoi opera house, from the French colonial era, but the mirror is also
broken by a bullet hole.

Mr. Epstein makes remarkable use of light as an expressive element, but a few
pictures are so intensely colored that they verge on the decorative. A
photograph of a drinks menu in an army guest house in Hanoi, for example,
appears next to a bouquet of roses, in various reds and pinks, placed in front
of a gauzy turquoise curtain.

In another picture from Hanoi, a woman at an outdoor beauty shop sits beneath a
towering red hair dryer that looks like a cross between a ceremonial headdress
and a missile.  Richly evocative pictures of this sort give the show its sense
of discovery.   CHARLES HAGEN

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
MOBIL BUYS STAKE IN VIETNAM OILFIELD

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 63 words


The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had acquired a 25 percent stake in
an oilfield off the coast of Vietnam, where it will explore for oil. Mobil, the
second-largest oil company in the United States, said it had bought the stake
from AOC Energy Development Ltd. of Japan, which retains a 30 percent stake in
the block. Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 3, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 863 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     7   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2     2   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of
           a killer.

 3     2   WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that
           lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.

 4    13   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 5     3   LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.)
           Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century
           Britain.

 6     2   HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a
           German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.

 7     1   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching
           his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the
           history of Mexico.

 8*    5   WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas
           Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in
           Wisconsin's cold woods.

 9    10   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a California town vexes a temporary district
           attorney.

 10    4   THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious
           attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal
           of past crimes.

 11   14   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 12    1   PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser
           tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South
           Carolina town.

 13*   7   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 14    1   CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster
           and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters
           World War III.

 15    6   THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
           (Jove, $4.99.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran
           solve a mystery.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    12   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    543  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    59   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 4    12   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5     1   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.)
           The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 6     4   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture
           and murder.

 7    44   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 8    143  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 9    22   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 10*  129  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 11    1   IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.)
           The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the
           1970's and 80's.

 12    9   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.

 13   142  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 14*  47   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 15*  18   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 16*  29   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 17*  17   EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) A
           woman whose idyllic wedding was followed by a series of
           murders.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     4   MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and
           Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&S, $11.) Ways to teach
           children about spending and saving money.

 2    159  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 3    166  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 4    24   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 19, at 3,050 bookstores plus
wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent
sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales
are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


TRANSLATING FOR KING JAMES: Notes Made
by a Translator of King James's Bible
Translated and edited by Ward Allen.
Vanderbilt University, $19.95.
The Cambridge University scholars who translated the Bible for James I were
neither well recompensed nor much remembered. This book attempts redress for at
least one of them, John Bois, a country preacher whose notes are rendered here.
In 1970 our reviewer, Helen Bevington, said that Bois "lives on as a tireless
and brilliant scholar, worthy of the tremendous task."
CIVIL WARS
By Rosellen Brown. Dell, $5.99.
This 1984 novel by the author of "Before and After" deals with a couple whose
idealism seems as worn as their marriage. It is 1978 and the Carlls, former
civil rights workers who are white, find themselves unwelcome in the black
neighborhood in Jackson, Miss., where they've lived for many years. As a family
crisis unfolds, "this lucidly courageous book asks not only about heroes stuck
in memory's groove but about us," Lynne Sharon Schwartz said here. A troubled
union is also at the heart of Ms. Brown's TENDER MERCIES (Dell, $5.99), which
explores the devastating aftermath of a boating accident in which Dan Courser
permanently cripples his young wife, Laura. The novel "contains prose as
masterful, and as moving, as any being written today," Joyce Carol Oates said
here in 1978. Dell has also reissued the author's first novel, THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF MY MOTHER ($5.99), in which the warring principals are a famous civil rights
lawyer and her diffident daughter, a former hippie with her own hapless child.
In 1976 our reviewer, Laurie Stone, said that the deep and deadly connections
between mothers and daughters "are nowhere in contemporary fiction better
dramatized than here."


THE PEOPLE IN THE PLAYGROUND
By Iona Opie. Oxford University, $10.95.
The rituals of childhood are passed on from generation to generation. Iona Opie,
a British researcher, has observed this firsthand through decades of recording
playground behavior. This account, which captures the period from January 1978
through summer 1980, displays the author's "wit and common sense," Vivian Gussin
Paley said here last year. Ms. Paley's own book YOU CAN'T SAY YOU CAN'T PLAY
(Harvard University, $10) describes a gentle experiment in social engineering
she undertook as a kindergarten teacher in Chicago. Her experiences make for a
book that is "magical in its appeal and inspiring in its message," our reviewer,
Derrick Bell, said in 1992. More prescriptions for furthering ethical
development can be found in BRINGING UP A MORAL CHILD: Teaching Your Child to Be
Kind, Just, and Responsible, by Michael Schulman and Eva Mekler (Main
Street/Doubleday, $14.95). Now revised and updated, it is a "sound,
research-based 'how-to' manual," Sandra Scarr said here in 1985.
THE INFINITE PLAN
By Isabel Allende. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden. Harper Perennial, $12.
In her first novel set in North America, the author of "The House of the
Spirits" tells the story of Gregory Reeves, a white boy who grows up in the Los
Angeles barrio, fights in Vietnam and goes on to successful but embittered
adulthood. Last year our reviewer, Robert Bly, saw in Gregory's history a mirror
of the country's postwar disillusionment. "Ms. Allende's ambit is large; she
offers pity and terror," he said.
THE REDISCOVERY OF THE MIND
By John R. Searle. MIT, $12.95.
Is the brain really just a computer? Far from it, says the author. Mr. Searle
asserts that mental activity must be understood in terms of its
neurophysiological basis; the brain, after all, is not a machine. "The ranks of
the computationalists have probably never had such a powerful challenge,"
Anthony Gottlieb said here in 1992. Michael S. Gazzaniga, the author of NATURE'S
MIND: The Biological Roots of Thinking, Emotions, Sexuality, Language, and
Intelligence (Basic Books, $15), is certainly not a computationalist. The brain
is innately endowed with a number of neural pathways, he argues, but life
experiences influence which circuits are ultimately used. Last year our
reviewer, Stuart Sutherland, found this a "fascinating if difficult book." Also
exploring the biology of consciousness is MEMORY'S VOICE: Deciphering the
Mind-Brain Code, by Daniel L. Alkon (Harper Perennial, $12). It examines the
molecular foundations of memory, and how memory, in turn, may alter the brain.
"The archeologists of the mind . . . have found their Boswell," one critic said
last year.
ARE YOU MINE?
By Abby Frucht. Grove/Atlantic, $12.
Douglas and Cara, a couple in their 30's, find themselves unexpectedly
anticipating a third child. The reader accompanies them on a reproductive
odyssey as they weigh their options. Last year our reviewer, Jay Gummerman,
said, "Ms. Frucht performs one of the toughest, most important acts a writer of
fiction can do, which is to take a politically charged issue like abortion and
completely and utterly humanize it."
AFTER THE WAR
By Richard Marius. Rutledge Hill, $16.95.
The war is World War I, and Paul Alexander, this novel's Greek narrator, tries
to bury his tragic memories of battle by settling in a small town in Tennessee.
Instead, he finds himself drawn into the lives of the inhabitants. The book
"moved me, made me laugh out loud, broke my heart," Robert Ward said here in
1992.
THE WOMAN WHO MARRIED A BEAR
By John Straley. Signet, $4.99.
An alcoholic private eye investigates the murder of a Tlingit woman's son in the
wilds of Alaska. In 1992 our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, found this mystery
"atmospheric" with "vigorous prose."
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Death Wishes

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1989 words


Modern-day Americans have been as repressed about death as the Victorians were
about sex, or so say the thanatologists, those academics who delve into all
aspects of death -- medical, psychological and social.

But suddenly death seems to have gone from interloper to invited guest, judging
by the outpouring of books and movies that have recently poked at it from every
angle. Death has even wormed its way into the world of marketing, inspiring a
number of macabre products, from skeleton earrings to the Death brand of
cigarettes.

Betty J. Eadie's "Embraced by the Light," a Christian account of a near-death
experience filled with ministering angels, has topped best-seller lists for
months. "How We Die" by Sherwin B. Nuland, a doctor's graphic tale of how six
major causes of death -- from AIDS to Alzheimer's -- sabotage the body, has also
become a best seller, leading a pack of recent titles like "Raising the Dead: A
Doctor's Encounter With His Own Mortality," "The Tibetan Book of Living and
Dying" and "Death: The Trip of a Lifetime."

Death has won a niche in Hollywood, too. Last fall, "Fearless," starring Jeff
Bridges, depicted an architect who feels so invincible after surviving a plane
crash that he keeps taunting death. That was followed by "My Life," in which a
public-relations executive played by Michael Keaton makes peace with his life,
and death, in the face of a cancer diagnosis. And of course, "Schindler's List"
and "Philadelphia" examine, respectively, the Holocaust and AIDS.

Beyond the serious treatment of death are products that evoke the end or even
scream it. Last year, the Los Angeles County coroner's office inaugurated
Skeletons in the Closet, a mail-order catalogue of grisly items like toe-tag key
chains and beach towels etched with a crime-scene body outline. (The profits
help underwrite the office's programs to combat drunken driving.) Becoming a hit
on college campuses is the "dead-baby" necklace, a creation of a California
jeweler who colorized a Victorian photo of a deceased infant (once a common
memento) and encircled it with silver beads. On the East Coast, a chic
bulletproof vest, encased in black leather, has been dubbed "Kill Couture."

Is it all a gloomy coincidence? Hardly. Psychologists, sociologists, theologians
and, yes, thanatologists, say that faddishness aside, a number of social forces
have jolted American society out of its denial of death. And if the forces
themselves are grim, the awakening is healthy.

"Death has come out of the closet," said Rabbi Earl A. Grollman, a psychologist
and the author of 10 books on death, including "Straight Talk About Death for
Teenagers" (Beacon Press, 1993). "For so many years people thought that if they
didn't talk about it, death would go away. It was the immorality of mortality.
But for the first time, people are willing to acknowledge that living is the
leading cause of death, and they want to talk about it."

The current interest in death certainly has its precedents, notably Dr.
Elisabeth Kubler-Ross's best-selling "On Death and Dying," published in 1969.
Ten years earlier, Dr. Herman Feifel's "Meaning of Death" captured wide public
attention. In between, the assassination of President John F. Kennedy turned the
private practice of mourning public, and the televised war in Vietnam beamed
images of death across shag carpets.

But in the last 15 years -- paradoxically, a time of relative peace -- new
phenomena have catapulted death to the fore of American life.

The AIDS epidemic has returned premature death to a society that had all but
wiped out fatal childhood diseases, and the mushrooming of violent crime has
raised the specter of random death.

Ethical debates swirl around the practices of euthanasia and assisted suicide,
whose chief proponent, Dr. Jack Kevorkian, is both hailed and vilified. The baby
boomers are seeing their parents die and, paunchy and graying themselves, are
grappling with their mortality. And with the approaching millennium, prophecies
of doom dating to Nostradamus have prompted fundamentalists to hunker down and
have set even skeptics on edge.

Taking the long view, social historians say that Americans are reclaiming death
as an integral part of life after more than a half century in which it was
deleted from the national consciousness. In the 19th century, people often died
young and usually died at home. The dead were commonly dressed in their Sunday
best for a final photograph, and their hair was framed as a keepsake.

But with the advances of modern medicine, infant and child mortality rates
tumbled, and the institutionalization of death meant that home and family were
replaced by a sterile hospital and a medical staff of strangers.

That shift in experience is documented in a traveling exhibition, organized by
the Strong Museum in Rochester, called "Memory and Mourning: American
Expressions of Grief." The show, which will be at the museum through next
February, contrasts attitudes toward death in two periods, 1850 to 1920 and 1920
to 1993.

"Nobody had to write a book in the 19th century called 'How We Die' because
people recognized it and experienced it," said David J. Rothman, who teaches
courses in social medicine and history at Columbia University. "Hospitals have a
variety of ways of disguising death, including how they get rid of the bodies. A
generation is now aging for whom death is a mystery, for whom death has, for the
most part, been invisible."

The process of dying has grown so complicated that the saying "my number's up"
sounds almost quaint. Phrases like "life-support systems," "extraordinary
measures" and "living wills" have become part of the vocabulary. Patients can be
sustained for months tied to tubes and pumps, leading to fears of a limbo called
"techno-death."

"People don't want to be passive," said Renee Weber, a philosophy professor at
Rutgers University who teaches a course called "Philosophies of Death and
Dying." "They want to have an active role in how they end their lives."

Increasingly, Americans seem to want to get back to a "natural" death. Hospice
programs, which attend to the well-being of dying patients, usually in their own
homes, did not exist until the mid-1960's but now number 2,000 nationwide.
Living wills, which allow the terminally ill to set limits on the amount of
medical intervention, have also soared in popularity.

Thanatologists say that in this century the American practice of repressing
death stemmed from the onward-and-upward attitude that medicine and technology
could conquer everything, an attitude extending subconsciously to death. "It's
an insult to us that we couldn't best this," said Dr. Therese A. Rando, a
psychologist in Warwick, R.I., who lectures on grief and bereavement. "That's
not the American way. Primitive societies deal much better with death than we
do."

In the current crop of books on death, there is, indeed, a bow toward other
cultures for guidance. "Death: The Trip of a Lifetime" (HarperSan Francisco,
1993) by Greg Palmer is a round-the-world tour of other countries and their
approaches to death. "The Tibetan Book of Living and Dying" (HarperSan
Francisco, 1992) by Sogyal Rinpoche, which has appeared on best-seller lists in
San Francisco and Seattle, casts a contemporary light on the 1927 classic, "The
Tibetan Book of the Dead." Still a steady seller itself, that book documents the
Tibetan Buddhist philosophy of living life to the full while acknowledging
death.

The last decade has seen a spiritual groping that some social historians and
theologians say is tied to concerns about death. Increasing reports of
near-death experiences are usually cast in religious terms. The New Age movement
has moved from the fringe to the mainstream, and the ubiquitous cherub has
become a talisman of the 90's. In the acclaimed Broadway play "Angels in
America," a character stricken with AIDS meets his ancestral ghosts and has
several encounters with a statuesque and ambiguous angel.

"Death does inherently prick our spirituality because it asks those questions:
why are we born, why do we have to die and what happens after," said Dr. Kenneth
J. Doka, a professor of gerontology at the College of New Rochelle, a Lutheran
minister and the president of the Association for Death Education and
Counseling, a nonprofit professional group.

By contrast, some recent literary depictions of dying, though elegantly told,
are coldly analytical. Two intellectuals who have not gone silently into that
good night are Dr. Lewis Thomas, the author of "The Lives of a Cell," and the
writer Harold Brodkey, who has AIDS. In the last year, The New Yorker has
published two first-person pieces by Mr. Brodkey that give a searing picture of
the state of his mind and body as death encroaches. A profile of Dr. Thomas last
November in The New York Times Magazine, just two weeks before he died at age
80, powerfully rendered his musings on death.

In the current best-seller "How We Die," Dr. Nuland pulls back the hospital
curtain, exposing the relentless march of disease with stark candor. Yet, there
are hints of transcendence. In the chapter "A Valentine -- and How It Fails," he
describes the heart's sinoatrial node, which drives the heartbeat. "Awestruck
anew each time they viewed the proud independence of an animal heart," he
writes, "wise men of ancient civilizations proclaimed that this supernal
mechanism of boldly autonomous flesh must be the dwelling place of the soul."

Some experts on death and dying criticize the marketing of death, motivated,
they say, by its shock value or black humor. Others argue that having a good
laugh over death -- drinking coffee, say, from a mug decorated with the mascot
of the Los Angeles coroner's office (Sherlock Holmes as skeleton) -- is the
first step toward coming to terms with it.

"There's still a sense of taboo, and it comes out in an illicit, pornographic
way," Dr. Doka said. "For an adolescent struggling with sexuality, pornography
is a funny way to skirt around it. Death souvenirs allow us to do the same
thing. We can mock death and have a joking familiarity with it, which are ways
to recognize it."

Tom Platt, a 42-year-old New York fashion designer, doesn't know anyone his age
without "a parent who has died or had a catastrophic illness in the last five
years." He says he uses humor not to tiptoe around the subject of death but to
skip right through it.

"Ten years ago, a friend and I started talking about death because it made both
our wives crazy," he said. "We have a whole repertoire of jokes about death. For
us, it is just a fun way of acknowledging it."

For Carol Harding, 38, of Woodland Hills, Calif., who has sold 3,000 "dead baby"
necklaces in six months, the Victorians demonstrated a positive acceptance of
death. "Every time you deny the inevitable, there's a blockage, and it subverts
itself into some form of neurosis," she said. "We're losing our parents and
losing our friends to AIDS, and we're trying to develop a way of coping."

But she's the first to admit that her necklaces also hold a purely macabre
appeal: "It's weird, like an accident on the freeway. You don't want to look,
but you look."

Ideally, people find a middle ground for their thoughts about death,
thanatologists say. "In a crazy, magical way we integrate both views -- that we
are going to die, and that we are not going to die," said Dr. Feifel, the author
of "The Meaning of Death" (McGraw-Hill, 1959) and now a professor emeritus at
the University of Southern California School of Medicine.

Obsessing about death can lead to paralysis, while ignoring it can squander
opportunity. "The important thing about death is the importance of life," Rabbi
Grollman said. "Do what you have to do now. Live today meaningfully."

The Romans had an expression for it: carpe diem, or "seize the day." Sure
enough, it's now emblazoned on a hot-selling T-shirt.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Clouds in Blue Sky," (Peter Walton/Superstock)(pg.1);

Illustrations: "Coffin with Flowers, Grim Reeper, 'RIP' Cap" (Nancy
Doniger)(pg.1);

Photo: The Los Angeles County coroner's office is marketing a "body outline"
towel. (Naum Kazhdan/The New York Times)(pg.8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Portraitist To Potentates Of All Stripes

BYLINE: By BILL RYAN

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1507 words


JIMMY CARTER once did a drawing for him. He recently had lunch with George Bush.
Captains of industry and renowned surgeons and educators seek out his services.
And Herbert E. Abrams is still a bit awestruck by his association with the high
and mighty.

"I feel that I'm a lucky, lucky man," he said. "I came from a background of
poverty. When I was young, I helped my father peddle fruit from a pushcart."

Mr. Abrams is one of the country's leading practitioners of portraiture, an art
form generally associated with the past -- with Henry VIII in the 16th century
telling his court painter, Hans Holbein, to go around Europe and paint royal
maidens Henry might care to marry, or with Gilbert Stuart in the 18th century,
producing at least 40 portraits of George Washington.

Capturing Carter and Bush

But even in an era of instant communication and sophisticated photography,
portrait painting is still alive. Mr. Abrams's portrait of Jimmy Carter hangs in
the White House. His painting of George Bush will also be there when he finishes
it.

Other portraits, some 200 of them, are in the Capitol in Washington,
statehouses, museums, corporate boardrooms, medical schools and the Pentagon.
His paintings of Gen. William C. Westmoreland and the astronaut Edwin E. Aldrin
Jr. hang at the United States Military Academy at West Point. A portrait of
former Senator Howard H. Baker is at the Capitol, and one of former Secretary
Donald T. Regan is at the Treasury.

Mr. Arbrams said his national acceptance began with his portrayal of General
Westmoreland, painted in the 60's when the general was superintendent at West
Point. In 1972, when the General was commanding American troops in Vietnam, Mr.
Abrams spent a week with him there, producing five paintings of war scenes for
the Army's military history program.

A second painting of General Westmoreland by Mr. Abrams now hangs in the Chiefs
of Staff Portrait Gallery at the Pentagon, along with the artist's paintings of
Gen. Creighton W. Abrams and Gen. Bruce Palmer.

Hillside Studio

Mr. Abrams has no idea how many other portrait painters are active in the nation
today. "I just do my own thing," he said.

For three decades, his own thing has been living and working in Warren, in
Litchfield County. He and his wife, Lois, bought some hilly acreage there in the
early 60's, and he built a studio perched on the side of the hill while they
rented a home elsewhere. Several years later, they added a home a few hundred
yards up the hill from the studio.

Each morning, Mr. Abrams walks down to the studio after breakfast, then walks
back up for lunch, and returns to his work place for the afternoon. It is a
discipline he imposes on himself, even though he admits he sometimes just sits
around the studio waiting for inspiration.

"Sometimes, I don't do anything for weeks," he said cheerily. Other times, he
said, he works like mad. The only constant is that he is in the studio each day.

At 73, Herbert Abrams is at the top of his form, official portrait painter for
two of the last four Presidents. He has enough commissions to afford such
luxuries as five weeks each winter at a beach resort in Puerto Rico. He does
about 10 portraits a year, at prices that range from $10,000 to $35,000 each.

He is duly thankful for the success. There were a lot of years, he will admit,
that his art did not pay off: "In the 50's, I sold paintings off a bench in
Greenwich Village, and once in a while I'd get $35 for doing a portrait."

'Visual Sensitivity'

He praises his wife for allowing him to keep painting during the tough years.
"She's the one who went out to work so I could stay at home and paint," he said.
"Can you imagine her coming home tired at night, and there I am sitting in a
chair and doing nothing." It was not a question.

In turn, Lois Abrams says that it took much too long for the public to realize
that her husband had a special talent. "He should have been recognized earlier,"
she said.

Mr. Abrams does not talk about talent when he describes himself or his work. "I
call it visual sensitivity," he said.

A good portrait painter, he added, must have the courage to paint as he thinks
he should, to capture the total essence of a person's personality in one
painting. He knows that there are certain risks involved, he said, since he is
dealing with strong personalities accustomed to getting their own way. No
matter.

"No one tells me what to do," he said. "If I get what I like, I think they'll
like it, too." And two-thirds of the people he has painted, he said, have become
real friends.

No Favorite Portrait

With flowing white hair and mustache, Mr. Abrams looks like a character in a
painting of the American frontier. Among his own works, he has no favorite
portrait. "Each one has a life of its own," he said.

And he has enjoyed all the people he has painted. "It's great," he said, "just
being part of these people's lives."

Some of the people, he will admit, have been more fascinating than others. One
of his favorites was Jimmy Carter. The Abramses were in Plains, Ga., a dozen
years ago as part of the research for his portrait of the former President, and
Mr. Carter asked how Mr. Abrams carried his portraits-in-progress on a plane.
Mr. Abrams said he rolled them up, put them in a tube of hard cardboard or a
wooden box and checked them through as baggage.

Mr. Carter said he thought there was a better way, went into his garage and came
back with a collapsible metal tube he used for carrying his fly-fishing rods. He
gave it to Mr. Abrams and even drew a little fish on the case. Mr. Abrams has
been using the tube ever since as carry-on luggage, eliminating the horrible
possibility that one of his paintings could wind up in, say, Los Angeles while
he is going to Seattle.

Photos and Live Sittings

Before starting a painting, Mr. Abrams insists on meeting subjects informally
for lunch, so he can observe how they move and holds themselves. After that, he
takes photographs from various angles and arranges for the subject to pose for a
few live sittings. He met George and Barbara Bush in New York in early winter
and has since met the former President at his office in Houston.

Using the photographs, the live sessions and his memory, Mr. Abrams will create
the Bush portrait, but he sets no time limits on himself. It depends on how many
spurts of inspiration he musters in his studio.

The reality of being in such an enviable position still surprises him. If anyone
started out with few prospects, said Herbert Abrams, it was he.

His father was a German immigrant who had a dairy farm in Massachusetts but went
bankrupt early in the Depression and took his wife and 10 children to Hartford,
where he hoped to find work in a factory. When he could not find a job, he got a
pushcart from which to sell fruit and vegetables.

'Wouldn't Go on Welfare'

Among the Abramses' neighbors in the blue-collar Frog Hollow section of Hartford
was the Killian family, and Robert R. Killian, a contemporary of Herbert Abrams,
remembers the elder Mr. Abrams well. "He wouldn't go on welfare, so he got
himself that pushcart," Mr. Killian said. Nearly a half-century later, Mr.
Abrams painted Mr. Killian, who had become Lieutenant Governor of Connecticut.
The portrait hangs in the State Capitol.

When he was going to Hartford Public High School in the impoverished 30's,
Herbert Abrams said, he had no visions of ever advancing far in life.
"Traditionally, our family did not graduate from high school," he said, and in
his sophomore year, he was following along in that pattern, failing a few
subjects and taking what he called long weekends, which meant he did not bother
to show up for school on Mondays. It seemed only a matter of time before he
would be out of school and into some menial job.

It did not happen. A teacher, Helen Simon, came to him one day and said she
wanted him on the board of The Chronicle, the school's literary magazine. "It
changed my life," he said. "This was a real honor."

He graduated in 1939 as editor of the magazine, went on to study art at Norwich
Free Academy and then into the service in World War II, becoming a pilot. After
that, he went back to studying art in New York, at the Pratt Institute and the
Art Students League. He dabbled briefly in abstraction but never had any
question that his emphasis would be on traditional art. He describes himself as
a traditional realist and his chosen medium is traditional, too: oils.

Other than the fact that it took him a few decades to become established, he
seems to have no regrets. He does what he wants, on his own terms, has traveled
extensively and has come to know any number of famous people.

Neither the Democratic nor the Republican Presidential sitter -- nor any other
sitters involved in politics -- have asked him about his own political leanings,
he said, though he would have told if asked.

For the record, he is a Democrat, currently painting a former Republican
President.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Herbert Abrams of Warren painted Jimmy Carter. Now it's George
Bush's turn. (Stephen Castagneto for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Wall St. Star's Agonizing Confession

BYLINE: By SYLVIA NASAR with ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3654 words


Larry Kudlow seemed a master of the universe. Being a top Wall Street economist
was not the half of it. Mr. Kudlow had been a prominent member of President
Reagan's economic team. He helped conceive and fight for the tax-cut proposal
that helped Christine Todd Whitman become Governor of New Jersey. One of the
nation's most articulate and charismatic commentators on financial issues, he
has become the economic guru of Jack Kemp and of the conservative radio host
Rush Limbaugh, as well as a regular on television interview programs and a
speaker commanding hefty fees. He even starred in Cadillac ads.

To hear some leading Republicans, the 46-year-old Mr. Kudlow has nowhere to go
but up. They consider him a hot political property, a potential challenger for
the Senate seat of Daniel Patrick Moynihan in New York or, should a
right-leaning Republican like Mr. Kemp win the White House in 1996, a shoo-in
for a Cabinet position. John Sweeney, executive director of the New York State
Republican Committee, last week called him "one of the brightest stars."

But last week, in an interview, Larry Kudlow had a confession to make: behind
the polished facade lived a troubled and deeply unhappy man who has been
battling an addiction to drugs and alcohol.

Swiveling in his chair in the offices of his new employer, National Review
magazine, Mr. Kudlow lighted yet another Merit Ultra Light and began an
explanation that many others would not summon the courage to make: Fifteen
months ago he took a four-week medical leave of absence from his Wall Street
firm, Bear Stearns.

"I went into drug rehab," Mr. Kudlow said, deciding to discuss his problem after
being told he was the subject of a profile. "I had an alcohol and
substance-abuse problem that needed to be taken care of."

He said that for 15 months he has been attending twice daily a self-help program
for recovering addicts.

"I am willing to share with you my problem," he said, following the example of
many people in programs like Alcoholics Anonymous. "Anyone who blames Bear
Stearns is not right. I take full personal responsibility."

Then this dapper man in a blue pinstripe shirt and monogrammed cufflinks, a man
sometimes described as poker-faced, began to cry. Sounding scared, not at all
like the suave raconteur and deft name dropper of two hours earlier, Mr. Kudlow
said he lived in fear of sliding backward. "I live my life day to day," he said.

Mr. Kudlow said he was talking largely because he wanted to be honest and
because his story might benefit other families with alcohol and drug problems.
"I'm on top of this thing, God bless," he said. "Maybe somebody reading about
this somewhere will be helped."

Mr. Kudlow is still striving to understand what drove him to depend on drugs and
alcohol, and the elaborate lying and dodging that are required to conceal such
habits from friends, family and colleagues. Whatever the reasons, it is clear
that there are many Larry Kudlows. One in 10 Americans has some form of alcohol
or drug-abuse problem, recent studies show. America's success-conscious society
is full of people who are less afraid to snort a line or put away a fifth than
they are of letting someone else see that they are not all they appear to be.
Everyone knows someone talented, ambitious and magnetic who has a serious
problem but chooses to ignore it for a long time, hoping that other people will
look the other way too because he's so valuable.

Several people inside and outside Bear Stearns say Mr. Kudlow used cocaine. Mr.
Kudlow refused to say what drug he used or to be specific about how his drug use
began. He did say that he began drinking regularly in the second half of 1970's
and that his drinking led to drugs.

Mr. Kudlow attributes his slide partly to pure pressure. On Wall Street there
are producers and then there's everyone else, and the pressure to produce helped
drive Mr. Kudlow to drink and drugs.

Then there was the exhausting travel and entertaining. "You think you're a
superman, you think you can do anything," he said. "I felt invincible and that
there were no limits as to how late I could stay up or how much I could travel.
Today, I can see how tough it was."

There was also the easy availability and acceptability of alcohol and drugs,
especially in the 1980's, combined with having plenty of money to throw around.
And he had no children to ground him.

Another problem was that when he felt down, he didn't know how to turn to a
friend. He described himself, for all his gregariousness and bonhomie, as a man
who spent much of his life isolated, ashamed to let others know him well enough
to share his failings and embarrassments along with the successes.

"I never had any friends beyond a certain superficial level," he said. "We hate
to admit weaknesses. We were raised to want to get ahead, to be good and clever
and successful. You're just ashamed to open up."

John C. Glidden Jr. described his longtime friend this way: "There's a searching
for approval, for acceptance. You can trace it right back to high school. His
father and my father were a lot alike. They both set high standards for their
sons."

The Early Years
From the S.D.S. To Wall Street

Lawrence A. Kudlow was an early Baby Boomer, born in the summer of 1947. He grew
up in Englewood, a northern New Jersey suburb with many upwardly mobile
families. He was one of a couple of Jewish boys at a private school called the
Englewood School for Boys, a tennis star, editor of the student newspaper, an
actor in school plays. The family owned a textile business, worked hard for
Republican causes and frequently replaced the Jaguar in the driveway with a new
model.

Had it not been for the Vietnam War, Mr. Kudlow's years in the University of
Rochester's class of 1969 might have been best remembered for his star
performance on the tennis team. But at some point Mr. Kudlow, a history major,
traded in his Porsche for a VW bus, let his hair turn "fuzzy" and joined the
left-wing Students for a Democratic Society. Asthma saved him from the draft.

What distinguished his brief career as a radical and antiwar organizer was less
what he accomplished than that he managed to have it chronicled by The New
Yorker magazine in a piece about the leaders of a nationwide protest in 1969.
That was an early sign of Mr. Kudlow's gift for attracting media interest.

Indeed, Larry Kudlow has always had a knack for reinventing himself to adapt to
the times, and the persuasiveness to make others follow him.

Some people dismiss Mr. Kudlow as an ideologue. Others find him slick, shallow,
overly opportunistic. And true, to paint himself in the best possible light, he
has been known to edit and embellish the facts of his life as reflexively as
most people clear their throats. A fellow conservative, the columnist Jude
Wanniski, described him as "a swashbuckler, a car salesman, a gunslinger."

But even most of Mr. Kudlow's critics find him hard to dislike, and he has many
admirers. Sophisticated, funny, slightly outrageous, always ready with a sound
bite, Mr. Kudlow exudes both confidence and vulnerability. Many people cite his
generosity and loyalty. His interest in politics and ideas is infectious. "He's
noted for not being a sycophant," said another old friend and political ally,
the economist Arthur Laffer. "I've never heard him pull punches because he was
worried about his audience's reaction."

As the war wound down, Mr. Kudlow studied politics and some economics in
graduate school at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University. He left
without collecting a master's degree, though a recent resume dances around that.
His first full-time job was as a junior economist at the New York Federal
Reserve, a time-honored launching pad for a Wall Street career in economics.

In 1974, in yet another brush with The New Yorker, Mr. Kudlow married Nancy
Gerstein, an editor in the magazine's fiction department and the first of three
wives. The marriage lasted about a year.

The next year, Mr. Kudlow jumped from the Fed to Fed watching on Wall Street. At
the age of 28, with no degree in economics, he became the chief economist of one
of the nation's biggest brokerages, Paine Webber, doubling his salary in the
process. Quotes from Mr. Kudlow, sometimes coupled with a description of him as
a maverick, began to appear regularly in the financial press.

While he had no extensive formal training in economics, he had an innate
understanding of how markets worked and was comfortable with numbers. And he
worked hard to teach himself.

Mr. Kudlow says he made his name in the late 1970's in good part by correctly
taking a far more bearish position on interest rates and inflation than the
consensus on Wall Street. By 1979, the 32-year-old Mr. Kudlow had moved to Bear
Stearns, a very prosperous upstart firm that liked his outspoken free-market
ideas, as chief economist.

Mr. Kudlow says he can't pinpoint when his social drinking turned into a habit
on which he depended, but he did begin drinking regularly at home alone or on
the road by the late 1970's, when he was making a name for himself. And, as is
the case for many people, "Alcohol was the gate-opener to everything else," Mr.
Kudlow said.

"If you go out with clients in any business, you have a round of drinks and you
say big deal," he said. "And that's how it starts."

Once he got used to loosening himself up with a drink before dinner, he said, it
was hard to resist other temptations young professionals of his generation faced
frequently. "Recreational drugs -- until recently that stuff was acceptable," he
said.

Shortly after the 1980 election, Mr. Kudlow, who was becoming increasingly
interested in conservative economic ideas, was drafted into the ranks of Ronald
Reagan's revolutionaries -- an experience again chronicled in The New Yorker in
a 1982 article about Reaganomics.

One day David Stockman, the President's newly appointed budget director, and a
caravan of "supply siders" -- dedicated to lowering tax rates to stimulate
economic growth by encouraging thrift and work -- came to see him on Wall
Street. In his book "The Triumph of Politics," Mr. Stockman recalls being
impressed by Mr. Kudlow, who was worried about deficits and called for steeper
cuts in government spending as well as tax cuts. "Here, I realized, was a fellow
traveler," Mr. Stockman wrote.

A newcomer at Bear Stearns, Mr. Kudlow made the most of his exalted guests. "I
called up one of the big shots at Bear and said, 'I've got Dave Stockman here
and Jack Kemp,' then a Congressman. 'Do we want to do anything?' " Soon, Bear
Stearns's partners were raising sherry glasses to the Reaganites in the private
dining room. Mr. Kudlow said he was quickly invited to become a partner. But two
weeks later, he was on his way to Washington.

From the start, Mr. Kudlow, chief economist of the Office of Management and
Budget and effectively Mr. Stockman's No. 2 man, was at the center of the
action.

During this time Mr. Kudlow remarried; his bride was Susan Cullman, the
granddaughter of a Bloomingdale. The Washington wedding was presided over by
John Sirica, the renowned Federal judge.

The Ascent
A Rise to Fame At Bear Stearns

By the end of 1983, the economy was roaring back, the Federal deficit was
mushrooming and Mr. Stockman had lost most of his influence after The Atlantic
magazine quoted him as calling the Reagan tax cuts a "Trojan horse." Mr. Kudlow
bailed out.

He decided to start a Washington consulting firm. But after a couple of years he
had grown weary of that. And by 1985 his second marriage had fallen apart.

Time to go back to Wall Street and to the Bear. "He had a very expensive career
in Washington," said Lee J. Seidler, a former partner of Bear Stearns, referring
to the fact that Mr. Kudlow would have made millions if he had still been with
the firm when it went public just before his return.

Mr. Kudlow asked his new girlfriend, Judy Pond, later his third wife, to join
him. Mr. Kudlow calls her "the love of my life."

Bear Stearns welcomed Mr. Kudlow back in his old job of chief economist, but his
life there was different this time.

He was promoted to senior managing director, one of 200 or so in a firm that had
mushroomed in his absence to 7,000 employees from 1,000. He was also named the
chairman of the investment policy committee, which determines the
recommendations the firm makes to its clients.

Chief economists predict the course of the economy, interest rates, prices and
the dollar. But they are, first and foremost, salespeople expected to help
attract clients.

Mr. Kudlow did it well. "Larry was an outstanding rhetorician, a very good
speaker, very clear," said Brian Barish, head of emerging-markets research at
Lazard Freres who worked in Bear's research department. He added: "If there was
any person I tried to model my own public speaking after, it was Larry."

Mr. Kudlow's forecasting record, while far from perfect, has been relatively
strong. For example, he correctly anticipated the timing of both the 1990-91
recession and the subsequent recovery. Increasingly, he appeared on television
programs, from Larry King to MacNeil/Lehrer. The most controversial appearances
were in broadcast and print ads for Cadillac for which Mr. Kudlow received,
among other things, a one-year lease on a red 1993 Cadillac Seville. (The firm's
chairman, Alan C. Greenberg, used to joke, "If Larry can turn G.M. around, more
power to him.")

But the pressure on Mr. Kudlow was incredible. The travel, report writing and
speeches were becoming increasingly burdensome. "It got tougher," he said. "It
was all bigger. You're stressed out. You're tired. You realize you may not be
able to do this anymore. It creeps up on you."

The Descent
A Hard Time Saying No

As he tells it, Mr. Kudlow hid his problems well. Tim Kearney, an economist at
Fidelity who worked with Mr. Kudlow, recalls that he never saw Mr. Kudlow other
than "in complete command of himself."

But colleagues did notice that Mr. Kudlow was losing weight. And an investment
banker at Bear Stearns said that Mr. Kudlow was not very dependable. "There's
been a lot of last-minute cancellations. After a while there was a certain
exasperation level."

"People always wanted to know, where is Larry?" he added.

Mr. Kudlow's personal problems worsened in 1992. "All of a sudden I could not
face the three-day road trips," he said. "The two or three plane flights in a
day. I was having trouble facing it. I was dreading it."

"So here I am in Salt Lake City, Indianapolis, Chicago, Paris, Frankfurt, Buenos
Aires, Budapest. Not only am I tired, dragging my feet, but I've got
responsibility and the show's gotta go on."

On top of the demands of the firm and its clients, Mr. Kudlow had a full plate
of extracurricular activities. "If the producer of 'Cross-Fire' called me to go
that night to Washington, I'd go," he said. "If Jack Kemp called, I'd go."

"I'm a person who has a hard time saying no and it gets me into trouble because
I sometimes overreach."

It was on the road -- at client dinners, and later at the hotel -- where Mr.
Kudlow lost control. "I'll give you an example," he said. "One drink over dinner
turns into two and pretty soon your problem becomes a bigger problem."

Mr. Kudlow said no one at the firm complained about his performance at the time.
"No one at the firm ever found . . . ," he said, stopping himself and
reformulating the thought. "Ironically, the last few years have been the best
performance years for me. My ratings in the I.I. polls" -- a reference to the
magazine Institutional Investor. "I was second in bonds, third in stocks. I
published more op-ed pieces and was more productive."

But "my personal life was getting bumped," he added. "I valued my marriage." By
autumn 1992, things were spiraling out of control.

Judy Kudlow, now a painter of flowers and landscapes, says that it was her
husband who decided that he had to act. "He's the one who knew he needed to get
help," she said. "And I was behind him. I was aware that he had a problem. We're
devoted to each other. We did it together, but he is the one leading the way."

In mid-December 1992 Mr. Kudlow and his wife met with the firm's chairman, Mr.
Greenberg. Mr. Kudlow asked for, and received, a leave of absence in order to
enter a treatment program.

The treatment program involved spiritual counseling, introspection and group
therapy. Since his release, Mr. Kudlow has been attending a self-help program
for recovering addicts -- as often as every morning before work and every
evening after work -- where people, some of whom have been sober for years, help
each other struggle with their demons.

He said the firm had not made him submit to extraordinary supervision or drug
testing. "They were generous and kind," Mr. Kudlow said.

Mr. Kudlow didn't miss a beat when he returned toward the end of January last
year. Around that time, Christine Todd Whitman came to Mr. Kudlow for advice at
the urging of their mutual friend, Forbes magazine's publisher, Steve Forbes Jr.
Armed with facts showing that New Jersey's economy had become hopelessly
noncompetitive, Mr. Kudlow argued for a state version of the original Reagan
tax-cut plan.

Ten months later, Mr. Kudlow stood behind Mrs. Whitman, in full view of the
camera, as she proclaimed her upset victory over Jim Florio in the governor's
race.

The Resignation
A Missed Meeting And Many Rumors

Then this year, on Tuesday, March 1, Mr. Kudlow was scheduled to speak to a
large group of institutional investors in Boston. Two hundred people turned up
for lunch at the Hotel Meridien. But Mr. Kudlow, the featured speaker, failed to
show.

Given Mr. Kudlow's recent troubles, a lot of people at Bear Stearns and on Wall
Street were suspicious. But Mr. Kudlow said last week: "I was sick. It was not a
relapse. I know there were rumors."

Why would he not have called to say he didn't feel well and wasn't coming?
"Unfortunately, there was a communications gap," he said. "I wish I could make
amends to every person who was there. That was not the reason for the
resignation."

Mr. Kudlow said "the explosion hit" when he went into the office the next day.

"Being unreachable was a fairly high-level sin," said Mr. Seidler, the retired
managing director.

Mr. Kudlow handed his resignation to the firm's general counsel that day.The
decision was his, Mr. Kudlow said, though the firm made it clear, in an unusual
news release, that it felt Mr. Kudlow's departure was also in its best interest.
Bear Stearns officials refused to discuss Mr. Kudlow's departure but the firm
described it as a "voluntary termination" in mandatory public filings made with
securities regulators.

Missing the luncheon, Mr. Kudlow said, "reinforced to me the notion that I
needed a less stressful and less energy-consuming job. It's as if you had
cancer, or a heart attack, or had your hip replaced. You've got to make changes
in order to live a healthy life."

An executive recruiter familiar with the firm said Mr. Greenberg and James E.
Cayne, the firm's president, were "heartbroken, really bummed out. They loved
him. He brought in huge business. In fact, that he even got a second chance was
a testament to how much they liked him."

The Rehabilitation
A Run for Office? There's Hope

Within two days Mr. Kudlow had negotiated a position as economics editor of
National Review, for perhaps a tenth of his former income of nearly $1 million.
He was soon crowing, "You know, this is a real job," and preparing for tapings
of "Firing Line," the television program hosted by his new boss, William F.
Buckley.

Mr. Kudlow says that he has been in recovery, the term used by addicts for being
free of drugs and alcohol, for more than 15 months. One thing helping him now,
he said, is sharing his experiences with younger men and women in the program
who are struggling to take the first steps to help themselves.

He has also turned to the spiritual counsel of the Rev. C. John McCloskey, a
Roman Catholic priest and a former Wall Streeter who now counsels high-powered
people.

Sitting in the couple's Upper East Side apartment, surrounded by richly flowered
tapestries and carpets and gleaming Biedermeier chests, Judy Kudlow says: "He is
better than he's ever been. He's stronger."

Mr. Kudlow, seated at the polished cherry desk that he brought from Bear Stearns
to his new office, said he has put any political plans on hold. But he doesn't
rule anything out. Punditry, politics and the lay priesthood -- and more
remotely, a return to Wall Street -- are all possibilities.

Can he still make it in politics? The decision by the media-wise Mr. Kudlow,
whose wife was once a Reagan press official, to go public with his problems may
be the best way to put the problem behind him and preserve some chance.

Indeed, some politicians who admitted such problems have gone on to victory. Ann
Richards, one of Mr. Kudlow's idols, became Governor of Texas even after
acknowledging she was a recovering alcoholic. Chuck McDonald, a spokesman from
her 1990 campaign, said voters might be less forgiving about drugs. But "you can
overcome anything if people believe you've changed your ways. He's got to get
some time on his side and some years of sobriety under his belt."

Even Robert J. Strang, a hard-nosed private investigator who spent two years
undercover on Wall Street looking for drug abusers, gave Mr. Kudlow a chance of
a comeback.  "Ten years ago, I would have said no," he said. "But today there
are enough people in this country who can identify with his story."

Mr. Kudlow certainly hopes so: "In our society there are a lot of people who
have suffered from alcohol or substance abuse -- you name it -- and society has
been understanding. Listen, I have a lot of faith and a lot of hope."

NAME: Larry Kudlow

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Larry Kudlow in his new office at National Review . . . (Jose
R. Lopez/The New York Times); . . . as a Bear Stearns economist in an ad for
Cadillac . . . and as a top official in the Reagan White House, above, and a
campus radical in Rochester. (pg. 8); Larry Kudlow, in his new office. "You
think you can do anything. I felt invincible." (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Victor P. Raymond; Veterans Affairs Official, 46

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 27;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


Victor P. Raymond, an Assistant Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs,
died on Friday at his home in Washington. He was 46.

The cause was complications of AIDS, said his companion, Robert C. Rea.

Mr. Raymond was named an assistant secretary for policy and planning last year
after serving as an analyst with the Department of Health and Human Services and
as an aide with the Senate Veterans Affairs Committee. He was also a member of
the White House Task Force on National Health Care.

He served as a captain in the Air Force and was a combat pilot in Vietnam. He
was a graduate of the University of Missouri and received a doctorate in
operations research from Johns Hopkins University.

In addition to Mr. Rea, of Washington, Mr. Raymond is survived by his father,
Clark Raymond, of Oklahoma City, and a brother, Gregory, of Denver.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT BOOKS

BYLINE: By Shirley Horner

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 11;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words



Forgotten Heroes

IT is no coincidence that Joseph G. Bilby writes about unsung heroes. A veteran
of the Vietnam War, he called his latest book "Forgotten Warriors: New Jersey's
African American Soldiers in the Civil War" and dedicated it to the men of the
First Infantry Division with whom he served from August 1966 to August 1967.

"I've wanted to honor neglected phases of New Jersey history long before
Vietnam," said Mr. Bilby, a resident of Wall Township, in Monmouth County. He
recalled how as an 8-year-old visiting his grandparents' graves in Mount Olive,
in Morris County, he discovered the grave of a Civil War veteran, Abraham
Sowers, who died a few days before Gen. Robert E. Lee's surrender on April 9,
1865.

"Imagine my surprise to learn when I visited the Newark Public Library four
years later that a Morris County relative, George H. Bilby, a cousin to my
grandfather, served in the same fighting regiment -- the 15th New Jersey -- as
Sowers," Mr. Bilby said.


Mr. Bilby's first book, "Three Rousing Cheers: A History of the 15th New Jersey
Infantry From Flemington to Appomattox" ($36), is itself a surprise. After the
war ended, laudatory regiment histories emerged as a matter of tradition, but
this author writes with a candor permissible after the passage of almost 130
years.

The book, taking its title from a contemporary song, opens on Aug. 8, 1862, with
a recruitment scene at what was then Camp Fair Oaks at the still extant
Flemington Fairgrounds -- one of the many gatherings held throughout the state
and sponsored by prominent citizens who, the author writes, "had no intention of
entering the army themselves." Mr. Bilby says they appealed to local pride,
exploited the fear of a possible draft and pledged bounty money to the
volunteers.

While the 947 soldiers mostly "accepted the correctness of their cause," many,
like his grandfather's cousin, an unemployed carpenter, sought escape from
economic woes.

In less than three years, 240 soldiers died -- more casualties than in any other
unit in the state and 12th in losses among the country's 2,000 Union regiments.

The courageous facts of history remain, but the distinction of "Three Rousing
Cheers" is that its intimate profiles of the volunteers who became seasoned
fighters reconstruct a war that seems to have happened yesterday.


"Forgotten Warriors" ($7.95, paper), which is Mr. Bilby's second book, is a
valuable start that encourages further research into a particularly poignant
omission of black history.

Until 1863 -- two years after the outbreak of hostilities -- New Jersey black
men "who wanted to fight had to look elsewhere," because the state's officials
ignored their military potential, Mr. Bilby writes, adding that apparently 2,782
black "Jerseymen" served in the Union cause. He cites particularly First Sgt.
George Ashby of Allentown, in Monmouth County, and of the 45th United States
Colored Infantry -- still alert at 100 in 1944 and following the news of World
War II.

Since 1980, Mr. Bilby has worked as an investigator for the Department of Labor
in Trenton, a job that no doubt honed his skills at unearthing the letters,
diaries, memoirs, photos and official records that pack these histories.

His publisher, Longstreet House in Hightstown, prints books only about the Civil
War and New Jersey history. The firm, said its editor, Dr. David G. Martin, is
named for the New Jersey branch of the Longstreet family famed for a Confederate
general, James Longstreet.

Poetry Celebration

When does a magazine stop resembling a magazine? Look to The Quarterly Review of
Literature, based in Princeton, for the answer.

Now 50 years old, it has not been a quarterly 1968, despite the name. It is an
annual poetry publication that awards $1,000 each to four to six poets and then
combines the winners' books in one volume, which is sold by subscription, at $20
a year.

The Review pokes holes in the notion that married couples wisely do not work
together; its co-editors, Theodore Weiss and Renee Karol Weiss, married in 1941.
He taught English and creative writing at Princeton University from 1968 to 1986
and is the author of 12 books of poems; she, a violinist and author of
children's books, also writes poetry.

Mr. Weiss described the publication's beginnings as "the experience of piloting
a literary cargo" through perilous waters. What came forth is an influential
literary publication that has printed the work of many famous poets and provided
a voice to those less well known like James Dickey, John Gardner, W. S. Merwin
and James Wright.

All this permanence called for a celebration -- a continuing one, to be sure --
first with "Quarterly Review of Literature: 50th Anniversary Anthology," a
576-page collection of new poems by Review winners, representing 15 countries,
along with a selection of poems previously printed ($40; $20 paper from QRL, 26
Haslet Avenue, Princeton 08540). Next came a series of events to end with a
program and reception at the New School in Manhattan on April 26 at 8 P.M.
Admission is $5.

Colorful Folk Tale

When "Marushka's Egg" is read on the White House lawn today, it will be the
second Easter in a row for this lively Russian folk tale for children, written
by Elsa Okon Real and illustrated by Joanna Wezyk, who also stages a puppet show
to accompany the reading.

For Ms. Wezyk, a 28-year-old resident of Elizabeth, who left her family in
Poland to arrive alone in the United States five years ago, the honor holds
special meaning because "my strong desire to illustrate books brought me here,"
she said.

In 1989, she received a Master of Fine Arts degree from the Academy of Fine Arts
in Cracow with a major in children's book art. But she said she was discouraged
by the inferior paper and the insistence on black-and-white drawings in her
native land.

"Marushka's Egg" revels in color.  The vivid story (Macmillan, $14.95) features
doll-like Marushka and her captor, Baba Yaga, a wily witch and probably the
best-known character in East European folklore. Ms. Wezyk uses, she said,
"memories of artwork I cherish from my childhood" in her festive -- indeed, more
festive than scary -- depictions of Baba Yaga, whose forest house stands on
chicken legs and who gets around in a flying mortar and pestle.

But whence the inspiration for the image of Marushka? Well, that's another
story. Soon after arriving in Elizabeth, Ms. Wezyk worked as a nanny for the
Harms family in East Brunswick, and the rosy-cheeked, golden-haired Marushka,
who finally triumphs over Baba Yaga, was, she said, modeled after Chrissie Harms
-- "the little girl I loved taking care of."

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The 'Great Man' Theory of Foreign Policy

BYLINE: By Ernest R. May;   Ernest R. May is Charles Warren Professor of History
at Harvard University. His most recent book is "American Cold War Strategy:
Interpreting NSC 68."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2323 words



DIPLOMACY
By Henry Kissinger.
Illustrated. 912 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $35.

WHEN reading Winston Churchill's "World Crisis, 1914-1918," Arthur Balfour
called it "an autobiography disguised as a history of the world." Henry
Kissinger's "Diplomacy" is a book of maxims disguised as a history of
statecraft. The maxims are often splendid. The history is not.

After a brief introduction, "Diplomacy" opens with an essay contrasting Theodore
Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson -- the Realpolitiker and the moralist. It then
backs up to Cardinal Richelieu, France's chief minister in the early 17th
century, and marches through the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars, the
Bismarckian era and the two world wars. Though half of the book concerns the
cold war, little is autobiographical. Only three chapters cover the early
1970's, when Mr. Kissinger was the President's national security assistant, then
Secretary of State. Except in a few anecdotes, these chapters, too, pose as
history. "Nixon and his advisers" substitutes for "I" or "we."

"Diplomacy" calls to mind Machiavelli's "Discourses." Machiavelli also commented
on history -- that of the Roman Republic. He mistook details and distorted Roman
history in the large. A scholar at a Welsh university analyzed "Discourses" and
concluded, according to Bernard Crick, the editor of the Penguin Classics
edition, that Machiavelli "could hardly have hoped for a pass degree." We do not
read "Discourses" to learn about Rome, however. We read the book now for what it
tells about Machiavelli himself and for its wisdom. Future generations will read
"Diplomacy" for comparable reasons.

Mr. Kissinger is an important historical figure. Only four other Secretaries of
State were molders of United States foreign policy -- John Quincy Adams, Charles
Evans Hughes, George Marshall and Dean Acheson. Mr. Kissinger's mammoth
autobiography (2,750 pages and still not complete) is designed to shape what
future historians write. ("Let us leave hindsight to history," Churchill once
said, "that history which I am now, myself . . . writing.") It also has some of
the literary quality of testimony prepared for delivery under oath. "Diplomacy"
is more self-revealing.

"Diplomacy" discloses the depth of Mr. Kissinger's reverence for both power and
analysis. It is "great man" history. It focuses on particular statesmen, not on
forces or trends. (It mentions almost no women, though Margaret Thatcher does
win an admiring reference or two.) Beginning with Richelieu, its heroes
calculate and manipulate balances of power. Mr. Kissinger remarks that
Richelieu's opponents, the Hapsburgs, were "men of principle" and "therefore
quite defenseless." After other states adopted Richelieu's approach, he writes,
"France lost the advantage of having adversaries constrained by moral
considerations."

Mr. Kissinger scorns or dismisses most people who thought in other terms.
William Ewart Gladstone, Britain's moralistic 19th-century Prime Minister, he
writes contemptuously, "insisted that Christian decency and respect for human
rights ought to be the guiding lights of British foreign policy, not the balance
of power and the national interest." He is equally critical of those who let
domestic politics dictate foreign policy. Of France's 19th-century
President-Emperor, Napoleon III (and perhaps elliptically of President Jimmy
Carter), Mr. Kissinger observes that he "conducted his foreign policy in the
style of modern political leaders who measure their success by the reaction of
the television evening news" and thus "made himself a prisoner of the purely
tactical."

Mr. Kissinger applauds anyone who approached international politics
analytically, whatever the results. He writes charitably, for example, of the
men who advised Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson on Vietnam.
Though he says they got the United States into a hopeless war from which "Nixon
and his advisers" arranged honorable extrication, he nevertheless praises his
predecessors as "gluttons for analysis." He faults them only for failing to
develop "criteria to assess a challenge so at variance with American experience
and American ideology."

Mr. Kissinger even admits admiration for Stalin and the tyrants of Beijing
because of their coolheadedness. Stalin, he says, "was indeed a monster; but in
the conduct of international relations, he was the supreme realist -- patient,
shrewd and implacable, the Richelieu of his period." Of the Chinese: Mao, Zhou
and Deng "reflected a common tradition of painstaking analysis and the
distillation of the experiences of an ancient country with an instinct for
distinguishing between the permanent and the tactical." Mr. Kissinger is
impatient with Hitler because he "operated by instinct rather than analysis."

Yet Mr. Kissinger does not revere only analysis focused on power. He holds it
equally important that analysis take account of values. In the 1950's, while
still on the Harvard faculty, he wrote "A World Restored," a book starring
Prince Metternich. In "Diplomacy," Metternich remains a hero. More than in the
earlier book, however, it is because of Metternich's understanding of factors
other than power. The long period of peace after 1815 was due, Mr. Kissinger
declares, to "a sense of shared values. There was not only a physical
equilibrium, but a moral one."

Despite Woodrow Wilson's moralism, Mr. Kissinger admires him. "Wilson grasped
the mainsprings of American motivation," he writes, adding later: "For three
generations, critics have savaged Wilson's analysis and conclusions; and yet, in
all this time, Wilson's principles have remained the bedrock of American
foreign-policy thinking."

Passages in "Diplomacy" imply that "Nixon and his advisers" paid too little heed
to values. Mr. Kissinger ascribes to Richard Nixon "powerful analytical skills
and extraordinary geopolitical intuition." He characterizes Mr. Nixon as "the
first President since Theodore Roosevelt to conduct American foreign policy
largely in the name of the national interest." He adds: "The drawback of this
approach was its dearth of emotional resonance among the American people."

Mr. Kissinger closes his narrative by contrasting Richard Nixon and Ronald
Reagan.  He characterizes Mr. Reagan as intellectually vacuous yet possessed of
"an extraordinary intuitive rapport with the wellsprings of American
motivation." "Nixon was to Reagan," he continues, "as Theodore Roosevelt had
been to Woodrow Wilson. Like Roosevelt, Nixon had had a far better understanding
of the workings of international relations; like Wilson, Reagan had a much surer
grasp of the workings of the American soul."

Parts of "Diplomacy" have the mind-provoking quality of great teaching. Mr.
Kissinger urges us, for example, to think of the present as like the period
after the Crimean War of the mid-1850's. Russia, previously thought all-powerful
on land, lost the war and had to sign a humiliating peace. Britain emerged
victorious, but the whole Metternichian system collapsed. Erupting nationalism
created, among other things, a united Italy and a consolidated German Empire
more powerful than any Continental state since the France of Napoleon I. Then,
as now, Mr. Kissinger writes, the "sense of shared values gradually eroded."

AMERICA'S alternative strategies, Mr. Kissinger suggests, resemble those
followed from the aftermath of the Crimean War until the 1890's by Britain on
the one hand and Bismarck's Germany on the other. British governments preferred
to stand apart from other nations, then move at the last moment if the balance
of power needed to be righted.  Bismarck chose entanglement in potentially
conflicting alliances in order continuously to keep rein on other governments.
The British approach, Mr. Kissinger contends, requires too much ruthlessness and
resolve for Americans. "Strange as it may seem," he writes, "the Bismarck style
of operating a balance of power is probably more attuned to the traditional
American approach to international relations."

Much of his concluding chapter illustrates this thesis, arguing that America
should maintain close relationships with nations that are potentially rivals,
much as Bismarck did with Russia and Austria-Hungary. Mr. Kissinger advises, for
example, that the United States keep tight ties with Bonn (Berlin) and with
Moscow. Germany and Russia then will not "fixate on each other as either
principal partner or principal adversary." He urges similarly that the United
States be effectively an ally of Japan, an ally of China and a confidant of
Asian states that dread both. "To the extent that the United States attempts to
preserve the equilibrium of Asia," Mr. Kissinger asserts, "it cannot wait until
the balance is already in jeopardy."

The strength of "Diplomacy" lies in its marriage of vision and shrewdness. Most
commentary on foreign policy lacks one quality or the other (or both). Scholars
tend to have vision but lack common sense, journalists to be level-headed but
shortsighted. "Diplomacy" corrects the academics' schematic balance-of-power
analyses. Mr. Kissinger writes that "determining the limits of power requires a
blend of experience and insight, and constant adjustment to circumstance. In
theory, of course, the balance of power should be quite calculable; in practice,
it has proved extremely difficult to work out realistically." Equally, however,
"Diplomacy" cautions against the formulas in op-ed pages and magazines, urging
either bold new concerns like the environment or hunger, or, alternatively, a
rigid focus on hard national interest. "Diplomacy" argues that both approaches
oversimplify. "The precise balance between the moral and the strategic elements
of American foreign policy cannot be prescribed in the abstract," Mr. Kissinger
says. He warns later, "A statesman can always escape his dilemmas by making the
most favorable assumptions about the future; one of his tests is his ability to
protect against unfavorable and even unforeseen contingencies." He ends by
insisting, "What no leader must ever do is to suggest that choice has no price,
or that no balance needs to be struck."

THE weaknesses of "Diplomacy" as a history are surprising as well as
disappointing. When he was a scholar, Mr. Kissinger wrote good professional
history. Yet here he gets facts wrong, and conveys little or no sense of how
diplomacy and statecraft evolved.

"Diplomacy" makes the types of mistakes for which students fail to get pass
degrees in history. To cite just three examples: Mr. Kissinger says that
Wilson's doctrine of self-determination "put European diplomats on thoroughly
unfamiliar terrain." It attributes to Britain's World War I Prime Minister,
David Lloyd George, a promise to "squeeze Germany until the pips squeak." And it
describes the Hossbach memorandum of November 1937 as recording Hitler's avowal
of plans for wars of conquest before "an assemblage of almost all of Germany's
general officers."

In fact, while self-determination may have been uncongenial to European
diplomats, it was not unfamiliar. Long before Wilson's Fourteen Points,
Europeans had heard self-determination preached ardently by, among others, the
leading newspaper publishers in Milan and London. Splits on self-determination
were intra-European as well as American-European.

The comment about Lloyd George is both wrong and unjust.  The promise to squeeze
the German lemon's pips came from Sir Eric Geddes, a businessman turned
politician -- one of those "hard-faced men who looked as if they had done well
out of the war," in the words of a later Prime Minister, Stanley Baldwin.
Geddes's phrase caused trouble for Lloyd George, who clung to a last-ditch hope
that public opinion would not demand unreasonable reparations from just-defeated
Germany.

AS for the Hossbach memorandum, it recorded a meeting involving only seven
people: Hitler himself, Col. Friedrich Hossbach (who took the notes), the
foreign minister, the war minister and the commanders in chief of the army, air
force and navy. Not even the chief of staff of the army was officially informed.
These facts are doubly significant because many German generals later denied
knowing Hitler's intentions. Their protestations smoothed Germany's cold-war
rearmament. While scholarly research has since established that many generals
actually knew more than they admitted, Mr. Kissinger's mistaken description of
the Hossbach memorandum blurs understanding not only of the Third Reich but also
of the German Federal Republic.

In providing a sense of the evolution of statecraft, "Diplomacy" is particularly
weak. It skips whole epochs. After a vignette of Richelieu, who died in 1642,
comes one of William III, who was England's king a half-century later. Then
comes William Pitt the younger, who became Britain's Prime Minister 80 years
after William III. Other figures of the 17th and 18th centuries are invisible.
Kaunitz, Choiseul, Vergennes and Benjamin Franklin are examples. As one odd
effect, "Diplomacy" says almost nothing about a period strikingly parallel to
our own -- that from the 1770's through the 1790's, which saw a cascade of
"democratic revolutions."

"Diplomacy" focuses on episodes with the randomness of a roving reporter at a
political convention. While most of two chapters go to the crises that
culminated in the Berlin wall in 1961, the 1962 Cuban missile crisis gets just a
few passing comments. Nor does "Diplomacy" acknowledge a canon. An uninformed
reader would never know that earlier writers -- Machiavelli among them -- had
already treated some of the book's themes. Neither a line of text nor a footnote
mentions Sir Harold Nicolson's elegant book of 1939, also entitled "Diplomacy."

As a history, Mr. Kissinger's "Diplomacy" is amateurish.  That is unfortunate
because it could have been a good history and a classic book of maxims. It is
only the latter.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Don't You Believe That Nicotine Isn't Addictive

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 612 words


To the Editor:

Cigarette manufacturers dispute that cigarette smoking involves addiction to
nicotine. They emphasize that more than 40 million Americans have quit smoking,
that most did so with no professional help, and that this is not consistent with
the behavior of individuals addicted to such drugs as heroin or cocaine. There
are problems with this argument.

Addiction is characterized by drug craving, compulsive use and relapse after
withdrawal. Conmpulsive use refers to persistence of drug taking despite
physical, psychological or social harm. Cigarette smoking usually meets these
criteria, and thus nicotine dependence has been included in the psychiatric
diagnostic manual in a parallel fashion to opiate, cocaine and alcohol
dependence.

Cigarettes, as usually used, are addictive. That 90 percent of those who stopped
smoking did so on their own should be put in the context not just of the 40
million who have stopped, but of the 50 million who are still smoking. Surveys
indicate that more than 70 percent of smokers want to quit. Indeed, every year,
one American smoker in three tries to quit, but 90 percent fail by year's end.
Even for those who have abstained for a year, one-third relapse.

The 40 million Americans who quit did not do so all at once -- the figure
represents an accumulation of about 2.5 percent of all cigarette smokers per
year over 25 years. Most of them had stopped a number of times and relapsed
before final success.

A recent Gallup poll showed that 70 percent of young people regretted starting
smoking, and 50 percent have tried but failed to quit.

It is not true that nicotine addiction is the only addiction where individuals
are able to stop without professional help. For example, the study of soldiers
addicted to heroin while in Vietnam showed that 90 percent were able to stop on
their own when they returned to the United States.

Data from 10 studies of heroin addiction showed an average of 30 percent of
addicts spontaneously remit.

Similarly, many cocaine abusers stop without formal treatment. Often what is
described as spontaneous remission is associated with such external influences
as health reasons or pressure from family, an employer or the criminal justice
system.

Medical treatment of nicotine addiction generally doubles or triples success
rates. Quitting on one's own is least successful, with less than 10 percent
succeeding on any attempt.

Indeed, nicotine may be more addictive than either heroin or cocaine. Interviews
with most individuals dependent on heroin and cocaine indicate that they would
like to continue. They enjoy the euphoria, whereas interviews with cigarette
smokers indicate that a substantial majority would like to stop, but find
themselves unable to do so.

The good news for all addictions is that some individuals can stop on their own,
aided by pressure from significant others like physicians or employers. That
this can happen with cigarette smokers does not make nicotine less addicting.

Senator Pete Dominici has said, "If you torture numbers long enough, you can get
them to confess to almost anything." The tobacco companies torture these and
other numbers in a desperate attempt to avoid facing the medical reality:
smoking is addictive and can cause serious illness.

We should do everything possible to help those already addicted to quit and to
keep youngsters from starting.

HERBERT D. KLEBER, M.D.
DAVID CONNEY, M.D.

New York, March 25, 1994

The writers are, respectively, medical director, Center on Addiction and
Substance Abuse, and lecturer in psychiatry at Columbia University's College of
Physicians and Surgeons.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 30 words


"I've seen more kids die in this area than buddies of mine in Vietnam. This is
not the country I fought for." -- RUDOLPH MONROE, a drama instructor at a
Chicago park. [A8:2.]

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Fight for Peace on Chicago's Streets

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, April 3


When the last bell of the day rings and students pour out of the neighborhood
high school, Hal Baskin prays for peace but prepares for trouble.

He peers into passing cars and worries about drive-by shootings. He spots a
group of boys shouting at one another across the street and runs over, knowing
how quickly teasing words can be replaced by fists or, more likely these days,
by bullets.

Be cool, he advises. They listen and leave before he hurries back to the other
side to make sure some girls on the corner catch their bus for home, safe for
one more day.

Mr. Baskin, 42, counsels members of street gangs and teaches nonviolent conflict
resolution. Every afternoon he is out in front of Englewood High School working
to keep the peace. Most days nothing happens, but these are tense times. Along
with sunshine and promise, the first days of spring have brought random violence
and innocent victims.

Endangered Truce

A year-old truce among several rival street gangs has apparently fallen apart in
the last three weeks in a hail of gunfire, greed and grief. Teen-agers have been
scared away from neighborhood recreation centers; parents have yanked their
third graders out of school; children have been killed in the crossfire.

Collapse of the Chicago truce could be a blow to the national movement for gang
peace that has been growing in cities like Minneapolis, Washington and Kansas
City. Chicago was supposed to be a showpiece. Just a few months ago, gang
members from across the country came here for what was called a national peace
summit and toasted the cease-fire.

Chicago officials have long dismissed the truce as a publicity stunt to draw
attention from the gangs' drug dealing. But Mr. Baskin and some officers who
patrol the city's housing projects said it was real and had helped save lives.
And despite the recent bloodshed, Mr. Baskin said the truce was still in effect.
"If the truce was really off," he said, "there'd be a lot more killing." He
blamed "a renegade element" for the carnage.

Weekend of Carnage

On Tuesday afternoon, a 10-year-old boy riding his bike in front of his home was
caught in a gang crossfire and killed. A few days before, a 3-year-old boy
sitting on his mother's lap in the family car was partly blinded when a bullet
from a gang firefight struck him in the head.

Last weekend, 13 people, several of them teen-agers, were killed in a rash of
shootings across the city. How many of the deaths were the result of the broken
peace pact is unknown.

But there is little doubt among the police that most of the 300 reports of
gunshots during the last weekend in March at the Robert Taylor Homes, a public
housing project on the city's South Side, were related to the gangs and their
rage.

"The kids call last Friday 'Bloody Friday' because so many people got hurt,"
said Mary B. Smith, director of Ogden Park, a couple of miles from the Robert
Taylor project, which is only one of the city's hot spots.

Two teen-aged boys who played and danced in her park programs were killed in the
wave of violence; a third boy was in a coma. Mrs. Smith said he was beaten after
he had resisted being drafted into a gang.

Rudolph Monroe, the park's drama instructor and a veteran of the Vietnam War,
sat slumped on a sofa in the park's field house as Mrs. Smith talked about
children in coffins.

"There are a lot of decent kids around here, but you never hear about them," Mr.
Monroe said. "It's a national disgrace how this country allows things to get so
bad. I've seen more kids die in this area than buddies of mine in Vietnam. This
is not the country I fought for."

No one seems to know for sure why the Chicago truce has fractured. Theories and
rumors range from a battle for drug turf to an insult in a bar. But regardless
of the reason, church groups, civil rights organizations and youth workers are
trying to patch it up as fast they can.

They have walked the tense streets far into the night and have talked for hours
with gang leaders on the street and in prison, where the top echelon rules by
telephone.

There have been radio pleas for peace, candlelight vigils and marches. On
Monday, the 26th anniversary of the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., Operation PUSH hopes to have 5,000 black men marching through the
streets of several West Side and South Side neighborhoods where most of the
violence has occurred.

Looking for Alternatives

"Our children no longer see hope," said Janette C. Wilson, the executive
director of PUSH, a civil rights organization. "All across the country, we're
building prisons and closing schools. Coupled with the truce, there have to be
alternatives."

The shootings and the headlines have come at a bad time for Chicago's
politicians and boosters, three months before World Cup soccer matches begin
here.

Mayor Richard M. Daley has promised a crackdown on the warring factions,
especially at Robert Taylor Homes, which has become a symbol of the violence and
the city's determination to stop it. But the housing project runs for blocks
along the Dan Ryan Expressway, one of Chicago's major arteries and only minutes
from Comiskey Park, where the White Sox play baseball.

Mr. Daley and Vincent Lane, the chairman of the city Housing Authority, want to
sweep and search any building or apartment in the complex without warrants when
intense gunfire breaks out. The American Civil Liberties Union challenged the
plan and persuaded a judge to issue a restraining order. Several residents said
the searches would make them feel like second-class citizens.

A Parent's Wish

But Gloria Coles, whose 15-year-old daughter was slain in a nearby development
four years ago, said the searches might be the only way to make the area safe.
"I just want my children to grow up," she said. "I think the sweeps are good.
They slow the shooting down a little."

In the last couple of days, Robert Taylor Homes has been relatively quiet
without the warrantless searches. The Mayor sent additional city police officers
to assist city and housing police officers already on patrol there, and more
were expected on Monday.

Harvey Grossman of the A.C.L.U. said: "We've always asked for more security, not
less. You don't have to violate the Constitution to provide it. But residents of
public housing don't have the political clout to get the police that they need."


An Obituary, Then Gunfire

On Thursday, Mr. Baskin was at his post awaiting the dismissal bell. "It's
always a nervous time, but I guess there's even more of a sense of urgency
nowadays," he said as the students swept toward him.

A teen-ager showed him an obituary for a 15-year-old who had been shot dead a
couple of days before. Mr. Baskin had just handed it back when shots rang out.

Dozens of students milling on the corners ducked and ran for cover. Several
tripped over a curb. One girl cut her chin on the sidewalk; she lay frozen in
fear. The gunman, about a half-block away, had fired from the sidewalk near a
church awning inscribed with the word "love."

A 16-year-old girl at the bus stop screamed in pain. A bullet had struck her
left heel, and her high-top sneaker was soaked in blood. "I want my mama!" she
cried. "It hurts! It hurts! Please call my mama!"

As she cried, the bubble gum she had been chewing fell to the ground with her
tears. Other girls also began to cry. The boys tried to mask their fear in
anger, but some of their eyes began to water, too.

Mr. Baskin and his co-worker, Robert More, ran toward the spot where the gunfire
had come, hoping to capture the gunman, but they were seconds late. The police,
who arrived about three minutes later, recovered five spent casings near the
church. Somehow, only the one girl had been hit.

Payback for an Insult

Later, through his contacts in the streets, Mr. Baskin was able to piece
together what passes these days for a motive for shooting into a crowd of
people. The gunman, a 16- or 17-year-old gang member, had been roughed up the
day before by a member of a rival gang.

On Thursday, he hit the streets armed. When he saw his attacker, he pulled the
pistol, turned his head away and started firing blindly.

"He really wasn't trying to shoot anybody," Mr. Baskin said. "He pointed at the
ground but the pistol must have jerked up. He was more afraid of the gun than
anything else."

Mr. Baskin spent the rest of the afternoon and evening cruising the streets and
working the phones, trying to keep the peace, praying that the wounded girl
didn't have a sister or brother or best friend or gang leader thirsty for
revenge.

"Nobody ever said peace was going to be easy," Mr. Baskin said. "It's hard work,
but I can't stop. I'm so tired of going to funerals."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gunfire and violent death are part of life in Chicago's Robert
Taylor Homes public housing project, even for small children. Last weekend in
Chicago, 13 people died violently, many of them teen-agers. Hal Baskin, who
counsels gang members and teaches conflict resolution, kept an eye on young
children. (Todd Buchanan for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

21 Injured in Greenpoint Tenement Fire

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


A critically burned woman was forced to leap from a window, 20 other people were
injured, some as they were rescued from fiery rooms, and 25 families were left
homeless early yesterday when a four-alarm fire roared through a row of four
tenement buildings in a Brooklyn waterfront community on the East River.

No one was killed in the spectacular blaze of undetermined origin, which burned
out of control for two hours despite the efforts of 200 firefighters and gutted
the three-story attached frame buildings at 198, 200, 202 and 204 Huron Street,
between Manhattan Avenue and McGuinness Boulevard in Greenpoint.

But many were trapped in subdivided apartments without fire escapes, and the
drama and peril of firefighting in a densely populated urban area unfolded on
Huron Street, across from Manhattan's skyscrapers, as three residents leaped
from second-story windows, a firefighter and four residents were plucked from
burning rooms onto aerial ladders and many firefighters were driven back by
collapsing roofs and walls of flame.

A Night of Terror and Bravery

"This was the worst thing I've seen since Vietnam -- it was an inferno," John
Cruz, 42, said as he surveyed the smoldering ruins of the smoke-blackened
clapboard, shingle and faux-brick tenements from his stoop across the street at
195 Huron and recalled a night of terror, chaos and bravery.

Mr. Cruz and other neighborhood residents said firefighters were delayed 8 to 10
minutes in battling the fire by a lack of water pressure in a hydrant and the
need to hook up at another fireplug. These witnesses contended that two of the
four buildings might have been saved with adequate water pressure.

But Deputy Chief Philip J. Burns, commander of the 40 fire units on the scene,
denied this contention, saying that firefighters had reported no delays or
inadequate pressure to him. He said the fire had begun on the top floor of 202
Huron and spread rapidly through a common cockloft connecting the buildings.

The fire was yet another hardship in a working-class community with a large
population of Polish and Hispanic immigrants, a district of tenement buildings,
smoky factories and run-down warehouses that is known for environmental hazards
and ranks highest in the city for leukemia in children and other cancers in
adults.

Residents who fled in nightclothes told of racing with children down burning
stairways, of neighbors who ran to their windows with ladders and firefighters
who risked their lives to get people out. One man forced to jump from a
second-floor window was saved from impalement on a wrought-iron fence by a
neighbor who had flung a mattress over its spikes, a witness said.

Diana Martinez, who escaped with her husband and two daughters, recalled seeing
a fireman trapped on the third floor of No. 202, where the flames had broken
out. "He came to the middle window, screaming, 'Get me out of here! I can't
breathe!' and all you saw was smoke coming from around him."

Pablo Roldan, who lives across the street, saw him, too. "He tried to break the
window guard, but it wouldn't break. He was screaming, 'Bring the ladder! Bring
the ladder!' They swung the ladder around, but he couldn't fit through the
window. He ducked back in and came crashing out and landed in the bucket. As
soon as he got out, the flames shot out the window."

Chief Burns said the cause of the fire was not immediately determined and would
be investigated by marshals, though he said he knew of nothing that would
classify it as suspicious. He said the blaze, which was reported in a telephone
call at 12:36 A.M., was advancing through the cockloft by the time firefighters
arrived and quickly went to four alarms.

Even before the arrival of firefighters, Chief Burns said, three residents
trapped in burning rooms -- two women and a man -- leaped from second-story
windows and were injured. The most seriously injured, Eva Jarocka, 38, of 202
Huron, suffered extensive burns and was in critical condition yesterday at the
burn center of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

Joseph Przygodzki, 56, of 202 Huron, leaped from a second floor window in the
front and suffered a broken leg. He landed on an iron fence, but was apparently
saved by a mattress that Mr. Roldan had thrown over the spikes. Mr. Przygodzki
was in stable condition at Bellevue Hospital Center.

As firefighters raced through the buildings to alert and evacuate residents,
others took water hoses inside to fight the flames, Chief Burns said. "When fire
broke out all along the top floors, we had to back the men out rather than risk
serious injury," he said. "There was overwhelming fire."

He said two tower ladders were deployed to shoot streams of water onto the roofs
and into the front windows of the burning buildings, while a high-powered water
cannon shot streams from the rear yard. But the flames, feeding on decades-old
wood construction, were too powerful, and it was 3 A.M. by the time firefighters
were able to bring them under control.

Roofs Collapse

In the meantime, he said, the roofs and upper walls of 200 and 202 Huron
collapsed; a firefighter, Lee Ielpi, was struck by a collapsing ceiling as he
searched for residents, a tower ladder was used to rescue another firefighter
and four residents were taken from burning rooms down aerial ladders. The chief
said 16 firefighters and 5 civilians were injured in the blaze.

Residents said that apartments in the buildings had been subdivided years ago,
cutting those in the front off from fire escapes set in the back.

Martin Czerwinski, 12, who lives on the second floor of No. 202, recalled: "I
was sleeping when my uncle came in screaming, 'Fire!' We opened a window and
yelled for help. My uncle said, 'Let's try to get down the stairs,' but there
was too much smoke and fire. So we went to the window and yelled. I thought I
was going to die." But Mr. Roldan and others ran up with ladders and they were
saved.

Most ran out in nightclothes, leaving all their possessions behind. Larry
Mackler of the American Red Cross said 25 families -- 65 people -- lost their
homes and all their possessions in the fire. Eight families were put up by the
Red Cross at hotels, while the others moved in with relatives or friends.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gricelda Dominguez, center, wiping her tears yesterday as she
and her daughter Guadalupe, right, told of losing all their belongings in a
four-alarm fire on Huron Street in Brooklyn. Pablo Roldan, right, and his son
Eric, describing a firefighter who appeared to be trapped on a third floor.
(Photographs by Chris Maynard for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tragedy in Turkey

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


Hardly anybody is paying attention, but a bad war in Turkey has turned worse.
Frustrated by a persistent Kurdish uprising in the mountainous southeast, the
Turkish Army is preparing a massive spring offensive involving 130,000 troops.

America is necessarily involved. Turkey is a NATO ally and buys American weapons
that were certainly not meant for use against Kurdish villages. Yet Washington's
protests are muted for an ironic reason: The U.S. relies on bases in Turkey to
provide help to Iraqi Kurds, who have carved out an autonomous enclave in
northern Iraq.

Each year the war inside Turkey grows bigger. In 1993, 4,000 civilians, soldiers
and guerrillas were killed. At least 800 villages have been evacuated to deny a
base to the leftist Kurdistan Workers Party, better known by its initials P.K.K.
In January, 50 Turkish warplanes struck at a P.K.K. camp deep within Iraq's
Kurdish territory, the biggest such raid so far.

Though it faces a huge budget deficit and roaring inflation, Turkey spent $7
billion on the war last year. Yet neither the Government nor the army appears to
have a political strategy for ending this conflict.

Kurds account for one-fifth of Turkey's 60 million people, and their demand for
cultural and political rights has a long history. After years of insisting that
Kurds were only "mountain Turks," Ankara explored a different approach under
President Turgut Ozal. Turkish Kurds were allowed to form their own party, which
briefly became part of the governing coalition formed in 1991 by Prime Minister
Suleyman Demirel. There were cheers abroad when Mr. Demirel promised greater
language rights, as well as other legal reforms long urged by human rights
advocates.

But hope faded when President Ozal died last April and was succeeded by Mr.
Demirel. This shift then brought to power Tansu Ciller, the first woman to serve
as Prime Minister. Mr. Demirel, who had been twice ousted by the armed forces in
times past, and the untested Prime Minister have joined hard-liners in treating
the Kurdish rebellion as foremost a military matter. To be sure, they have been
abetted in this by the P.K.K.'s terrorist offenses, including the killing of
Turks in Germany, where as many as 400,000 out of 1.6 million Turkish "guest
workers" are Kurds.

Americans learned at bitter cost in Vietnam that aerial attacks neither pacify
nor win hearts and minds in hostile villages. It is hard to imagine any military
victory in Turkey, given the sheer size of the Kurdish minority. And
dismayingly, military escalation has closed down the political track to a
settlement.  Having banned a Kurdish-based political party, the Government is
now detaining five Kurdish members of Parliament on fishy charges of "sedition,"
a capital offense. Meantime, Amnesty International has kept detailed track of
"disappearances" -- 26 in 1993 -- of mainly Kurdish prisoners.

These are alarming symptoms of a deeper fever. Turkish officials fear that
granting cultural autonomy to Kurds only increases the clamor for full
independence. But that has not been so in Spain, where Catalan and Basque
separatist movements have ebbed with greater devolution. In any case, recalling
that the Nixon Administration once cynically used Iraqi Kurds as pawns,
Americans have special cause to look critically at this ominous war.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the mideast showing area of the Kurdish Region.

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Get Ready for ARF

BYLINE: By DAVID C. UNGER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


East Asia, from Seoul to Singapore, is now the world's axis for expanding trade
and economic growth. Any interruption of that region's growth would reverberate
around the globe. Fortunately, most economic indicators point toward further
expansion -- provided there is continued political stability and peace. With
that in mind, East Asian nations are preparing to launch, this July, a promising
new vehicle for avoiding military conflicts. It is called the Asean Regional
Forum, or ARF.

It has received scant attention in the West, even though the U.S. will be an
important participant. It is not a military alliance like NATO or a collective
security organization like Europe's Conference on Security and Cooperation. But,
in time, it could come to play a central role in American strategy for the
Asia-Pacific region.

Since the end of the Vietnam War, East Asia has been largely free of war and the
destruction, diversion of resources and political turmoil that go with it. Peace
has brought investor confidence, reliable trade links, a stable and productive
work force and rising levels of affluence. But any relapse into armed conflict
could abruptly turn economic miracle into catastrophe.

The risk is limited, but real. The cold war is over everywhere else, but the
risk of ideologically based fighting still haunts the Korean peninsula and the
Taiwan Straits. Elsewhere, territorial disputes remain dangerously unresolved,
including claims by six nations to the potentially oil rich Spratly Islands in
the South China Sea.

Meanwhile, mainland China is investing heavily in modernized military equipment
that could be used to intervene beyond Chinese borders. Prominent Japanese
politicians are talking openly about discarding the constraints that have
bottled up Japanese military power since World War II. And many Asians worry
that an inward-looking United States may be psychologically disengaging itself
from the region's security.

No one is more alert to the new dangers than the prosperous but vulnerable
countries of developing Asia. The Regional Forum began as a project of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations -- Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines,
Singapore, Thailand and Brunei. Already, it is far more than a paper
organization. Informal Asean seminars have encouraged cooperative development of
disputed areas in the Spratlys and promoted exchanges of military information,
along with joint training exercises to build up confidence and damp down
paranoia.

The forum is no longer limited to Asean. It also includes, among others, China,
Japan, Russia, South Korea, Vietnam and the U.S. Conspicuously excluded,
however, are two of the region's most dangerous potential flash points, Taiwan
and North Korea. If it is to live up to its ambition of preventing regional
conflict, the Regional Forum must eventually embrace the entire region.

For decades, security in the Asia-Pacific region has been built around America's
cold war treaties with Japan, South Korea, the Philippines and others. Those
treaties remain. But their governing assumption was that the enemy would always
be international Communism; they provide little guidance or reassurance in
disputes that pit one U.S. ally against another. The Asean Regional Forum can.
That gives Washington a strong interest in encouraging its development.   DAVID
C. UNGER

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

American Center In Paris Cuts Back

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 6;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 31


There it sits, a gleaming, marbled, fully functional architectural abstraction.
It is surrounded by a nearly finished city park and staffed by 22 busy people.
But for the moment, at least, it's a shell.

This is the current state of the new American Center in the Bercy district of
eastern Paris. Frank Gehry's building, which cost a big chunk of the $40 million
the center obtained in 1987 when it sold its old quarters in central Paris, was
pretty much completed months ago. But the center's board decided in the fall of
1992 that it did not have enough money to proceed with long-range plans for this
combined museum, performance space, educational facility and community center.
The programming staff was messily fired and uneasy silence settled on what was
to have been a major showcase of American culture in the French capital.

Now, signs of life can be discerned moving warily through the conceptual
wreckage. The board has been reorganized with what seems like a more distinctly
American cast. New leaders have emerged, both on the board and on a transition
leadership committee. New money -- tangible, if not yet overwhelming in quantity
-- is coming in. News conferences are planned for Paris and New York to trumpet
the good news. A skeletal programming staff has been assembled. And an opening
date has at last been set: June 7.

In keeping with the modest profile the center is trying to assume, the day is
being billed not as a flashy gala but as an amiable marathon leading to the
partial, gradual opening of the center and set just prior to the summer
vacation, when nothing much cultural happens in Paris, anyhow. On the other
hand, the new team hints that President Clinton might stop by on his D-day
rounds, so hopes are not all that modest.

New Faces at the Top

The new power at the center is Frederick B. Henry, who joined the board a little
more than two years ago. Mr. Henry, the president of the Bohlen Foundation, is a
longtime New York arts figure, active at the Whitney Museum and on other arts
boards. He is already co-chairman of the center's board with Judith Pisar, the
former sole chairwoman.

Mr. Henry said in a recent interview that Mrs. Pisar had already withdrawn from
her functions as chairwoman, as had Henry Pillsbury from his longtime role as
executive director. (Mr. Pillsbury is still much in evidence, however, puttering
about the empty building he had so much to do with instigating.) In September,
Mr. Henry said it was "the plan" to name Mr. Pillsbury president (which ranks
under the chairman in the pecking order) and for Mrs. Pisar formally to
relinquish her post.

In the meantime, Mr. Henry set up a transitional "special committee," headed by
himself and Rachel Newton Bellow, who is currently serving as board president,
to run the center between mid-1993 and the end of 1994. Ms. Bellow has taken a
leave as program officer for arts and culture at the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation
in New York.

If the center's previous sin was pride -- hurling up a huge building and
assuming money would materialize to support activities within it -- Mr. Henry
and Ms. Bellow suggested the problem now was to adjust 1980's expectations to
1990's realities.

"The center's problems were an opportunity for it to redefine itself at this
moment," Ms. Bellow argued. The original plan was to open in September 1993 with
am ambitious exhibition of commissioned art called "Landscape as Metaphor,"
which had a budget of $1.5 million. Now, programming ideas call for more varied
and modest events, with the average item budgeted at between $150,000 and
$250,000.

Heavy Collaboration

Most of these events, which fill the calendar with a few gaps for the center's
first 18 months of operation, were planned by volunteers drawn from American
arts institutions. Some projects are overtly collaborative, in that the shows or
performances will also be seen in the United States. Most are collaborative in
the sense that the Americans, whom Mr. Henry and Ms. Bellow described as mostly
young and venturesome, brought the friskiness and originality of the American
arts scene with them.

Programs have been divided into four areas: visual arts, performances, film and
video, and conferences. Among the many more or less fixed plans are "Pure
Beauty: Some Recent Work From Los Angeles"; "Stations," a video installation by
Bill Viola; "Griot New York," a week of performances by the Garth Fagan Dance
Company already seen in New York and set to open here on June 8; a piano recital
of John Cage's music by Margaret Leng Tan; "Banned in the U.S.A.," censored
American films from 1916 to the present; "Exchanges in the Dark: Film Noir in
France and Hollywood," and "War and Memory in France and the U.S.," a conference
on World War II, Vietnam and the Gulf war. In addition, several French troupes
are scheduled, as well as events in Paris's prestigious Festival d'Automne.

Mr. Henry said that when the old board first realized the extent of the center's
financial crisis in mid-1992, the reaction was desperate. "Among some members of
the board, there was a real sense of panic," he said. The new team wants to look
both prudent and bold. It feels action is necessary to quicken interest among
potential donors, but is unwilling to commit to programs or staff without money
in hand.

"Money itself is not the problem," Ms. Bellow argued. "What the American Center
needed was a plan, and programs, in all areas. But we discipline ourselves. We
won't commit to projects we haven't the resources for."

Financial Goals Modified

For the center to be fully operational, the financial goals remain the same as
in 1992: an annual operating budget of $5 million to $8 million with an
endowment of $25 million. Mr. Henry said the center had $6 million in hand and
pledges for $4 million more for its endowment. Only $2.3 million has come in so
far for the first operating year, but he said that was tolerable since the
center now was "not springing fully developed onto the Paris stage." Grants in
hand include bequests from the Bohlen Foundation and the Mellon Foundation.

In 1992, center officials spoke of earning up to 85 percent of operating
expenses through language classes (the mainstay of the old center on the
Boulevard Raspail), rentals and concessions. Now, in tune with the new
determination to raise money for strictly artistic purposes, earned income is
being de-emphasized. Still, the center's theater and exhibition spaces remain
attractive, and have already been rented for various more or less high-toned
purposes (for instance, filming by Arte, the French-German-Belgian cultural
television network).

Despite the role played by Olivier Brunet, a French banker who is the center's
new vice president and treasurer, much of the fund-raising know-how is American.
Given French reliance on government subsidy, Ms. Bellow said, "there is no way
to find that level of not-for-profit expertise in France." Of the 27 major
individual and corporate sponsors for the center's opening year, 5 are French.

Still, in this time of increased cultural tension between France and the United
States, both Mr. Henry and Ms. Bellow are determined that the center not be
perceived simply as a display window for American art. Many of the planned
programs reflect French and American links or reactions to common problems.

Mr. Henry had the simplest possible explanation for this dual emphasis. "The
center is American, but it's located in Paris," he said. "It's a united
operation."

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Conceived to be a major showcase of American culture in Paris,
the American Center, designed by Frank Gehry, is beginning to show signs of life
after months of idleness while the board retrenched. (Luc Boegly/Archipress)
(pg. C17)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Sense to Keep Talking to North Korea

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


To the Editor:

Senator John McCain (letter, March 28) characterizes the Administration's
response to the situation on the Korean Peninsula as concessional. First, let me
make it clear that I have the highest regard for the Senator from Arizona. He is
a true American hero, who fought valiantly for our country in Vietnam.

Nevertheless, his characterization of the Administration's handling of the
crisis as "concession-laden" for attempting to resolve the crisis by diplomacy
is unfair. United States policy has been reasoned and reasonable. We have
responded to North Korean noncompliance in a tough manner, yet without
unnecessarily raising the stakes. What precisely would the Senator have us do?

For economic sanctions, we would need cooperation from Japan and China. Japan
has several hundred thousand North Koreans on its soil, and China is North
Korea's only ally in the world. Yes, China can quiety help convince North Korea
it has chosen a dangerous path, but quiet diplomacy is vastly different from
agreement by China to negate its many contracts to provide oil and other
critical consumer commodities to North Korea. We have all seen how difficult it
is to persuade the Chinese to make any improvement in human rights. Does the
Senator believe we can persuade China to put a stranglehold on its neighbor and
ally?

I visited North Korea last October, and met President Kim Il Sung. I delivered a
tough, but not confrontational, message. North Korea is, arguably, the most
isolated nation on the face of the planet. With Communism destroyed in Eastern
Europe, North Korea remains a bastion of hard-line Stalinist dictatorship in the
same neighborhood as some of our most important allies -- Japan and South Korea.
The United States and its allies must balance the need to be firm against the
possibility North Korea may take precipitous action.

We have not conceded anything to North Korea. We have known from the beginning
that the discussions would be protracted. But we are pursuing the right course,
and we are delivering tough messages: We are deploying the Patriot missile
defense system, and we will accept nothing less than full compliance with
international inspection requirements.

The way out of this is not by provoking North Korea into a military attack while
we proclaim, "If you do this, we will bury you."

If the North Korean leadership believes the United States may take military
action, which will undermine the regime's survival, it may itself pursue a
deadly course of action. There is no question that United States and South
Korean forces would prevail in the event of armed conflict. But such a conflict
could cost tens or even hundreds of thousands of lives.

Our first priority should be to avoid such a debacle. That means diplomacy can
and must prevail. That's not concession-laden. That's common sense.

(Rep.) GARY L. ACKERMAN
Chairman, Subcommittee on
Asia and the Pacific
Washington, March 29, 1994

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

John A. Heintges; Army General, 81

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 113 words


Lieut. Gen. John A. Heintges, who was deputy commander of the Military
Assistance Command in Vietnam in the 1960's, died on Thursday at the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in Denver. He was 81 and lived in Colorado Springs.

General Heintges died of complications from Parkinson's disease, the Army said.

As a colonel in World War II, he commanded the Seventh Infantry when the
regiment captured Hitler's villa at Berchtesgaden in May 1945. He was a 1936
graduate of West Point, and retired in 1971.

General Heintges is survived by his wife, Marianne; two sons, Robert A., of
Manhattan, and John A. Jr., of Dallas, and a daughter, Karen A. Gaucher of
Darien, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Opens International Trade Fair

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam's first international trade fair since the end of the
19-year United States economic embargo opened yesterday in Hanoi with Coca-Cola
and Chrysler stealing the show. Crowds mobbed the Chrysler exhibit to admire the
latest American cars. About 200 foreign and 150 Vietnamese companies exhibited
at the fair. Women in traditional dresses with the Chrysler logo worked the
booth. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Governor Shouldn't Have Power to Bar Recruiters From SUNY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


To the Editor:

The opportunity for college graduates to find jobs in their fields remains very
difficult, especially here in New York State.

That's one of the reasons some college graduates turn to a career in the
military. Unfortunately, obtaining information from military recruiters will be
much more difficult for State University of New York students.

Last month, the Cuomo Administration banned military recruitment at New York's
34 four-year, state-operated college campuses because of the Pentagon's don't
ask, don't tell policy on homosexuals.

Not only does this decision go against national policy, but it could also
jeopardize Pentagon research grant awards to SUNY schools, as well as the
ability of SUNY students to receive the education benefits of the G.I. bill.

More important, it takes away an opportunity for young New Yorkers who have a
patriotic will to serve, which could ultimately affect the security of our
country.

With 83,375 New Yorkers active in the United States armed forces, there are more
military personnel that call New York home than nearly any other state -- which
certainly could change now that recruitment has been severely limited in this
state.

This is not something that should be decided by the Governor; it's a policy of
the United States Government, which is charged to protect its citizens. To me,
it is incomprehensible to put impediments in the way of the citizens of this
state who wish to make a living protecting our country.

As a Vietnam War veteran, I am appalled by this decision -- a decision that
should by no means be left under the complete control of only one man.

CHARLES H. NESBITT
Member of Assembly, 137th Dist.
Albany, March 28, 1994

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Says Thais Helped Pol Pot Escape

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 6


The Cambodian Government has accused Thailand of helping Pol Pot, the leader of
the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, flee into Thailand last month in the face of
advancing Cambodian Army troops.

Foreign diplomats stationed in Cambodia said today that they had no reason to
doubt the accusations against Thailand made by Prince Norodom Ranariddh,
Cambodia's First Prime Minister, and said it would be one more dramatic example
of the close ties between Thailand, particularly its armed forces, and the Khmer
Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrilla group responsible for the deaths of at
least several hundred thousand and perhaps more than 1 million Cambodians in the
1970's.

Prince Ranariddh said Tuesday that he had photographs of Pol Pot taken late last
month after the guerrilla leader had escaped into Thailand as Cambodian
Government troops overran the rebel headquarters compound in the western
Cambodian city of Pailin.

"We have pictures to prove" that Thailand helped Pol Pot flee Pailin, he said.
"I can show you a picture of Pol Pot, his house being attacked, and Pol Pot
escaping with cars and a convoy of trucks driving on a tarmac road inside Thai
territory."

Cambodian officials said later that Thai soldiers and the civilian police
assisted the Khmer Rouge leader in his flight into Thailand, although the Prince
referred only generally to Thailand in his remarks. While the civilian
government of Thailand insists that it has tried to cut off links with the Khmer
Rouge, the military often operates independently.

The Prince, the son of King Norodom Sihanouk, did not release any photographs
and offered no details about how photographs of the Khmer Rouge leader might
have been taken.

In recent months, Thailand has repeatedly denied accusations from neighboring
Cambodia that the Bangkok Government continues to support the Khmer Rouge. Its
denials have been undercut by a series of embarrassing incidents that have
demonstrated close links, many of them based on a lucrative cross-border trade
in gems and lumber, between the Cambodian guerrillas and the Thai Army and Thai
businessmen.

Spokesmen for the Thai Foreign Ministry were not available today because of a
holiday in Thailand.

A spokesman for the Thai armed forces, Lieut. Gen. Anusorn Krisanaseni, was
quoted in Bangkok newspapers today as saying that while Thailand had not helped
Pol Pot flee Cambodia, the Thai military had sent a convoy of trucks into
western Cambodia late last month without seeking permission from the Cambodian
Government "to repatriate Cambodians fleeing the fighting into Thailand."

Prince Ranariddh said it was clear that the photographs made available to him
showed Pol Pot in Thailand, since the roads were of the sort of quality found in
Thailand. "It was not inside Cambodia," he said. "Cambodia does not have such
good smooth roads in that region."

Pol Pot, the nom de guerre of the 65-year-old guerrilla leader whose real name
is Saloth Sar, lived in sanctuary in Thailand for several years after his
government was toppled in 1979, as Vietnam invaded Cambodia.

Many commanders in the Thai military see the Khmer Rouge as a useful buffer
between Thailand and its traditional enemy, Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Pailin.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

4 Injured as Crew on Cargo Jet Fights Off Attempted Hijacking

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: MEMPHIS, April 7


A man armed with a hammer and a spear gun attacked the flight crew of a Federal
Express cargo plane today before the crew wrestled him to the floor and the
captain safely landed the plane.

Three people aboard the DC-10 were critically injured and a fourth suffered less
serious injuries, said Rick Roberts of the Regional Medical Center at Memphis.
The suspected attacker was among the most seriously hurt, said Dick Marquise, an
agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Larry Cox, president of the Memphis Shelby County Airport Authority, said the
crew members suffered head and body injuries.

"They were very bloody," Mr. Cox said. "It looked like they had been in an
explosion or a film you would see of Vietnam. It must have been hand-to-hand
combat."

Only the pilot was still able to fly after the attack, and he brought the plane
in, Mr. Cox said, adding, "The captain obviously had great skill."

Federal Express identified its plane's crew as Capt. David G. Sanders, 49; James
M. Tucker, 42, the first officer, and Andre H. Peterson, 39, the second officer.

The passenger was Auburn Calloway, 42, a DC-10 second officer with Federal
Express, the company said. No one else was on the plane, Federal Express said.

Mr. Calloway was sitting behind the crew in the plane's jump seat, Mr. Cox said.
Federal Express often allows its employees to ride free aboard its planes if
room is available.

The F.B.I. said it did not know what prompted the attack, but The Commercial
Appeal of Memphis quoted people at Federal Express as saying Mr. Calloway faced
a disciplinary hearing on Friday.

Federal Express said an emergency radio call from the crew indicated that the
passenger was trying to take control of the plane.

The Primary Instrument

It was not clear how a spear gun and hammer were brought aboard the plane, Mr.
Marquise said.

"He had a spear gun; whether that was the weapon he used during the assault, I
don't know," the agent added. "The hammer appeared to be the primary
instrument."

The man would be held on Federal charges of attacking an aircraft crew, said
Robert Wright, special agent in charge of the F.B.I. office in Memphis.

Federal Express, an international air freight company, has its headquarters in
Memphis.

The plane left Memphis at 3:16 P.M. on a flight to San Jose, Calif. The attack
occurred about 40 miles from Memphis, and the plane returned to the Memphis
airport after the attacker was subdued, the F.B.I. said.

Safe Landing a 'Miracle'

"The three crew members did one heck of a job landing the aircraft," said Jerry
McMichael, vice president of the airport authority. "It was a miracle they were
able to land."

Federal Express released a statement identifying the attacker as "a jumpseater
who was also a Federal Express pilot." A jumpseater is an employee who is flying
free, a practice the company allows when there is room aboard a plane.

The company statement said that when the plane landed, emergency chutes were
deployed to evacuate the three crew members and the attacker. It was not
immediately clear if there had been damage to the plane.

Frederick W. Smith, the chairman of Federal Express, was out of town at the time
of the incident but was notified of the attempted hijacking. The company
statement quoted him as saying he was "shocked and saddened at this tragic
news."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Lelyveld Will Succeed Frankel As The Times's Executive Editor

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words


Max Frankel, the executive editor of The New York Times for the last eight
years, will step down on July 1 and be succeeded by Joseph Lelyveld, the
newspaper's managing editor. The change was announced yesterday by Arthur
Sulzberger Jr., publisher of The Times.

Mr. Lelyveld, 57, a Pulitzer Prize-winning author who has been a foreign
correspondent, columnist and editor in 32 years with The Times, will be
succeeded as managing editor by Eugene L. Roberts Jr., a former national news
editor of The Times who was executive editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer for 18
years, until 1990.

The choice of Mr. Roberts for the paper's second-highest newsroom position -- a
selection made by Mr. Lelyveld -- was the first such key appointment from
outside the ranks of The Times since 1904, when the publisher, Adolph S. Ochs,
named the renowned Carr V. Van Anda of The New York Sun, to the managing
editorship, then The Times's highest editorial position, which he held until
1932.

Mr. Roberts, 61, whose staff at The Inquirer won 17 Pulitzer Prizes during his
tenure as editor, has been a professor of journalism at the University of
Maryland since 1991. He will take a leave from that post late this summer to
work at The Times for three years, until he reaches The Times's mandatory
retirement age for top executives.

Next fall, Mr. Frankel, 64, will become a columnist for The New York Times
Magazine, writing on communications and the media. In a 43-year career with The
Times, Mr. Frankel has been a foreign correspondent, chief of the Washington
bureau, Sunday editor, editor of the editorial page and executive editor. He won
the Pulitzer Prize in 1973 for coverage of President Richard M. Nixon's 1972
visit to China.

"No new publisher could have ever had a better friend and teacher than I did in
Max Frankel," said the 42-year-old Mr. Sulzberger, who became publisher in 1992.
"His time as executive editor coincided with some of the most difficult
financial days ever experienced by this newspaper. With his help and guidance,
we emerged from those years journalistically stronger than we entered them --
with new and expanded sections, greater circulation, an improved news report and
a powerful, more diverse staff."

Mr. Sulzberger also praised Mr. Lelyveld, who has been managing editor for four
years. "I am overjoyed that we have in Joe Lelyveld a superb journalist who, in
his years as managing editor, has proven to all his talents and abilities as a
leader in the newsroom," he said. "In the years ahead, I know he will build on
Max's legacy by adding his own imprint to our news report."

Mr. Lelyveld, who was born in Cincinnati on April 5, 1937, attended the Bronx
High School of Science and graduated from Harvard College in 1958. He joined The
Times as a copy boy in 1962 and has served in a wide range of reporting and
editing assignments.

Two Tours in South Africa

He was a correspondent based in London, New Delhi and Hong Kong and served two
tours as the Times correspondent in South Africa. He was also a national news
correspondent and a staff writer and columnist for The Times Magazine. From 1987
to 1989, he was foreign news editor of The Times, and he became managing editor
in 1990.

After his second tour in Johannesburg, Mr. Lelyveld won a Pulitzer Prize in 1986
for his book "Move Your Shadow," about apartheid in South Africa. He is also the
recipient of numerous honors in journalism, including two George Polk Memorial
Awards and citations from the Overseas Press Club and the Sidney Hillman
Foundation. He also held a Guggenheim Fellowship.

Mr. Frankel was born in Gera, Germany, on April 3, 1930, and came to the United
States in 1940. He earned a bachelor's degree from Columbia College in 1952 and
a master's degree in political science from Columbia University in 1953. He was
admitted to Phi Beta Kappa, served as editor of the student newspaper, The
Spectator, and began his career at The Times in 1949 as a Columbia College
correspondent.

First Major Mark

He became a full-time staff reporter for The Times in 1952. After two years in
the Army, he returned to The Times and made his first major mark as a rewriteman
in July 1956 by capturing the drama and desperation of the sinking of the
Italian liner Andrea Doria off Nantucket Lightship after a collision with the
Swedish ship Stockholm.

Later that year, he was sent overseas to cover stories arising from the Polish
and Hungarian uprisings against Communism. From 1957 to 1960, he was a
correspondent based in Moscow. He was also a Caribbean correspondent and covered
the United Nations before moving to Washington in 1961, becoming the diplomatic
correspondent in 1963 and White House correspondent in 1966.

Mr. Frankel was chief Washington correspondent and head of the Washington bureau
from 1968 to 1973, then served as Sunday editor until 1976, when the newspaper's
daily and Sunday staffs were merged. He was editor of the editorial page from
1977 to 1986, when he was named executive editor.

In addition to a Pulitzer Prize, Mr. Frankel received an Overseas Press Club
award in 1965 and the George Polk Memorial Award for foreign-affairs coverage in
1970.

A War Correspondent

Mr. Roberts, who earned a bachelor's degree at the University of North Carolina
in 1954 and was a Nieman Fellow at Harvard University in 1961-62, was a reporter
at The Goldsboro (N.C.) News-Argus, The Norfolk Virginian-Pilot and The News &
Observer of Raleigh and was a labor writer and metropolitan editor of The
Detroit Free Press before joining The Times in 1965 as chief Southern and civil
rights correspondent.

In 1967 and 1968, he was The Times's chief war correspondent in South Vietnam,
and he was the national news editor from 1969 to 1972, when he resigned to
become executive editor at The Philadelphia Inquirer. He was senior vice
president of The Inquirer from 1980 to 1986 and president from 1986 to 1990.

His honors include the National Press Club's Fourth Estate Award in 1993 for
lifetime achievement in journalism.

"It is a huge thrill for me to announce that my old mentor and friend is finally
coming home," Mr. Lelyveld said. "Gene is a leader and a great teacher. I'm
confident that his wisdom and example will be a tremendous boon to the paper and
to us all, in particular the already emerging next generation of leadership."


NAME: Joseph Lelyveld

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Max Frankel, right, with Joseph Lelyveld, who is to succeed him
as The Times's executive editor on July 1. (Naum Kazhdan for The New York
Times); Eugene L. Roberts Jr. will become the newspaper's new managing editor,
succeeding Mr. Lelyveld. (pg. C25)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Historian Glut

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words


History is constantly being revised these days. It's because there is a glut of
historians. Revising history is the only way to keep them busy.

The historian glut results from the Government's Vietnam War policy of granting
draft deferments for staying in college. Young men who would happily have left
the campus and gone into honest work were naturally tempted to stay on, and on,
and on.

This required them to study something. They studied history. What do you study,
after all, when you face a long sentence to college, but lack a head for science
or mathematics, go to sleep the instant somebody says "economics," aren't built
for professional sports, were never any good at Latin or French, and find out
they aren't giving Ph.D.'s for daydreaming?

You study history.

Sure, first you think you'll study literature. It would be swell, you think, to
sit around sewing leather elbow patches on your tweeds and reading Spenserian
sonnets, metaphysical poets, Alexandrine couplets. It sounds perfect. Imagine
wowing the engineering students by casually tossing off phrases from Milton.

". . . in Heaven yclept Euphrosyne . . ."

". . . filled her with thee, a goddess fair, so buxom, blithe and debonair . .
."

Sounds perfect, but why do you fall into deep coma three minutes after plunging
into the essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson?

Because literature is not vital, that's why. Not vital for a turbulent age like
the age that is forcing you to stay in college forever when, given your
druthers, you'd like to be out in the great national hurly-burly, working as an
honest shoemaker, or driving a cab and meeting such fascinating people, or . . .

Well, not vital in a violent age. History is to blame for your fate. You are a
victim of history. It's only natural that having got literature out of your
system you will, first, want to study history and, then, take your revenge on
history.

Somebody has to pay for the mess history has made of life. Why not take it out
on the historians who wrote it, show they were all wrong about practically
everything and, if they hadn't been, the world wouldn't be in the mess it's in
today.

Ordinarily a country manages to get by with 10 or 12 historians per generation.
With the historian explosion created by Vietnam, however, thousands were
suddenly coming down the pipeline.

How could they be kept busy? Newspaper editors could print only a limited number
of letters correcting foolish reporters' errors about Benedict Arnold and Mary,
Queen of Scots. With the Vietnam War over, students no longer needed to study
history; college therefore no longer needed history professors in boxcar lots.
The obvious solution for excess historians: revising the history they had been
taught.

Now they are going at it with gusto. No reputation is safe anymore. Not even
Adolf Hitler's. Scarcely a day passes now without some re-examiner of the past
announcing that Hitler wasn't such a bad chap after all. That he probably didn't
even know people were being exterminated, poor misunderstood guy.

Mussolini's reputation is bound to be revised upward now that the revival of
Fascist politics in Italy invites the attention of historians desperate for
something to revise.

Thomas Jefferson has been revised so far down that I recently read a newspaper
columnist -- a newspaper columnist! -- asserting her own moral superiority to
him. Even the once-sainted Abraham Lincoln can no longer be spoken of admiringly
without issuance of the prefatory apology:

"I realize of course that he was a racist."

The trend in history, they say, is to dwell on the social developments of the
past, a sort of how-they-lived story of humanity's miserable passage up the
geologic clock. This of course revises the old idea of what history is.
Historians like Macaulay, Trevelyan and Prescott made history an entertaining
romp down the years, starring characters of the sort who fascinated people in
the movies.

History is always bound to be wrong, of course, including the revised versions.
This being so, who would give up Prescott's Hernando Cortez, that Spanish Errol
Flynn swashbuckler, for the modern historian's study of the diet of roof
thatchers in 1750?

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Brief Romance, Growing Fears, Then 2 Deaths

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2041 words


In a city of disconnected lives and romantic possibility, it was hardly a
remarkable beginning: a wine tasting on a spring evening, a swirl of Beaujolais
and conversation, a lovely separated woman and a lonely divorced man, strangers
with savoir faire and talent, bruised but still open to a relationship.

She was Sarah Auerbach, 35, and she owned an apartment in Brooklyn Heights and
was an executive with a Wall Street investment banker. He called himself Rick
Varela, though his name was Ricardo; he was 46, a recent arrival from Chicago, a
management consultant with a big accounting firm who lived in a luxury building
in Manhattan.

They began dating a year ago and even took a summer trip to Europe. But they
lasted together only seven months, until autumn. His suave talk of Vietnam
heroics and other braggadocio had begun to crumble; the concealed psychiatric
needs, lies hiding violence in his past, began to emerge.

Ms. Auerbach broke it off -- a decision Mr. Varela refused to accept, and the
nightmare of every woman alone began: the harassing phone calls, ugly encounters
at her home and office, a ruse to get into her apartment and a knife-point rape,
all the terrors of an obsessed stalker.

Two weeks ago, he got the gun in Illinois. Last weekend, he rented a car to
stalk her. And on Thursday, as she passed two silk blouses across the counter of
her neighborhood dry cleaner, Mr. Varela -- disguised in a ridiculous wig,
sunglasses and a military trench coat -- strode up behind her, the police said,
and killed her with six bullets to the head and body.

Then he drove away, returned the car to a midtown agency, went to a movie about
Nazi Germany's film maker Leni Riefenstahl, had a few beers in a Greenwich
Village bar, called his former wife and daughter in Illinois to say he loved
them and, sometime after midnight yesterday, went to the promenade in Brooklyn
Heights, overlooking the towers of lower Manhattan, and fired a single shot into
his right temple.

Behind a Tragic Mismatch

As stunned relatives and friends mourned the deaths of Sarah Auerbach and Rick
Varela yesterday, the stories of two lives shattered in a tragic mismatch -- and
of apparent failures to avert a murder and suicide, despite her complaints to
the police and other warning signs -- were pieced together from interviews with
investigators and acquaintances in New York, Long Island and Illinois.

"I was stalked once -- the police treated it like a joke," said Donata Colucci,
who knew Ms. Auerbach from her frequent visits to a Brooklyn Heights athletic
club, where Ms. Colucci is a trainer. "There are no stalking laws. Someone has
to shoot someone before anything can be done."

But Deputy Inspector Martin Johnson, who detailed the case yesterday at the 84th
Precinct, said authorities were powerless. "Unfortunately, our criminal-justice
system requires that the complaining witnesses cooperate with the
investigation," he said. "She did not want to publicize her rape and so did not
file charges. She did not seek a protection order from court."

She was born Sarah Schwartz, and she and her identical twin, Julia, grew up in
Merrick, L.I., graduating from high school there in 1976. The yearbook shows a
dark-haired, brown-eyed girl with a calm, sweet face, a good scholar and athlete
who was a member of varsity tennis and volleyball teams and of an honors society
and Spanish Club.

Julia was more outgoing, a classmate, Michael Adwar, recalled. "Sarah was quiet,
studious and smart," he said. "She was pretty straight, no drugs. And she didn't
date many guys." But Sarah attended the senior class prom with Reed Auerbach,
one of the most popular youths in school. Even as they went away to college,
they kept in touch and were to be more than high school sweethearts.

Mr. Auerbach attended Columbia University and studied law, while Ms. Schwartz, a
talented mathematician, went to the State University of New York at Binghamton.
She graduated in 1980 and went to work for an accounting firm. Three years
later, she was hired by Salomon Brothers, the investment firm, where she moved
quickly on the executive track.

Picture Perfect

After Mr. Auerbach graduated and went to work as a lawyer in Manhattan, he and
Ms. Schwartz were married in 1983. Friends remembered them as a kind of
picture-perfect yuppie couple: successful, sophisticated, with the endless lofty
prospects that seemed so common in the 80's.

They bought a $250,000 two-bedroom cooperative apartment at 41 Pierrepont Street
in Brooklyn Heights, where nannies walk carriages, shopkeepers call customers by
name, and crime and urban woes are obscured by quiet, tree-lined streets and
sweeping views of Manhattan.

Success grew. At Salomon Brothers, with offices at the World Trade Center, she
became a vice president. Mr. Auerbach became a partner at Strook & Strook &
Lavan.

But several years ago, the marriage some friends regarded as ideal somehow went
wrong. Mr. Auerbach moved out, a separation in contemplation of divorce was
arranged, Ms. Auerbach settled in to life alone in the brownstone flat and,
friends said, began to date occasionally. She became more outgoing, some said.

'Big Flowers and Big Hair'

"She wore wild, colorful suits and big hair -- big flowers and big hair," said
Ms. Colucci, a trainer at the Eastern Athletic Club on Clark Street, where Ms.
Auerbach began going two or three times a week for workouts. "She was very
orderly, very bright and very colorful, never down in language or attitude."

Her neighbors remembered her as friendly, quiet but outgoing. "She was a
beautiful person, a wonderful neighbor," one said. Susanne Donnery, a director
of Eastern Athletic, called her "sweet" and "refined," and said she liked to
attend social events, especially wine tastings.

Ricardo Varela's background was more obscure yesterday. Police investigators
said he was born in Chicago, attended Roosevelt University in Lansing, Ill., and
earned a degree in accounting. From January 1968 to August 1969, he was in the
Army as an enlisted man; he served in Vietnam for at least a year in a clerical
capacity as a Specialist 4, and was honorably discharged.

Inspector Johnson said Mr. Varela lied about his Vietnam experiences, often
portraying them as the exploits of a daring adventurer. "The best psychological
profile I have arrived at for him is that he's a very smooth-talking, suave
liar," he said.

In 1977, Mr. Varela was arrested in Lansing for aggravated assault, but the New
York City Police Department said it did not know the outcome of the case, which
hinted, too late, of violence in his past.

Mr. Varela was married in Lansing, a suburb of Chicago, and had one child, the
authorities said, though it was unclear yesterday just when the marriage and
birth occurred. In 1992, the couple was divorced, and Mr. Varela sometime late
that year left his former wife, Barbara, and grown daughter, Laura Bryant, in
Lansing, and moved to New York.

He went to work for the accounting firm of Ernst & Young, which has 20,000
employees in 100 locations. He worked on the 18th floor of the company's office
at 750 Seventh Avenue, but spent most of his time outside the office, advising
clients as a management consultant. Mort Meyerson, a spokesman for the company,
said Mr. Varela exhibited no professional or personal problems.

'He Was Very Low-Key'

Mr. Varela rented a one-bedroom apartment on the 11th floor of the Executive
Tower Apartments at 150 West 51st Street in midtown Manhattan, but was almost
unknown to his neighbors and to the staff. "He was very low-key," Jack Wilson,
the concierge, recalled. "He was always friendly and well-groomed."

Alone in Manhattan, Mr. Varela on a night in late March last year attended a
wine tasting for single people in New York. There, he met Ms. Auerbach and they
soon began to date, according to Inspector Johnson, who said they had even taken
a trip to Europe together last summer.

But by September, Inspector Johnson said, the relationship had gone bad. Mr.
Varela, who apparently had a penchant for lying about his background, was being
treated by a psychologist or psychatrist, the inspector said, though he said he
could provide no details of this.

Ms. Auerbach broke it off, but Mr. Varela did not go away. He began a series of
harassing phone calls to her home and office, and began to follow her around,
confronting her publicly and privately with his pleas to resume their
relationship. She rebuffed these, and told acquaintances of her annoyance and
frustration.

But on the night of last Nov. 18, the frustration turned to terror. Mr. Varela,
the police said, went to her apartment, told her through an intercom system that
his father had died and that he needed to see her, to be comforted by her.

A Rape at Knife-Point

She let him in, and according to a report she filed with the police the next
day, he pulled a knife and raped her, then spent the night with her. After
reporting the attack at the 84th Precinct police station, she decided not to
press charges, so the complaint was dropped, the police said.

John Miller, the Deputy Police Commissioner in charge of public information,
said Ms. Auerbach indicated to the police that she wanted only to be left alone
by the man who was stalking and harassing her.

Several days later, on Nov. 23, Ms. Auerbach filed a harassment complaint
against Mr. Varela with the Port Authority police, who have jurisdiction for
protecting the World Trade Center, where her office was located. She said he had
been harassing her on the telephone and had tried to get into her office.

She filed another harassment complaint against Mr. Varela with the city police
on Feb. 5, saying he was stalking her and had tried to accost her near her
apartment. But she never agreed to file charges against him; nor did she seek an
order of protection from State Supreme Court.

"Yes, the system is cumbersome," Inspector Johnson acknowledged. "But we're
forced to work with what we have, and if you don't cooperate with us, we can't
protect you."

On March 21, on a trip to Illinois, Mr. Varela bought a 9-millimeter
semiautomatic handgun in Franklin Park, near Chicago, after a three-day waiting
period. While the purchase was legal in Illinois, he did not have a license for
the gun in New York City, where its possession was thus illegal.

Last weekend, Mr. Varela rented a gray, four-door 1994 Chevrolet from an Avis
outlet on West 54th Street in Manhattan, and apparently used it to follow Ms.
Auerbach. On Thursday morning, he parked near her apartment, in a disguise that
perhaps gave him more attention than cover -- a dark bushy wig, sunglasses and a
military-style trench coat -- and followed her to the Best Cleaners, at 185
Henry Street.

He hid briefly in a bakery across the street, then at 8:55 A.M. moved in as she
stood at the counter, firing six shots into his victim, who fell dead before
several horrified witnesses. She was hit in the left side of the head, the chin,
neck, lower left chest, hip and right side of the back.

He ran to his car, sped away and returned it to Avis an hour later. But someone
had got the license plate, and by afternoon the police had traced the car and
were looking for Mr. Varela. By then, he was in the darkness of the Film Forum
on West Houston Street, watching "The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni
Riefenstahl."

Just before midnight, he called his former wife in Lansing, saying he was at a
bar in Greenwich Village. "When she got the phone call, she said he sounded like
he had been drinking, typical crying-in-my-beer type conversation, feeling sorry
for himself," Inspector Johnson said. "He never admitted to the crime."

He told his former wife and daughter that he loved them, then hung up. His tone
of apparent farewell had worried them, and they called the police in New York.
Detectives searched the village, but by then he was on the promenade at Brooklyn
Heights, seated on a bench with the murder weapon. A passer-by found him dead at
3:35 A.M. yesterday, a bullet in his head, the gun at his side, and a suicide
note in his pocket.

It acknowledged the murder of Ms. Auerbach, the police said, but contained no
hint of remorse.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The journey of a romance gone awry ended in a Brooklyn Heights
cleaning shop this week when a gunman killed Sarah Auerbach, a 35-year-old
investment banker. The suspect had refused to accept her demands to end the
relationship and had stalked her for days. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York
Times); Sarah Auerbach. The suspect in her killing was later found dead.
(1980)(pg. 25)

Map of Brooklyn showing location of the promenade where the suspect was found.
(pg. 25)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: April 10, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   6   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      4  87   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      2   8   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 4      3  12   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 5      5  23   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 6      6  52   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      7   5   ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials
                from reaching North Korea.

 8      8   7   THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths
                investigate a series of catastrophes.

 9          1   ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.)
                Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong
                Kong to China in 1997.

 10    11   2   RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.)
                Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the
                Pharaohs.

 11     9  11   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 12        31   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 13    10   9   FAMILY BLESSINGS, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                widow's affection for the close friend of her son, killed in an
                accident, creates familial tension.

 14    12   4   SECOND NATURE, by Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) A woman
                adopts a "wolf man" and, by teaching him, learns a lot about
                good and evil.

 15    13   7   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $22.95.) Archy
                McNally's search for the thief of a family's heirlooms uncovers
                a string of surprises.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  48   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   6   HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and
                surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."

 3      3  16   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 4      4   4   ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary
                kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she
                was 11 years old) to 1993.

 5      5   5   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      7   4   MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.)
                The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a
                Washington Post reporter.

 7      6  13   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 8      8  19   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      9  27   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 10    11   8   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 11         4   I TOOK A LICKIN' AND KEPT ON TICKIN', by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $19.) The late humorist's description of his
                experience following heart surgery.

 12    10  31   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 13    13  34   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 14    14  86   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 15    12  33   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  12   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  46   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      4   2   FIRST THINGS FIRST, by Stephen R. Covey, A. Roger Merrill and
                Rebecca R. Merrill. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Ways to organize
                your life to be successful.

 4      3  24   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.)
                Advice on women's health and fitness.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 26, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ANCESTRAL TRUTHS, by Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) A splendid
novel, formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is peculiar; its
prime focus is on a woman trying to remember whether she killed her male
traveling companion (she certainly wanted him dead).

THE DEATH OF THE MESSIAH. From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the
Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels, by Raymond E. Brown. (Anchor Bible
Reference Library/Doubleday, 2 vols., $37.50 each; boxed set, $75.) A 1,600-page
treatment by a distinguished scholar; meant for experts, readable by any
interested person.

DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) Mr. Kissinger's "great
man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and
shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.

E.M. FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general
reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally
punctuated by little bursts of liberation.

THE END OF THE HUNT, by Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This
splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the
civil war of the 1920's. Analogies will be drawn with the present.

HERE: Stories, by Elizabeth Inness-Brown. (Louisiana State University, $19.95.)
Short stories concerning chiefly people encompassed (or imprisoned) wholly by
the present, without a clue how to get out of it or beyond it.

LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF DEATH: Tuberculosis and the Social Experience of Illness
in American History, by Sheila M. Rothman. (Basic Books, $25.) A social history
of tuberculosis using the "illness narratives" of patients to chart a disease
from the unscientific perspective of the patients.

THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath & Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In
the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed
by odious male poet), Ms. Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about
the values, and value, of biographers.

STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the
highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to
1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.

THE WAY TO THE CATS, by Yehoshua Kenaz. (Steerforth Press, $20.) An
unremittingly bleak novel of age, death and decay, set in a Tel Aviv hospital
where there are few visitors, and they as disagreeable as the patients.

WHAT IS TOLD, by Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) This genially
pessimistic first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of
cosmopolitan Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to
places like Free Fall, N.J., in a narrative presided over by presences from the
spirit world.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 10, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 872 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     8   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2    14   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 3     3   WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that
           lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.

 4     3   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of
           a killer.

 5     3   HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a
           German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.

 6     4   LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.)
           Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century
           Britain.

 7     2   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching
           his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the
           history of Mexico.

 8     6   WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $5.99.) Lucas
           Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in
           Wisconsin's cold woods.

 9    11   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a small California town vexes a temporary
           district attorney.

 10    2   PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser
           tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South
           Carolina town.

 11*   5   THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious
           attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal
           of past crimes.

 12    8   JEDI SEARCH, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.)
           The first volume of "The Jedi Academy Trilogy," a "Star
           Wars" saga.

 13*   2   CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster
           and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters
           World War III.

 14*  15   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 15    1   FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An
           affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people
           returning to their hometown.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    13   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2    544  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.

 3    60   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 4     5   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture
           and murder.

 5*   13   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 6     2   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.)
           The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 7    130  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 8*   45   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 9    23   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 10   144  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 11   10   A CALL FOR REVOLUTION, by Martin L. Gross. (Ballantine,
           $8.99.) More examples of Government waste, and how to stop
           it.

 12*   2   IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.)
           The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the
           1970's and 80's.

 13*  143  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 14*  10   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

 15*  30   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show
           host.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    160  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 2     5   MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and
           Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&S, $11.) Ways to teach
           children about spending and saving money.

 3    167  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 4    25   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales, for the week ending March 26, at 3,050 bookstores plus
wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent
sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales
are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENDPAPER;
Outside In

BYLINE: By Marshall Sella;   Marshall Sella is a contributing editor at New York
magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 86;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 879 words


[Excerpt from "Nightline," March 7, 1995. Topic: President Clinton's 1996
budget. Guests: Senator Oliver L. North, Republican of Virginia; Senator Al
Sharpton, Democrat of New York, and Representative Sonny Bono, Republican of
California.]

Ted Koppel: Specifically, which programs do you define as unnecessary, Senator
North?

North: Ted, I came to this great nation's capital -- to speak for some folks
outside the Beltway, a group of God-fearing folks called "America." Maybe you've
heard of it. I know I'm not too popular with the pundits at The Washington
"Compost" and The New York "Crimes." I don't expect to be feted by the fat-cat
ultrafeminists or the radical homosexual lobby.

Sharpton: I cannot believe what I am hearing. This man sitting next to me is an
outsider? This is the man that built the fence! This is the man behind the man
behind the man! Colonel, I come from the house of Dr. King, so don't you be
crooning James Brown to me! I was marching through streets of fire and rage when
you were still shredding everything you could lay your pink hands on.

Bono: [remote from Palm Springs, Calif.]: "Compost"? I don't have a monitor out
here . . . Ollie, are you holding up a prop or something?

Koppel: I think the Senator is referring to The Washington Post. But if we can
get to. . . .

Bono: Oh, Com-Post. That's funny!

North: If I could just respond to Alfred. I'm not talking about fire and rage.
I'm talking about family and country. A lot of people have called me a hero
because of the many true tales of my quiet courage under fire. Frankly, I don't
think of myself that way; the men I fought alongside -- they were the real
heroes. And, Alfred, those men were every color of the rainbow.

Bono: Except red.

North: Beg pardon, Sonny?

Bono: The "rainbow men" probably weren't red, like Communists. You were talking
about Vietnam, weren't you, Ollie? Or did you mean that Iranian thing, where you
flew to Teheran with the cake and stuff? I can't see you through this camera.

North: I did mean Vietnam, Sonny -- I guess nobody will be shocked to hear I'm
not a poet. I'm just an American, here to deliver a message.

Bono: Hey, no problem. I'm not good at poems either.

Sharpton: I've come with a message, too, Mr. North -- a message delivered not
from White House money launderers or California country-club caddies, but from a
forsaken community! Who's the true outsider here tonight? Al Sharpton!

Koppel: Gentleman, I truly must insist that we stick to --

Bono: Mind if I add something, Ted? I sure respect the Senators' outsideness,
but I'm really the outsider here -- and not just 'cause I'm in a studio -- what?
-- hundreds of miles away. I was elected to buck traditional politics. And
having owned a restaurant, O.K., I know a little about being the victim of bad
laws and red tape and . . . and taxes! I mean, people have said to me, "Sonny,
you can't do this job -- you can't even play an instrument." But I know the
tune. And maybe D.C. has enough know-it-all policy hunks anyway.

North: Ted, I think that's a touchdown for Sonny. I may sound old-fashioned, but
we -- those of us gathered here in this room and those of us watching at home,
those Americans who are doing most of the working and living and dying in what,
for my money, is the greatest nation in the world!

Koppel: I'm not sure that was a complete sentence, but if by some miracle you
were moving toward a budget response, we're on bended knee, sir.

North: You bet, Ted. I just believe there's an America beyond the "America" -- a
nation comprised of outsiders. Being outside, we can look up and see clouds
gathering. These are clouds that signal an end for the Licentious Left.

Sharpton: I got news for you, Colonel. That isn't clouds. That's smoke! Smoke
from the cities! Smoke from places far beyond the guard towers you stole from
the school-less schoolkids and the bedless sick folk and the homeless homeless!
This country is about to explode, and you still grinning that gap-tooth smile!

North: No, Alfred, those are rain clouds you see -- cleansing clouds of change.

Sharpton: The air is filled with smoke!

Bono: So the smoke is what, now? Good clouds?

North: Yes, clouds that harbinger an end to crippling taxes -- a new beginning.

Bono: Then wouldn't that be sunshine? Like a dawn or something?

Koppel: Gentleman, there's only time for a brief last word; clearly we can give
up on the budget issue. Senator North, we may as well start with you.

North: Edward, even though I've had two blockbuster books -- "Under Fire" and
"One More Mission" -- there's only one book for my family. To paraphrase that
Good Book: "Mine eyes shall not spare them, neither will I have pity: They shall
know that I am the Beltway Outsider that smiteth!"

Koppel: Fine. Congressman Bono?

Bono: I'm not a professional politician, Tom, I could've stayed right here and
had a real nice life -- I have a wonderful wife, wonderful kids, wonderful dogs
-- but instead I'm . . . well, actually I am here right now, but I'll be out
East pretty soon to vote on some important budget things that people should, you
know, be thinking about.

Koppel: Reverend, I'm afraid that will have to be the last word. Thank you all
for joining us.

Sharpton: Figures.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
Berkoff Directs a Quirky, Stylish 'Richard II'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2025 words


RICHARD II (1367-1400) WAS NOT A good king. He wasn't always a bad king either.
As characterized by W. C. Sellar and R. J. Yeatman in their classic parody of
English history, "1066 and All That," Richard was an "unbalanced king." This is
why he was so easily toppled by his first cousin Bolingbroke, who "quickly
mounted the throne and said he was Henry IV, Part I."

"1066 and All That" dispatches Richard in two blithe paragraphs. Yet it's
probably as good an introduction as any to the genealogy of Shakespeare's
history plays, including "The Tragedy of Richard II" now being given an
exceptionally stylish production by Steven Berkoff in the Anspacher Theater at
the Joseph Papp Public Theater. The Playbill includes a double-page spread
outlining 200 years of Richard's family tree, which is helpful as well as
intimidating: it reminds you of everything you've forgotten about the
Plantagenets, Lancasters and all other claimants to the English throne.

It also gets you off on the wrong foot for Mr. Berkoff's production, which,
among other virtues, is so well and clearly spoken and so clean of dramatic line
that it's accessible from start to finish. All you need to remember is that
Richard II is the one who abdicates, not the one with the hunchback, and that
the play is the first in the tetralogy that goes on to "Henry IV, Parts 1 and 2"
and "Henry V."

Richard isn't an easy character to admire. He's unbending when he should be
pliant and weak when action is demanded. He's arrogant, cruel and given to the
company of men described (in a possible euphemism) as flatterers. "Reproach and
dissolution hang over him now," says the Earl of Northumberland, one of the
first nobles to join Bolingbroke's army to march against Richard, also referred
to as a "most degenerate king."

Yet Richard's fatal flaw as a king is also what makes him most arresting as a
dramatic figure: like a poet, he automatically responds to crises (in Richard's
case, of his own making) by distancing himself from them. He is his own best
audience. As the rebellion against his high-handed rule becomes apparent, he
stands outside events as if to observe himself in the center of a long shot. He
moves himself to tears. And somewhere deep inside, enjoys the spectacle.

Richard is a wonderfully complicated, contradictory man, in fact the only figure
of any complexity in a drama that is otherwise populated by characters who never
have any doubts about what they're doing, for evil, good or simple survival. To
give visual representation to this essential aspect of "Richard II," Mr. Berkoff
has devised a handsome production that's almost entirely black, white or shades
of gray, in which only Richard is allowed the subtleties of color.

The men are decked out in what look to be black Edwardian morning coats and gray
trousers. They wear ascot ties, carry white gloves, black top hats and canes.
The women are in gray. The drop at the back of the stage is a mural of black,
white and gray heraldic shields. In such a context, the vividly tinted Richard
(Michael Stuhlbarg) appears to live in the glow of his own traveling spotlight.
Though, like the others, he wears black-and-white Edwardian clothes, he also
sports orange-red hair, beard and mustache, whose tips are waxed like a dandy's.
His hazel eyes are set off by just the suggestion of black eye liner, his ruby
lips by the unnatural pallor of his face.

As the image demands attention, Mr. Stuhlbarg's Richard commands the stage with
the authority of the divinely anointed king he believes himself to be. There's
something a little too precise about his diction, as if everyone else had yet to
master the proper way of speaking. His manners are polite to the point of
sarcasm.

When he's being introspective, his flights of grand poetic fancy ("For God's
sake let us sit upon the ground/ And tell sad stories of the death of kings")
land him in a pool of self-pity ("How can you say to me I am a king?"). As Mr.
Stuhlbarg plays the great abdication scene toward the end of the play, the self-
dramatizing Richard upstages the new monarch, Bolingbroke (Andre Braugher), by
what appears to be the arrogance of his total submission. He hands his crown to
Bolingbroke, but then won't let go. Bolingbroke tugs; Richard hangs on. He
plants his feet on the ground and Bolingbroke pulls him -- slides him, really --
around the stage as if he were a stubborn schnauzer on a short leash.

It's a very good performance in a production of carefully considered, mostly
effective eccentricities. In spite of the Edwardian dress, there's no attempt to
set the play in anything but its own time. The costumes are functional in that
they serve the visual design. This is not an updated "Richard II" winking with
contemporary allusions that Shakespeare never imagined. It's a classic tale of
kingship, of the momentum of history by which kings are unmade as inevitably as
they are crowned. Yet Mr. Berkoff does use contemporary devices.

At the start of the play, when Richard hears the charges of treason being
brought by Bolingbroke against Thomas Mowbray (Jack Stehlin), which sets in
train all that follows, Mr. Berkoff places the chorus of court attendants at the
back of the stage, where they're seen in silhouette. The downstage action heats
up. Honor is challenged, gloves are thrown down. In response, the silhouetted
auditors at the rear move jerkily, as if photographed by a stop-motion camera,
to adopt various attitudes of interest, contempt and concern.

The action of the play is as stylized as the production's look. A crowd of
nobles hurriedly abandons the stage, but they hurry in the time-bending way of
cinema's slow-motion. There's a kind of comic, silent-movie hysteria in the
sequence in the York household in which mother and father attempt to stop their
son's mission to assassinate Bolingbroke. Not all of this business is as
effectively executed. When an army appears onstage, it takes a moment to realize
that the officers and men are supposed to be on horseback, which is why the
actors seem to be walking funny.

The best thing about this production is its consistency of language and
performance. The London-born Mr. Berkoff has successfully staged an American
Shakespearean production in which all the actors sound as if they were born on
the same continent, even if they weren't, and in the same century. There are no
great oratorical flourishes, but there also are no battles of American, English
and drama-school accents and speech patterns.

Mr. Braugher, whom I remember best for his moving performance in the film
"Glory," is strong, cold and utterly focused as Bolingbroke who, in unseating
Richard, is to become as much a pawn of history as the man he succeeds. Also
memorable are Earl Hyman's dying old John of Gaunt, whose loyalty doesn't
prevent Richard from grabbing his estates, and Herb Foster's Duke of York, a man
of fixed beliefs, even if he is the play's only character y of a complexity to
come near Richard. Though the women in "Richard II" are pretty much functions of
the plot, Carole Shelley is very fine as the Duchess of York, a wife and mother
who, toward the end, steps forward to assert herself with startling resolve.

Note, too, the names of Christine Jones (scenic design), Elsa Ward (costume
design) and Larry Spivak, who composed and performs the excellent musical score.
I didn't see Mr. Berkoff's productions of "Metamorphosis" on Broadway and
"Coriolanus" at the Public, but I like his theatrical conceits. Moviegoers might
remember that he is also an actor. He played the vile Russian officer who, in
"Rambo: First Blood, Part 2," put Sylvester Stallone on an electrified rack and
tried to fry him, failing, unfortunately, in the nick of time.


                             --------------------


'Jackie Mason: Politically Incorrect'

With the American flag at stage right, silvery stars projected onto a blue drop
behind him, and, at center stage, a bright red lectern he never uses, Jackie
Mason is back on Broadway, surrounded by colors that associate him with our
Founding Fathers.

His one-man show at the Golden Theater is called "Jackie Mason: Politically
Incorrect." In it, promises the Playbill, the star will focus "his acerbic wit
on one of his central passions: politics." Acerbic he is, also bilious. Even
pompous. The wit is not as easily identified.

For something more than two hours, including a 15-minute intermission, Mr. Mason
delighted the preview audience with which I saw the show. Among his targets:
President Clinton and his smoking marijuana without inhaling ("Would you put a
pastrami sandwich in your mouth if you weren't going to swallow it?");
affirmative-action employment practices that make it difficult to fire anybody
("If you hire a female black homosexual, you might as well close down your
business right away"); Minister Farrakhan's attacks on Jews ("The Jews are the
only ones who always fought for civil rights. They went down to the South and
died for the blacks"), and women in the Clinton Administration, including
Attorney General Janet Reno ("They don't look like women").

Mr. Mason puts much stress on looks. Short, balding with a spare tire around his
middle, he has the pampered appearance of a man who's just come from a sauna, a
massage and a hairdresser. He paces back and forth across the Golden stage
wearing a double-breasted suit, the jacket so draped that it seems to call
attention to the well-fed fact that he isn't wearing a corset. The presentation
is simple. The delivery is fast.

Either you're on Mr. Mason's wavelength, as was the man sitting behind me
("That's cute, that's cute," said the man throughout the performance), or it's
one of the longest nights you'll ever spend in the theater, as it was for me.
Mr. Mason's wispy, bluntly pronounced political apercus are designed to appeal
to a middle-class constituency that feels short-changed by life. He's better
doing Jewish doctor jokes.

At one point the night I saw him he managed to screw up his face so that he
actually resembled Tonya Harding, but he concluded the Harding routine by saying
under his breath -- and I think I heard correctly -- "vicious pig bastard."

That's cute?


                             --------------------


'Mort Sahl's America'

The small stage at Theater Four, where Mort Sahl is doing his Off Broadway
one-man show ("Mort Sahl's America"), is also lit to suggest a Stars and Stripes
motif. Though both he and Mr. Mason touch on many of the same topics, there's no
other similarity between the performances.

Wearing his usual gray flannels, a shirt open at the neck and a sweater (red),
and carrying a rolled-up newspaper, Mr. Sahl looks tanned and fit in a way that
has nothing to do with high-cost pummeling. He also seems genuinely amused by
the idiocies and contradictions of the world around him.

He talks about his friendship with the Ronald Reagans and Gen. Alexander Haig,
which so astonished his liberal admirers from the Eisenhower years, but his
humor remains intact and free-wheeling. About rumors that several of Mr.
Reagan's advisers had been photographed with a call girl: "A very cynical
attempt to humanize the Reagan Administration." He sends up Hollywood liberals,
Henry Kissinger, Barbara Walters, Oliver North, Larry King ("I read parts of
your book all the way through"), and Curtis Sliwa, "New York City's new minister
of culture."

He swears he was asked to go on the Phil Donahue show if he could talk about
being molested as a child. After much soul-searching ("I liked my parents"), he
decided he would do the show but would say he'd been molested by Roseanne
Arnold's parents. He talks about his little-publicized work as a screenwriter
(helping out with "The Firm" and "Ordinary People"), about Vietnam, about the
Clintons. The mind slices through cant; the wit is true. "Mort Sahl's America"
is a very funny show.

THE TRAGEDY OF RICHARD II An accessible production, from start to finish, by
Steven Berkoff.

JACKIE MASON: POLITICALLY INCORRECT No Jewish doctor jokes?

MORT SAHL'S AMERICA The humor is intact and free-wheeling.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mort Sahl in his one-man show, "Mort Sahl's America." (Suzanne
Karp Krebs/"Mort Sahl's America")(pg. 7); Patrick Page, Michael Stuhlbarg,
center, as the king, and Daniel Oreskes in "The Tragedy of Richard II" -- No
battles of American, English and drama-school accents. (Carol Rosegg/Martha
Swope Associates/"Richard II")(pg. 5)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART VIEW;
A Watershed Event at the Met

BYLINE: By Holland Cotter

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 41;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1634 words


GANESHA, THE elephant-headed Hindu god of beginnings, the remover of obstacles,
has been working overtime at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. And he has conjured
a triumph. The public debut of the museum's Florence and Herbert Irving
Galleries for the Arts of South and Southeast Asia on Wednesday not only puts
several of the world's great artistic cultures on permanent display for the
first time in Manhattan but does so on a scale matched by no American
institution and by very few in the world.

The results are not flawless. There are details of the installation one would
have wished otherwise, and, as with any youngish collection (most of the 1,300
objects on view have been acquired within the last 20 years), some objects will
doubtless be replaced over time by finer examples of their kind. But the fact
remains that the Irving Galleries opening is a watershed event -- for Asian
culture in this city, for a museum whose claim to be encyclopedic takes a giant
step closer to reality, and for art lovers who for years have had to see a
meager sampling of the museum's splendid South Asian sculptures confined to drab
hallway vitrines.

They've been set free at last in 18 new galleries carved out of 15,000 square
feet of second-floor exhibition space once reserved for temporary shows. The
rooms, which run railroad style along the building's Fifth Avenue side, have two
points of entry, one through the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery for Chinese sculpture
just off the museum's central balcony, the other at the Douglas Dillon Galleries
for Chinese paintings further north.

The rooms themselves are narrow but well proportioned, opening out in size at
three points. With their highly abstracted architectural motifs drawn from
Buddhist and Hindu monuments, their subtle lighting, and their floor paving
keyed to harmonize with the sculptures themselves (the pale rosy sandstone in
the Gupta room is especially lovely), they convey a sense of subdued
monumentality punctuated by some strikingly dramatic sights.

An eighth-century sculpture of the multi-armed god Vishnu -- at 10 feet tall one
of the largest Hindu sculptures outside India -- placed in a sanctumlike
enclosure is certainly one of them. A group of bronze portable processional
figures from the Chola dynasty floating, spotlighted, across a gun-metal-gray
room is another. And a third is the arrangement of Cambodian sculptures in a
simulated open-air courtyard. With its silk-smooth grace, this Khmer work serves
as a glorious conclusion to the galleries' episodic tour of the dozen cultures
-- from Nepal and Tibet to Burma, Thailand and Indonesia -- that drew
inspiration from the Indian subcontinent.

The very fact that India is, technically speaking, a subcontinent rather than a
country or territory suggests the immense chunk of cultural material it
encompasses. More than twice the size of Europe, it gave birth to three major
religions (Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism), was adoptive home to a fourth
(Islam), and from time unrecorded has nurtured a less formal, popular religion
so widespread and profound that it continues to permeate all of its art.

That religion is embodied in the very first sculpture at the Sackler Gallery
entrance, the figure of a female earth spirit, or "yakshi," dating from the
first century B.C. Nude except for an ornamental belt securing her skirt, her
limbs as taut as ripe fruit, her gaze forthright, she is an emblem of both
physical abundance and spiritual amplitude. Philosophically speaking, she
introduces a spiritual universe -- optimistic and life-affirming -- far removed
from most of the religious art of the West.

That she was carved for a Buddhist holy site and thus associated with a religion
known for its asceticism is only one indication of the wide conceptual embrace
of early Indian art, but there are plenty of others. The handsome face of the
second- or third-century A.D. bodhisattva, or enlightened being, in the second
gallery, for example, has clear origins in the naturalism of classical Greek
sculpture (the topknot on his head is also found on the Apollo Belvedere), while
a Gupta Buddha in the third gallery, carved two centuries later, looks barely
human. With his rhythmic curves and smooth near-vegetable forms, he is an
abstract ideal of introspective tension.

The installation's organizers -- Martin Lerner, curator, and Steven Kossak,
assistant curator -- have used such signpost images throughout to anchor each
step of a chronological sequence, but they've also surrounded them with a rich,
sprawling jumble of less familiar work. The early terra cottas alone -- a
first-century B.C. relief of a royal couple, for example, whose raffish turbans
are the last word in preposterous haute couture -- are tantalizing evidence of a
whole lost range of popular art that existed in this expressive but ephemeral
medium.

The collection strikes a clear, vibrant high note in the small Kashmiri gallery,
its fabric-covered walls creating a sudden splash of deep crimson. Once a
crossroad for Himalayan trade, now devastated by civil war, Kashmir remains a
radically understudied territory and the history of its ancient cultures a
hopeless tangle. Yet the art it produced, especially in bronze, is of a beauty
quite beyond compare. As is true elsewhere in the Irving Galleries, the Kashmiri
pieces are, with a few exceptions, more notable for their diversity than for
sheer heart-stopping individual brilliance, but this riveting material deserves
close attention and it is wonderful to have it here.

From this point one moves through a gallery of Pala sculpture, the stylistic
model for much of the later art of Southeast Asia, then past the colossal Vishnu
-- an image more impressive for its scale than for sculptural finesse -- to the
selection of the Metropolitan's Chola dynasty temple bronzes from South India.
The jewel in this crown is without doubt the rare and celebrated 10th-century
image of the goddess Parvati, wife of the Hindu deity Shiva. But nearly every
piece on view radiates the kind of suave supernatural sheen that distinguishes
this art.

The so-called Medieval Sculpture Court that follows is the installation's one
serious miscalculation. Up to this point, the historical trajectory has been
nicely managed. But in this room, which constitutes the second entrance to the
galleries, organizational logic breaks down and anything goes. Hindu sculptures
join a two-story red sandstone mock-Mughal tower fitted out -- absurdly -- with
a patchy teakwood ceiling from a Jain temple. From a distance this farrago has a
certain visual panache, but up close it feels as flimsy as a stage set, and
historically speaking it is confusing in the extreme.

Still, a couple of the collection's most eye-catching pieces are here: an
imperturbable seated Jain "tirthankara," or savior, of the purest white marble
(a type of figure often confused with the Buddha) and a 12th-century dancing
goddess, her necklace flying as she twists her body in sensual abandon. In
practically any Western culture these two figures -- one ascetic, one erotic --
might be seen as ethical opposites. Within the context of Indian art, they
harmoniously coexist.

IT IS AT THIS POINT IN THE installation that India itself and the several
countries in her cultural sphere part ways. To the north of the Medieval
Sculpture Gallery one finds work from Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand, notable
among which is a monumental seventh-century Vietnamese Vishnu. A marvel of
volumetric simplicity, he represents what is sometimes referred to as a
Cambodian-inspired "international" style; this imprecise phrase disguises the
tragic reality that the history of this period in Southeast Asia was all but
obliterated centuries ago in scorched-earth waves of intercultural warfare.

Inevitably, the fact of similar but far more recent destruction haunts the Khmer
courtyard. And it is here in particular that one is prompted to speculate on
exactly how art objects are extracted from their impoverished, often
strife-torn, homes of origin to land in the lap of a rich American museum.
Suffice it to say the ethically fraught area of museum acquisitions deserves
hard scrutiny. Whatever their provenance, the Met's Angkor-period sculptures
constitute one of the largest gatherings of this material outside the Musee
Guimet in Paris and Cambodia itself. It includes a superb 10th-century
Avalokiteshvara, the Buddha of Infinite Compassion, one of the few surviving
Cambodian images in bronze, and a hypnotic female figure carved in a velvety
moss-brown stone.

Although nothing on her person proclaims her identity -- she could be a goddess
or a mortal -- her alert, sensuous, hip-slung pose traces a straight line back
to the Indian yakshi who opened the path of Indian art centuries before.

That path continues and concludes -- at the Metropolitan, at any rate -- on the
Irving Galleries' mezzanine level (reached by staircase from the medieval
gallery or the Khmer court), where an array of Nepali, Tibetan and Indian Rajput
painting carries the collection into the 19th century. A few minor Mughal
artifacts constitute the only glancing references to India's Islamic population
(Mughal miniatures will remain on display in the museum's Islamic galleries),
making the huge sandstone tower that much more of an anomaly.

In a perfect world the tower would have been reconsidered, but it detracts
nothing from the splendid accomplishment the Irving Galleries represent. They
not only put a near-comprehensive picture of an underprivileged field of the
cultural history on view, but for anyone who believes that art is there to
stretch one's horizons beyond the bounds of the familiar, past the obstacles of
routine thinking, they also serve as a place to begin anew.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: An 11th-century Indian "tirthankara," or savior (often confused
with the Buddha). (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 42); The Khmer
courtyard, left, one of the Met's 18 new second-floor rooms. This 12th-century
dancing goddess carved from stone was found in India. (Photographs by Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 41)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LANNAN FOUNDATION;
Previously Engaged

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


To the Editor:

Great credit goes to the Lannan Foundation for its forward-looking collecting
and its risk-taking generosity to institutions dedicated to the presentation of
contemporary art ["In L.A., Political Activism Beats Out Political Art," March
20]. There is, however, one clarification I should like to make. Although the
Lannan Foundation paid the bulk of the production costs for Chris Burden's
"Other Vietnam Memorial" and eventually acquired the work, Burden originally
proposed the piece at my invitation for inclusion in "Dislocations," a 1991
exhibition I organized at the Museum of Modern Art.

It is perhaps most indicative of the approach and impact that the foundation has
had in recent years that it came forward to offer the substantial funds
necessary for the monument's fabrication after it had already made an equally
large contribution toward defraying the costs of the exhibition as a whole. One
can only hope that the Lannan Foundation will continue to play that kind of role
in the future and that others will follow its example in the extent,
adventurousness and spontaneity of its support of experimental art.

ROBERT STORR
New York

The writer is the curator of the department of painting and sculpture at the
Museum of Modern Art.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Roving Professor In Health Sciences

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 14CN;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


WHEN the Cable News Network reported the firebombing of a synagogue in Lubeck,
Germany, two weeks ago, one Connecticut viewer had an immediate and personal
reaction. He called a former college classmate, now a reporter, and recalled his
visit there in 1982.

The viewer, Prof. Stanley S. Katz of Quinnipiac College in Hamden, came across
the synagogue during a trip to Germany to attend a meeting of the World Congress
of Gerontology in Hamburg. Looking for a restaurant one evening, he and his
wife, Sylvia, happened onto a four-story brick building with a Star of David
visible on the pediment.

They assumed it was a synagogue, and that the building adjacent to it, "of the
same vintage and design," Dr. Katz recalled, "was probably the vestry." He rang
the bell, prompting a man to appear at the window above. "Yes?" he asked. "I'm
Professor Stanley Katz," the visitor replied, "and this is my wife. We'd like to
see the synagogue."

From 400 Families to 12

"What is your name?" the man asked. "I repeated it," Dr. Katz said, and the two
men discovered that they shared a family name. Bertold Katz, the man at the
window, was the synagogue's cantor and vestryman. He invited the American couple
in.

The synagogue has been diminished to a congregation of 12 families, compared
with 400 before World War II. It was one of only two in Germany to survive the
Nazi era. The reason for its survival -- and this was what Dr. Katz found
compelling -- was that "the synagogue shared a common wall with a church, St.
Anne's Cathedral, and to burn the synagogue would have meant destroying the
church, so the Lubeck synagogue survived," he said.

Dr. Katz remembered the incident as well as the identity of the man maintaining
the synagogue, and even produced the name, address and phone number of Cantor
Katz's brother in Los Angeles. In fact, Dr. Katz seems to remember the first
name and middle initial of almost everyone he has ever met, a prodigious list
because the educator has no reluctance to ring a bell, as he did on St.
Annenstrasse in Lubeck, seeking information.

This curiosity, compounded by a zest for involvement, has produced some
significant results for Quinnipiac College, where he served as dean of the
department of allied health sciences. Dr. Katz has helped establish similar
schools and programs in Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Pakistan. And, if
his assessment is accepted, he will help establish a program in Ho Chi Minh
City, Vietnam.

New-Found Wealth of Nations

The Iranian deal was inspired by expediency. With the founding of the the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in the early 1970's, oil revenues
soared from "pennies to dollars," Dr. Katz recalled. Iran's petroleum revenues
went from $3 billion to $30 billion in one year.

"We began to discuss what these countries were going to do with their new-found
wealth," he said. Richard Lee, a former Mayor of New Haven who was then vice
president for development at the college, went to see his friend Robert S.
McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense who was then head of the World Bank.

Mr. McNamara had been studying the health needs of developing nations, and he
told Mr. Lee that Iran, an American ally at the time, was certainly worth
exploring. They decided to try to persuade Iran to establish a school of allied
health sciences at the Imperial Medical Center in Teheran.

Mr. Lee had been invited to a worldwide meeting of mayors in Teheran but
suggested that Dr. Katz go in his place. Using contacts, former classmates,
letters of introduction and his own study of the complex art of Persian
negotiating, he produced a contract in 1977 that was to lead to other links with
developing countries.

Students in Health Care

A year later, he was asked to be a consultant on a joint American-Saudi Arabian
commission, which led to the first school of allied health services in Riyadh.
He also helped establish four new nursing institutes in Pakistan. Two years ago,
he went to Oman to help improve health education there.

Half the students at Quinnipiac are training to be allied health practitioners,
in areas like respiratory care, physical and occupational therapy and health
administration.

In the United States, "there are usually 3 nurses and 10 to 15 allied health
professionals to each physician," Dr. Katz said. "In the third world, there can
be one physician to one nurse, sometimes two physicians per nurse, with only two
three allied health people to a doctor."

Last week, Dr. Katz -- who is 69 and no longer dean but remains a professor at
the college -- was conferring with Nicole Vecchi, a 32-year-old Vietnamese
physician trained at Yale University, who now lives in Connecticut and is
studying public health and international medicine at Yale.

Teams Without Doctors

Dr. Katz has been asked by Dr. Michael DeBakey, the heart specialist who is
chancellor of Baylor College of Medicine, to study the medical needs of Vietnam
on behalf of Genesis Health Care International, which is seeking a contract to
train allied health professionals.

The importance of health care is not limited to developing countries, as Dr.
Katz was reminded by Cantor Katz in the Lubeck synagogue. "When I learned that
he had spent the war as part of the British armed forces," he recalled, "I asked
why he had decided to return to Lubeck. He said he had a heart condition, and
the German Government had a good social welfare system.

"He said, 'They promised me a lifetime of care, as well as a subsidy to maintain
the synagogue,' " Dr. Katz said. "It was an offer he could not refuse."

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Singapore, the Tiger Whose Teeth Are Not Universally Scorned

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


FOR the large American community in Singapore, the laughter about this place has
suddenly stopped. There is not much joking these days about Singapore as the
city so clean that bubble gum is a controlled substance, so prudish that
Cosmopolitan magazine is banned as a threat to common decency, so well planned
that a traffic jam is all but unheard of.

Now, the Americans know, Singapore is a nation with laws so tough and
unforgiving that an American teen-ager convicted of spray painting cars faces a
punishment that human rights organizations consider torture -- a flogging with a
rattan cane. Prisoners subjected to a caning usually go into shock from the
intense pain and are left with permanent scars.

For the Government of Singapore, the case of Michael Fay, an 18-year-old from
Dayton, Ohio, is an opportunity to demonstrate again its contempt for the
Western concept of individual rights (though he still could win clemency from
Singapore's President). The case illustrates how this tiny city-state has become
a role model for China, Vietnam and other one-party governments in Asia.

"Authoritarian government and economic success are usually mutually exclusive
over the long haul," said a Western diplomat here. "What's frightening about
Singapore is that they actually manage to pull them both off." Lacking a
tradition of pluralism or the pressure of a powerful dissident movement,
Singapore shows no sign of following countries like South Korea and Chile, which
only temporarily were able to suppress democracy in the name of economic
development.

The 2.8 million people of Singapore live in what is arguably the cleanest,
greenest, safest large city on earth. As a result of enlightened economic
policies that have created a comfortable Asian haven for multinational
companies, Singapore is the richest nation in Asia outside of Japan, with a per
capita income of more than $15,000 a year.

And in many ways, the Singaporeans have it far better than the Japanese, who for
all their economic might tend to live in rabbit-warren houses and commute hours
to work. In Singapore, it is common for taxi drivers to own their spacious
apartments.

But Singapore's success has come with what many see as a terrible price -- the
loss of free speech, even free thought, and the endless intrusions of a
government so obsessed with the daily life of Singaporeans that it is a crime
even to fail to flush a public toilet. Chewing gum is outlawed for fear that it
will jam the doors of subway trains.

While the ruling People's Action Party is widely admired for turning a squalid,
malarial island into one of Asia's economic dragons in only a generation, many
Singaporeans live in constant fear of their Government. Opposition-party leaders
are subjected to vicious intimidation by the Government, including ruinous libel
suits and attacks on their professional licenses.

"There is no unemployment, no real poverty -- isn't it fantastic what the
Government has accomplished?" said David Marshall, a former Singaporean chief
minister and Ambassador to France and one of the few here brave enough to
criticize the Government publicly. "But are we becoming robots?"

'A Plastic Heart'

In a speech last January that was considered shocking for its bluntness, Mr.
Marshall, often described as the conscience of the nation, said that the ruling
party had a "computer brain and a plastic heart" and ruled the country by fear,
not affection.

"There has been a suffocation of all dissent," he warned. "That is a very
terrifying thing, my friends, and it is something we ought to wake up to." He
was contemptuous of the tightly controlled press, describing Singaporean
journalists as "boot lickers."

The Government's response is simple: Compare life in Singapore to life in the
developed Western nations, especially the United States, that criticize
Singapore. Indeed, Americans are apparently so fed up with the crime in their
own neighborhoods that majorities said in polls that they would support
sentences like the one imposed on Mr. Fay.

After the State Department protested the sentence as "excessive" -- Mr. Fay is a
first-time offender who is reported to suffer from a serious neurological
disorder -- the Singapore Ministry of Home Affairs released a pointed statement.

"Unlike some other societies which tolerate acts of vandalism, Singapore has its
own standards of social order as reflected in our laws," the ministry said. "We
are able to keep Singapore orderly and relatively crime free. We do not have a
situation where acts of vandalism are commonplace, as in cities like New York,
where even police cars are not spared the acts of vandals." Conviction here for
armed robbery or drug trafficking carries a mandatory death penalty.

The father of modern Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew, the former Prime Minister, has
openly questioned the value of Western concepts of human rights and free speech.

In a speech in the Philippines, an impoverished nation but one with a true
democracy, Mr. Lee said that "When you are hungry, when you lack basic services,
freedom, human rights and democracy do not add up to much." He once told an
interviewer, "I'm not sure human rights are a traditional value, even in
Christian societies."

It is remarks like these -- and the undeniable success of his economic policies
-- that have made Mr. Lee an honored guest in China, Vietnam and other nations
that hope to retain one-party authoritarian rule while opening up their markets.

But diplomats and Asian scholars wonder whether the lessons of a tiny city-state
like Singapore are really applicable to much larger neighbors. It is one thing
to feed, educate and keep a close eye on slightly fewer than 3 million people
living together on a small island. "And it's something very different when
you're China and you've got 300 times the population," said a diplomat.

"Many of us think the lessons of Singapore can't translate elsewhere, and for
anyone who cherishes individual rights, that's splendid news."

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Fay crossed himself on March 31 as he entered
Singapore's High Court, where he was sentenced to a flogging. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Prison Boot Camps Prove No Sure Cure

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 37;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1575 words

DATELINE: BROCTON, N.Y., April 6


No one complained at 5:45 this morning when a drill instructor shouted for
another round of push-ups on the cold and wet pavement wriggling with worms that
crawled from the newly thawed earth. But a few hours later, 38 young inmates sat
in a circle and spoke uneasily about the final task in this grueling boot camp
prison: they had to go home.

"My name is Mr. Cooper," a drug dealer from New York City told other inmates
here a day before his release from Lakeview Shock Incarceration Facility, half a
mile from Lake Erie. "I'm not. . . . I'm excited but I'm scared. I've got to do
it on my own. It's about time I grew up."

After six months of pre-dawn runs, military drills, drug treatment and clean
living, Randy Cooper's fear of returning to crime seemed justified: despite
completing a program that many criminal-justice experts once hoped would solve
every problem from overcrowding to reforming young offenders, he is no more
likely over time to stay out of trouble than an inmate who served his sentence
in a regular prison.

The paradox for New York State's boot camp program, at a time when many justice
experts and politicians are questioning the value of such boot camps around the
nation, is that the state's program is considered one of the best.

Inmates do not simply move rocks; they attend daily substance abuse classes,
group therapy sessions and academic training courses, and are closely monitored
in an intensive six-month program to be completed after leaving boot camp.

Yet the dropout rate is high; about a quarter of the inmates fail to complete
the program and are sent to a regular prison. And although boot camp graduates
do marginally better than other inmates at first, after two years the numbers of
offenders who return to prison are roughly the same, around 50 percent over four
years.

"This is a model that's the best I've seen," said Doris L. MacKenzie, a
criminologist who studied eight states' boot camp programs in a report for the
Justice Department to be published later this month. "But the problem is that in
recidivism rates, there aren't larger differences."

Defenders of boot camps -- which vary greatly in character in the 30 states that
have programs -- say expectations were too high from the start. There is no
single quick fix, they say, that can overcome the problems of violence, drugs
and family dissolution that especially infest New York City's poorest
neighborhoods.

"I'm going to be very honest," Anderson Greig, 27, a Brooklyn man who sold
cocaine before going to Lakeview, said as he polished his boots in preparation
for graduation. "This inmate feels ready to accept his responsibility to
society. But drugs is always going to be there."

Moreover, in New York, though not in every state, boot camps have met other
goals: saving money and reducing prison overcrowding. Officials in New York,
which has the nation's largest boot camp program, with more than 1,800 beds,
estimate the program has saved $305 million since the first of the state's camps
-- there were once five but are now four -- opened in 1987. The reason for the
savings is that inmates in shock incarceration serve shorter sentences, freeing
beds for other convicts.

Hard to Quantify Success

Ronald Moscicki, the director of New York's boot camp program and a former Army
Ranger in Vietnam, conceded that it was hard to quantify the success of boot
camps, although he talks about instilling discipline, treating drug addiction
and providing a better, safer prison experience.

"I just don't believe the recidivism rate is such an accurate measure of what we
are doing," he said in his office at Lakeview, where his walls are covered with
Vietnam War memorabilia and his bookshelf holds titles like "I'm O.K. -- You're
O.K." "But I'm not sure what is."

The idea of shock incarceration is to "shock" young, nonviolent, often
drug-addicted offenders to change their ways through intensive exercise,
military drills and hard labor during a relatively brief sentence. And as the
first such boot camps opened in 1983, in Georgia and Oklahoma, it became clear
they would satisfy many constituencies: hard-liners could take heart that
inmates were not lazing around prison yards, and liberals could take solace in
shorter prison terms and, in most states, more efforts at rehabilitation.

But as the programs spread -- there are no boot camps in Connecticut or New
Jersey, though Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey supports them in
concept -- doubts slowly began to surface about their effectiveness.

Corrections officials in New York, skeptical from the start that push-ups and
marching were the only answer, developed a program that is an odd combination of
Marine Corps training and group therapy in a church basement. The day at
Lakeview starts with the blast of a tape-recorded bugle and a drill instructor
bellowing at the inmates to get out of bed.

"Good morning, Fifth Platoon!" yelled Gerald L. Aults, a drill instructor at the
prison for three years. "Are you fired up?"

"Fired up! Fired up! Fired up!" the 38 men in the Fifth Platoon, Alpha Company,
only a day away from graduation, screamed back at full attention. "Motivated!"

The men then joined some 500 other inmates, nearly 200 of them women, for an
hour and a half of exercises and several laps around the grounds of the 77-acre
camp, which is surrounded by coils of razor wire. But within a few hours, the
men were sitting in a community meeting, pouring out their feelings about going
home, and still later they sat in mandatory drug treatment classes and other
therapeutic programs, for an exhausting 16-hour day.

The physical training, Mr. Moscicki said, is only a means to discipline the
inmates, to set a foundation for the other treatment.

"P.T. is not punishment," he said. "P.T. sets a tone. P.T. is motivational and
it plain wakes them up."

"The N.Y.P.D. does not want us to make faster inmates," he said.

There is a measure of indoctrination to the program, and by the end of six
months many inmates start talking about their past and future in the jargon of
self-help.

"A.S.A.T. is a good program," said Anthony Fils, 30, a convicted heroin dealer,
speaking of the Alcohol and Substance Abuse Treatment classes.

"It taught me to admit that I was powerless over my addiction," said Mr. Fils,
who just completed the shock program in Summit, N.Y. "I was into denial."

The question, though, is whether the indoctrination takes hold or whether it
fades after the shock graduates are back on the street. Again, the results seem
mixed, and it is unclear how far boot camp is to blame for each failure or
responsible for each success.

Keith Peterkin, for example, was arrested in 1989 in Bushwick, Brooklyn, after a
profitable seven years selling crack. At 24, he had also developed a $100-a-day
crack habit.

At first he went into the shock program because he knew he would get out in six
months, compared with the two- to four-year sentence in a regular prison that he
got on a plea bargain. But he said he had already decided it was time to change.

He has now stayed clean of drugs for five years and works as a counselor in a
program for shock inmates after they are released.

If he had gone to a regular prison, he said, "I probably would have come home
and started the same things before I left. It's just the environment of jail,
the people you meet. You don't have the same strength from the program, the
discipline."

Went Back to Crack

But there are also many inmates like Michael Grant, who started selling heroin
in the Bronx after his father died and he dropped out of the State University at
Binghamton. At the boot camp, he rose to become a squad leader and felt
confident when he left. He said he still sang military cadences in the shower.
But he began using crack again within two weeks after his release in December
1991.

"I believe it's the environment and living conditions you are under," he said.
"I don't think shock can handle that. It's like throwing people back to the
wolves."

New York tries to prevent the backsliding with one of the nation's most
intensive programs for inmates who complete shock incarceration. For six more
months they have to attend drug treatment and fellowship classes, and they are
given a job at the minimum wage, together with leads for better jobs. A higher
percentage of shock graduates are employed after the first year than parolees
from regular prisons, according to Parole Department figures.

"The dirty secret of shock incarceration in this state is that it is a
full-time, big-time drug treatment program," said Doug Millar, who heads the
"after shock" program for the Department of Parole.

State legislators say there is no move to cut back the shock program in New
York, although the Legislature this year refused a request by Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo to expand the program to include some convicts with weapons offenses.

"Shock is useful even if all it does is mean we're spending less of our prison
resources on people whose incarceration doesn't make that much difference," said
Assemblyman Daniel L. Feldman, a Democrat from Brooklyn and chairman of the
Corrections Committee.

"One would hope it does more than that, and it does," he said. "But no one
should delude themselves that this boot camp, military drill discipline alone is
going to straighten everybody out. I thought it would. A lot of us thought it
would. But it doesn't."


LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the Lakeview Shock Incarceration Facility in Brocton, N.Y.,
a drill instructor led inmates through morning exercise. The boot camp program,
once thought to be a miracle cure for criminals, is inspiring less confidence,
with many returning to prison; Women at Lakeview, their hair close-cropped,
participating in a group therapy session. Inmates also attend substance abuse
classes and receive academic training. (pg. 37); Inmates at the Lakeview Shock
Incarceration Facility lining up for breakfast. Those with their trays in the
foreground were late for the meal and were punished by being made to eat
standing up. (Photographs by Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. 43).

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Amazing: Mets of '69 Really Were Champs

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words


Twenty-five years. It just doesn't seem possible. Twenty-five years since the
New York Mets stopped being the Worst Team in the History of Baseball and became
the world champions of 1969. By doing so, they became the prototype for every
underdog team that ever dared to dream. It was a wonderful, enjoyable team
during a bizarre, electric age. People should know about that team and that
time.

Sports are mostly about today, about right now. As well they should be. Today's
fans care most about whether Barkley or Ewing can win a championship in Jordan's
absence. Today's fans are debating whether the Rangers can win a Stanley Cup.
Today's fans are celebrating Arkansas's victory in the Final Four. Every
championship is special, by definition, but I am here to tell you that the 1969
championship by the New York Mets was extraordinary, for any city, for any year.

They start celebrating it tomorrow at Shea Stadium when 10 of the 1969 Miracle
Mets will be introduced at the home opener, but there will be mini-anniversaries
all this season. No matter what else is happening, we must pause to celebrate
the day the Mets acquired Donn Clendenon. The day Gil Hodges trudged out to left
field to inquire why Cleon Jones seemed so peaked. The day Tom Seaver almost
no-hit the Cubs. The days Rocky Swoboda and Tommie Agee made the catches against
the Orioles. The day Ed Charles jumped for joy, and the cameras caught him
suspended in air, forever. Mets on the Moon. Glory days.

Twenty five years is a long enough time -- a good, healthy, arbitrary quarter
century -- to recognize that the Mets were special. They were, to cite Lyndon B.
Johnson's grandiose and unfulfilled promise, the light at the end of the tunnel.

"It was the end of the 60's, the city was in disarray, the war," said Art
Shamsky, one of those Miracle Mets. For people in the MTV generation, he is
talking about the Vietnam War. The nation was still mourning Robert Kennedy and
Martin Luther King, Woodstock was happening and the antiwar movement was
intensifying, and there was some question whether the center would hold. And in
the middle of it all, came this giddy diversion called the Mets. Maybe all they
did was keep some people from going crazy, from despairing, but in 1969 that was
no small accomplishment.

"A lot of people may have felt like losers in those days," Charles said the
other day. "People all over the country identified with us going from last to
first. It was a joyous thing."

It is important to note that the Mets were not just a New York phenomenon.
Everybody with even a passing awareness of baseball -- and don't most Americans,
ultimately, have at least a passing awareness of baseball? -- knew the Mets had
been a goofy losing team under Casey Stengel and his successors.

"I was traded to them in the winter of 1967 and my first reaction was that it
was sort of like punishment," said Shamsky, now a businessman in New York. "But
in 1968 we had a nice nucleus of young pitchers, and we started to believe we
could win."

In 1968, they improved all the way up to 73-89, their best record in their seven
seasons, under their new manager, Gil Hodges. The muscular old Brooklyn Dodger
hero had a way of speaking softly and intelligently, but making his players feel
that he could, in Casey's words, "squeeze your earbrows off." (Yes, Casey said
"earbrows.")

In 1969, the Mets improved their record by 27 games. Their record of 100-62 won
the division, and then they won the playoff and the World Series, with only one
real current star, Tom Seaver. (Nolan Ryan was just a talented kid.) Other
players had the years of their lives, and Hodges patched and platooned, and
amazing things commenced to happen, just as Casey had prophesied.

I won't tell you it was the greatest team in history, or even in recent New York
history. The Yankees of the Jackson-Martin-Munson-Nettles era were fascinating
and lethal. The Yankees of the early 60's could club you to death, or subdue you
by going first to third on a single. The Knicks of 1970 and 1973 were suave and
admirable. The Giants of the Parcells-Taylor era were a hardy blend of
viciousness and discipline. And for me, the professional height of all New York
sports that I've ever covered took place in 1986, when the Mex was charging
bunts, when Mookie was levitating, when Doc was Doc.

Sports have changed drastically since 1969, and the Gil Hodges Mets were the
most fun of any New York team I've covered. The players were less rich and more
mature than today's players. The press and the broadcasters were not quite so
full of themselves. The fans were hip and mellow (never mind how or why). And
the Mets came from nowhere. That was the point of that team.

"I think we enjoyed it more, the guys talked baseball, we felt like a family,"
Charles said last week. "It started with Mrs. Joan Payson, the owner, who had a
habit of making people feel at home. It included the leadership of Gil Hodges.
And there was the chemistry of the team. We were all close. I went to barbecues
at the home of Kranepool, Shamsky, Swoboda. We went out together on the road. I
never saw a team with so much closeness."

Shamsky recalls trotting out to right field (against righty pitching) and seeing
"the fans pouring out of the subway onto the platform, afraid they'd miss the
first pitch."

"And you'd hear this roar of 50,000 fans behind you."

Most of those Mets never got rich from playing baseball. Charles works at a
juvenile center in Hollis, Queens, as a liaison between the justice and
education branches of the city. Shamsky is promoting 1969 "miracle" products and
arranging Mets appearances through Big Apple Collector, a memorabilia company.
All the members of the 1969 team, including families of the late Calvin Koonce,
Gil Hodges and Rube Walker, will figure in the proceeds, Shamsky said.

"We were a team then; we're a team now," he said.

All of them -- Bud Harrelson, Tug McGraw, Jerry Grote, Jerry Koosman -- know
that sports never gets better than they way they felt in 1969. They have every
right to celebrate this conspicuous anniversary. All six months of it. It was a
very good year.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mets' Ed Charles jumps for joy as Jerry Koosman and Jerry Grote
embrace after winning the World Series. (United Press International, 1969)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'Home,' Praising a Life Devoted to the Land

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 14NJ;  Page 11;  Column 5;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: NEW BRUNSWICK


OF course you can go home again, the playwright Samm-Art Williams affirms. More
than that, everything will turn out even better the second time around.

In "Home," a play that can honestly be called heartwarming, Mr. Williams, in
words that sing, wrote the praises of a life devoted to the land. Attend the
tale of Cephus Miles, farmer by calling, who winds up down and out in "a very,
very large American city" after five years in prison for draft dodging.

To the perils of Cephus, Mr. Williams hitched a fairy tale with a surprise
ending. After seven vagrant years up North, Cephus comes back to reclaim the
farm that was sold to pay back taxes. How Patti Mae Wells, who once ditched him,
becomes his angel is the surprise part.


It's not just because Cephus's home is in Cross Roads, N.C., that the Crossroads
Theater Company has a special fondness for Mr. Williams's play. The company, now
in the forefront of black theater, is honoring its theatrical forebear, the
Negro Ensemble Company, the groundbreaking organization that first produced
"Home" in 1979 and is now itself homeless. "We're eking out productions and
trying to stay alive" are the words of Susan Watson Turner, its producing
director.

Having staged a 1982 revival of "Home" in its birthplace, a walkup on Memorial
Parkway, Crossroads is perpetuating an important tradition of bringing back good
old -- well, 15-year-old -- plays for new audiences in its new state-of-the-art
theater.

Although "Home" is written in prose, it plays like a narrative poem with the
pleasantness of real storytelling. Told by Cephus in the first person, from a
flashback to childhood, "Home" presents a bountiful cast of characters, with a
small cast of actors: Tony Todd as Cephus, whose recollections (of Gramps, of
Uncle Lewis) add to the bounty; Melissa Maxwell (as the women in Cephus's life,
most prominently Patti Mae) and Lynda Gravatt (as the other women).


Mr. Williams's lyric language is evocative of the burning sun, the soft pungent
soil and county fairs, of Saturday fish fries and the Sunday morning crap game
in the graveyard's dirt road. For that, young Cephus, skipped Sunday school and
got some beating. Seems he was making moonshine "in them woods," as a paid
assistant to the local bootlegger, who was married to Cephus's Sunday school
teacher.

Throughout, Cephus "feels the heartbeat of God," even though it's all too often
a distant sensation, emanating from Miami, where God, Cephus suspects, is on
vacation.

At the age of 25 -- the time is Vietnam -- Cephus is uprooted, espousing his
"love thy neighbor"-"thou shalt not kill" credo. Besides, tending to 15 cows, 73
chickens and 10 acres seems more important.

Five years later, his prison stretch over, Cephus is determined to be a big
shot, a smoothie. He gives in to the illusion of the big city, "movin' and
groovin' and freaking out" in what is jokingly called "the promised land." What
it promises him is the chance to load trucks, work in a factory and, once his
prison record is found out, sweep the barroom floor for $1 and a shot of wine.

In addition to portraying such characters as a prostitute, a welfare caseworker,
a minister and a bartender, Ms. Maxwell (listed in the program as Woman One) and
Ms. Gravatt (Woman Two) deftly serve as a verbal overture, a chorus -- sometimes
literally, with a spiritual or a blues lament -- and the sounds of the city and
of the fields.

As an exultant Cephus ("I love the land"), a rebellious pacifist ("I won't go"),
a beaten-down wino and finally a man renewed by his homecoming to a place where
there are "no more back doors for colored folks," Mr. Todd is a weathered,
radiant hero.

Under Kenneth Johnson's spirited direction, the three actors move all their
sundry characters with alacrity and grace, over the planks and platforms that
represent the warring of the prison and the city and the welcoming of home.

"Home," produced by the Crossroads Theater Company, 7 Livingston Avenue, New
Brunswick. Performances continue through May 8. This week's schedule: today and
next Sunday at 3 P.M.; Tuesday through Saturday at 8 P.M. and Saturday at 3 P.M.
After next Sunday, the schedule is: Wednesday through Saturday at 8 P.M.,
Saturday at 3 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M. Also, weekday noon
matinees are scheduled for April 14, April 21, April 27 and May 5.  Box office:
(908) 249-5560.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Performing in "Home" at the Crossroads Theater are Lynda
Gravatt, left; Melissa Maxwell and Tony Todd. (Rich Pipeling)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fleeing Vietnam

BYLINE: By George Packer;   George Packer is the author of "The Village of
Waiting," a memoir about Africa, and "The Half Man," a novel.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 27;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1128 words



SOUTH WIND CHANGING
By Jade Ngoc Quang Huynh.
305 pp. St. Paul:
Graywolf Press. $20.

AMONG the world's 19 million refugees there are bound to be some who will write.
The literature of displaced people, which enjoyed a revival after World War II,
ought to have another soon as the century ends in an explosion of wars and
catastrophes from East Africa and Central Asia to the heart of Europe. This
genre that the 20th century has generously nourished recalls nothing so much as
the 18th-century picaresques, like "Candide," in which a naive hero is uprooted
from a peaceful home, finds himself in the chaotic thick of history he can
barely comprehend and undergoes a sequence of unimaginable disasters, enduring
terrible cruelty only to be rescued by rare kindness, surviving on wit, crumbs
and luck to tell the tale.

And yet the tale is almost never told, or at least we hardly ever hear it. Of
the millions of surviving victims of the Vietnam War, most Americans know the
names of only two or three. Those who never got out, or weren't able to write in
English, or didn't want to return mentally to the scenes of horror, will go down
in silence. Jade Ngoc Quang Huynh somehow defied these odds, including almost
certain death, to reach us in his memoir, "South Wind Changing."

Mr. Huynh grew up in the Mekong Delta of South Vietnam, one of 17 children of a
prosperous farmer intermittently touched by the war. He was attending Saigon
University when the North Vietnamese tanks rolled through in 1975. The French
and American embassies had shut their gates; Mr. Huynh's ordeal was about to
begin.

For the crime of being a student he was thrown into a labor camp in the jungles
near the Cambodian border. The book's strongest pages describe in terms both
horrifying and tender his months of "re-study": the beatings, the brutal field
work, the efforts to avoid starvation by catching snakes and rats or stealing
bits of rice, the endless grave digging, the whispered friendships. Forced labor
puts him in intimate contact with the natural world, which is both a humid
oppressor and a rich source of beauty, memory and metaphor. When another
prisoner's mother arrives to try to see her son, Mr. Huynh is overwhelmed by
vicarious love: "Have you ever watched the surface of the water waving toward
the rushes at the side of the lake, hearing them brush against each other?
Hung's mother's eyes were like a paradise with endless love to share."

Mr. Huynh hates the northern conquerors with a disdain less ideological than
cultural, touched by snobbery. His attitude toward the Vietcong is more mixed;
perhaps the book's most interesting figure is a Vietcong camp subcommander named
Chu Tu, who endured 30 years of hardship in order to liberate his country, only
to find himself still taking orders in the jungle: "After the war ended, we were
supposed to run the government in the south as Uncle Ho had planned, but now all
the northern comrades control the whole country. We have no voice, no power, and
that's why I'm still here." Mr. Huynh's friendship with his disillusioned captor
deepens when they travel to a city to treat the wound Chu Tu suffers during a
Cambodian attack. Given ample opportunity to escape, Mr. Huynh hesitates: the
fates of others are tied to his by the threat of reprisal -- those of his fellow
prisoners, his family and even Chu Tu, whose leg has been amputated by an
incompetent doctor. "I thought about Chu Tu lying inside and how far I had come
from when I first decided to be kind to him. Then, I thought only of using him
as a means to spark a conflict among the guards; but he had touched something
deeper in me, something more fundamental than any plot. I had come to understand
that he was a victim, a human being caught in a stupid conflict of ideology,
like myself, and I felt compassion for him."

THE conflict between freedom and responsibility touches the core of Mr. Huynh's
Buddhism, and even after he decides to escape Chu Tu it pursues him through
several thwarted attempts to flee Vietnam. Each decision separates him further
from loved ones who sacrifice money and put themselves at risk on his behalf.
But in a country where war has given way to the ubiquitous secret police and
profound cynicism even among the winners, loyalties to family and homeland
weaken beside the urgency of individual salvation. Debating with a friend
whether to flee, fight or give in, Mr. Huynh brings up "the people and our
patriotism." "Nowadays no one speaks about patriotism," his friend replies.
"Keep your ideals and morals in the closet and let's do what we have to do
today."

Escape is harrowing: a leaky, overloaded boat, storms on the South China Sea,
pirates. After months in a Thai detention camp Mr. Huynh finally makes it to the
United States, where he rejoins part of his family. Of course, his troubles
don't end but simply become less life-threatening. He went from jobs at
McDonald's and as a machine operator to receiving a Master of Fine Arts degree
from Brown University. In the book's last third Mr. Huynh's narrative touch
loses its sureness: some events are compressed into confusion while others
include too much detail; the introspective passages become less illuminating:
"We were all happy and life rolled on." But it ends movingly with a remembrance
of the mother he hasn't seen for two decades. At its best, in the account of
imprisonment and escape, "South Wind Changing" achieves an unlikely, powerful
blending of lyricism with straightforward descriptions of cruelty. Its value,
though, transcends its literary merits and flaws, as a rare record of one
Southeast Asian among the anonymous millions who lived to tell the tale.



DEATH IN THE JUNGLE

"Snake! snake!" a shout ripped through the air. The prisoner who had been
designated jumped up from his spot in the corner.

Everyone stood up. "Where, where is it?" we yelled. The guards jerked their guns
from their shoulders and trained them on us. . . .

"Sit down, now!" comrade Son yelled. . . . [He] tensed like a tiger, his
expression fierce, ready to strike. He shouted again but no one listened; he
pulled out his K-54 Soviet-made rifle and pulled one of the inmates near him by
the man's collar and shot into the air. Still we didn't listen; he pointed his
gun at the middle of the prisoner's head and pulled the trigger. Blood splashed
out everywhere. Son shot a few more bullets to make sure we heard his shooting.
The prisoner died without a word. We froze and stood in silence while comrade
Son dragged the dead prisoner across the ground in front of us until the man's
shirt fell off.

"Is this the snake you are talking about?" comrade Son said. "Where is there
another?"
   From "South Wind Changing."

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press;
For journalists around the world, new dangers of imprisonment, physical attack
and death.

BYLINE: By William Glaberson

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


THE news business isn't just another business.

Every now and again, there is a reminder that the news business can be about
more important things than profits and losses.

It can be about ideas. And the price some journalists must pay to disseminate
them.

The latest reminder is a report that is not much more than a list. Recently
released, "Attacks on the Press in 1993" is the grim annual survey by the
Committee to Protect Journalists, a New York-based nonprofit group financed in
part by most of the large American news organizations.

"Attacks on the press, once rare, have become almost commonplace" around the
world, wrote Charlayne Hunter-Gault, a national correspondent for "The
MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," who is a member of the committee's board.

American journalists sometimes wander into danger. Or dive into it during riots
and wars, as they did last year in Sarajevo and Somalia. But many journalists
around the world live with danger much of the time.

Journalists like Hernan Lopez Echague of Pagina/12, a daily newspaper in Buenos
Aires. On Aug. 25, according to the committee's report, unidentified men roughed
him up in front of his home. They slashed his right cheek.

Two weeks later, three men forced him into a car and beat him. Both times, the
men told the journalist, in the words of the report, "to stop investigating the
relationship between leading members of the ruling Peronist party and hired
thugs, called patotas, who attacked journalists." They told him that if they had
to come back again, he would be killed.

It is possible that more journalists are in danger from such threats simply
because more journalists are covering events. It may be, too, that monitoring of
journalists' activities has improved enough to record intimidation more
thoroughly.

But the committee concluded that worldwide changes may have increased the risks
of news gathering. The birth of a new press in the republics of the former
Soviet Union, for example, means more people are practicing journalism in more
places that are not used to it.

"For years, the primary fear of independent journalists in much of the world has
been retaliation from government forces on the totalitarian left or the
authoritarian right," wrote William A. Orme Jr., a former reporter in Latin
America who is now the committee's executive director. "While these remain
serious concerns, in many countries the most direct assaults on press freedoms
now come from religious fundamentalists and dissident nationalists."

Too frequently last year, threats against journalists were carried out. Around
the world, at least 56 journalists were killed on the job, the committee found.
Most of the deaths, the report said, "were deliberate assassinations of
reporters working in their own hometowns."

Journalists like Carlos Grant, 67, a correspondent for El Tiempo, a national
daily in Honduras. He was, the committee found, "killed in the town of El
Progreso by a local loan shark who was upset about an article Grant had
written."

Or Vitas Lingis, 33, founder and publisher of Respublika, a newspaper in
Lithuania, "shot to death by unknown gunmen."

"Lingis, who had written frequently about corruption, had been investigating a
story about the Lithuanian criminal underground," the committee said.

Or Romeo Lagaspi, publisher of Voice of Zambales in the Philippines. When he was
last seen by his family on Jan. 11, 1993, he had been charged with criminal
libel for a column he wrote on police corruption. "Police," the committee report
said, "showed Mr. Lagaspi's family photographs of a charred corpse, which they
hinted was that of the journalist."

The committee reported hundreds of incidents of physical attack, censorship and
legal actions taken against journalists in the last year.

As of last month, the report said, at least 126 journalists were imprisoned in
28 countries because of their reporting. That is a significant increase from the
90 imprisoned journalists a year earlier, the committee found.

China is at the top of the list with 22 journalists in prison. Other countries
with large numbers of jailed journalists are Kuwait and Ethiopia, 18 each;
Syria, 12; Turkey, 11, and Vietnam, 9.

In Libya, Abdallah Ali al-Sanussi al-Darrat, a writer from Benghazi, has been in
jail longer than any other journalist in the world, according to the committee.
He was arrested in 1974 or 1975 and has been held without a trial, the report
said.

A major goal of the report is to draw attention to the plight of journalists
under attack. The committee said that "coverage of the problems faced by
independent journalists in developing countries is the best way of furthering
the cause of press freedom worldwide."

Reporters, it is true, fight with their pens, their microphones and their
cameras. But sometimes, their tools are no match for violence.

May 28 in Tajikistan was one such time. On that day, according to the committee,
Pirimkul Sattori, a correspondent for the newspaper Khatlon in Kurgan-Tyube, was
arrested "by unidentified persons in military uniform."

"Several days later," the committee said, "his body was found in a cotton
field."

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A new report says physical attacks on journalists "have become
almost commonplace." In Somalia last year, Mohammed Shaffi, a television
cameraman for Reuters, was shot while going to the scene of a United Nations
attack on a Somali post. He was taken to a hospital in the back of a pickup
truck. (Agence France-Presse via Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Journal;
In This Author's Book, Villains Are Vietnamese

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


It is one thing for Duong Thu Huong to attack the Vietnamese Communist Party for
what she considers to be its corruption, its incompetence and its frequent
indifference to the misery of Vietnam's poor.

But it is something altogether different -- and for many of the party faithful,
far more worrisome -- for one of Vietnam's most popular novelists and most
influential dissidents to single them out as such hypocritical fools.

Some of the most reprehensible characters in Miss Duong's books are thinly
veiled portraits of party functionaries she has known -- and loathed. "In
general, my writing is based on what I see in life,' Miss Duong said. "I
sometimes see terrible things."

In her novel "Paradise of the Blind," which was translated into English and
published last year in the United States by William Morrow & Company to admiring
reviews, the life of a talented young Vietnamese woman is nearly ruined by the
venality of her Uncle Chinh, a corrupt party official whose face is as ugly as
his spirit. He is described in the book as "shrunken -- his yellowish cheekbones
protruding, his nose as pointy and sharp as a sugar cane leaf."

Miss Duong (pronounced zung) allowed herself a tiny, satisfied smile as she
explained that Chinh is "based on a man who is a leading cadre of the Vietnamese
trade unions." She added, "He lives here in Hanoi, and unfortunately his type is
very common in Vietnam."

Has this man read the book? "Probably," the 47-year-old author said, walking to
the kitchen of a friend's home in Hanoi, searching for a serving bowl for the
bunch of enormous red grapes that she had brought along to share with a rare
Western visitor. "I hope so."

She returned to the sunlit living room, taking a seat beneath a barely moving
ceiling fan. A cat dozed in the afternoon heat of Hanoi, Vietnam's gracious if
dilapidated capital.

"When I wrote this book, I knew it would cause me trouble," she said, lifting a
chipped thermos to pour out cups of the bitter yellow-green tea that is the
lubricant to all conversation in Vietnam. "I didn't care about the trouble
because I knew I was telling the truth."

"Paradise of the Blind" is set mostly in the 1980's in Vietnam and in Russia.
The protagonist, Hang, has been forced to take a job as a guest worker in a
Russian factory to support her handicapped mother, who has spent much of her
life under the thumb of her conniving uncle.

The book is a revelation to many American readers if only because it includes
almost no mention of what Americans know as the Vietnam War.

It offers a vision of Vietnam years after the guns have fallen silent -- a
nation of haunting beauty, still cursed by poverty but proud of its hard-won
independence and rich culture. In this Vietnam, the enemy is not the American
military. Miss Duong's villains are the Government factotums who betray the
revolution that put them in place.

Miss Duong grew up with impeccable credentials in the Communist Party. The
daughter of one of Ho Chi Minh's guerrilla disciples, she volunteered at age 20
to go to the front lines in what the Vietnamese called "the War Against the
Americans" and stayed there for a decade.

"I was not a soldier, but I served with the soldiers," she said. "I was part of
a theatrical troupe. We were responsible for arranging performances to entertain
the soldiers and the people who lived in bombed-out areas -- to enhance morale.
Our job was to make our voices loud enough to drown out the sound of the bombs."

Miss Duong does not claim great literary talent, but her books are among the
most beloved works in modern Vietnamese literature. "I am honored to be a
second-rank writer, so long as I can liberate what is at the bottom of my
heart," she said.

In a nation of 72 million people -- nearly 90 percent of them literate and most
of them so poor that they have no ready access to television -- Miss Duong has
broad influence over public thinking.

Miss Duong's works are not formally banned, although they might as well be.
Since she left the Communist Party in 1990 -- she says she was expelled, party
officials say she resigned -- Government-controlled publishing houses will not
reprint her popular old works, nor will they publish her new works.

A request for one of her books from one of the booksellers along Trang Tien
Street, the willow-shaded central thoroughfare, is likely to be met with an
panicked look. "We all love her novels," a bookseller whispered. "But we cannot
have them on our shelves."

Miss Duong's leadership in the dissident movement was established on April 1991,
when she was arrested and held for seven months on charges of trying to smuggle
"reactionary" documents out of the country. The documents turned out to be her
own writings.

"I was taken outside of Hanoi to a compound where I was held in a tiny room,"
she said. "They wanted to know if I had communications with anybody who was
dangerous -- foreigners or overseas Vietnamese. It is all a pretext to harass
me, to frighten me."

She was moved to a prison. "In my cell, there were no windows -- only a door
with a hole for me to look out of," she said. Although she was not threatened
with physical harm, she lost nearly 35 pounds because of inedible prison food,
she said.

At least in the timing of her arrest, Miss Duong was lucky. That summer, the
Soviet Union, Vietnam's superpower patron, lurched toward disintegration.

"As the Soviet Union collapsed, the style of my interrogations changed very
noticeably," she recalled. "I could argue with the interrogators, and they would
listen to me. Even the guards in the prison would admit to me that they didn't
believe any more in Marxism. Many of them had read my books."

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The dissident writer Duong Thu Huong is popular with the
Vietnamese, but not with the Communist Party. Some of the most reprehensible
characters in her books are thinly veiled portraits of party functionaries.
(Timothy Karr for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kissinger Will Help Mediate Dispute Over Zulu Homeland

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 523 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


After 17 years on the diplomatic sidelines, former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger has agreed, along with Lord Carrington, the former British Foreign
Secretary, to help mediate the fierce dispute in South Africa between the
African National Congress and Zulus who want an autonomous homeland.

Mr. Kissinger, who served as Secretary of State and national security adviser in
the Nixon and Ford Administrations, will fly to South Africa this week in what
some experts call a long-shot effort to end the strife that threatens to
undermine that country's first all-race elections, from April 26-28.

Mr. Kissinger's critics have often criticized him for his connection with the
bombing of Cambodia two decades ago. But Nelson Mandela, president of the
African National Congress, and Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi, the Zulu leader,
have invited Mr. Kissinger to mediate because they remember the role he played
in the 1970's in helping bring peace and independence to Zimbabwe and Namibia.

'Aren't Many' Kissingers

"When you're an accomplished leader you want to deal with people who have proven
themselves in many different areas," said Chester A. Crocker, the top African
affairs specialist in the Reagan Administration. "There aren't many Henry
Kissingers in the world."

Mr. Kissinger and Lord Carrington will lead an international team of seven
mediators, several of whom are experts in constitutional law.

Among the major issues they will seek to resolve is the Zulus' demand for
significant autonomy under the new South African constitution. At a minimum, the
Zulus want the constitution to be amended to allow for a loose federal
arrangement that provides autonomy for the KwaZulu black homeland in Natal
province. Another issue under dispute is what the status of the Zulu monarchy
will be after the elections.

The Inkatha Freedom Party, which is headed by Chief Buthelezi, is boycotting the
elections, saying the constitution allows the central government to dominate the
regions. But A.N.C. officials argue that Chief Buthelezi fears he will be
marginalized and wants to make sure the constitution guarantees him a power
base.

Could Last 10 Days

Mr. Kissinger, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1973 for his role in ending the
Vietnam War, refused to comment today on his decision to mediate. He is
scheduled to leave for Johannesburg on Tuesday, and South African officials said
the mediation effort could last from two to 10 days.

Although Lord Carrington's effort to mediate peace in Bosnia fell apart in
August 1992, he is remembered in southern Africa for his success in overseeing
talks in the late 1970's that ended the civil war in Rhodesia and led to its
independence as Zimbabwe.

Besides Mr. Kissinger, the other American mediator is Leon Higginbotham, a
retired judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in
Philadelphia. The other four mediators are Judge H. K. Bhagwati of India, Judge
Antonio La Pergola of Italy, Paul Kevenhoerster, a professor at the Institute of
Political Science at the University of Muenster in Germany, and Jean-Antoine
Laponce of Canada.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry Asks if Continued Use of a Fuel Worsened Toll in Fiery Air Base Crash

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, April 11


The Air Force is investigating whether its continued use of a particularly
volatile jet fuel, long ago abandoned by the Navy and commercial airlines, may
have increased the death toll in the plane crash and explosion that killed 23
soldiers at Pope Air Force Base last month.

Air Force safety experts have contended for years that the fuel has been
responsible for numerous fatal explosions and accidents involving Air Force
jets. The fuel is only now being eliminated by the Air Force, even though its
dangers have been identified since the Vietnam War and alternatives have been
widely available since the mid-1970's.

The March 23 accident occurred when an F-16 Fighting Falcon collided with a
C-130 Hercules transport plane in midair, sending the fighter skidding into a
C-141 Star-Lifter transport that was about to be boarded by hundreds of
paratroopers from Fort Bragg's 82d Airborne Division. Besides the 23 soldiers
who died on the ground, 85 were injured.

Experts say the crash almost certainly would have resulted in an explosion no
matter what fuels were used. But they also say a less volatile fuel would have
reduced the force of the explosion and the speed of the fire, providing precious
seconds for soldiers desperately trying to outrun the billowing fireball.

Quicker to Burn and Spread

The fuel being used at the time was the naphtha-based JP-4. Experts agree that
JP-4 is far quicker to ignite, spreads faster and can explode with far greater
force than a safer, kerosene-based fuel, JP-8, which is used in commercial
aviation and which the Air Force is now adopting. A 1988 report on JP-4 said it
can produce an explosion more than three times as powerful as one from JP-8.
Pope Air Force Base had planned to begin converting to JP-8 the week after the
accident.

"If you had a roomful of experts, they would all agree the accident would have
been less severe if you had JP-8 on board rather than JP-4," said Robert G.
Clodfelter, an airline safety expert who is president of Aircraft Fire
Protection Associates of Centerville, Ohio. "You might get estimates of 10 or 20
or 2 percent of how much less the critical casualties would have been, but I'd
venture to say a few more people would have survived that accident if the planes
had JP-8 instead of JP-4."

The fuel is not the only question being raised in connection with the accident,
which occurred after the F-16 and a C-130 Hercules transport tried to land on
Pope's single runway at the same time. Attention is also being focused on a 1993
General Accounting Office report that warned against the consolidation that
brought the fighter jets and air transport operations to the same base.

But the Pope crash could add to a long debate about the pace of the Air Force's
conversion from the JP-4 fuel.

More Vietnam Casualties

The debate over JP-4 dates from the Vietnam War. Officials determined that over
half the aircraft combat losses were caused by gunfire-induced fuel fires and
explosions that were far more likely with JP-4 than with other fuels. By the
mid-1970's, the Navy and commercial aviation had phased it out.

But conversion took far longer in the Air Force. In the late 1980's, planes
based in Europe were converted to JP-8. A plan adopted in 1991 called for a
two-year phase-in of JP-8 on domestic-based Air Force planes beginning in 1993.
It began at West Coast bases last October and is listed as 74 percent complete,
with full switching to JP-8 scheduled by October 1995.

The Air Force says that factors beyond its control determined the pace at which
JP-4 was phased out.

"It was primarily the availability of product and the price which prevented this
conversion earlier," said Maj. Bruce Gillman, an Air Force spokesman. "We now
feel that it is technologically feasible to supply JP-8 and that the safety,
survivability and environmental advantages far outweigh any cost differences."

Politics and Costs

But critics say the Air Force could have made the transition years ago and that
politics and costs, not availability, caused the delay.

"People have been screaming about this for 25 years," said Bud Baker, a retired
Air Force lieutenant colonel, in a telephone interview. "Politics and
bureaucracy and the corporate bottom line took precedence over people's lives."
Nine days before the accident, he wrote a column, headlined "Abandon JP-4 fuel
-- immediately," in the trade publication Air Force Times.

An Air Force investigating team is studying the accident, which is also likely
to be the subject of Congressional hearings. Maj. Bob Watson, an Air Force
spokesman, said the fuel issue would be studied, but there is no guarantee that
the Air Force will address the issue publicly.

Air Force officials say that the force of the accident was such that whatever
fuel was used would have produced a devastating explosion.

"You had an unguided missile crashing to the ground, 18-plus tons of aircraft
hitting another plane full of fuel," Major Watson said. "Whether it was JP-4 or
JP-8, you were going to have an explosion."

Many Aircraft Lost

According to a report in Air Force Times last week, a senior Air Force official
wrote to the Defense Logistics Agency in 1988 saying the Air Force in the last
year had lost a KC-10 and a KC-135 aircraft in accidents that would not have
occured had JP-8 rather than JP-4 been in use.

"In recent years, we have lost three B-52s, two C-5s, two other KC-10s, an F-4
and a C-130 in similar accidents attributed to the use of JP-4," Lieut. Gen.
Charles C. McDonald, who is now retired, said in the letter, dated Oct. 18,
1988. At the time he was deputy chief of staff for the Air Force's logistics and
engineering agency.

In the same letter, he wrote that the force of an explosion with JP-4 was as
much as 260 percent greater than with JP-8, Air Force Times reported. And Air
Force officials say a JP-4 fire spreads far faster than a JP-8 one.

Mr. Clodfelter said fire in a pool of JP-8 spreads about 10 meters a minute.
JP-4 would spread about 230 meters a minute.

Price and Availability

The change to JP-8 has been affected by many factors, including the difference
in engine start-up times, price and availability. Most planes built before 1975
needed adjustments costing about $5,000 an engine to run the JP-8, the Air Force
said. But planes built after that can use either fuel, and there was no
additional equipment cost in the changeover.

Air Force officials contend, without going into specifics, that factors beyond
their control affected the speed of the transition. Mr. Baker said that
commercial airlines and small refiners were influential in slowing the change,
with airlines fearing price rises or product shortages and refiners facing
financial hardship if forced to spend millions of dollars to convert their
operations to produce a new fuel.

Ed Merlis, senior vice president for external affairs for the Air Transport
Association, said the industry had concerns, dating at least from the late
1980's, about the impact on price and supply when the Air Force switched to
JP-8. A solution was the two-year phase-in for domestic use by the Air Force,
adopted in 1991 to begin in 1993 and end in 1995.

But he said his organization opposed another proposal, reflecting concerns of
refiners, to try to slow further the phasing in of the new fuel.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Ron Brown Re-emerges in Halls of Power, and Thrives

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


During a breakfast meeting at which the Secretary of Commerce was communing with
his senior staff last week, the topic drifted from Russia to Japan to China and
then hovered, briefly, over his recent visit to the great state of Iowa.

The Secretary, Ronald Harmon Brown, a study of nervous energy even in repose,
took a long, slow sip of coffee, brushed a wayward bit of doughnut from his
elegant blue suit and then fixed his gaze on the woman who had arranged the
trip.

"Iowa," he said with a deep sigh. "Uh, yeah, I-o-w-a."

It was a subtle reprimand for what Mr. Brown obviously saw as a 17-hour low
point. He quickly moved on. But later, when he rose to get another cup of
coffee, he stopped to make amends, sharing a laugh and a warm moment.

A Definite Style

The sum of Ron Brown's style could be printed on an index card: Maximize your
time. Focus on your goals. Know who runs what. See them. Make your point. Don't
linger. Never look back.

Mr. Brown, 52, has never looked back. Nor has he had to. A quintessential
operator with a perfect pitch for power plays, he remade the Democratic Party as
its chairman and then stepped easily into the Clinton Administration, accepting
a department that had long been a low-watt bulb within the Cabinet.

He seemed perfectly situated to remake a lumbering bureaucracy with 36,000
employees and a $3.5 billion budget into an aggressive element of an
Administration sworn to deliver on its most famous campaign line: "It's the
economy, stupid." Mr. Brown floated through his Senate confirmation and several
early missteps with hardly a scratch.

But then he took a difficult detour that seemed to threaten both his reputation
and his future.

Shortly after Mr. Brown's confirmation, field agents from a Miami office of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation opened a criminal investigation into accusations
that he had accepted a $700,000 bribe from a representative of the Vietnamese
Government in exchange for arm twisting to liberalize American trade policy
toward Vietnam.

Centered on accusations by Ly Thanh Binh, a Vietnamese businessman living in
Florida, the investigation dragged on for months, moving in and out of the
headlines. It gained new force with conflicting reports from the Commerce
Department over whether the Secretary had met with the man who was supposed to
have arranged the bribe, Nguyen Van Hao, another Vietnamese expatriate in
Florida. Mr. Brown finally admitted that he had met with Mr. Hao three times,
but he denied any wrongdoing.

In February, the Justice Department agreed. Concluding that Mr. Brown had not
misused his position, it closed the investigation.

Back in Play

Now Mr. Brown is back. While other Administration officials duck over the
Whitewater matter, the Commerce Secretary has been winning extravagant praise.
In short order he has produced the apparent oxymoron of a Democratic
Administration that is good at doing business with big business.

After playing an important role pushing through the North American Trade
Agreement, he won kudos for his deft maneuvering to win a $6 billion passenger
jet deal for the Boeing Company and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation in Saudi
Arabia; for persuading Russian officials to drop a threatened 50 percent tariff
on imported aircraft, and for pushing those same officials to reduce a
$5-a-barrel oil tax that would have hampered or killed pending deals with
American oil giants like Texaco.

Fresh from those successes, and now huddling with President Clinton on
classified negotiations over issues like international patent law and China's
trade status, Mr. Brown is secure enough to let a reporter trail him in even
some of the more private meetings of his day.

And he is, again, where he is most comfortable: dead center in the power circle,
sipping cocktails with world leaders. In Russia last month, he met with
President Boris N. Yeltsin. In South Africa, on an earlier trip, he met with
President F. W. DeKlerk, Nelson Mandela and Chief Mangosuthu G. Buthelezi.

It is precisely that ability to play in the symphonies of power that has been
both Mr. Brown's strength and his Achilles heel. In a career marked both by
astonishing success and persistent suspicions, his style and substance always
raise the same questions.

Detractors say Mr. Brown exemplifies the slippery slope of Washington politics
that the Democrats once railed against. His strength, by his own admission, is
in his contacts and his familiarity with the strange ether of this capital.
Critics, though few will speak on record, say he is a master of insider dealing
and quiet profit taking.

Praise and Criticism

A former partner in the powerful Washington law firm of Patton, Boggs & Blow,
Mr. Brown retired last year with a $1 million golden handshake but retains a web
of ties that have left lingering questions about mixing business with
government. He is sure-footed, wealthy, subtle and elusive.

Many longtime Washingtonians see nothing wrong with that. "You can't fault
people for being savvy, smart and well-connected," said Anne Wexler, a Deputy
Secretary of Commerce under President Jimmy Carter. "Ron Brown does very well
with everything he is given."

Others are much less charitable. "The long and short of it is that he is an
operator," said Charles Lewis, the executive director of the Center for Public
Integrity and one of the few Washington insiders willing to question the
Secretary on the record. "He knows everybody. And they need him."

In 1992 Mr. Lewis raised conflict-of-interest questions about Mr. Brown, who was
then chairman of the Democratic National Committee, in a report titled "Private
Parties: Political party leadership in Washington's mercenary culture." It did
not include a smoking gun, just smoke.

Mr. Lewis praises Mr. Brown for competence but says the landscape that the
Secretary knows best is a quicksand of interconnections. "He knows the game,"
Mr. Lewis said. "And he knows where the edges are. And he is willing to walk
right up to the edge. To the absolute edge."

That, of course, is not illegal. Yet some who have questioned the connections
have learned first hand one way in which Mr. Brown may use his power.

Before the publication of his report, Mr. Lewis said, he got a call from a union
leader on the center's board. After praising Mr. Lewis's work, the leader said
he had received a call from Mr. Brown and asked Mr. Lewis to hold the report
until after the Presidential election because of its criticism of Mr. Brown.

Mr. Lewis, a former producer of the CBS News program "60 Minutes," refused. The
labor leader withdrew from the center's board and canceled his financial
commitment to the fledgling research organization.  Within a month, Mr. Lewis
said, "half the labor money dried up."

Other critics cite a general uneasiness with Mr. Brown's style, but give no
examples. On the other hand, to a person, friends and longtime colleagues speak
with respect that borders on reverence. Many friends say Mr. Brown has been
subjected to a double standard because he is a black man in what has always been
a white man's job. They say he is always underestimated, and then when he does
what everyone said he could not do, which is to take an inside track, he is
condemned.

Seeking a Party Post

That was particularly true, they say, in his passage through the Democratic
National Committee. When Mr. Brown, who had made his mark steering Jesse
Jackson's 1988 Presidential campaign and rising through the ranks of the
National Urban League, announced in the fall of 1988 that he intended to run for
Democratic chairman he created a storm inside a party that seemed to be
energetically crafting its own obituary. He had to fight hard, enlisting the
support of old friends like Gov. Mario M. Cuomo (one of his law professors at
St. Johns University), Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Senator Bill Bradley.

Alexis M. Herman, a friend from the Jackson campaign and now an assistant to the
President, remembers the rawness of that fight. Critics complained, she said,
that Mr. Brown could not get Jewish money and support because of his links to
Mr. Jackson. They also argued, she said, that he could not attract big business
to the party and would alienate conservative whites.

None of that proved true. Instead, Mr. Brown so deftly worked the sidelines that
every other candidate for the chairmanship pulled out.

'A Tough Town'

Seated in his elegant office one afternoon last week, Mr. Brown looked back at
the trials of his last year and said they had made him grow.

"There are a lot of people out there who maybe feel I haven't needed them," he
said. "Maybe I should have spent more time being loved. This is a tough town
that way."

Yet Mr. Brown is loved in the way that only Washington can love. James Hackney,
a friend of 20 years and Mr. Brown's counselor at Commerce, said Mr. Brown has
"from 15,000 to 16,000 friends" if that can be measured by the people who call
Mr. Hackney and identify themselves as such.

That smoothness started early, as Mr. Brown was growing up in Harlem and coming
into contact with intellectuals, artists, politicians and other members of the
black elite. "There was always something different about him," said his wife of
31 years, Alma Arrington Brown. "He was more mature than the other boys, and
sure of himself."

And even then, he didn't waste much time. After his first date with Alma
Arrington, Mr. Brown fell sound asleep in the car ride from Greenwich Village
back to her home to Brooklyn.

It hardly seemed like a good sign. But as soon as he woke up, she said, he
started planning their next date.

Trying the 'Political Hat'

He still plans, though he denies it. At an afternoon meeting with several
hundred staff members at the Commerce Department on Wednesday, between a meeting
with Vice President Al Gore, private talks with Egyptian officials, a reception
at the Willard Hotel and a trip to Los Angeles, a clearly relaxed Ron Brown took
questions.

Easily fielding queries from salaries to foreign policy, he smiled when asked
about the toll the Whitewater matter was taking next door at the White House.

"Now," he said. "You are asking me to put on my political hat. And it almost
doesn't fit me any more."

For a moment, the room fell silent. Then, like a storm gathering just beyond the
horizon, the sound of laughter started until it crashed about like thunder. For
a moment, Mr. Brown looked taken aback. Then, he leaned way back and started
laughing, too.

NAME: Ronald Harmon Brown

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown has retaken his place as a
major player in the Clinton Administration after troubles last year. Mr. Brown,
second from right, presided over a staff meeting recently. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

Chart: "Ronald Harmon Brown"

Born: Aug. 1, 1941, Washington

Hometown: New York City

Education: B.A., Middlebury College; J.D., St. John's University.

Career Highlights: 1971-79, various positions, National Urban League; 1980,
chief counsel, Committee on Judiciary, United States Senate; 1981, general
counsel, staff director, office of Senator Edward M. Kennedy; 1981-92, partner,
Patton, Boggs & Blow, Washington; 1989-93, chairman, Democratic National
Committee; 1993-present, Secretary, Department of Commerce.

Family: Married to Alma Arrington; one son and one daughter.

Hobbies: Tennis, skiing and golf.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

It's Serious Spring Planting

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a time when gardeners of all sorts struggle with plants and
shrubs of various sizes, a planting crew in Holmdel, N.J., took on a much bigger
assignment -- a 30-foot oak tree that will become part of the New Jersey Vietnam
Veterans Memorial. Already 25 years old, the tree is expected to reach 75 feet
and will be part of the memorial's centerpiece that will include an eight-foot
bronze statue of two soldiers and a nurse. (William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Radioactivity Experiment and the Human Aftermath Wins a Pulitzer

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


The stack of documents was almost entirely about animal experiments conducted by
the Government, but one footnote caught Eileen Welsome's eye: 18 unwitting
hospital patients had been injected with radioactive plutonium.

Ms. Welsome, a reporter for The Albuquerque Tribune, spent more than six years
tracking down those victims, whose names had long been classified top secret.
Yesterday she won the Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for her series
telling how they had lived out their lives.

In the arts, the playwright Edward Albee won his third Pulitzer for "Three Tall
Women," about the long life of his striking, headstrong mother, who died when
she was in her 90's. Yusef Komunyakaa, a Louisiana-born poet who blends
childhood memories and adult perceptions about everything from civil rights to
the Vietnam War, won the Pulitzer for poetry for "Neon Vernacular: New and
Selected Poems" (Wesleyan University Press-University Press of New England).

to the metropolitan news staff for spot news, for what the Pulitzer board called
"comprehensive coverage of the bombing of Manhattan's World Trade Center."
Isabel Wilkerson, The Times's Chicago bureau chief, won in the feature writing
category for a profile of a fourth grader from the South Side of Chicago and for
two articles about the flooding in the Midwest last year.

Kevin Carter, a freelance photographer on assignment for The Times, won for a
photograph of an emaciated baby who collapsed head first in a dry-as-kindling
field in the famine-ravaged Sudan. A vulture lurked a few feet away. The child
recovered enough to resume her trek after the vulture was chased away. It is not
known whether she reached the center.

For the third time in the 78-year history of the Pulitzers, conferred annually
by Columbia University, no prize was given in the history category. The Pulitzer
board rejected the three recommendations from the jury that reviewed the
entries: "Crime and Punishment in American History" by Lawrence M. Friedman
(Basic Books); "Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of J.F.K."
by Gerald Posner (Random House), and "'William Faulkner and Southern History" by
Joel Williamson (Oxford University Press).

Seymour Topping, the administrator of the prizes, said, "The board in this case
was simply not comfortable giving the award to any of the three nominees."

Michael Kammen, a Cornell University professor who was the chairman of the
nominating jury in history, called the board's decision "a grave injustice."

"These books in some ways were superior to the books that have received
Pulitzers in past years," Professor Kammen said.

Two Chicago Tribune writers won Pulitzers: Ronald Kotulak, a reporter, and R.
Bruce Dold, an editorial writer. Mr. Kotulak's Pulitzer, in the explanatory
journalism category, was for what the Pulitzer board called "lucid coverage of
current developments in neurological science."

Mr. Dold's prize, for editorial writing, was for a series about a 3-year-old boy
killed by his mother and the larger child-welfare issues that the death raised.

The Times had seven finalists, three of them for metropolitan reporting. In spot
news, one of The Times's finalists was, in effect, competing against himself.
Robert D. McFadden, who wrote the main articles on the World Trade Center
bombing, was also entered separately for other stories he wrote in 1993, many of
them on deadline.

The other finalist in spot news was The Los Angeles Times, for its coverage of
the first day of the brush fires that blackened much of Southern California last
year.

Ms. Welsome, the winner for national reporting, said her investigation started
when she was sifting through documents on animal experiments from the 1940's at
an Air Force weapons laboratory near Albuquerque. "I wanted to know what they
had been doing with these animals because I love animals," said Ms. Welsome, who
is a dog owner. "In the course of looking at these documents, I found the
footnote that mentioned something about 18 human beings had been injected."

She copied the footnote and began the long search for patients whose names the
Federal Department of Energy refused to make public. "These people were known as
code numbers only," she said. "I wanted to know who they were, what had happened
to them. What I found was an almost incomprehensible story of inhumanity and
coverup."

In that way, the plutonium experiments became intensely personal for Ms.
Welsome, for her readers and ultimately for the national press, which picked up
the story.

Some other winners said yesterday that the works for which they were cited were
also intensely personal, but in vastly different ways. The composer Gunther
Schuller won in music for a piece called "Of Reminiscences and Reflections." He
said it was about his wife, Marjorie, who died in 1992.

They met half a century ago in Cincinnati, where she was a music student and he
a 17-year-old instructor. He said he had worked that first encounter into
another piece "that I'd like to submit next year."

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 14, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
MOBIL TO SIGN VIETNAM OIL EXPLORATION CONTRACT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 126 words


The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it would sign a contract to explore
for oil off the southeast coast of Vietnam, becoming the first United States oil
company to drill in the country since the end of the Vietnam War almost 20 years
ago. Mobil struck oil in 1974 off the coast of what was then South Vietnam, but
ceased operations when North Vietnam captured the country in April 1975. The new
agreement is to be signed next Tuesday with Petro Vietnam, the state-owned oil
monopoly, a spokesman for Mobil, Thomas Collins, said yesterday. The pact will
formalize the 72.5 percent share awarded to Mobil, based in Fairfax, Va., and a
group of Japanese and Indonesian partners in December in a block containing a
promising area called Thanh Long.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

John W. Seigle, 64, Sikorsky Executive And Retired General

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


John William Seigle, a retired major general and vice president of Sikorsky
Aircraft of Stratford, Conn., died on April 3 at St. Raphael's Hospital in New
Haven. He was 64 and lived in Woodbridge, Conn.

The cause was pneumonia, his family said.

Mr. Seigle, who was born in Cincinnati, joined the Ohio National Guard and spent
33 years in the Army. He entered West Point in 1949, was commissioned in 1953
and earned a master's degree and a Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University
in the 1960's.

Twice wounded, he received a Silver Star and other citations for bravery in the
Vietnam War as commander of an armored cavalry squadron. Later, he headed a
cavalry regiment that guarded a sector of the border between East Germany and
West Germany.

In the 1970's, he took part in planning for the training and conditioning of the
all-volunteer Army. He retired from the service in 1982.

The next year, he joined United Technologies Corporation of Hartford as a vice
president for planning and business development of its building systems sector.
At his death, and for the last seven years, he was vice president for planning
at Sikorsky Aircraft, a subsidiary of United Technologies.

General Seigle is survived by his wife, Marilyn Johnson Seigle; two sons, John
W. 2d, of East Hartford and Gregory P., of Washington; a daughter, Sally C.
Seigle of Woodbridge; two brothers, Col. Robert N., of Burke, Va., and Thomas
R., of Knoxville, Tenn.; three sisters, Carole J. Holland of Knoxville, Sylvia
D. Stayton of Cincinnati, and Nancy Sue Stratman of Grapevine, Tex., and two
grandchildren.





NAME: John William Seigle

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tuborg in Vietnam

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 89 words

DATELINE: COPENHAGEN, April 14


Carlsberg said today that it had formed a joint venture with a Vietnamese
brewery to make Tuborg beer in Vietnam. The venture, Hue Brewery Ltd., will take
over the Hue Brewery Plant, which Carlsberg helped build in 1990. Carlsberg and
the Danish Industrialization Fund for Developing Countries together will own 50
percent of the company. The plant will brew Tuborg locally as well as making its
own brand, Huda Beer. Carlsberg is already involved in a Vietnamese brewery that
produces the company's other main brand, Carlsberg.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words


More From PBS

The scant supply of PBS videos in stores is scheduled for an infusion in the
fall. This week, PBS announced an agreement with Turner Home Entertainment to
distribute some PBS programs on cassette. The first will be "Baseball," a new
19-hour historical biography of the game by the producer and director Ken Burns.

PBS plans to broadcast the series in September. Mr. Burns also produced and
directed "The Civil War," the acclaimed PBS series and a best seller on tape,
which will also be rereleased by Turner.

In October, PBS ended a similar distribution arrangement with Pacific Arts, a
Los Angeles companyhaving financial problems. The end of this arrangement cut
off the flow of tapes to stores.


Renting Movies

Home video is alive and well, but no dealer today would say people rent movies
the way they used to. "I'm doing about a third of what I once did," said Earl
Spencer, the owner of the Bonus Store, a photo-developing and video outlet on
the Upper East Side.

Mr. Spencer has rented movies since 1985, and in many ways his experience is
typical. In the 1980's customers left his store with cassettes by the arm load,
he says, but he says he agrees with an industry survey that found that people
these days often leave stores without renting anything.

"Now they just go to the new releases," he said. "If they don't find the one
they're looking for, they don't bother looking for anything else, like they did
in the old days. They just walk out."

In many cases, he added, customers aren't aware of anything else. "People have
30 old titles roaming around their heads," he said. "Once they have seen those
they say, 'Now I've seen all the good movies.' "

Beyond What's New

To let people know about hundreds of other good films available, Mr. Spencer has
devised what might be a unique kind of cassette-rating system. Close to the
display of new releases in his store, he has arrayed older films ranked
according to how many stars they receive in "Leonard Maltin's Movie and Video
Guide." Cassette boxes are affixed with differently colored labels carrying
theguide's capsule review of the film (usually 75 words or less). Four-star
films get red labels, three-star yellow labels and two-star green.

As an example of a movie he would like to call to renters' attention, Mr.
Spencer mentioned "A Woman's Face," the 1941 film starring Joan Crawford as a
woman whose life undergoes big changes after plastic surgery. The film gets
three stars in the Maltin guide and a yellow label in the Bonus Store. "Think of
the appeal a movie like that would have in New York," Mr. Spencer said. "But no
one rents it because no one knows about it."

Then there are the films perhaps no one wants to know about. Movies with
one-star Maltin ratings get purple labels. Rather than purge bad movies from the
shelves, the store advertises them as ones to avoid. Mr. Spencer said flagging
the bad along with the good gives the rating system credibility with his
customers, who have little time for movies in general and no tolerance for bad
ones.

"People get burned once, and they get turned off," he said.


NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Visions of Light:
The Art of Cinematography
1992. Fox. $96.83. Laser disk, $39.98. 95 minutes. No rating.

Backed by clips from dozens of flims, two dozen noted cinematographers (among
them Sven Nykvist, Haskell Wexler, Conrad Hall, Gordon Willis, Laszlo Kovacs and
Vittorio Storaro) talk about films they admire. Yes, this is a documentary, but
be assured that the tightly assembled array of examples, from "Oliver Twist" to
"Apocalypse Now," draws viewers along almost as if the film were a thriller.
Comments are instructive, especially on the uses of light and dark and the
strategies cinematographers come up with to serve directors while pleasing
themselves. But the movies are the stars, making one, Vincent Canby wrote in The
New York Times, "want to rush out to see, or see again, virtually every film
that has been recalled."

The Saint of Fort Washington
1993. Warner. $95.45. Laser disk, $34.98. 104 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

Matthew (Matt Dillon), tossed onto the street, is forced into a huge homeless
shelter where survival depends on catching on to a new set of rules. There to
help out is Jerry (Danny Glover), a Vietnam veteran who tries to educate the
helpless young man in the ways of the street. But while the ambiance is
authentically bleak, the characters take on a nobility that weakens a story of
life under duress. Mr. Dillon and Mr. Glover are effective, but Tim Hunter's
film is best "when it avoids even a hint of the metaphorical and sticks to the
plain, hard facts" (Janet Maslin).

Ruby in Paradise
1993. Republic. $94.98. 115 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

A strong-willed young woman (Ashley Judd) sets up her life in Panama City Beach,
Fla., where she sells trinkets at a gift shop and copes with the amorous son of
her boss. The strength and appeal of Victor Nunez's film is the quiet way it
lets Ruby reflect on her situation in her journal and pass it along as spoken
narrative. Projecting a serene if grave maturity, Ms. Judd becomes the center of
a film in which the director relies "less on high drama than he does on
quotidian honesty, which he achieves in sporadic but sometimes gentle, pleasing
ways" (Maslin).

Mr. Jones
1993. Columbia Tri-Star. $95.25. Laser disk, $34.95. 110 minutes. Closed
captioned. R.

Richard Gere works maybe a little too hard as a manic-depressive whose dashing
charm is continually undone by bursts of wild behavior, like leaping onto the
podium to play conductor at a concert. It's a case for Dr. Libbie Bowen (Lena
Olin), a psychiatrist who would completely take to the fellow if she could only
keep him out of hospital wards. Mr. Gere's showy, intense performance stays a
little too wired to give Mike Figgis's film any chance to focus and the
director's moody touches are "too muted to be of much help" (Maslin).

FROM YEARS PAST

Taking the Classics Apart
And Putting Them Together Again

"Visions of Light: The Art of Cinematography," to be released on Wednesday by
Fox, celebrates movies for the many brilliant ways they were composed and shot.
Here are some examples cited in the film.

THE MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS. Joseph Cotten, Dolores Costello, Agnes Moorehead and
Tim Holt star in Orson Welles's film about prominent Midwesterners who can't
adjust to changing times. 1942. Various distributors. 88 minutes. $19.98. No
rating.

MILDRED PIERCE. A struggling divorcee (Joan Crawford, who won an Oscar) is given
a hard time by her lover (Zachary Scott) and daughter (Ann Blyth). 1945. MGM/UA.
$19.98. 109 minutes. No rating.

JULES AND JIM. In Francois Truffaut's film, Jeanne Moreau is the object of
obsession. 1961. Home Vision. $39.99. 110 minutes. In French with English
subtitles. No rating.

ROSEMARY'S BABY. Roman Polanski's adaptation of Ira Levin's novel plays
startling visual tricks and stars Mia Farrow, John Cassavetes and Ruth Gordon.
1968. Paramount. $14.98. 134 minutes. No rating.

THE CONFORMIST. Jean-Louis Trintignant stars in Bernardo Bertolucci's film about
a man who sells out to the Fascists to further his career. 1970. Paramount.
$44.95. 108 minutes. In Italian with English subtitles. No rating.

DOG DAY AFTERNOON. Like many films cited in "Visions of Light," Sidney Lumet's
movie (with Al Pacino and Chris Sarandon) about a bungled bank robbery has the
immediacy of a news documentary. 1975. Warner. $19.98. 130 minutes. R.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Coming from PBS: "Baseball," a documentary by Ken Burns,
includes the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League, in 1948. (Florida
State Archives); Ashley Judd stars in "Ruby in Paradise," a new video release.
(October Films)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Inflation: Myth and Reality

BYLINE: By Laura D'Andrea Tyson;   Laura D'Andrea Tyson is chairwoman of the
Council of Economic Advisers.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Fears of accelerating inflation have haunted the financial markets just at the
time when the economy has turned in its best inflation performance in decades.

In 1993, the core indexes of consumer and producer prices (which exclude food
and energy) registered their smallest gains in 20 years. Favorable trends are
continuing this year: the annualized increase in the core Consumer Price Index
over the past three months was 2.9 percent, the same as over the 12 months
beginning in March 1993.

The Administration, like most private forecasters, predicts an uptick in
inflation in 1994, as continued growth raises the utilization of industrial
capacity and reduces unemployment. We certainly recognize the critical need to
remain vigilant against inflation. The building blocks for a sustained expansion
-- smaller Federal deficits, stronger business balance sheets, improvements in
productivity, robust investment -- are in place. It would be a missed
opportunity if the expansion suffered a premature end as a result of
accelerating inflation.

So far, however, there are few signs of changes in the underlying causes of
inflation. Rather, the financial markets appear to be reacting more to inflation
myths than to realities.

Myth No. 1: Inflation can spike upward suddenly. Some commentators contend that
inflation can strike at a moment's notice. History suggests otherwise. Since
1957, the first year for which core Consumer Price Index data are available,
there have been only nine years in which the inflation rate increased by more
than half a percentage point.

Five were oil shock years: 1973, '74, '79, '80 and '90. Oil prices can
dramatically affect overall prices: core inflation jumped six percentage points
from '73 to '74, and the '79 oil shock raised core inflation by nearly three
percentage points in one year.

Since 1957 there have been only four years when there was no oil shock yet
inflation increased by more than half a percentage point: '66, '68, '69 and '78.
The first three were Vietnam War years, when the economy was overheated:
capacity utilization was well over 86 percent and the jobless rate under 4
percent. The average jobless rate was considerably higher in '78, but that year
was preceded by two years of rapid wage inflation, a trend we do not see now.

In short, it takes an oil shock or a severe overheating of the economy to
produce a surge in core C.P.I. inflation. Neither appears to be on the horizon.
Oil prices are low and likely to remain so at least for this year. And today's
capacity utilization rates, in the 82 to 85 percent range, are well below the
levels at which inflation might spike upward.

Myth No. 2: Price increases for industrial goods presage higher general price
inflation. The price indexes of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and
National Association of Purchasing Managers increased noticeably in February and
were blamed for fueling inflationary expectations. It is true that these indexes
are somewhat correlated with the producer price index for intermediate goods --
say, industrial chemicals and wood pulp -- and other measures of commodity
prices. It is also true that commodity prices, severely depressed in recent
years, can be expected to rebound as the economy expands.

But over the past decade, the purchasing managers' index has, unsurprisingly,
been a poor forecaster of changes in C.P.I. inflation. The managers' index is
based on a narrow survey that includes only industrial companies, which account
for a small share of overall economic activity; in addition, that index covers
only purchases of industrial commodities.

Myth No. 3: Wages will soon accelerate because we are so close to full
employment. One source of inflation could be an increase in the growth rate of
unit labor costs -- that is, the cost of labor required to produce a fixed
amount of goods. But unit labor costs have been decelerating, not accelerating,
in recent years.

During 1993, unit labor costs increased by only 1 percent, compared with
increases of 1.3 percent in 1992 and 2.5 percent in 1991. Over the past half
year, they have fallen as wage changes have remained roughly constant in the
face of increasing productivity growth. These developments lie at the heart of
the good inflation story.

But are we on the verge of accelerating wage inflation, as some observers
suggest? No. Even though the economy has created about 200,000 jobs a month over
the past six months, wage growth has remained slow. Average hourly earnings
increased only 0.1 percent in March despite significant employment growth. Over
the past 12 months, average earnings increased only 2.4 percent.

The major commercial forecasters believe that labor market pressures do not push
wage inflation higher until the unemployment rate, as measured today, falls to
the range of 5.9 to 6.3 percent.

The Council of Economic Advisers reached a similar conclusion in its recent
review of the relation between unemployment and inflation.

These views are reinforced by the economy's most recent experience. If labor
markets were truly tight, there should be signs of mounting wage growth. But
wage growth has been stagnant over the last year. Even when the unemployment
rate falls to the 5.9 to 6.3 percent range, it is likely that wages will begin
to drift upward only gradually. And strong productivity growth will continue to
moderate growth in labor costs.

Myth No. 4: Rising import prices will heat up inflation. During the past year,
the dollar has depreciated against the yen and import prices of Japanese goods
are up about 7 percent. But Japanese imports represent only about a fifth of
total U.S. imports and only about 2 percent of our gross domestic product. The
prices of imports from the rest of the world are lower than a year ago, partly
because the dollar has appreciated against most other currencies. Over the past
year, prices of European, Canadian and other Asian goods are down about 1
percent, and imports from developing countries are about 4 percent cheaper.

Price increases for imports other than oil remain lower than the rate of core
inflation, as has been true during the past five years. It is highly unlikely
that import prices will be a source of accelerating inflation any time soon.

Myth No. 5: Higher gold prices mean inflation will increase. Gold prices have
rebounded from the doldrums and are at their highest levels in about three
years. But we have examined the relationship between gold prices and core C.P.I.
inflation, and we find that there has been no correlation between the two since
1982. Developments like gold hoarding in China and political turmoil in South
Africa buffet gold prices to such a degree that any causal link between gold
prices and U.S. inflation seems hard to imagine.

In the absence of an oil price shock, it takes a sustained period of strong
pressures on productive capacity to ignite truly inflationary conditions. Unless
capacity utilization exceeds 86 or 87 percent, or the jobless rate drops
substantially below its current level for a prolonged period, these conditions
are not likely to develop in the near future. Instead, the economy seems well
positioned to experience a decade-long phase of steady growth and modest
inflation, much as it did from the mid-50's to the mid-60's.

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.S. JETS OVER IRAQ ATTACK OWN HELICOPTERS IN ERROR; ALL 26 ON BOARD ARE KILLED;

Trigger Fingers

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


In one sense, the horrific accident today over northern Iraq, in which American
fighter planes shot American helicopters from the sky, was just one more chapter
in a long, tragic story.  "Friendly fire," the military calls it -- an
oxymoronic phrase that serves perhaps to dull the pain.

But in the past, such incidents have usually taken place in wartime. This one
occurred in peacetime. Peace in the Middle East is a fragile thing, of course,
and the accident follows a real shooting war, but there has been no recent
pattern of clashes or provocations to make trigger fingers itchy.

Nor is it easy to blame the fog of war. In battle, fatigue and fright are often
factors. It used to be said that all combat took place at night, in the rain and
at the junction of four map sections, with half the combatants lost. But these
misguided missiles were fired in daylight, in clear weather.

Defense Secretary William J. Perry conceded that "there were human errors,
probably, and there might be process or system errors as well."

Military analysts, some of them privy to information not released to the public
by the Pentagon, blamed pilot error and said there was no evidence of a general
failure of the electronic systems that are supposed to make such accidents next
to impossible.

But it is the very ambiguity of the political and military contexts in which
contemporary fighting men are asked to operate, and the speed with which
advanced technology sometimes forces them to make decisions, that troubles many
who have pondered modern warfare. Planes move so fast, and weapons are so
lethal, that judgments must often be almost instantaneous and mistakes often
exact a far greater toll.

Charles R. Shrader, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who studies the problem,
asserted that technology makes accidents more likely, not less so.

"We are reaching the limits of the ability of human beings to control the
destructive forces at their command," Colonel Shrader said in a telephone
interview from his home in Carlisle, Pa. "It is not that people do stupid or
careless things. Modern technology has simply evolved so fast and in so many
different ways that it is overtaxing human capacities, and that makes it far
more difficult to devise foolproof ways to prevent these things."

Not that fixes have not been tried, low tech as well as high. After an American
A-10 Warthog mistakenly bombed American armored personnel carriers early in the
Persian Gulf war, huge crosses were painted on the vehicles for easier spotting
from the air. After incidents where South Vietnamese troops and American troops
fired at one another during the war in Southeast Asia three decades ago,
improvements were made in radio communications.

Colonel Shrader said it was his view that the Pentagon had worked hard in recent
years both on technical problems and on intensified training.  But it has never
been possible to eliminate such casualties.

Stonewall Jackson, the Confederate hero, was shot by mistake by his own men.
Lieut. Gen. Lesley J. McNair, the chief of Allied ground forces in World War II,
was killed by American bombs in Normandy in July 1944 in a disastrous accident
that took the lives of 111 United States soldiers.  There were repeated
incidents in Vietnam, including one, recounted in detail in C. D. B. Bryan's
book "Friendly Fire," in which artillery under the command of Norman
Schwarzkopf, then a junior officer, opened fire on the wrong target.

In 1988, the United States cruiser Vincennes mistakenly shot down an Iranian
airliner, killing 290 people. In 1992, another American warship, the Saratoga,
fired on a Turkish warship.

In the gulf war, according to one compilation, 38 of 148 verified American
combat deaths resulted from accidents rather than from enemy fire.  But there
was not a single case there of a fratricidal killing involving planes.

"We had tons of planes in the air there, from a lot of countries," said Bernard
Trainor a retired Marine general who teaches at Harvard University. "The pilots
spoke different languages, used different radio frequencies and operated, in
some cases, in vary close quarters. But nothing like this happened, because the
pilots observed the basic rule: unless you are threatened, or unless you are
ordered to, never open fire on another aircraft until you have positive
identification that the aircraft is hostile."

The pilots maintained they had made "visual identification" of the helicopters,
a Pentagon official said.  But that is not considered sufficient, especially in
the case of helicopters, whose whirling rotors can make their outlines
indistinct from some angles.  So other procedures were developed.

Flight Plans Filed

In the first place, General Trainor said, the flight plans of the helicopters
were filed and should have been available not only to the pilots of the F-15C's
that brought the helicopters down but also to the crew of the Awacs control
aircraft that was in the area. He said that either the plans were not properly
distributed or they were overlooked or ignored.

It was not clear whether the F-15C pilots had tried to use their I.F.F.
transponders and if so, why they did not work. I.F.F. -- the initials stand for
Identify, Friend or Foe -- is a system that enables pilots to make an electronic
identification of other planes. Nor was it known whether any attempt was made to
use radio messages.

"There may have been some electronic mishap, though there is no evidence of that
yet," General Trainor said. "But you can't just blame the technology in any
event. You can't absolve the pilots from failure, and the blame may be shared by
the Awacs crew."

The relatively few air-to-air disasters, including the Russian downing of a
Korean jetliner, have usually involved a combination of failures that, in the
end, led pilots to see, mistakenly, what they expected to see.


LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 23, 1994, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on April 15 about the
accidental downing of two American helicopters by American warplanes over Iraq
misidentified Lieut. Gen. Lesley J. McNair, an American who was killed by
accident in World War II. He was chief of United States Army ground forces, not
all Allied ground forces.


GRAPHIC: Map shows the location of Erbil, Iraq.

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Poetry Emotion

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


Yusef Komunyakaa won the Pulitzer Prize this week, but he does not expect to
become a household name, and not because his name itself, phonetically simple
once parsed out bit by bit, looks at first glance so unpronounceable. Mr.
Komunyakaa won the prize for poetry, and there is little premium in poetry in a
world that thinks of Pound and Whitman as a weight and a sampler, not an Ezra, a
Walt, a thing of beauty, a joy forever.

It's hard to figure out why this should be true, why poetry has been shunted
onto a siding at a time, a place, so in need of brevity and truth. We still use
the word as a synonym for a kind of lovely perfection, for an inspired figure
skater, an accomplished ballet dancer. Many of the finest books children read
when young are poetry: "The Cat in the Hat," "Goodnight Moon," the free verse of
"Where the Wild Things Are."

And then suddenly, just as their faces lose the soft curves of babyhood, the
children harden into prose, and leave verse behind, or reject it entirely. Their
summer reading lists rarely include poetry, only stories; "The Red Badge of
Courage," not Mr. Komunyakaa's spare and evocative poems about his hitch in
Vietnam:

 He danced with tall grass

for a moment, like he was swaying

with a woman. Our gun barrels

glowed white-hot.

When I got to him,

a blue halo

of flies had already claimed him.

 For some of those children who once were lulled to sleep by the rhythms of
Seuss and Sendak, poetry comes now set to music: Nirvana and Arrested
Development, Tori Amos and the Indigo Girls. Many readers are scared off young,
put off by the belief that poetry is difficult and demanding. We complain that
it doesn't sound like the way we talk, but if it sounds like the way we talk, we
complain that it doesn't rhyme.

A poet who teaches in the schools tells of how one boy told him he couldn't,
wouldn't write poetry. Then one day in class he heard Hayden Carruth's "Cows at
Night" and cried, "I didn't know we were allowed to write poems about cows."

Or to write a poem about two women talking in the kitchen:

 Crazy as a bessy bug.

Jack wasn't cold

In his grave before

She done up & gave all

The insurance money

To some young pigeon

Who never hit a lick

At work in his life.

He cleaned her out & left

With Donna Faye's girl.

Honey, hush. You don't

Say . . .

 That's Mr. Komunyakaa, from the collection, "Neon Vernacular," that won the
Pulitzer. His publisher originally printed 2,500 copies, which is fairly large
for poetry but a joke to the folks who stock those racks at the airport. Few are
the parents who leap up with soundless joy when a son or daughter announces,
"Mom, Dad, I've decided to become a poet."

People who are knowledgeable about poetry sometimes discuss it in that knowing,
rather hateful way in which enophiles talk about wine: robust, delicate,
muscular. This has nothing to do with how most of us experience it, the heart
coming around the corner and unexpectedly running into the mind. Of all the
words that have stuck to the ribs of my soul, poetry has been the most filling.
Robert Frost, Robert Lowell, Elizabeth Bishop, Emily Dickinson, the divine W. B.
Yeats. April is the cruellest month. O World, I cannot hold thee close enough!
After the first death, there is no other. A terrible beauty is born.

Poems are now appearing on posters in subway trains; one commuter said of a
Langston Hughes poem, "I can't express it, but I get it." Now rolling through
the soot-black dark of the tunnels and the surprising sunshine where the subways
suddenly shoot aboveground: Marianne Moore, William Carlos Williams, Audre Lord,
May Swenson, Rita Dove and Gwendolyn Brooks, who wrote that exquisite evocation
of carpe diem, and perhaps of poetry, too:

 Exhaust the little moment. Soon it dies.

And be it gash or gold it will not come

Again in this identical disguise.

 Says Mr. Komunyakaa, who teaches, "I never really approached it from the
perspective of making a living. It was simply a need." Maybe it's a need for us
all and we just forget it, as we move past bedtime-story rhythms and into a
world without rhyme or reason.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Battles Terrorists, Not Kurds

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 485 words


To the Editor:

Re "Tragedy in Turkey" (editorial, April 4): For more than 900 years, peoples of
Kurdish background have lived on the Anatolian peninsula in peaceful coexistence
with all other ethnic groups, a reality of the very basis of modern Turkey.
However, certain extremists, who aim at destabilizing the region, found the
turmoil after the Persian Gulf war convenient for using the Kurdish population
in pursuit of their own ill agenda. The power vacuum after that war in areas
bordering southeast Turkey has become fertile ground for the P.K.K. -- Kurdistan
Workers Party -- to breed its campaign of terror.

As a Marxist-Leninist terrorist group, the P.K.K. had been stripped of its
ideology with the Soviet Union's fall. Consequently, the P.K.K. claimed to
represent the Kurdish population with a so-called program of extreme nationalism
under the guise of free thought and expression. Its intention is to carve a
separate state out of the sovereign borders of Turkey.

Unfortunately, it is easy for Western societies to confuse the terrorism P.K.K.
represents with the Kurdish victims of the gulf war, whom Turkey and the United
States try to help through Operation Provide Comfort.

No Government in Turkey has ever intended to solve the so-called Kurdish issue
through "military means." Turkey's political leaders are wise enough to avoid
the "Vietnam Syndrome." Instead, the Turkish Government has accelerated economic
and social reform programs for the Southeast region. Such measures have
earmarked nearly 17.5 percent of Turkey's total investment capital for enormous
development projects in the Southeast, such as the Southeastern Anatolia
Project. The P.K.K. realizes the huge constructive potential of such initiatives
and attempts to impede them through violence.

You misunderstand the separation of powers in Turkey's democratic system when
you speak of the Turkish Government's banning a Kurdish-based political party
and detaining five Kurdish members of Parliament. Not the Government, but the
Turkish Grand National Assembly -- including nearly 100 Parliament members of
Kurdish origin -- voted to lift the immunities of the members in question
through a democratic, legal and constitutional process.

They have been accused of capital crimes, but no capital punishment has been
carried out in Turkey since 1984, although executions continue in other Western
countries.

Turkey does not view its Kurdish citizens as a "minority," but as equal members
of society. Turks of Kurdish origin have served as presidents, prime ministers,
members of Parliament, governors and judges. We will not condemn these citizens
to permanent minority status.

An unstable Turkey does not benefit the strategic interests of the United States
nor serve peace and stability in a region already devastated by volatility.

NUZHET KANDEMIR
Ambassador of Turkey
Washington, April 5, 1994

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: April 17, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1458 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   7   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2  88   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 3      4  13   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 4      3   9   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 5      5  24   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 6      6  53   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 7      9   2   ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.)
                Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong
                Kong to China in 1997.

 8          1   LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and
                fun as experienced by half a dozen couples working in
                advertising and film production.

 9      7   6   ROGUE WARRIOR II: Red Cell, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $22.) An attempt to stop nuclear materials
                from reaching North Korea.

 10         1   THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist
                and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century
                Manhattan.

 11     8   8   THE CAT WHO CAME TO BREAKFAST, by Lilian Jackson Braun.
                (Putnam, $19.95.) Jim Qwilleran and his feline sleuths
                investigate a series of catastrophes.

 12    12  32   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly
                becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held
                in North Vietnam.

 13    10   3   RIVER GOD, by Wilbur Smith. (Dunne/St. Martin's, $24.95.)
                Ambition, greed and romance in Egypt at the time of the
                Pharaohs.

 14    11  12   FATAL CURE, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $22.95.) A series of
                mysterious deaths haunts a couple who practice medicine in a
                sylvan Vermont town.

 15         1   NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $21.95.) The ordeal
                of a physician after she is accused of being responsible for
                the death of pregnant women.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  49   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      3  17   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 3      2   7   HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and
                surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."

 4      4   5   ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary
                kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she
                was 11 years old) to 1993.

 5      5   6   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 6      6   5   MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.)
                The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a
                Washington Post reporter.

 7      7  14   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 8      8  20   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 9      9  28   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 10*        1   OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a
                novelist-photographer-musician.

 11    12  32   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations
                on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television
                show "Seinfeld."

 12    13  35   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
                Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business
                innovation.

 13    10   9   A DRINKING LIFE, by Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) The
                memoirs of a New York born-and-bred Irish-American journalist.

 14    15  34   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

 15*   14  87   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  13   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 2      2  47   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      4  25   STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A
                prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological
                health and fitness.

 4         36   AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.)
                A physician's advice about aging.

 Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 2, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF HAROLD CLURMAN: Six Decades of Commentary on Theater,
Dance, Music, Film, Arts and Letters, edited by Marjorie Loggia and Glenn Young.
(Applause Books, $49.95.) Fully a third of the journalism of the theater's
distinguished gadfly and cheerleader over a long, long time.

DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) Mr. Kissinger's "great
man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and
shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.

E.M. FORSTER: A Biography, by Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general
reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally
punctuated by little bursts of liberation.

THE END OF THE HUNT, by Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This
splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the
civil war of the 1920's. Analogies will be drawn with the present.

HERE: Stories, by Elizabeth Inness-Brown. (Louisiana State University, $19.95.)
Short stories concerning chiefly people encompassed (or imprisoned) wholly by
the present, without a clue how to get out of it or beyond it.

MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner, by Connie Bruck.
(Simon & Schuster, $25.) The inner truth of this amazing entrepreneur may not be
within human grasp, but Ms. Bruck, a staff writer for The New Yorker, makes
known what seems knowable.

MESHUGAH, by Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) The third
(so far) posthumously published novel by Singer is set in the early 1950's; its
characters, despite their high spirits and unstoppable gab, are haunted by
stories that can't be forgotten and can't be told.

REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS, by Murray Kempton. (Times
Books/Random House, $27.50.) Pieces long and short by a journalist whose abiding
fidelity to the radical impulse and the baroque style have made him as
inimitable as he is indispensable.

THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath & Ted Hughes, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In
the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed
by odious male poet), Ms. Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about
the values, and value, of biographers.

STONES FROM THE RIVER, by Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the
highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to
1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.

WHAT IS TOLD, by Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) This genially
pessimistic first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of
cosmopolitan Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to
places like Free Fall, N.J., in a narrative presided over by presences from the
spirit world.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 17, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 873 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     9   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2    15   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 3     4   WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that
           lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.

 4     4   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of
           a killer.

 5     4   HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a
           German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.

 6     3   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching
           his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the
           history of Mexico.

 7     3   CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster
           and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters
           World War III.

 8     3   PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser
           tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South
           Carolina town.

 9*    5   LORD OF RAVEN'S PEAK, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.)
           Romance and adventure among vikings in 10th-century
           Britain.

 10    2   FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An
           affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people
           returning to their hometown.

 11    1   SPANDAU PHOENIX, by Greg Iles. (Signet, $5.99.)
           Intelligence agencies vie for a diary full of
           still-invaluable secrets about World War II.

 12*  16   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) A journalist is charged with killing an eminent
           novelist.

 13*  12   PRIME WITNESS, by Steve Martini. (Jove, $5.99.) A series of
           murders in a California town.

 14    6   THE THROAT, by Peter Straub. (Signet, $6.99.) The vicious
           attack on a woman in a small town leads to the reappraisal
           of past crimes.

 15*   1   PRIVATE SCREENING, by Richard North Patterson. (Ballantine,
           $5.99.) The assassination of a Presidential hopeful leads
           to a series of events that frighten the nation.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    14   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2    545  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a
           psychiatrist.

 3    14   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 4     3   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.)
           The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 5    61   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 6     6   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture
           and murder.

 7    46   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 8    131  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France, as described by a British
           writer.

 9    24   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 10   145  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 11*   3   IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.)
           The memoirs of an Irish rebel, wrongly imprisoned in the
           1970's and 80's.

 12   11   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

 13*  48   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 14*  144  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 15*  31   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show
           host.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    161  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 2     6   MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and
           Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&S, $11.) Ways to teach
           children about spending and saving money.

 3    168  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 4    26   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 2, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


THE GREAT MELODY: A Thematic Biography and
Commented Anthology of Edmund Burke
By Conor Cruise O'Brien. University of Chicago, $22.50.
This 18th-century political scholar was more than a crusty conservative. The
author emphasizes Burke's stance against government tyranny, stressing his role
as a champion of independence for America, Ireland and India. "Mr. O'Brien has
brought back a lost treasure," John Patrick Diggins said here last year. His is
"a brilliant work of narrative sweep and analytic depth."


THE COLLECTED STORIES
By John McGahern. Vintage International, $12.
The characters in this fiction are, like the author, Irish, and they are usually
bound to the rural regions of their nation by poverty and hard circumstance. But
they are not without imagination, and these stories illustrate their various
means of escape, whether it is comic-book fantasy or the wilds of romantic love.
Last year our reviewer, Josephine Humphreys, said, "Mr. McGahern, a master of
the clean, plain, powerful description, is able to convey the strange phenomenon
of immanence, the presence in material things of nonmaterial significance."
Ireland is also the subject of three memoirs by Alice Taylor reissued by St.
Martin's Press. TO SCHOOL THROUGH THE FIELDS: An Irish Country Childhood ($8.95)
re-creates the author's early years as a member of a large farming family. "Ms.
Taylor's book seeks to memorialize a place utterly changed by time," Patricia
Hampl said here in 1990. These girlhood experiences are continued in QUENCH THE
LAMP ($8.95), in which Ms. Taylor fondly recalls rural rituals and eccentric
neighbors. In 1991 one critic praised "the careful and generous eye of this
gifted Irish writer." THE VILLAGE ($8.95) celebrates Ms. Taylor's life in
Innishannon, County Cork, where she arrived as a bride in the 1960's and where
she still lives. "What makes the story unique is Taylor's disarming style; she
writes as though she were sitting next to you," one critic said last year.
Contemporary Ireland is the setting of THE HEATHER BLAZING, by Colm Toibin
(Penguin, $9.95). Eamon Redmond, a judge, finds that his conflicts with his son
and daughter mirror the dissension within the nation, where secular social
principles clash with a long religious history. Last year our reviewer, Lucy
McDiarmid, said that the author "writes with the vision of an enlightened
Republic of Ireland still being struggled toward in the world outside fiction."
Another of Ireland's authors is seeing three of her early novels reappear in
print in AN EDNA O'BRIEN READER: August Is a Wicked Month, Casualties of Peace,
Johnny I Hardly Knew You (Warner, $11.99). In "August Is a Wicked Month," a
London journalist separated from her husband goes to the south of France, where
she takes refuge in an affair and pays dearly for it. "There is some pathos in
this vacation from morals," Martin Levin said here in 1965. Another wife seeks
escape in "Casualties of Peace," a novel that centers on a frail sculptor and
her earthy housekeeper. In 1967 our reviewer, Eleanor Dienstag, said it
"pulsates with . . . racy, exuberant, nervous prose." The last novel, originally
titled "I Hardly Knew You," is about the violent end of a woman's love affair
with a much younger man, her son's best friend. In 1978 our reviewer, Anatole
Broyard, criticized the book but praised its "talented and worldly" author: "She
has always ridden the passions as if they were a magnificent horse."
BOILING POINT: Democrats, Republicans, and the
Decline of Middle-Class Prosperity
By Kevin Phillips. Harper Perennial, $13.
The majority of Americans are still reeling from the 1980's, argues the author,
who demonstrates the devastating consequences of Republican tax policies and the
decline in the nation's industry. Last year our reviewer, Alan Ehrenhalt, said
this book is "an impressive piece of economic analysis and a troubling moral
argument."
CONTENTS UNDER PRESSURE
By Edna Buchanan. Avon, $4.99.
The author, a Miami police reporter, has created an alter ego in the form of
Britt Montero, a feisty journalist who is determined to find out the truth
behind the death of a retired black football player. The police claim his car
crashed while they were in pursuit, but Britt has other ideas. The outcome is
"undeniably vivid and disturbing," Josh Rubins said here in 1992.
AFTER TET: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam
By Ronald H. Spector. Vintage, $13.
Written by a former marine who served in Vietnam during the 12 months following
the Tet offensive of 1968, this book chronicles the many misadventures of that
agonizing period. Mr. Spector shows how United States foreign-policy makers
exploited the young, usually working-class Americans who were thrust into the
center of the war. He has also interviewed North Vietnamese, noting that their
elite were also largely absent from the conflict. Last year our reviewer, Morley
Safer, said, "There is a wealth of fascinating detail in 'After Tet' that will
surprise both old Vietnam hands and casual readers." He added, "This is history,
at its best." The often sacrificial role of American servicemen in the war is
further examined in RED THUNDER, TROPIC LIGHTNING: The World of a Combat
Division in Vietnam, by Eric M. Bergerud (Penguin, $11.95). The author, writing
of the 25th Infantry Division, notes that the soldiers became lures to flush out
the elusive enemy. Whether such a strategy would have been tolerated if the
American troops had been more middle-class "is an especially unpleasant question
for the reader . . . to ponder," Russell F. Weigley said here last year.
COME TO ME: Stories
By Amy Bloom. Harper Perennial, $10.
A finalist for the National Book Award, this collection concerns families in
crisis, divided by death, extramarital love affairs, mental illness or simple
accident. Last year our reviewer, Anne Whitehouse, said the author's "voice is
sure and brisk, her language often beautiful; the result is humorous as well as
heart-rending fiction."
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John McGahern. (JERRY BAUER)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION: GOLDEN AGES;
When Networks Took Risks, and the High Road

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 36;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words


ALTHOUGH TELEVISION AS WE know it today is, give or take a couple of years, only
45 years old, talk about one golden age or another has been bandied about for
decades. The medium thrives on almost instant nostalgia. (It does wonders for
the rerun business.)

The 1950's were no sooner over than industry observers were mourning the demise
of the golden age of live drama on series like "Playhouse 90." Television
veterans still get misty-eyed about the challenge of going on the air live
without the safety net of a second take.

In retrospect, the 50's were really a big tease. The potential of commercial
television as an outlet for serious drama would soon begin crumbling under the
far wider popularity of variety shows and westerns. The so-called golden age
coughed up a few promising writers, Paddy Chayefsky and Horton Foote among the
best, and a few directors, like Arthur Penn and John Frankenheimer, who went on
to substantial careers in film. For the most part, though, productions preserved
on kinescope now bring to mind the first, very awkward steps of silent movies.

My candidate for television's golden age or, more precisely, an age of most
tantalizing promise would be the mid-1970's, with 1973 especially prominent. It
was a time when the bulk of the television universe was snugly contained within
three networks and an increasingly active public television.

The networks remained in the control of broadcasters whose every programming
decision was not exclusively based on ratings and who could still venture an
occasional risk: William S. Paley at CBS, Robert W. Sarnoff at NBC and Leonard
Goldenson at ABC. Public television was being enlivened by people like John Jay
Iselin, then president of WNET, who, in addition to cultivating domestic talent
new to television, had a huge market of fine European programs practically to
themselves.

With advancing technologies, television productions were becoming immeasurably
more sophisticated. Bright young writers and performers began flocking to the
medium. "Columbo" and "Kojak" gave the police-detective format innovative
twists. "The Waltons" raised the quality of warmhearted family drama. The
phenomenon of made-for-television movies got a considerable boost from
productions like "Brian's Song" and "That Certain Summer." The latter tackled,
albeit very gingerly, the subject of homosexuality, a topic that was just about
invisible elsewhere on prime time.

Even the sitcom reached unexpected heights. On Saturday night, CBS had perhaps
the legendary lineup: "All in the Family," "M*A*S*H," "The Mary Tyler Moore
Show," "The Bob Newhart Show" and "The Carol Burnett Show." This was the kind of
snappily written, marvelously acted fare that killed traditional Broadway light
comedies like "The Seven Year Itch." For better or worse, television was
radically changing the basic configurations of popular culture.

Richard Nixon began his second term as President in 1973, but the Senate
Watergate hearings began in May, and after a decade of war America got out of
Vietnam. The most striking aspect of this period (perhaps in history as well as
in television) was a willingness, indeed an eagerness, to move in unexpected,
sometimes controversial directions.

Norman Lear headed entertainment's maverick list. After turning the bigoted
Archie Bunker (Carroll O'Connor) into one of the nation's most beloved sitcom
characters, he used "Maude" to confront the subject of abortion. Maude (Beatrice
Arthur) found herself pregnant in her mid-40's and, after careful deliberation,
decided on an abortion. That plot line would be unthinkable on television today.

Mr. Lear later shook up the schedule with "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman," a satire
about life in small-town America. When the networks wanted no part of the
concept, Mr. Lear distributed the show in syndication. Among the ingredients: A
grandfather arrested for being the town flasher, bisexuality, battered wives and
penis transplants.

Meanwhile, public broadcasting was assuming a higher profile in television land,
and people like Mr. Iselin began pushing in more provocative, experimental
directions. The series "The Great American Dream Machine" provided a lively
magazine catch-all for social essays, comedy sketches, animated features and
whatever else might pop into the producer's head. Space was made on the schedule
for independent film makers like Ed Emshwiller and Nam June Paik.

By far the most talked about public-television project of this period was "An
American Family," produced by Craig Gilbert, and taped by Alan and Susan
Raymond. They simply moved in with the Louds of California for several months
and let the camera run as the family went about its business. Among the more
prominent developments: a divorce and a son's announcement that he was gay. News
and talk shows were awash in discussions about both the family and the role of
television in exposing what was once very private. In short, "An American
Family" was precursor to today's avalanche of tell-all talk shows.

While domestic theater, dance and opera continued to thrive on public
television, Masterpiece Theater began importing drama series from Britain.
Superbly acted and costumed productions often grappled successfully with what
might have seemed the least likely material for television, like Henry James's
"Spoils of Poynton." At the other end of the literary spectrum, the series could
turn the commonplace soap opera into splendid entertainment with "Upstairs,
Downstairs."

As public television brought a new focus to the question of overall television
quality, commercial broadcasters took note. Suddenly the networks were, at least
occasionally, taking the high cultural road. BBC mini-series could now be found
on NBC (Alistair Cooke's "America" and "The Search for the Nile") and on CBS
("The Six Wives of Henry VIII"). NBC produced its own mini-series, Joseph
Wambaugh's "Blue Knight," starring William Holden.

For one brief shining moment, classy drama became almost commonplace on the
networks. Laurence Olivier in "Long Day's Journey Into Night" and Katharine
Hepburn in "The Glass Menagerie" were on ABC. Joseph Papp's Broadway production
of "Much Ado About Nothing" and Lewis Freedman's "Playhouse 90" resurrection
were on CBS. The latter showed Brian Moore's "Catholics," with Trevor Howard and
Martin Sheen, and Ingmar Bergman's play "The Lie" with George Segal and Shirley
Knight. On NBC, Jack Lemmon starred in John Osborne's "Entertainer." If not an
entire age, certainly a golden year or two.

Finally there was the documentary, a form of reporting particularly suited to
television. Public television made room for adventurous independents. Among the
best: Louis Malle's "Calcutta" and Frederick Wiseman's "Basic Training."

Network news departments, too, retained a firmly grounded sense of
responsibility about informing the public. And they had producers of enormous
talent. At NBC, Fred Freed went to Denver for a riveting essay, "Murder in
America"; Robert Northshield returned to Vietnam for "Sins of the Fathers," a
heartbreaking portrait of illegitimate children left behind by American
soldiers. At CBS, Peter Davis's "Selling of the Pentagon" rattled the military
establishment, creating a public furor that guaranteed an even bigger audience
for the documentary's rebroadcast.

LOOKING BACK AT TELEVISION IN the mid-1970's, what emerges is at least an
awareness of substance and continuity. At the various helms were figures of
intelligence and some sophistication. But even they couldn't save the business
from the artistic straitjacket of ratings and bottom lines. The prospect of more
channels once held the promise of a national renaissance. The present reality is
"Beavis and Butt-head," and a younger generation that seems more turned off than
ever from the once grand American dream.

Still, there's always the theory, however shaky, that what goes around comes
around. Back in 1973, NBC picked an abrasive, irreverent fellow named Tom Snyder
to host its new "Tomorrow" show, immediately following Johnny Carson. The
"Tomorrow" time slot was eventually taken over by David Letterman. Now Mr.
Letterman is triumphing on CBS opposite Jay Leno, Mr. Carson's successor. A top
candidate for a talk show to follow Mr. Letterman: Mr. Snyder. Television is an
unpredictable business.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Beatrice Arthur and Bill Macy in the CBS series "Maude," which
began in 1972 -- The last abortion? (Werner Wolff/Black Star); Gordon Jackson
and Jean Marsh in PBS's "Upstairs, Downstairs" -- Edwardian soap. (London
Weekend Television)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Hotels

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


To the Editor: Having specialized in providing travel services in Vietnam for
the past four years, I read John H. Cushman Jr.'s report entitled "Travel
Industry Prepares for a Rush to Vietnam" (March 13) with great interest.
However, it contained one piece of information that I'm afraid is misleading.
That is where Heather Smith of the Earth Island Institute is quoted as saying:
"You can get a great hotel for 10 bucks a night. In the north they have a hot
shower, but in Saigon they don't."

As a tour operator, my company, Absolute Asia, has found that the minimum
acceptable standard of hotel in Saigon for our clientele costs in the
$50-to-$60-a-night range. Many tourist class hotels cost $100 plus per night,
and deluxe hotels in Saigon (i.e., the Century, the Norfolk, the Omni and the
Floating Hotel) are priced at $150 to $200 per night.

As the article stated, travel to Vietnam is increasingly markedly. Consequently,
hotel space in Saigon and Hanoi is limited and travelers are advised to make
early arrangements.

KEN FISH
President, Absolute Asia
New York, N.Y.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In the New Russia, an Era of Takeovers

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3689 words

DATELINE: VOLGOGRAD, Russia


BORIS ISGARCHEV does not dress the part of a corporate raider. His shirts are of
flea-market quality, with stiff, cardboard-like collars. The overcoat he wears
is brown polyester, and his suit, when he wears one, is shapeless and old. But
in bravado and self-importance, Mr. Isgarchev would fit in well among America's
takeover artists of the past decade. When he gains control of a company, he
proclaims, it prospers.

"My best quality is bragging," Mr. Isgarchev said, describing himself
accurately, but with just a hint of self-deprecation. "I enjoy great prestige as
a businessman. People know that I am fair. And they know that when I buy into an
enterprise, that enterprise will make money."

Mr. Isgarchev holds shares in a dozen enterprises in this metropolis 550 miles
southeast of Moscow, operations that range from chemical companies to bottling
plants. But the apple of his eye in recent months has been the city's largest
hotel.

The hotel is in a sorry state: Rusted plumbing delivers brown water to the
bathrooms and almost nothing has been refurbished since the building went up in
the 1950's. But Mr. Isgarchev thinks the hotel, with its palace-like interior,
has the makings of a four-star tourist mecca -- a money machine in a city once
called Stalingrad. Here the Russians finally defeated Germany, in a battle that
became a turning point in World War II. That victory invests Volgograd with the
potential appeal for Western tourists of Normandy or Dunkirk.

Other entrepreneurial spirits around town agree, and so a fight is under way for
control of the hotel. It is a fight that, because it is so typical of what is
happening elsewhere in Russia, says a lot about where this nation is in its
transition to a free-market system. In many ways, the battle resembles those
that have shaken corporate America. There are, for example, the acquisitive
investors, like Mr. Isgarchev, promising at raucous shareholder meetings that
they offer the best deal. There is the soaring price of stock in companies that
have become targets. There is the disruption in the lives of many employees
afraid of losing their jobs and wondering which takeover artist they should
trust to save them. And there is the lingering question about whether such
battles really do help companies, and thus the economy, toward better times.

Mr. Isgarchev, who is 47, is one of an emerging class of newly wealthy merchants
in every major Russian city. Mostly they are men who have made fortunes since
the mid-1980's by purchasing Russian raw materials for very little in rubles,
then reselling them abroad for dollars. Now, for all the national chaos, the
corruption, the gangsterism and the political struggles that are debilitating
Russia, these merchants have found an investment that is hard to resist.

They have discovered that thousands of enterprises, until recently owned by the
state, can be bought today for much less than they are worth. For so little, in
fact, that it would be as if the American financier Henry Kravis could buy
General Motors at $3 a share instead of the nearly $60 at which the stock is
trading. Even if G.M. shut down, its buildings and machinery could be sold for
much more than that $3 a share.

Acting on this knowledge, the merchants are buying control or trying to buy
control of hundreds of companies from their workers and managers. And they're
doing it with the full support of the Yeltsin Administration, which applauds the
wealthy investors as catalysts in the conversion of Russia to a market economy.

In the first step of this process, starting 18 months ago, the Government
converted nearly 10,000 enterprises employing roughly half of the nation's 65
million workers into shareholder corporations. In the second step, shares in
these companies were distributed free or nearly free, with the biggest blocks
going to each company's workers and managers. Now, in the third step, control is
passing from the employees, who are considered not particularly entrepreneurial,
to the merchants who, presumably, are.

In theory, the merchants will then carry out the critical fourth step: investing
in their new companies to make them more productive and more profitable. The
hotel here, for example, would require more than $1 million, by some estimates,
to refurbish the 165 rooms, change the pipes, put in new elevators and a modern
telephone system, and buy buses and other equipment to serve foreign tourists.

"These merchants are enormously important in bringing to Russian companies
aggressive management," said Andrei Shleifer, a Russian-born Harvard economist
who works with the Privatization Ministry in Moscow. "They often acquire 15 or
20 percent of a company's stock, and then they gain control by making alliances
with workers or, sometimes, with managers. They are moving at a faster pace in
their acquisitions than American raiders ever did, even at the height of the
takeover wave."

What is not clear is whether the merchants will in fact make the investments to
improve their new companies, or merely turn around and sell them at a higher
price -- "flip" them, in Wall Street parlance -- to other investors who think
they can then repeat the process.

So far, little such investment has been made. Indeed, Mr. Isgarchev sold his
shares in the hotel at a profit. But he is on the hotel's board of directors,
and he has said that he is ready to buy in again, if he can get control by
purchasing enough shares, inexpensively, or by allying himself with other
shareholders.

Adventurous Americans have entered the takeover game, advancing money to Russian
partners, including Mr. Isgarchev's rival in the battle for the hotel. More than
$200 million has flowed from the United States to Russia for this purpose,
Government officials estimate. But again, the accent is on ownership of valuable
properties at bargain prices, not major investment.

Meanwhile, the big hotel, called the Intourist, continues to deteriorate, like
so much else in this struggling nation. But things could change. "Russia is
crazy now, and understandably there is a reluctance to invest," Professor
Shleifer said. "Maybe it will take five years before things settle down. Then,
whoever controls the hotel will undoubtedly refurbish it."

The Target
If You Fix It, They Will Come

EVEN in these troubled times here, a luxury hotel seems a particularly good
investment in Volgograd, a city of 1.1 million on the Volga River. Volgograd is
not only an industrial city but an important tourist center, thanks to its
history.

Stalin came here in 1918 to defend the city, then called Tsaritsyn, against
White Russians trying to undo the Bolshevik Revolution. Later he gave Tsaritsyn
his name -- Stalingrad -- and many industries. During World War II, the city was
destroyed during six months of desperate fighting that ended in February 1943
with the defeat of the German Sixth Army. Half a million Russians died, and
Russians cannot forget.

Every year, tens of thousands visit the city, which was renamed Volgograd in
1961, after Stalin had been downgraded. They walk through graceful plazas built
around war memorials guarded by majestic poplars.

In a central park, a broad stone walkway, lined with these poplars, leads upward
to a pantheon near the top of a hill where the heaviest fighting took place. On
the hilltop above the pantheon is the statue of Mother Russia, standing 275 feet
high. It is the tallest statue in the world, 125 feet taller than the Statue of
Liberty.

The circular pantheon, with its eternal flame of life rising from a central
altar and its bronze tablets inscribed with the names of some of the soldiers
lost in the battle, is as moving for an older generation of Russians as the
Vietnam memorial or the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Washington are for
Americans.

The five-story Intourist Hotel stands in the midst of these plazas and
memorials. To look inside is to see its potential. There are graceful high
ceilings, broad hallways, large rooms, thick quiet walls, and a white marble
staircase that descends to a palatial, columned lobby.

The dream is that once all this is modernized, American and European tourists
will come for two or three days, at $250 a day, and visit the battle memorials
on group tours arranged by the hotel.

Then they will board cruise ships -- also arranged by the hotel, for a fee --
and sail down the Volga to the Caspian Sea, 250 miles to the south. The hotel
might even own the cruise ships.

That dream fuels the fight for control of the hotel.

The Investors
From a New Breed Of Empire Makers

BORIS ISGARCHEV'S image of himself is that of a combative and resourceful man,
made so in childhood as the youngest of three brothers, and the smallest and
weakest. (He is 5-foot-6 and slightly built.) In college, in 1970, he made his
first bundle of money, by selling telephone poles that a state company had left
wastefully to rot.

Trained as a chemist and accountant, Mr. Isgarchev rose to a top job at a
chemical plant here, but his brashness got him into trouble with Communist Party
higher-ups and he left in the 1980's to go into trade. Soon he was buying and
selling raw materials like oil, and that made him rich.

Such fortunes are beginning to throw off some sumptuous badges of wealth in a
city of mostly shabby neighborhoods where concrete-slab apartment buildings
intermingle with wooden or brick cottages. Showy four-story brick mansions, with
cathedral windows and broad front galleries, modern kitchens and two-car
garages, are appearing. But Mr. Isgarchev still lives with his wife and a
daughter in the small apartment the family has occupied for years.

Most of his energy is devoted to acquiring blocks of shares in state enterprises
that have been newly turned into corporations. Many of his investments are in
chemical companies, the industry that once employed him. But he also owns stakes
in the tire factory here, two bottling plants, and a metals factory, among
others.

Last summer, after the hotel's ownership shifted from the state to a shareholder
corporation, Mr. Isgarchev bought 10 percent of the shares and suggested
publicly that he might try to buy control of the hotel.

Enter a rival merchant, Ivan Grigoryev. Mr. Grigoryev, 36 years old, a burly man
with a thick mustache, is a former journalist who made his first big money in
the late 1980's buying American computers and reselling them. Besides computers,
he trades commodities and was, for a while, director of an exchange, only to
lose the post in a scandal that landed him in jail briefly.

Last September, Mr. Grigoryev bought out Mr. Isgarchev's shares in the hotel.
Mr. Isgarchev says he received in rubles the equivalent of $96 a share, nine
times what he had paid for the stock three months earlier. The battle for the
Intourist Hotel was just warming up.

The Employees
Workers Wonder Who's the Savior

JOB security, a hallmark of the old command economy, has become much less of a
priority than it was just a year ago, when the state still owned most of the
economy. Layoffs, shortened workweeks, forced vacations at greatly reduced pay
and frozen wages have become widespread -- an inevitable byproduct of the
struggle over ownership or the struggle simply to keep a company alive without
subsidies from the state.

The privatization process in this nation of 150 million people has resulted in
the distribution of stock to millions of workers, giving them big stakes in the
companies that employ them. But many of these workers are now selling their
shares. Often, they are hard up for money. And often they sell in the hope that
the purchaser will save their jobs.

Mr. Isgarchev played to this yearning. So did Mr. Grigoryev. When he began to
bid for control of the Intourist Hotel, people like Galina Tokarena came to him
for help.

She is an intense woman of 39 who had worked at the hotel for 15 years, the last
five as an English-speaking guide and interpreter for foreign guests. Today she
is unemployed, angry and critical of the hotel's general director, Yevgeny
Konovalov.

Mr. Konovalov, who rose to general director during the final years of the
centralized Soviet economy, had promised, in his cordial, sincere manner, to
expand the hotel's tourist services. Ms. Tokarena had believed him, but months
passed and nothing changed. Then, last August, Mr. Konovalov eliminated her
guide-interpreter job. She quit rather than take a humiliating demotion.

Ms. Tokarena turned to Mr. Grigoryev. He was just beginning to accumulate
Intourist shares, and to openly challenge Mr. Konovalov. She sold him 20 of her
40 shares, stock she had acquired earlier in the year at almost no cost. Some of
the shares had come to her as an Intourist employee; others she obtained in
exchange for vouchers the Government had distributed free to every Russian,
vouchers convertible into stock.

Mr. Grigoryev paid her, in rubles, $52 a share, which meant that each share
brought her more than she had earned in a month at the hotel.

She knew that by waiting a few more weeks she might have sold for a higher
price. Mr. Grigoryev eventually acquired 1,085 shares, or 17.5 percent of the
6,000 outstanding shares, including Mr. Isgarchev's 10 percent stake. As he
bought, borrowing some of the money from a bank to make the purchases, the price
rose to $128 a share in the late fall.

But price was not Ms. Tokarena's priority. "We believed in Grigoryev," she said.
"We saw that it was worthwhile to concentrate the shares in his hands. If he
could become the general director, things would be better."

Even as she turned to Mr. Grigoryev, Ms. Tokarena had tried to challenge Mr.
Konovalov within the system. The hotel's 216 employees owned in late August more
than 40 percent of the shares, four times the number needed to petition for an
emergency shareholders' meeting at which Mr. Konovalov might have been censured
or ousted. As a shareholder, Ms. Tokarena signed such a petition. Mr. Konovalov
ignored it.

"We had signatures representing 10 percent of the shares," she said, "and he did
not call a meeting. We scheduled one anyway, but people were too scared to come
and risk their jobs, and Konovalov did not show up." As owners, the workers
clearly lacked influence.

That has also been the case elsewhere. The tire factory in Volgograd, for
example, is now owned almost entirely by its managers.

The Volgograd Aluminum Works, one of Europe's biggest producers of aluminum, is
largely in the hands of a consortium of Russian bankers and merchants in league
with the plant's managers. For less than $3 million the consortium is getting
control of a factory worth more than $40 million, even in its present
deteriorated state.

Mr. Konovalov, who is 46, finds this whole process distasteful. He would prefer
a longer transition to a market system. During this transition, the hotel would
be owned neither by the state nor by shareholders but by "the entire work
collective."

Shareholding employees are clearly a problem for the general director.
Disaffection among them opened the door to Mr. Grigoryev. Already the shares
held by employees have declined to less than 35 percent of the total from more
than 40 percent in late summer. "You can compare our shareholders to kids," Mr.
Konovalov said. "They have not yet perceived what they have and they can be
cheated out of their shares."

The Showdown
Grand Promises To Shareholders

THE FIGHT for the Intourist flared at a raucous shareholders meeting in
December. Riot police were on hand at the former Young Pioneers Palace, a few
blocks from the hotel, where several hundred shareholders gathered.

Mr. Isgarchev, although he had sold his shares, took the podium and announced
that he was worth $33 million. If shareholders needed his help, he told them, he
could make another run at the stock. The shareholders, many of them hotel
employees afraid of losing their jobs, elected Mr. Isgarchev a director.

Mr. Isgarchev acknowledged that if he were to gain control of the hotel, he
might have to continue to shrink the staff, which included chambermaids on every
floor, around the clock. But he would find jobs for anyone laid off at his other
operations, he insisted.

In return for this safety net, he wants people to be willing to sell him their
shares. "The Intourist Hotel may be worth $6 million," he said. If so, then the
6,000 shares outstanding would each be worth $1,000, or roughly eight times
their current trading price. "We could buy more shares tomorrow from the
workers," Mr. Isgarchev said. "They trust us and they do not know the true value
of their shares."

Mr. Grigoryev, the other man bidding for control, had gotten on the ballot to
run against Mr. Konovalov for general director. But he did not try to get into
the shareholders' meeting. There was the possibility that he would be arrested,
on a disorderly conduct charge brought by Mr. Konovalov after Mr. Grigoryev
shouted at him.

Mr. Konovalov won the election, but not the battle. Mr. Grigoryev remained a
threat, until very recently, when he sold his stake to a Moscow bank, Apabank,
presumably for much more than he paid, although the amount was not disclosed. He
sold to repay money that he had borrowed.

That left Mr. Konovalov unchallenged for the moment. But if Mr.  Isgarchev makes
another bid for the hotel and gets control, then he too could replace Mr.
Konovalov. "This is a badly managed hotel that survives only because of its good
location," Mr. Isgarchev said.

Mr. Konovalov's job thus remains on the line, unless he finds a way to buy
control of the hotel himself (he owned only 21 shares recently). Or he might
enlist a "white knight" to buy enough shares to insure his job as general
director. Apabank, having acquired Mr. Grigoryev's shares, is a potential ally,
he said.

Mr. Konovalov, naturally, is not well disposed toward Mr. Grigoryev's supporters
among the hotel's staff. As he put it: "Good people will remain employed at the
hotel and the bad ones will have to go -- that's inevitable. But those who have
sold their shares, if they are not good workers, they will be the first to be
asked to leave."

The Outlook
Little to Show For All the Talk

WHAT is striking in all the infighting is that no one says much about
renovation. By most estimates, an investment of $1 million or slightly more
might well produce profits far greater than the measly $109,000 the hotel earned
last year.

Mr. Konovalov barely mentioned renovation, or its cost, at the shareholders'
meeting. Weeks later, he has made only small changes, mainly new television sets
in many rooms and some improvements in the telephone system.

At this pace, the hotel would still be, at the turn of the century, much as it
is today: a landmark with fewer than half its rooms occupied, mostly by Russians
paying $20 a night, not foreign tourists at $250.

Whenever renovation comes up, Mr. Isgarchev switches the conversation to his
skills as a businessman.  "We have specialists in hotels and in tourism, and we
know how to provide services for foreign businessmen who come to Volgograd and
stay at the hotel," Mr. Isgarchev said, referring vaguely to the staff of his
investment company, Tsaritsa, a name suggesting Russian royalty and the rebirth
of glorious days.

Mr. Grigoryev is not much more enlightening. He has as partners an investment
group of 30 or so Colorado businessmen, doctors and lawyers headed by Robert
Dawson, a Denver real estate broker and developer. The Americans advanced
$20,000 to Mr. Grigoryev to help him buy Intourist stock, but with permission to
sell the stock, at a profit, if he could not get control, which he hasn't.

"We would not advance more money to buy, say, 21 percent of the shares, but we
would have advanced funds to buy a controlling interest, and still would," Mr.
Dawson said last week. "Mr. Grigoryev would have to come to us and say, 'I have
these stockholders lined up.' "

If Mr. Grigoryev were to re-enter the battle and get control of the hotel, then
the Coloradans would invest $400,000 to $600,000 in refurbishing -- but in
stages over years, Mr. Dawson said. The Russians "want to make Rodeo Drive out
of Volgograd in less than a year," he said, "and that is not going to happen."

The pressure to invest comes from the Government, not the marketplace;
specifically in Volgograd it comes from Yuri M. Medvedev, the 46-year-old
director of the Privatization Ministry's regional office here. Mr. Medvedev's
office has supervised the conversion from state ownership to shareholder
corporation of more than 900 companies, including the Intourist Hotel. He was
present at the hotel shareholders' meeting in December and his office has
watched over all the buying and selling of shares in recent months.

No one seems more willing than the Privatization Ministry to let the market
shape the transition to private enterprise -- up to a point.

If the marketplace cannot bring forth, fairly quickly, the minimum of $1.2
million that Mr. Medvedev considers necessary to renovate the Intourist Hotel,
then the ministry will hurry along the process -- invoking a sort of industrial
policy.

Specifically, the law has allowed the ministry to hold back at least 15 percent
of the shares in each company going private. If the owners that emerge -- the
Isgarchevs or Grigoryevs or Konovalovs -- fail to invest, then the ministry can
sell the held-back shares at an "investment auction."

Such an auction for the Intourist Hotel is scheduled for next month or June, Mr.
Medvedev says. Bidders will soon have to submit detailed plans for spending $1.2
million. The winner would get the 15 percent of the stock immediately, and if he
actually invests the $1.2 million as promised, the Privatization Ministry will
print up enough new shares to give the investor ownership of the hotel.

Have any bidders appeared for the investment auction? Not yet. And indeed, none
might appear, in a world of investors still more interested in buying ownership
of Corporate Russia for a fraction of its value than in improving what they own.


LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Boris Isgarchev, in the Intourist Hotel in Volgograd, which he
talks of making profitable, if he can win control. (Nikolai
Ignatiev/Network-Matrix for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Ivan Grigoryev promised
to save the jobs of hotel workers if he gained control. Then he sold his stake.
Boris Isgarchev says he can save the Intourist, behind him. (Photographs by
Nikolai Ignatiev/Network-Matrix for The New York Times)(pg. 8)

Map of Russia showing location of Volgograd.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Those Who Stay Calm in Disasters Face Psychological Risk, Studies Say

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 20;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words


People who seem to be handling a disaster with aplomb may need the attention of
rescue workers and counseling as much as those who seem to be experiencing
panic, new studies show.

Those who react with an apparently unwarranted calm may be particularly prone to
post-traumatic distress problems like severe anxiety, sleep disruptions or
flashbacks, which may not surface until months or even years later, experts say.
They may also be inclined to put themselves in danger during a disaster because
they ignore the reality of the peril.

The heightened risk is found in those whose steadiness during a catastrophe is a
result of what is known as dissociation. Its symptoms include lack of emotional
reaction, a feeling that the events are unreal, or disorientation.

Some Victims Ignored

The findings are important for rescue workers or counselors in helping not only
victims of natural disasters but also those of catastrophes like the gas
explosion that leveled apartment houses in Edison, N.J., last month, and the
bombing last year of the World Trade Center.

While victims who are panicked or agitated routinely get attention, those who
are dissociating are often ignored because their symptoms are elusive and they
may appear to be paragons of calm.

But the studies suggest that they may often shut out reality. During the 1991
fires in the Oakland, Calif., hills, for example, those with dissociative
symptoms whose homes were threatened were twice as likely as others to try to
cross police barriers and rush back into the flames, one study found.

The new findings suggest that psychological counselors should identify and offer
help to those who exhibit signs of dissociation in an effort to prevent serious
emotional difficulties later.

Trouble Down the Road

The symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, which by definition emerge only
several months after a disaster, include a constant, fearful vigilance;
nightmares and sleeping difficulties; flashbacks and intrusive memories or
preoccupying thoughts of the trauma; anger and anxiety, and emotional numbness.

"Many of the people who appear to be doing the best may be heading for the worst
post-traumatic trouble down the road," said Dr. David Spiegel, a psychiatrist at
the Stanford University medical school and an author of a study of victims of
the 1991 Oakland fires that will be published in The American Journal of
Psychiatry in June.

Of 154 people who had lost homes or were otherwise threatened by the fire, about
a third reacted at the time with dissociative symptoms. Based on other studies,
"about one in four people will go on to develop post-traumatic stress disorder
after a major disaster," Dr. Spiegel said. "We found that the highest proportion
of those who did so had dissociated at the time of the fire."

Experiencing dissociative symptoms was four times stronger a predictor of future
problems than a harrowing encounter with the fire, Dr. Spiegel said.

The heightened risk of post-trauma symptoms in people who dissociate has also
been found in research with combat veterans and with rescue workers in the 1989
earthquake in the San Francisco area.

"There's a strong relationship between reports of dissociation during a
soldier's worst combat trauma and his having post-traumatic stress disorder 20
years later," said Dr. Charles Marmar, a psychiatrist at the University of
California at San Francisco and the director of the Post-Traumatic Stress
Disorder Project at the Veterans Affairs Medical Center in San Francisco.

In a study of 251 Vietnam veterans, Dr. Marmar found a greater prevalence of
post-traumatic stress disorder among veterans who reported dissociative
responses during their worst combat experiences. These included blanking out
during the events, time slowing down, events seeming unreal or feeling as if
they were watching themselves from afar or in slow motion. The findings will
also be published in The American Journal of Psychiatry later this year.

Dr. Marmar, working with Dr. Daniel Weiss, a colleague at the hospital,
developed a scale to evaluate whether a person is dissociating in the aftermath
of a trauma. Dissociative symptoms can easily be overlooked because those who
have them can appear unfazed by the trauma they have just gone through.

One of the more obvious signs is the person's reporting a sense of "being in a
daze," said Dr. Cheryl Koopman, who did the study of the Oakland fire victims
with Dr. Spiegel.

Another is having wildly inappropriate emotional reactions. One man who was
watching the fires after his home was destroyed, Dr. Koopman said, was heard to
exclaim: "I'm exhilarated! This is fun. I've got a great view!"

Another man, who had lost his home in the blaze and become temporarily separated
from his 15-year-old son, recalled: "I saw myself as though I was watching
myself on TV. I felt outside of my conscious experience."

A student in Berkeley, who was cooking pancakes while his apartment house
burned, was under the impression that the intense heat and smoke was from his
cooking, even though he knew there was a firestorm nearby, Dr. Koopman said.
Several occupants of the apartment house perished.

People who reacted with such bizarre composure "were less likely to pack up
their important possessions as the fire bore down on their house, and more
likely to react as though nothing unusual were going on," Dr. Koopman said.

But Dr. Koopman's study also found that 17 percent of those fire victims who
experienced dissociation tried to break through police barricades and go back
into the fire zone, while only 8 percent of those with no such symptoms did so.

Underlying Feelings

"It's a defense that works too well," Dr. Spiegel said. "People who dissociate
are at a greater risk for endangering themselves."

Underlying feelings of panic and terror may be the trigger for such
dissociation. Dr. Marmar noted that "many patients with panic attack report some
of these dissociative symptoms at the height of the panic."

Dr. Marmar found the same strong link between dissociation during a disaster and
later post-traumatic symptoms in a study of 198 emergency service workers who
tried to save those trapped in the collapse of the Nimitz Freeway in Oakland
during the 1989 earthquake.

Those most at risk during such a crisis, Dr. Marmar said, "are those people who
try to cope with emotional difficulties in their lives by avoiding their
feelings or keeping them to themselves," he said. "The more you try to sweep
your feelings under the rug, the more likely you are to dissociate during
trauma."

The relationship between dissociation and a heightened risk of later problems
applies to other traumas like rape or a serious auto accident, Dr. Spiegel said.


Debriefing Recommended

Dr. Spiegel recommends that everyone involved in a traumatic incident, victims
and rescue workers alike, undergo a psychological debriefing afterward. He
cautioned that if counseling is given only to people whose emotional turmoil is
obvious, many of those most at risk for later problems will be missed.

In the debriefing, those involved should be brought together in groups to talk
about what happened, what they felt and how they are feeling at the moment. For
those who had dissociative symptoms, "you need group or individual therapy that
will get them to deal with the emotions they may not have been in touch with
during the trauma," Dr. Spiegel said. "Fear, anger and feelings of helplessness
may not have a rational object, but they still need to be expressed."

It is best to offer such help in the first week or so after the trauma, he said,
"especially to those who are obviously denying the importance of what happened."

"But," he went on, "these are the people least likely to feel the need for help.
We tell them, 'Our experience has been that people reacting like you have the
worst problems later.' "


LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Vexing Adventures Of the Last Alaskan Bushrat

BYLINE: This article was adapted from "A Shovel of Stars: The Settling of the
North American Continent, Part II," by Ted Morgan, to be published next spring
by Simon & Schuster.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4663 words


Looking back on 22 years as a bushrat, which is what wilderness homesteaders are
called in Alaska, Miles Martin reflected that things began to go wrong in the
spring of 1983, the year of the "big moose bust."

Miles was in his cabin 50 miles from the town of Nenana when a helicopter landed
and three game wardens from the Alaska Department of Fish and Wildlife
Protection jumped out. "It costs them lots of money to operate the chopper," he
recalled, "and when they come looking for you, you can bet they're not going to
go home empty-handed."

They confiscated one gun and his diary, in which an entry for October 1982 read,
"Got a moose." They sniffed around outside and found some old moose bones, which
they claimed as evidence.

Miles had in fact shot a moose out of season, and someone must have snitched on
him for the reward, which could be as much as $1,000. As a "subsistence person,"
living on the land by trapping, hunting and fishing, he was entitled by law to
kill a winter moose, but only in a "subsistence management area," that is,
Government land, about 100 river miles away, with no trail, which was not
feasible.

Nor could he kill a moose during the legal season, 20 days in September, since
the meat would spoil before winter. The rules seemed to be designed for affluent
hunters with freezers, not for subsistence people who had to wait for winter. A
single moose provided a thousand pounds of meat. Miles needed only one to see
him through the winter, but he had to kill it late enough so that nature would
freeze it.

The wardens gave Miles a citation to appear in court in Fairbanks in 30 days,
which they knew he could not do as the river was breaking up and he could not
travel by boat and there was no road from his cabin. They told him that if he
did not appear they would ask the judge for an arrest warrant. If he was found
guilty, the fine would be $1,000, and he might lose his hunting and fishing
privileges.

Fish and Wildlife was making this a test case. The agency's attitude was:
"There's no such thing as subsistence, and we're going to prove it." The point
was that people hunted and fished indiscriminately while claiming subsistence.

Miles felt like a misfit, as if he were living in the wrong century. He had come
to Alaska to live an authentic frontier life, to be free of authority and rules,
self-regulating and autonomous. All true frontiersmen, he believed, were
antisocial types of some sort. "What they have in common is a desire to do for
themselves and be left alone," he said. "They don't want either protection or
interference from the Government. 'I can take care of myself' is the watchword."

But Alaska, while "the last frontier" to tourists, was crippling the very life
style it promoted in brochures by harassing the subsistence people. Then Miles
had to contend with the animal rights groups, who didn't want him to trap for
fur, or kill the wolves that destroyed the caribou he also counted on for food,
or use dog teams to inspect his traplines. He was one of some 10,000 licensed
trappers (including Indians and Eskimos) in Alaska, but he was considered a
villain because he used steel traps, which conjured up images of cruelty --
animals with bloody paws struggling to free themselves from the metal teeth.

Miles Martin is not a bushrat from central casting. More Wally Cox than John
Wayne, he is short and mild mannered, with expressive brown eyes and thinning
brown hair. In his 22 years in the wilderness, he's lost some of his teeth to
scurvy. He doesn't smoke or drink and rarely cusses. His idea of a date is to
take a local woman for a ride on his snowmobile and follow moose tracks through
the snow.

Born in 1952, he moved as a boy from Cleveland to East Lansing, Mich., when his
father became a professor at Michigan State. Rebelling against parental
authority, Miles enlisted in the Navy at the age of 18 instead of going to
college and spent four years aboard an aircraft carrier in the North Atlantic.

When he got out of the Navy in 1972, Alaska beckoned. After being cooped up with
thousands of men below decks, he wanted space and isolation. He had been reading
Thoreau, who said that a forced self-reliance and a life free from encumbrance
could be found on the frontier.

Miles flew into Fairbanks in the spring of 1972, walked into the office of Al
Wright, a bush pilot, and said, "Fly me into the bush -- I don't care where."

"When do you want to be picked up?" Wright asked.

"I don't," Miles said.

It turned out that with the cost of supplies and the air charter, he was $300
short, so he made a deal to work at Al's fishing camp on the Yukon River for the
rest of the year. The job involved catching salmon, cutting it into strips and
smoking it, and he could keep half the fish he smoked.

Miles was a happy man. He had turned his back on civilization, and he was alone
at the camp, dipping salmon strips into a mixture of brown sugar and brine and
then hanging them over smoke. The river Indians called it squaw candy. Miles
remembered all the people who had told him he'd never make it in the bush, and
he wanted to prove them wrong, so when his job at the fishing camp was over, he
decided to stay on the Yukon on his own.

The winter of 1973 found him in his cabin, trapping. He had a boat, where he
stored his supplies. But one day he went down to the landing and discovered that
Indians had stolen everything. "They took my beans and rice, my smoked fish, my
lantern and kerosene, and my axe," he recalled. "You don't take someone's axe --
that's like committing murder."

Miles was 300 miles from Fairbanks at the start of winter with no supplies, but,
overconfident, he stayed on. He had some flour, rice and sugar and a jar of
peanut butter, and he figured he'd eat the meat from his traps. But in spite of
rationing, his food ran out, and the game became scarce. Miles realized it was
get out or die.

He knew he was 30 miles from the pipeline haul road. He could hear the
dynamiting. In what he thought was March or April 1974, he started out on
snowshoes with the last of his supplies, covering 10 miles the first day. But
the second day it was 50 below, and he made only three miles through the heavy
snowdrifts. His Army duck-feather sleeping bag got wet, and that night when he
fell asleep, he rolled into the fire and burned holes the size of footballs in
it. The mistakes were piling up.

On the third day, breaking trail in deep snow, he said to himself, "There's only
so much a person can endure." His toes and fingertips were freezing, and his
strength was failing. He got to the point where he would take 10 steps, then
rest for half an hour and eat a little taffy he'd made from mashed berries and
sugar. Then he'd be good for 10 more steps.

As the sun was setting and he stopped to make camp, he saw that a pack of wolves
had gathered across the river, sitting and watching. He wasn't afraid because he
knew they'd wait until he was dead. He considered playing dead and killing the
first wolf that approached him with his knife. But then he thought, "I might not
be pretending."

On the fourth day he advanced one mile, so he decided that the best thing to do
was to stay in one place and try to get rescued. When dawn broke on the fifth
day he stomped out a big triangle in the snow, placing a piece of dark blanket
at each of the three corners, walking back and forth to beat out the triangle,
300 feet to a side.

The next day, Miles sat inside the triangle and ate the last of his food, a
teaspoon of peanut butter. He didn't think he was going to make it. At sunset he
saw the trail of a Wien Air Alaska jet going from Fairbanks to Prudhoe Bay. He
jumped up and waved, even though he feared the jet was too high for anyone
inside to see him. But a passenger who was looking at the river spotted his
triangle and alerted the stewardess, who told the pilot.

When Miles saw the jet turn around and fly over the treetops, as if in slow
motion, with its windows lit up and the passengers' faces framed against the
glass, he knew the pilot had seen him. An hour later, he saw a light on the
river, which came from a helicopter spotlight, and soon he heard the rotor and
felt snow blowing all around him as the chopper landed with its blade
windmilling. Men wearing headsets pulled him in, and the first words he heard
were, "My God, you smell like a forest fire."

BY 1975, AFTER WORKING AT EIELSON AIR FORCE Base, 25 miles east of Fairbanks,
for a year, Miles had saved enough money to build a houseboat, which he took up
the Tanana and the Kantishna in the spring of 1976 to a remote area around Lake
Minchumina.

Miles wanted to trap. As a boy, he'd caught rats for neighbors at 50 cents a
rat. But even in the wilderness, there was always someone there ahead of you.
The five trappers on Lake Minchumina had laid claim to 200 square miles, and
they didn't want him around. If he started trapping, he would have to go to war.
The first time, they'll pull a gun and say, "Don't come around here again." The
second time, . . . well, the second time will be the last time.

Then he met an old-timer who told him about a trapline he'd stopped using, 100
miles down the Kantishna, on Hansen Lake. The old-timer also had a cabin there,
long deserted, where Miles found a note on the table under a coffee cup that
read: "Stopped by to see you. Sorry I missed you. June 1952." That was the year
of his birth.

Miles squatted for three years on Hansen Lake, but felt the squatter's age-old
insecurity. He didn't dare put in a garden or make improvements because the land
wasn't his, and the state could take it away. When homesteads opened up 100
miles downstream under a lottery system, he applied and was one of 80 winners.

Now, Miles had a houseboat and five acres, and built a cabin to prove up his
claim. The first winter, he went out on snowshoes and set his traps haphazardly.
He had open-jaw traps for foxes and wolves, selling their fur for parkas, and
pole traps for marten, his bread and butter, whose dark, lustrous fur sold for
$50 a pelt. But on foot he could cover no more than 20 miles a day.

In 1978, he decided to buy dogs, which changed his style of trapping, for dogs
needed designated trails, and those trails had to be cut. Over the years, he
extended his traplines to 200 miles, registering them and becoming a
professional trapper. When he had built the houseboat, he had wanted to remain
nomadic, but now he had a commitment to the land.

When Miles bought his first six-dog team, he knew nothing about dogs and
acquired a collection of every undesirable type -- the "giveaway" (worthless),
the "shooter" (only worth shooting), the "biter" (which starts fights) and the
"chewer" (which chews its harness). His only good dog was 16-year-old Thunder,
past retirement age. Miles didn't know how to put the harnesses on and was too
embarrassed to ask. Thunder knocked the harness out of his hands to tell him he
was putting it on wrong.

The biggest troublemaker was Scorpion, a wolfhound that resented being the wheel
dog, next to the sled, which was the worst position. So Scorpion tried to prove
his leadership abilities by fighting with the lead dog, but Miles needed every
dog, he couldn't allow fights.

Then on a trip to Lake Minchumina, Scorpion sat down, and the other dogs
couldn't go without him. Miles unharnessed the team. It was a dangerous
situation, so Miles picked up a stick to whip him. Scorpion gave him a look that
said, "Without that stick you're nothing."

Miles put the stick down. The other dogs formed a circle around them. It was
like a fight for leadership in a wolf pack. Scorpion jumped for his throat.
Miles reached his arms out while the dog was in midair, and with the strength of
anger held him suspended, with his thumbs on the dog's windpipe, for a full five
minutes, until he saw that Scorpion was weakening. Then he threw him on the
ground and strangled him until he was dead. "No dog is going to go for my throat
and live," Miles shouted at the rest of the team.

It took him years to acquire dogs that didn't fight or chew, with good feet,
good lung capacity, long hair and long legs that could pull twice their weight
of 40 to 60 pounds. Always on the lookout for a good dog, Miles heard of a
female homesteader living alone who bred dogs and had one for sale. He went to
see her and said: "I want a male. I've got an all-male team."

"That's interesting," she said. "I've got an all-female team."

"Why don't you want males?"

"Oh, they're always stopping to pee against trees. I can't make them go."

"Well, I can deal with that," said Miles. "It's only a male being a male. It's
not that they need to pee -- it's territorial. They want to leave their mark.
Sometimes I stop and pee on the tree myself, and that satisfies them."

"Why don't you want females?" the breeder asked.

"If one does something wrong," Miles replied, "and I want to smack her, she
smiles and rolls over and looks cute. How can you hammer on a cute dog? Then she
jumps up and does the same thing all over again."

"Well," said the breeder, "it's just a female being a female. I can live with
that."

Dogs were a full-time job. You had to feed them, give them their shots and break
up fights. In the winter, it took Miles a week to run 10 miles of traplines. It
was 60 below, and the sun rose at 11:30 A.M. and set at 1:30 P.M. Miles didn't
mind it. He liked extremes -- all dark and all light. That's what got the blood
going. That was the way the world was meant to be.

In a good week, he'd collect 100 pelts. In a bad week, entire sections of his
traplines were lost under snowdrifts, he couldn't get to the traps and the
animals rotted. He was also having problems with other trappers horning in.

One young fellow came around who was catching mink for bikinis. "With one mink
you can make five bikinis," he said. Whenever Miles found an unknown trapper on
his trails, he'd ask him, "Are you lost?" If he saw him a second time, he'd set
a big-jawed trap for the poacher or stretch a wire across the trail to snare his
dog team. Those were warnings. As a last resort, he said, "Poachers just get
buried out here -- but that brings in the authorities."

Sometimes he got letters from people in the Lower 48 wanting homesteading
advice. One fellow from California asked, "Can you tell me what church I'd be
going to, and where the hospital is, and how much free land you can get?"

Miles replied: "If you want churches and hospitals, stay where you are. As for
free land, the land is not free, you pay for it with your blood."

By 1980 Miles Martin had lived in the Alaska back country for eight years and
had three homesteads on the Kantishna, in places where the landscape features
hadn't been named yet. The closest to a town was five miles from Nenana, where
he went periodically to pick up his mail and supplies.

Homesteading was no fun. It was backbreaking labor, with a workday that started
at 6 in the morning and ended at 9:30 at night. Just to feed his dogs through
the winter he had to catch 2,000 salmon, fishing for weeks before the freeze-up.
Sometimes he asked himself, "What am I trying to prove?" And then he'd see the
cotton grass by the pond and the light catching the birch trees and a bald eagle
sitting on a driftwood pile under a double rainbow.

But scenery wasn't enough. He liked having wilderness skills and seeing the
results of his efforts in his skinned and gutted kill, or a cord of wood he had
cut. He liked living off the land, catching salmon in the summer and hunting
moose and caribou in the winter. If he lived in the city he'd go nuts because he
couldn't stand the red tape: Do you have a license? Oh, that won't meet the fire
code.

In the back country, he was far from the pencil-pushers, or so he thought. For
in 1980, the Census Bureau made a determined effort to count the hundreds of
residents classified as "subsistence homesteaders," sending out census-takers in
pontoon planes, which could land on water, since most homesteaders lived on
rivers and lakes. They flew around at treetop level, landing wherever they saw a
cabin.

One day that spring, Miles looked out the window of his cabin on the Bearpaw,
about 120 miles from Nenana, and watched as a plane landed on the river. Two
census-takers, a man and a woman, paddled a rubber dinghy to shore and warily
approached. He went out to greet them, and the woman said: "You never know how
homesteaders will react. One of them took a shot at us."

Miles invited them in and showed them the wall of his cabin that is covered with
approximately 200 skulls of the animals he's killed, from a porcupine to a
grizzly.

"How do you get the skulls so clean and white?" the woman asked.

"I cut off the heads and bury them for six months," Miles said, "and the maggots
and worms do the rest."

The census-takers found Miles so talkative and friendly that they decided to
give him the long form, and started asking questions.

"Any running water?" one asked.

"Sure," Miles said.

"Where?"

"Right outside," Miles said.

"Any plumbing?" the other asked.

"Yes," Miles said.

"Where?"

"I dump the slop bucket on the ice and it flushes when the ice breaks."

One census-taker looked at the other and said, "I think we'd better give him the
short form."

It seemed to miles that after the census tagged him his problems began, and he
felt the hot breath of government down his neck. First came the "big moose
bust," and then Fish and Wildlife tried to pass a law prohibiting dogs from
being fed fresh salmon, which he felt was aimed at him personally. When that one
didn't get by, they decreed that only certain types of salmon could be caught;
the rest, called chum, had to be thrown back. If he did that, he'd have to
inspect his nets 10 times a day.

In 1985, Fish and Wildlife went after him, seizing his nets and charging him
with selling salmon roe. By then, Miles had five homesteads and moved from place
to place during the fishing season, painting his fish floats black so they
couldn't be seen from the air. "I felt like a peasant during the Vietnam War,"
he said. "Why mess with someone like me, who's barely making ends meet? We have
no clout, no money, no influence, and they are trying to shut us down."

Some of his bushrat friends had given up, moved to Fairbanks and gone on
welfare. "Can you imagine that?" Miles asked. "A homesteader on welfare. It's a
contradiction in terms."

In the summer of 1992, he celebrated the 20th anniversary of his years in the
wilderness. He was still hanging on, though still being harassed by Fish and
Wildlife, to the point that, against all his finer feelings, he had hired a
lawyer in Nenana, Marc Grober, to whom he paid a visit that August. (Another
reason Miles needed a lawyer was that in 1992 he was one of several suspects in
the murder of a local troublemaker, who had been shot and found floating face
down in the river. Miles was never charged, and no one has been arrested in this
example of frontier justice.)

Grober, a bush-haired, potbellied, slightly hyper refugee from New York, agreed
with Miles that the laws had become too intrusive. "They're turning homesteaders
into criminals," he said. "If you scratch your can while you're cutting strips,
you're breaking the law. They tell you the mesh size of your net. They tell you
that your sink and your cutting table must be made of stainless steel -- I don't
know a single subsistence fisherman who obeys those laws." Grober advised Miles
to put a float line across the river with no net attached -- to make the wardens
spend money on pointless searches and thereby discourage further inspections.

Wanting to clarify his position on the Kantishna, Miles made an appointment in
Fairbanks with Keith Schultz, an official from the state Department of Fish and
Game in charge of commercial fishing in the interior.

"No more gill nets on the river," said Schultz, an amiable, light-haired
outdoorsman of the "I'm just doing my job" variety. "Gill nets are banned on the
entire Kantishna." (A gill net is like a volleyball net, with a lead line to
hold it down and a float line to hold it up -- the fish are caught in large
numbers because they can't get through the mesh.)

"Yeah," Miles said, "but Fish and Game themselves use gill nets to catch and
release fish."

"They used to, but. . . ."

"If I'm forced to use a fish wheel, and I don't have a spot where the wheel can
go. . . ."

"You can go on the Tanana and fish."

"That's 80 miles Continued on page 51
away. That's like asking you to commute to work 80 miles every day. It costs me
$25 an hour to run my boat."

"Build a fish wheel."

"I'll need $200 to build a wheel, when I'm already set up to fish with nets."

"There aren't that many fish anyway."

"There used to be so many fish I could walk across the river over them," Miles
said. "That was only three years ago. I could take a gig in the dark and stick
it in the river and come up with a fish."

"Well, the board decided to stop fishing on the Kantishna to protect the chum,"
Schultz said.

"When's it coming up again?" Miles asked.

"In 1994. You can attend the meeting."

"Sure. The last meeting was in Bethel, 500 miles away. You think I'm going to
fly down there in the middle of the trapping season to talk to a board made up
of commercial fishermen about the problems of subsistence fishermen?"

"It won't be in Bethel."

"Their real interest is to protect fishing on the lower river, and shut down
fishing in the interior. If that's your goal say so."

"Every five years the fish return," Schultz said.

"I can't feed my dogs every five years."

Miles was getting testy, and both men felt there was nothing more to be said. He
walked out of Schultz's office shaking his head and asking himself, "How can I
live the way I do and stay legal?"

Just as people unused to wilderness had to adjust to the claustrophobic feeling
that comes with winter darkness, whenever Miles came to Fairbanks he had to
adjust to urban life with its commercialization of the frontier. In Fairbanks,
there was a Sourdough Fuel, a Goldstream Cinema and radio station K-WLF. On the
tube, a bearded prospector looked up from his panning and said, "Alaska has
always appealed to independents, and Frontier Credit wants to preserve that
spirit."

The frontier spirit had become a marketable commodity while the Government was
threatening the die-hards still trying to live the frontier life. Having been a
homesteader for 20 years, Miles had the old-timer's gripe that newcomers were
coming in and spoiling things. Miles now saw homesteaders who swapped wives and
injected heroin. When they needed money, they turned in a neighbor for shooting
moose out of season, even though they did it too. All too often Miles heard,
"I'll give it a couple of years and see how it works out."

In need of a new rifle, he stopped by Caribou Loans, the pawnshop where he buys
his guns. He was chatting with the bearded manager and his rather massive wife
when a raffish fellow sauntered in wearing a porkpie hat and a red T-shirt that
said, "I've called in sick so often I'm going to have to call in dead."

The man went up to the counter and told the manager, "Times are gettin' tough
and I have to ransom my baby again," and he plunked a hunting rifle with a scope
down on the counter.

"How much do you need?" asked the beady-eyed wife.

"I need $2,000," the man said, "but last time you gave me $125."

"Will $125 do it for you?" the woman asked. "With the interest, you'll owe
$180."

"O.K.," the man said. "And I hope this time it don't take so long."

Miles wondered hopw much longer he could last, how many years of hard outdoor
work he had left in him. Maybe 10? At 42, his hair was turning gray, his teeth
were falling out, his eyes were going and he no longer felt the old excitement
about being out in the weather. What, he wondered, would give out next -- mind,
heart, liver?

Fish and Wildlife was squeezing him, but what else could he do? He had no
pension, no insurance, no health plan. To raise a little cash, he had been
making jewelry and carvings during the long winter months, using animal bones
and teeth, semiprecious stones, and gold, silver and copper, which he sold at
fairs and to gift stores in Fairbanks.

From this seemingly innocuous artistic sideline came the blow that almost sent
Miles over the edge. In November 1993, while he was at one of his homesteads,
frozen in for the winter and working on his trap lines, he heard that there was
a warrant out for his arrest in Raleigh, N.C.

A couple of years before, he had met a woman at a fair in Fairbanks who bought
some of his bear claws decorated with inlaid metal strips. She said she was
going to travel through the Lower 48 in her mobile home selling them, and wanted
to become known as "the claw lady."

Miles kept supplying her by mail, but one day the woman wrote him that she had
set up a table with his bear claws at a bazaar in Raleigh, and a Fish and
Wildlife agent made a buy and busted her for the illegal sale of bear parts. She
had to pay a $750 fine.

Soon after that, Miles received an inquiry from a gift company asking for "bear
parts." When he saw that the return address was Raleigh, he thought, "Damn,
that's where Joy's in trouble." He replied that he was phasing out bear parts,
which came from bears he killed in self-defense.

Then came an order from the court in Raleigh to pay a $750 fine or show up to
answer charges. By then he was in his winter quarters, and by the time he saw
the order the date to pay had long passed. The Raleigh court issued a warrant
for his arrest and asked for his extradition.

Miles was broke, and his lawyer told him, "You're going up against the Feds --
you could get taken to North Carolina in handcuffs." He was appointed a public
defender, Rich Curtner, who discovered that Miles was now charged with violating
a Federal law for "using the mail to transport an illegal substance." The
offense carried a maximum sentence of 10 years in jail and a $100,000 fine.

At a hearing in Fairbanks in December 1993, the judge ruled that North Carolina
would not have issued a warrant without "probable cause," in effect granting
extradition, and set Jan. 28 as the day Miles had to appear in court in Raleigh.
The court supplied him with a one-way ticket.

While the public defender tried to make a deal, Miles went back to his cabin,
convinced that his case was being used to crack down on subsistence people. He
was getting a little paranoid. He felt like "the mad trapper of Rat River
waiting for the SWAT team." No way was he going to North Carolina -- he'd shoot
it out first, or kill himself.

On Jan. 21, a week from the due date, the deal came down, approved by the
Fairbanks judge and the Raleigh court: a $500 fine, with six months to pay.
Miles had to pledge to never again sell bear claws.

Though relieved, he asked himself: "So this is law and order, dragging me in and
out of court? All I want is to be an old-time trapper, with a log cabin and a
canoe, 100 miles from the nearest road and my old snowshoes hanging on the wall,
getting my mail once a month, but they won't let me. What am I supposed to do,
join organizations, go to meetings, write proposals, get a phone and a fax
machine?"

First came the frontiersman, he thought, first on the land, breaking the way.
Then came the settlers, with their wives and children. Last came the Government,
the big, slow-moving beast. But once it's in motion, watch out, the big head
slowly lifts its eyes and blinks, and the frontiersman goes, "Oh, damn," while
the settler goes, "Well, maybe."

Finally, the land was organized and the cities were built and antagonism built
up toward the original frontiersman -- who dresses funny, smells funny, acts
funny. There was no more pride in what the frontiersman had done. Now he was a
nuisance, and soon he'd be a memory. My, but those times must have been
something, huh?

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Miles has seen the frontier spirit become a marketable
commodity, but 50 miles from Nenana, where he has a cabin, above, the
backcountry is still so untrafficked that many landscape features, like a lake
where Miles ice fishes, above right, remain unnamed. (pg. 44-45); Some
homesteader friends have given up, moved to Fairbanks and gone on welfare. "Can
you imagine that?" Miles asked. "A homesteader on welfare. It's a contradiction
in terms." (pg. 46-47)(PHOTOGRAPH BY REX RYSTEDT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Connecticut Q&A: Maya Lin;
Human Proportions on a Heroic Scale

BYLINE: By MIMI G. SOMMER

SECTION: Section 14CN;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words


MAYA LIN, the architect and sculptor, has deep roots in Connecticut's soil. It
was as an undergraduate at Yale that she submitted the winning design for the
Vietnam Veterans War Memorial in Washington, D.C. (She graduated in 1981, and
earned a master's degree there in architecture in 1986.)

Ms. Lin's public works deal with profound human issues. In 1989, she focused on
racial inequality in her Civil Rights Memorial sculpture at the Southern Law
Poverty Center in Montgomery, Ala. A black granite water wall and circular table
are carved with events and names crucial to the civil rights struggle.

On Oct. 1, 1993, Ms. Lin's Women's Table, a fountain sculpture commemorating 22
years of undergraduate coeducation at Yale, was dedicated on Rose Walk at the
heart of the campus. Spirals of numbers on the massive, green granite piece
trace the history of women's emergence at the university.

Ms. Lin's art represents monumental thinking on a human scale. She recently
completed Groundswell, a garden landscape sculpture made of 43 tons of recycled
glass for the Wexner Center for the Arts in Columbus, Ohio, her home state. She
is developing two other environmentally focused works, one for the University of
Michigan Aerospace Center, the other for a new Federal courthouse in Manhattan.

Ms. Lin discussed her work recently at her studio in the Chinatown section of
Manhattan.


Q. When did you first see yourself as an artist?

A. My father was a ceramicist. My mother is a poet and a writer. All my
childhood, I made artwork. When I got into college, I found that science was a
bit more pre-med than anything else. My biology professor said, "If you don't
believe in vivisection, you're going to have a hard time." All of a sudden I
found myself heading toward art, which is my main love.


Q. Was college the trigger for your calling?

A. There was no trigger. I think I just discovered in college that I really
loved art and science. Architecture was a combination, tied into mathematics,
structural engineering and art. In graduate school, I realized my definition of
architecture is not most people's. My approach is much more a sculptor's
approach. I found myself defining myself more as an artist.


Q. Is your major focus on public art?

A. I've been creating a body of small private sculptures. The public works are a
hybrid, because they have functions like architecture. You have to solve certain
problems. Intuition comes out of the sculptural base.


Q. Do you consider your public sculptures innovative and influenced by your
Chinese heritage?

A. I think one thing that stands apart in my work is there's something
antimonumental about it. It's not a matter of innovative. I think you're dealing
with things that are very atypical. They're very intimate.

No matter how you see my works, the end scale is a very personal, immediate,
human scale. Everything's to be understood by touch, by reading. Information is
perceived strictly one on one. Now, you could say that's partly an Eastern
upbringing, inwardly seeking answers and questions. You focus on the individual
versus the group. The other thing, perhaps it's more feminine.


Q. Some male undergraduates and female graduate students feel excluded by the
Women's Table. Is that valid?

A. They are so far off the mark. Yale has only been officially coed undergrad
since 1969. The point was the 20th anniversary of that date. But the majority of
women on that table are from all the graduate schools.  Women at Yale have a
long history.

Answering men's exclusion: the reason that piece is there is because, for 300
years practically, there have been images of men, names of men, statues of men
all over that campus. I had to go through seven years at Yale where there's
little dedicated to any woman, period. What does that do to us? That piece is
specifically there for us. The interaction is for anyone -- men, women,
children.


Q. Would you say the table's stream of numbers addresses all women?

A. Yes, because essentially you've got a spiral which shows women's emergence.
They happened to be at Yale, but you'll probably find it accurate for most
schools. My work speaks to women emerging in society, becoming a presence in the
work force, in the schools, to vote. I discovered while researching the subject
that horrible phrase "the silent listeners," meaning women could only audit.


Q. Is that why you chose spiraling numbers versus names for the Women's Table?

A. There's no reason for names in this piece. You use names, say in the Civil
Rights Memorial, to educate people about that time. I had to leave information
about how the person died. You're teaching people that someone was murdered for
using a whites-only bathroom. The text communicates.

The Women's Table doesn't need names. I read a lot of Yale women's history to
come up with that, and I called Edward Tufte, because I saw in his book,
"Envisioning Information," a spiral of chemical elements. I asked him for help,
because I wanted to be inclusive of graduate and undergraduates.


Q. Why did you uses granite instead of marble?

A. It's a lot harder. It's also crystalline, something I like working with.
It's green when it's wet. I likened it to a table of moss.


Q. Is your work naturebound?

A. I'm working on a piece that will be stone with mosses and lichen. In the
outdoor works, I always hope my work will be extremely sensitive to the
environment, working with it, versus trying to conquer nature or command it.


Q. Did Yale's architecture influence you?

A. I did a long study as a student about the old campus architecture.  Osborne
Hall -- an odd Romanesque building with pillars and a very open arcade that
fronted New Haven's Green and was outward and open to the city -- was torn down.
Bingham Hall, with a closed tower, replaced it. I was very interested in what
that means psychologically, when buildings begin to be introverted rather than
extroverted.


Q. Does the Women's Table site on a pedestrian street reflect openness?

A. I think pedestrian streets are positive, and people will come through.
Getting into a car is actually very alienating, not very human. I think of the
Women's Table site as creating a heart to Yale which it never had. You always
had this feeling the automobile was going to run you over. For once you have a
place to sit and relax.


Q. Did Woolsey Concert Hall at Yale influence you?

A. Woolsey Hall is completely influential in the Vietnam Memorial. My freshman
and sophomore years, they were carving in the names of the Yale alumni killed in
Vietnam. You couldn't walk through the hall without touching the names.


Q. Your art incorporates profound human issues. Would you elaborate?

A. In the Vietnam and Civil Rights Memorials, and even with the Women's Table,
I've addressed issues I do care about, being very honest, accepting individual
death or loss, which people don't like to examine.

Q. Do you believe the environmental focus will improve the urban psyche?

A. I can only hope. My main world was zoology, biology, the study of animals,
the recognition, even as a child, that the species, man, is wreaking
unbelievable damage upon the planet. Hopefully, there's time to change.


Q. What is your favorite working environment?

A. By myself, in a place that I know, usually late at night when no one else is
around.


Q. How do you realize such huge projects from a small studio, with a small
staff?

A. I see myself as an artist. I choose to stay one-on-one with my projects. I
don't delegate design, and because I work so small, I'll always need
architectural or landscape firms to get my projects realized.


Q. Have there been hurdles?

A. My parents brought me up with a very liberal education. I never realized I
would be discriminated against. I did come across certain amounts of
discrimination both for my race and my sex after college, and when I was in D.C.
some resented an Asian designing the memorial. It was depressing, disappointing.


Q. How do you see art's function in today's world?

A. Absolutely varied. What is really interesting, as we move into the 21st
century, with communications as they are, is the potential for cultural mixing,
for sharing esthetics, visions. If you can believe it, an architectural
education didn't include anything but Western architecture. That will change.

It's not that everything should be homogeneous. We should be aware how other
countries evolved. There's a danger in the world becoming one suburban sprawl.
The car, I think, has shaped our cities; they have no character.

Cities are living organisms. Their problems will be solved by teamwork with
architects, economists, developers, transportation experts, politicians. When
there's congestion, the answer may not be build another thoroughfare. It might
to readdress the city, so people don't have to drive.  We can begin to walk
again.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Architect and sculptor Maya Lin, left, with her assistant Kathy
Chia, at work in Manhattan. (Frances Roberts for The New York Times)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 19, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: The Bluff That Failed;
Serbs Around Gorazde Are Undeterred By NATO's Policy of Limited Air Strikes

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


In conducting limited air strikes last week to defend the Muslim enclave of
Gorazde, Western military commanders played the game the way the Serbs had hoped
they would -- and lost.

NATO carried out the first two air strikes in its 45-year history, but Britain
lost a jet in a third attempt, two of six American bombs dropped were duds, and
the moment of decision turned into one of humiliation. As Gorazde's defenses
crumbled, it was clear that the raids were little more than a symbolic shot
across the bow.

These were the restrictions: Western bombing strikes could be made only on the
specific tanks blasting Gorazde or on the nearby command post directing fire. No
action that would seriously aggravate Moscow. Nothing that would risk a wider
war in the Balkans. No attempt to roll back Serbian gains on Bosnian Muslim
territory.

With such powerful political constraints, the policy could work only if the
Serbs caved in after the first bombing runs. But the Serbs called the bluff and
sent their tanks into Gorazde, and the West held its fire. The result was a
humbling moment for NATO as it stood by and watched Serbian tanks roll into an
area that the United Nations had declared a "safe area."

By today, chagrined Administration officials were debating the United Nations'
restrained approach and plan to recommend to Mr. Clinton Tuesday that he press
for a broader use of air power. But it was unclear if the West was prepared to
follow through.

The NATO air strikes signaled "more hesitancy than determination," said Frank C.
Carlucci, who was Defense Secretary in the Reagan Administration. "It was too
little, too late. You do not want to wait until the tanks are inside the city
and then say you cannot use air power because the tanks are inside the city."

The West's difficulties go back much further than the current fighting in
Gorazde.

The Security Council took on the responsibility of safeguarding Gorazde and six
other areas last May when it passed a resolution promising to protect the
predominantly Muslim safe areas.

But because it had only a limited number of troops and because the United
Nations-imposed arms embargo had locked in the Serbian advantage in heavy
weapons, it was clear that the United Nations needed NATO air power to defend
the enclaves.

When the Serbs stepped up their attacks on Gorazde, a predominantly Muslim town
swollen with refugees, air power was not the main means to protect the enclave:
it was the only means. While the United Nations had a handful of observers in
the town, it had not stationed peacekeeping forces there.

How Much Air Power?

The question was how much air power to use. In principle, there was a wide array
of options. Air strikes could have been conducted against Bosnian Serb command
posts, logistical and communications sites, ammunition dumps, heavy weapons
throughout Bosnia and troops.

With more than 100 aircraft in Italy and on British, French and American
aircraft carriers in the Adriatic Sea, the NATO alliance had the firepower for a
sustained air campaign.

But the United Nations commanders in Bosnia, not NATO officials, were calling
the shots. Their authority allowed them to order only limited air strikes --
what they call close air support -- to remove the threat to United Nations
personnel in Gorazde. Even if they wanted to, they did not have the authority to
unleash the decisive and wide-ranging use of force called for in post-Vietnam
United States military doctrine.

Even by the limited standards of "close air support," the strikes requested by
the United Nations were extremely modest. In opting for pinprick strikes, United
Nations commanders operated on the assumption that the Serbs would be impressed
by symbolic demonstrations of power. United Nations officials also wanted to
entice the Serbs into rejoining the negotiations and assumed that the Serbs
would refrain from their customary practice of talking and fighting for
territory at the same time.

Neither the United Nations nor NATO nations had laid the political groundwork
for a broader use of air power in case the Serbs called their bluff.

But Ratko Mladic, the Serbian commander, was making a different set of
calculations. By riding out a few air strikes and pressing their attacks, the
Serbs could shrink the Muslim enclave into a defenseless patch of territory that
would survive at the sufferance of the Serbs.

The results were evident. The world's mightiest military alliance, in its first
air attacks, had played by Marquess of Queensbury rules and had come up short.

In the two air strikes and the third attempted raid over seven days, NATO planes
dropped a total of six bombs, two of which failed to explode. The low point came
on Saturday, when NATO lost a British Sea Harrier plane in a failed effort to
bomb a Serbian tank firing on the town. A French reconnaissance plane was also
damaged by Serbian fire. Two British United Nations observers were wounded, and
one died.

"There has been no plan, just an ad hoc response," Michael Dugan, a retired
general and former Air Force Chief of Staff. "No military power applied in this
kind of fashion is going to have much of a political impact. There are few
examples in history where raids have had a significant impact, and these two or
three attacks do not qualify as a good raid."

For more than two years, the West has wrestled with the question of how to
change the Serbs' behavior, following diplomatic pleas with military threats.
Now, more than ever, the credibility of NATO and the United Nations is on the
line.

Just last week, Manfred Worner, NATO's Secretary General, warned in an interview
with Reuters that "NATO would react very forcefully" if the Serbs retaliated.

Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, was equally blunt. Asked how
NATO would respond if the Serbs fired on the alliance's planes, Mr. McCurry
warned ominously, "Let them try."

By staging last week's modest air strikes, NATO has put itself in an awkward
position. To protect the Muslim enclaves, it must persuade the Serbs that they
face serious harm from NATO airplanes unless they comply with United Nations
demands.

"We crossed the bridge, and we started to use force," Lawrence S. Eagleburger,
the former Secretary of State, told CBS News on Sunday. "The fact of the matter
still is that when we use force, it ought to be in sufficient quantity that
there is no doubt whatsoever that we're serious."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An estimated 2,000 Sarajevans rallied yesterday in support of
those trapped in Gorazde, which is being pounded by Serbs. The flags are of
Turkey, left, and Saudi Arabia, the Bosnian Government's main backers.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Military Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AIDS Mothers' Undying Hope

BYLINE: By GEORGIA DULLEA

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1403 words


DOWNSTAIRS, the mothers of adult children with AIDS talked of doctors, drug
trials and T-cell counts. Upstairs, the mothers whose children had died of the
disease talked of cremations, burials and patches on a memorial quilt. When they
were not talking, they were weeping, upstairs and downstairs, on those Tuesday
nights in the small brick building in Greenwich Village.

The saddest nights were the ones just after a death. Leaving the downstairs
group, the grieving mother would climb a steep, narrow flight of stairs with a
dim light at the top, to join the others.

"The stairs symbolized what they were experiencing, the separation of the living
and the dead," said Barbara Fried, a social worker who became a leader for the
upstairs group after losing a son to AIDS.

For Eileen Mitzman, "walking upstairs for the first time felt like going to the
showers at Auschwitz," she said. For Rhea Parham, knowing there were friends "up
there" who had been through the same pain and survived, made the journey easier.
For Blanche Mednick, who still believed in the myth of the magical mother, as
the social workers call it, there was anger on every step.

"The magical mother is the healer who can cure every illness," Ms. Mednick said
at a recent gathering of upstairs mothers. "When Brian died -- and this is so
peculiar -- I was angry with the mothers downstairs. I knew one magical mother
could not cure him, but somewhere in the back of my mind was the thought that 10
magical mothers would help me save my child."

Since 1986, when the mothers began meeting, almost 300 of them have passed
through these support groups, which are sponsored by the People With AIDS
Coalition of New York. On the second anniversary of the original group, Florence
Rush wrote about it in the coalition's newsletter:

"We are the mothers of adult people with AIDS. We range in age from 40 to over
80. We are working-class, white-collar, business and professional women. We are
widowed, divorced and married. We are black, white, Hispanic, Catholic, Jewish
and Protestant. Our sons and daughters, gay and straight, have AIDS, and that is
all that matters."

While the mothers are no less diverse today, they are growing more and more
political as the AIDS crisis deepens. Some mothers have lost more then one child
to the disease. And some, like Ms. Rush, have found themselves nursing a gay
son's lover, along with a son.

"His own parents abandoned him," she said. "They said, 'You made your bed; now
go lie in it.' "

At times, these mothers bring to mind the Argentine women who held up pictures
of their lost children, "the disappeared ones," outside the presidential offices
in Buenos Aires after the so-called Dirty War of the 1970's.

Traveling in small groups, with framed photos of their children, living and
dead, the AIDS mothers have been lobbying in Albany and Washington for the last
two years. Ms. Mitzman's technique is to set a picture of her daughter, Marni,
who was 26 when she died in 1991, on legislators' desks, near their family
photos.

"That's the only way to get to them," she said. "For 12 years, they couldn't
identify with anyone with AIDS. It wasn't their disease, so they did nothing.
Now, we show them pictures of children who look like their children, and they
gulp."

At the moment, the women are caught up in a Mother's Day card campaign organized
by a national group, Mothers' Voices, that many of them belong to. Last year,
drawing on a network of religious and educational groups around the country, the
campaign collected 500,000 signatures on special greeting cards for members of
Congress.

This year, the goal is one million signatures, and the plan is to truck the
signed cards from the New York offices of Mothers' Voices to Washington, where
they will be delivered by teams of mothers. The message: "Mother's Day can never
be the same until there is a cure for AIDS."

"Activism provides an outlet for some of the anxiety and loss of control they
feel," said Susan Katz, a social worker and the leader for the downstairs
mothers. "It allows them to do something constructive about a process that is
deconstructing."

The mothers who become advocates are not necessarily the ones who call
themselves feminists or the ones who took to the streets during the war in
Vietnam. "Some of them are ladies who lunch," Ms. Katz said.

But first they march. Carrying a 15-foot banner with "Mothers' Voices" in blue,
the mothers joined several other groups outside City Hall one morning last month
in a demonstration against a proposal to eliminate or drastically cut the city's
Division of AIDS Services.

"They say cut back!" chanted the young marshals from Act Up.

"We say fight back!" chanted the middle-aged mothers.

The mothers have been going to Act Up meetings for the last year or so, where
"they get a wild and popular reception," said Tom Beer of Act Up, the AIDS
protest group. Now the mothers call themselves "Act Up in sheep's clothing," and
one of them wears an Act Up T-shirt to the office, under her cashmere sweater.

A week after the City Hall protest, the mothers were out again. Carrying small
white candles, they marched across the Brooklyn Bridge in a larger protest
against cuts in AIDS services. The march resulted in the arrests of 47
demonstrators, including two upstairs mothers.

That night the mothers' telephone chain rang with the news: "Connie and Barbara
were booked and released. They got to keep the plastic handcuffs."

The women no longer meet in the brick building in Greenwich Village. The People
With AIDS Coalition moved to Chelsea last month, and the downstairs mothers
followed. The upstairs mothers are meeting at Ms. Rush's apartment.

There are no more physical stairs to climb, just psychological ones every bit as
steep. This may be why the women still speak of themselves as upstairs or
downstairs mothers. And why -- though they march and lobby and work together on
the coalition's help line for mothers -- when the time comes to talk about the
children, the two groups must be apart.

"The women downstairs, whose children are alive, must live with hope, and the
women upstairs no longer have that hope," Ms. Parham said. "What the women
downstairs cannot hear is that that hope is gone."

One thing that separates the AIDS mothers from others whose children have
life-threatening diseases is the way the virus is transmitted. "We still haven't
dealt with our own sexuality, with homosexuality and with drug addiction," Ms.
Mednick said. "That's the thing that keeps some mothers from taking to the
streets or even telling relatives their child has AIDS. They are ashamed."

Even on the mothers' panel of the memorial quilt, the shame is stitched, said
Deane Dixon, an upstairs mother who keeps the groups' history. It is a splendid
quilt, of a satiny fabric in midnight blue, scattered with 111 stars of silver,
pink and gold lame, one for each child. The full names of all the children
appear on the quilt, except for six who are identified only by first names or
initials.

When the mothers first began meeting eight years ago, it was thought to be the
only group of its kind in New York City. Today there are several mothers'
groups, as well as groups for parents and other family members. In each of these
groups, there are lessons to be learned.

"In caring for another mother's child while yours is still functioning, going to
the hospital and seeing the last stages of the illness, you are learning the
ropes, getting a video," Ms. Katz said.

The group is where the stories of AIDS begin. "After a child dies, the stories
are told and retold. Memories are created, and the bonds continue, and the story
doesn't end."

The group is where each birthday of a child, each holiday, is celebrated as
though it might be the last one.

About this time last year, a downstairs mother and son got "his and hers"
tattoos. She had a red rose inscribed on her left calf, along with his name. He
had a black panther on the same leg with her name.

"It was my Mother's Day present from him," said the 42-year-old woman, who works
for a dentist. "I never thought I would have a tattoo, but this sickness makes
you do a crazy things."

Her son has not told his friends that he has AIDS. "He says every time I look at
my feet I will remember him," she said. "If he wanted me to put a red rose on my
forehead, I would do it."


LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: For mothers of adult children with AIDS, help comes from
banding together: from left, Rhea Parham, Dr. Patti Britton, Blanche Mednick and
Eileen Mitzman. (pg. C1); Planning strategy for the Mother's Day card campaign,
clockwise from left: Blanche Mednick, Dr. Patti Britton, Eileen Mitzman, Carol
Gertz and Rhea Parham. (Catrina Genovese for The New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Real Pain

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN;   Bob Herbert is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


It was not surprising, watching "60 Minutes" Sunday night, to learn that Andy
Rooney had never heard of Kurt Cobain or the band Nirvana. It was not surprising
that Mr. Rooney, who has made a career as a camera-friendly curmudgeon, took
issue with ripped jeans and was perplexed by grunge.

And it was not even surprising that, speaking of Mr. Cobain's suicide at the age
of 27, Mr. Rooney brought to the issue of youthful despair a mixture of sarcasm
and contempt. After all, that has long been the attitude their elders have
brought to the pain of those far younger than they: in Mr. Rooney's words, "What
would all these young people be doing if they had real problems like a
Depression, World War II or Vietnam?"

No, not surprising, but worth noting because in 1994 that sort of attitude is as
dated and foolish as believing that cancer is contagious.

Suicide remains the great mystery.  Often we can never know precisely why: why
for Vincent Foster one day became more unendurable than the ones before, why Mr.
Cobain balked at one last sunset. Some people kill themselves because they have
troubles they cannot surmount; others are already sick and don't want to get any
sicker. Many are old; some are young. Of those last, we are fond of saying that
they had their whole lives ahead of them.

"A lot of people would like to have the years left that he threw away," Mr.
Rooney said of Kurt Cobain. He went on to ridicule the young, many of whom found
enlightenment of a kind through Nirvana's music. "What's all this nonsense about
how terrible life is?" he asked, and he added, speaking rhetorically to a young
woman who had wept at the suicide, "I'd love to relieve the pain you're going
through by switching my age for yours."

I wouldn't. I wouldn't be 17 again on a bet. I've known a number of young women
of about that age who seemingly had everything to live for and yet who somehow
wanted to die. Or perhaps not to die so much as to rest.  You could lecture them
about their future and their good health and fine homes and nice schools, and
they would understand the rightness of the position but not, for the life of
them, feel it in their souls. They would tell you that they felt always as if
they carried a backpack full of bricks.  And some of them can figure out only
one way to put that pack down.

Why would I tax those young women with the foolishness of their feelings and
lord over them the lessons I've learned? Why would anyone facetiously advise
them and their counterparts, as Mr. Rooney did, to "wipe the tears from your
eyes, dear"?  What they feel is real, and no amount of caviling about youth
wasted on the young will change that, or save some of them from pills or razor
blades. I can't understand why this is the one kind of pain we want to deny or
denigrate, or why we would imagine that the young are immune from it any more
than they are immune from AIDS or pneumonia.

In Newsweek William Styron wrote of an evening with friends some years ago that
passed uneventfully for all but him; he remembers it vividly because between
pasta and conversation he obsessed about killing himself.  He writes of "a pain
that is all but indescribable, and therefore to everyone but the sufferer almost
meaningless." That pain was not ameliorated by his best-selling books or his
Pulitzer. Good fortune does not preclude inner darkness, whether the good
fortune of youth or of accomplishment.

Mr. Rooney said Mr. Cobain's suicide made him angry. It makes me angry, too, not
because I want his wasted years -- such things are not transferable -- but
because Mr. Cobain had a 2-year-old daughter who will grow up fatherless.
Suicide often seems selfish and senseless to the survivors. It often feels
inevitable and necessary to its practitioners. It's a waste, but not an
indulgence.

"Why?" people say afterward. Mr. Styron's dinner companions noticed nothing
amiss the night he remembers as black as a hole. He had hidden the pain well.
Young people who feel an inner agony, in Mr. Styron's words, as "exquisite as
any imaginable physical pain," often do not reveal themselves because they
suspect that some adult will scoff and say that what they feel is "nonsense,"
that they have no "real problems." Sunday evening, some adult did just that, and
on national television too.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Blunder Over Iraq: Hopes That Died

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1527 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO, April 20


Second Lieut. Laura Ashley Piper could have been a walking billboard for
military recruitment. Fluent in Russian and German, a champion rugby player, she
was a 25-year-old Air Force officer on the fast track who jumped at a challenge
the way children jump at ice cream.

Col. Jerald L. Thompson, 48, of the Army spoke 10 dialects of Arabic and had
received dozens of medals for battlefield heroics in a career dating from the
Vietnam War. But most of all, friends recalled his stoutness of heart, like the
compassion he showed to a young American soldier in the Persian Gulf war whose
gun accidentally discharged and killed a fellow soldier.

Warrant Officer Erik Mounsey, a 28-year-old Army pilot who liked to dress as
Santa for children at Christmas, had grown up in a suburb near Los Angeles
International Airport, where he would spend hours gazing at the jets roaring
overhead and dreaming about one day sitting in the cockpit. At his wedding, the
sole of his left shoe read, "Top," and the sole of the right shoe read, "Gun."

These three were among the 26 people, including 15 Americans, who died in one
horrifying accident over Iraq last Thursday morning, when two United States jet
fighters mistakenly fired on two helicopters carrying a United Nations relief
mission.

"People are always wondering, 'Where are our role models today?"' said Laura
Piper's mother, Joan, her voice quavering. "Well, here they are."

In the aftermath of that error, some families have expressed anger at the
military.

"I'm totally enraged," Cornelia Bass, whose son, Cornelius, 22, was among the
victims, told a television station here. "He served his country well, honorably,
loyally. It shouldn't have happened."

But others, including the Piper family, said it was worthless to try to point
fingers. "Laura would have been the first to blast the notion of blame," said
Ms. Piper's father, Dan, a retired Air Force colonel. "She knew what she was
doing. She knew the danger. She was there to protect the Kurds. And I think
she's a hero."

The victims came from nearly every avenue of American life: affluent and
working-class, urban, suburban and rural, top collegiate scholars and young
people with just a high school diploma. But they clearly shared a sense of
mission and obligation and an unabashed patriotism.

They were some of the military's top-notch talent, taking part in a United
Nations mission to create a safe haven for Kurds from aggression by the Iraqi
forces of Saddam Hussein. At the time of the accident, the helicopters, whose
crew members included five Kurds, were carrying the leadership of the Western
military field operation that had worked as liaison to the Iraqi Kurds since the
end of the Persian Gulf war. They were on their way to the northern Iraq town of
Salahuddin to meet with Kurdish leaders.

When Allen Hall learned that his son, Michael, a 28-year-old warrant officer 2d
class, had been among those killed, "I just put myself in my wife's arms for
about 15 minutes."

He said he has gone through waves of grief, then anger and, finally,
forgiveness.

"I really thought about the two pilots that shot him down," he said. "Can you
imagine what they are going through? I'm mad at the whole thing. Someday I'd
like to meet them. Not to get mad at them. Just to talk to them. I don't want
them to feel there's hard feelings. There's anger and ire and all that, but you
have to forgive. You can't carry grudges. Some people question that, how can you
forgive someone who killed your son. But Michael would have wanted me to
forgive."

The last time Mr. Hall heard from his son was six weeks ago. He was awakened in
the middle of the night by his son, who wanted to chat.

"I wasn't feeling good, so I cut him off," the father said. "I feel bad about
that now."

'I'm Totally Washed Out'

Some fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters and friends, virtually paralyzed
by crushing grief, have spent hours on living room couches, still as stone,
exhausted by weeping, barely able to speak. Others have pulled out every picture
they could find, every letter, every packed-away memento, cherishing the past,
damning the present.

"I am totally washed out, losing my Johnny, my only son, in a situation like
this," said John W. Garrett Sr., the father of one of the victims, Warrant
Officer 2d Class John W. Garrett Jr., 32, of the Army, who was married with an
8-year-old daughter. "But I fault no one. It could be nothing else but an
accident."

And in some cases, they groped for explanations for frightened little children
who had been promised that daddy would soon be back home.

"We've got a very great loss here," whispered Jack Orril, the stepfather of one
of the victims, Specialist Michael Robinson of the Army, who had a 3-year-old
son, Christopher. "It's a shame that this boy will not know his father."

Specialist Robinson, 23, grew up Godfrey, Ill., a factory town near St. Louis,
where his five brothers and sisters tried to cope with grief by writing a poem
as a tribute: "We are still very proud of you, for all that you did give, when
you chose to serve your country, making it a safer place to live."

One of the sisters, Candy Robinson Spencer, asked plaintively, "How could this
happen?"

Until that morning, the future had sparkled with promise for these people in
uniform. Some were anticipating soaring higher in rank; others were looking
forward to a returning to civilian life to build new careers and strengthen
family ties.

Colonel Thompson, the mission's American commander, was nearing the end of his
assignment in Iraq and would have soon rejoined his wife and two children in
Fort Bragg, N.C.

Specialist Bass of the Army, a 22-year-old from San Antonio, had hoped to attend
college after his stint in the military and become an artist.

Specialist Ricky Robinson of the Army, a 33-year-old medic from Rifle, Colo.,
who was married with two young sons, had told friends he joined the mission for
humanitarian reasons.

Pfc. Mark Ellner, 22, of the Army, who graduated from a suburban Denver high
school in 1990 with a perfect grade point, had told friends he wanted to join
the military "and come out a better person."

Capt. Patrick McKenna, a 27-year-old pilot who graduated from The Citadel in
South Carolina, volunteered for the hazardous duty, friends said, because he was
single and others in his crew had wives and children.

The body of Staff Sgt. Paul N. Barclay, 25, of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., was
returned to Fort Devens, Mass., today, accompanied by a special military color
guard after the plane carrying the body landed at Manchester, N.H.

The other American victims were Barbara Schell, a career diplomat; Col. Richard
A. Mulhern, the replacement for Colonel Thompson; Sgt. 1st Class Benjamin Hodge,
32, of Muskegon, Mich., and Specialist Jeffrey Colbert, 22, of Myersville, Md.

Fourth-Grade Foresight

Lieutenant Piper was only in the fourth grade when she picked up the newspaper
one day and exclaimed with delight: "Mom, you'll never guess what -- they're
going to let women into the Air Force Academy. That's where I'm going."

"She didn't say 'I'll try,' or 'I'd like to," her mother recalled. "She said,
'I'm going.' "

She was born at the academy in Colorado Springs. She had watched her parents
renew their wedding vows in a chapel at the academy. Two years ago she earned
her diploma in political science from the academy.  On Saturday, she will be
buried there.

Among those who considered Laura Piper a hero, perhaps no one stood in awe so
much as her 10-year-old brother, Sean. The refrigerator at the family's home was
pasted with dozens of post cards to the boy, all of them signed, "Love, Laura."

As a girl, she had talked often about helping the powerless of society. At 16,
she was elected to the Board of Education in Fairfax County in Virginia, and
promptly argued that the affluent school district should raise money for the
homeless.

An outstanding athlete, she starred on the rugby team at the Air Force Academy
and was a champion shot-putter on the schools track and field squad. She was
engaged to be married to Lieut. Dan Murray, who also served in the Air Force.

"She was even a role model for me," said her mother. "She was taking advantage
of the opportunities that hadn't been there for me, for her grandmother, for
women of earlier generations."

Inspiration for Mother

It was Laura who tried to persuade her mother to return to college. Mrs. Piper,
then past 40, was having serious doubts. But then daughter came home with a gift
for her mother: a briefcase stuffed with pencils, paper and erasers.

Mrs. Piper earned her degree, and this year became a schoolteacher. When she had
a section on the Middle East, Laura sent home artifacts from Egypt for her
mother's fourth-graders.

"She was a fantastic person, but not perfect," said her mother, managing a
chuckle through the tears. "She had a passion for life, for living right now in
this moment. And if you didn't share that passion, well, she didn't have much
patience. People have often accused me of living vicariously through Laura. But
I wasn't the only one."

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Warrant Officer Erik Mounsey of the Army, with his daughter
Natasha in November 1991.; Col. Jerald L. Thompson of the Army, the American
mission's commander in Zakho, Iraq.; Second Lieut. Laura Ashley Piper, in her
graduation photo from the United States Air Force Academy.; Staff Sgt. Ricky
Robinson of the Army, with his stepchildren Joseph D. Tipton, left, and Chadd
Tipton. (Photographs by The Associated Press) (pg. A1); Paul N. Barclay, Staff
Sergeant, 25; Patrick McKenna, Captain, 27; Michael Robinson, Specialist, 23;
Benjamin Hodge, Sergeant 1st Class, 32; Michael A. Hall, Warrant Officer 2d
Class, 28; Jeffrey Colbert, Specialist, 22; John W. Garrett Jr., Warrant Officer
2d Class, 32; Members of the 10th Special Forces color guard today carried the
coffin of Staff Sgt. Paul N. Barclay at the Manchester, N.H., airport.
(Associated Press) (pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Conflicting Lessons of Vietnam

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 947 words



The War Within
America's Battle Over Vietnam
By Tom Wells
Illustrated. 706 pages. University of California Press. $30.

Nearly two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, the shelf of books about
the longest war in American history continues to grow. We turn to the new books
not for nostalgia but because Vietnam provides perspective on when and why our
armed forces should or should not be used. The authoritative private Center for
Defense Information in Washington tells us there are 24 "hot" wars around the
world today.

The humbling American defeat in Vietnam suggests two conflicting courses of
action. It is mentioned as the reason not to get embroiled again and,
conversely, to get over the Vietnam syndrome and restore our power and prestige
by military means. The Persian Gulf war and the current war in the Balkans offer
examples of both involvement and hesitation. Deciding on the threshold for armed
engagement remains a daunting challenge to Washington and United Nations policy
makers wherever nationalism, ethnicity and tribalism now prevail.

The current young generation, with little knowledge of the mood of the country
during the Vietnam War, will be startled by the anti-Government facts assembled
by Tom Wells in "The War Within." Mr. Wells, a sociologist who has taught at
colleges in California, has written a long and mostly evenhanded chronicle of
the 10-year war on the home front for and against the Vietnam adventure. He has
unearthed documents and interviewed dozens of opponents of the war and former
Government officials, some of whom have second thoughts about their fiery
wartime positions. The result is an invaluable record of an unforgettable
American calamity.


Here are the marches on the Pentagon and the battles in the streets, when the
United States was divided between prowar "hard hats" and antiwar "peaceniks," or
"hawks" and "doves," in the simplistic words of derision of the time. On the
command level, here is the clash between the Administrations of Lyndon B.
Johnson and Richard M. Nixon and a great cross section of Americans, including
students, teachers, the clergy, lawyers, doctors and Women Strike for Peace.

Most poignant of all, here are the Vietnam Veterans Against the War, who camped
in Washington and threw away their Purple Hearts and medals for heroism as a
protest against the expansion of the war by Mr. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger,
his national security adviser and later Secretary of State.

Even those who experienced the Vietnam War at home will be reminded of
long-forgotten incidents by "The War Within," some of which sound almost
fictional in the retelling. Mr. Wells brings up the effort by the Nixon
Administration to embarrass Philip and Daniel Berrigan, the Catholic priests who
played a leading part in urging draft resistance. A bizarre plan was concocted
in Washington in 1972 with the help of the Director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, J. Edgar Hoover. Philip Berrigan and six other people were
accused of a conspiracy to kidnap Mr. Kissinger and blow up underground steam
tunnels in Washington. The trial of the so-called Harrisburg Seven was
deliberately placed in Federal court in Harrisburg, Pa., which was considered
solid Nixon country, but in the end, the jury didn't fall for the incredible
kidnapping and conspiracy tale.

In addition to the marches on Washington by hundreds of thousands of people,
many individual acts of resistance in and out of Government are recalled in "The
War Within." Under Secretary of State George W. Ball fought behind the scenes
against the war buildup; Adlai E. Stevenson, the chief delegate to the United
Nations, was accused of being softheaded when he advocated a negotiated
settlement as early as 1964, which would have saved many thousands of lives. In
the journalistic ranks, columnists, television commentators and editorial
writers opposed to the war and especially the civilian casualties caused by B-52
bombings were sometimes derided by their colleagues and superiors. In every
profession and occupation, there were strong views on both sides.


"The War Within" includes a useful chronology of events, beginning in 1964 with
the Tonkin Gulf episode and the Southeast Asia Resolution by Congress, and
continuing to 1975, with the fall of Saigon to Vietcong and North Vietnamese
troops. Mr. Wells might well have begun his chronology in 1963, during the
Presidency of John F. Kennedy, when 16,000 American "advisers" were sent to
South Vietnam to rescue the faltering and corrupt Government. Measured by
American casualties, that was the real beginning of the Vietnam War for the
United States. No book can tell the whole story as well as Maya Lin's stark,
unconsoling monument in Washington, which lists the names of the 58,000
Americans who died in the war.

Mr. Wells writes, "Many U.S. political and military leaders came to conclude
that, to exorcise the Vietnam syndrome, the United States should apply its
military power massively, overwhelmingly and decisively in any intervention
overseas." Such was the case with the Persian Gulf war, about which President
George Bush said that America had "kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for
all." But the author quotes Gen. Colin L. Powell, former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, on the subject of undertaking limited air raids in the former
Yugoslavia to protect Muslims from Serbs. "As soon as they tell me 'surgical,' "
General Powell said two years ago, "I head for the bunker."

"The War Within" deserves to be read and pondered for the lessons it provides
about the surprising power of ordinary citizens to make and break wars and
Presidents.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Wells (Lisa Bryant/University of California Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia: A Promising Package

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


If the new military and diplomatic moves announced by President Clinton
yesterday afternoon win endorsement from NATO and Russian leaders, they will
constitute the most promising international initiative yet to bring the
two-year-old Bosnian war to a workable diplomatic settlement.

The package includes proposals for extending the kind of NATO air threats that
now protect Sarajevo to the other five U.N.-declared protected cities,
tightening enforcement of international economic sanctions against Serbia and
taking unspecified steps to better coordinate U.S., European and Russian
diplomacy. Formal NATO endorsement of the package is considered likely and
Russian approval is at least a strong possibility.

As the President made clear, the objective is not to defeat the Serbs, or even
roll back all their forcible gains, but to make them "pay a higher price" until
they agree to negotiate in good faith.

The "Sarajevo formula" of demanding the withdrawal of heavy weapons from the
safe zones and backing that demand with the threat of air strikes worked in
Sarajevo in February, and can work again, especially with Russian endorsement
and support. That is where the plans for new diplomatic coordination come in.

Protecting all six U.N.-declared havens is urgent for more than just
humanitarian regions. Holding those Muslim and mixed areas outside of Serbian
military control is essential to the design of any workable territorial
settlement.

Tighter enforcement of economic sanctions is a worthwhile though less
immediately significant step. It is certainly a more appropriate response to
Serbian duplicity than the earlier European proposal for a phased easing of the
embargo in return for marginal Serb diplomatic concessions.

All along, the Clinton Administration's performance on Bosnia has been better
than it looked. True, its public diplomacy has been maddeningly vague and its
military tactics questionable. The Serbian penetration of Gorazde has been, like
so much of the Bosnia war, a humanitarian disaster, this time with the added
element of public humiliation of the U.N. and NATO.

Yet consider what the Clinton Administration has done right over the past 15
months. Almost alone, it resisted cynical European schemes for an enforced peace
at the expense of the principal victims, until finally the Europeans became more
evenhanded. It has advocated, though not energetically enough, an end to the
U.N. arms embargo that prevents the Bosnian Government from adequately defending
itself.

It has held out against an unwise commitment of U.S. ground troops to what would
have been a mission impossible of enforcing a peace no Bosnian faction sincerely
accepted. And it has understood all along that air strikes are not a magic
formula capable of instantly reversing the fortunes of war.

As a result of the Clinton Administration's policies, the Serbs are now more
isolated internationally and the U.S., Western Europe and Russia are closer to
coordinating their policies than ever before in this war.

Even now, as NATO prepares to widen its air cover, a diplomatic rather than
military solution must remain the goal. The object, put crudely, is to bomb the
Serbs to the peace table and to preserve the integrity of all six U.N.-declared
safe havens.

That will stir up bad memories from the Vietnam War, when the Johnson
Administration's efforts to bomb its Vietnamese enemy to the peace table ended
in disaster. Since that time, the Pentagon has argued that Washington's only
military choices are massive intervention or no intervention at all. That is an
unrealistic straitjacket for a global power; it is time to discard it.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37th PRESIDENT;
RICHARD NIXON, 81, DIES; A MASTER OF POLITICS UNDONE BY WATERGATE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1662 words


Richard Milhous Nixon, the 37th President of the United States, who was the only
President in more than two centuries of American history to resign from office,
died last night at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

He was 81 years old and lapsed into a deep coma on Thursday morning after
suffering a stroke on Monday.

His daughters, Julie Nixon Eisenhower and Tricia Nixon Cox, were at Mr. Nixon's
bedside when he died.

Jonathan Weil, a spokesman for New York Hospital, issued a statement that said:
"President Richard M. Nixon died at 9:08 P.M. as a result of a massive stroke
which he suffered on Monday, April 18. His family was with him."

Mr. Nixon had indicated an unwillingness to receive extraordinary medical
measures to revive him, and had slipped into a coma by Thursday.

President Clinton paid tribute in a short address from the Rose Garden, saying,
"He understood the threat of Communism, but he also had the wisdom to know when
it was time to reach out to the Soviet Union and to China."

Mr. Nixon was driven from office by the Watergate scandal, resigning in the face
of certain impeachment on Aug. 9, 1974. He often acknowledged that the event
would inevitably stain his pages in history, and despite strenuous and partly
successful efforts over two decades to rehabilitate his reputation, he was
right. It was a spot that would not out. He never completely dispelled the sense
of shame that clung to his last days in the White House.

In some ways, American politics has never fully recovered, either. The break-in
at the offices of the Democratic National Committee at the Watergate complex in
Washington on June 17, 1972, and the frenzied, protracted efforts to cover it
up, helped to convince many Americans that they could not trust their Government
-- an idea that had begun to take hold in the earlier deceptions about Vietnam
under previous Administrations of both parties.

Yet Mr. Nixon, surely one of the half-dozen pivotal figures of American politics
in the quarter-century that followed World War II, wrought foreign policy
accomplishments of historic proportions that had proved beyond the reach of his
Democratic foes.

Once a leading member of the China Lobby, an anti-Beijing organization, he
reopened American relations with China in 1972. He began the rapprochement with
the Soviet Union with the signing of the first treaty limiting the potentially
deadly nuclear arms race. And after at first broadening and intensifying the
conflict in Indochina, he ended American involvement in the fighting there.

Mr. Nixon's funeral will be at 4 P.M. on Wednesday at the Richard Nixon Library
and Birthplace in Yorba Linda, Calif., the family said. They had asked that
there be no official ceremony in Washington. President Clinton, who will be
among the funeral speakers, said the Government had made an Air Force plane
available to carry the body to the West Coast.

The Nixon Library said the body would arrive in California at 1 P.M. on Tuesday
and be taken to the library by motorcade. The Rev. Billy Graham, a longtime
friend of Mr. Nixon's, will officiate at the services, and Senator Bob Dole, the
minority leader, and Gov. Pete Wilson of California will deliver eulogies along
with Mr. Clinton. The body will remain at the library overnight for public
viewing. The burial, on Thursday, will be private.

Mr. Nixon's tumultuous political career was born in the anti-Communist fervor of
the cold war. In the early days of that struggle and afterward, he employed
slashing tactics that provoked strong emotions among voters. He was demonized on
the left and lionized on the right.  "Nixon's the One," supporters chanted;
"Would you buy a used car from this man?" detractors sneered.

Even his biographer, the historian Stephen E. Ambrose, found the inconsistencies
difficult to resolve, the balance difficult to strike.

"It is mealymouthed, even cowardly, to end an assessment by saying that Nixon
deserved to be re-elected and to be repudiated," Mr. Ambrose wrote in 1989. "But
a contradictory judgment seems inescapable with this contradictory man, the
author of detente and the author of the Watergate cover-up."

In his 1990 memoir, "In the Arena," the former President himself conspicuously
avoided elegiac tones in summarizing his long political life.  "Only when you
have been in the depths," he wrote, "can you appreciate the heights. Without
risks you will suffer no defeats. But without defeats you will win no
victories."

Combative and Partisan

Combative, suspicious and sometimes vengeful, as the Watergate tapes
demonstrated, Mr. Nixon was a fiercely partisan Republican as a Representative
and then as a Senator from California in the late 1940's and early 1950's, as
Vice President under President Dwight D. Eisenhower from 1953 to 1961 and as
President from 1969 to 1974.

Always formal, always awkward, even in his farewell wave from the White House
helicopter, seemingly bereft of spontaneity and charm, he comported oddly with
the hail-fellows, well met, who typify American politics.

Henry A. Kissinger, a partner in so many of Mr. Nixon's proudest foreign policy
achievements, first as his national security adviser and then as Secretary of
State, wrote that he "had no truly close friends," adding: "Fearful of
rejection, he constructed his relationships so that a rebuff, if it came, would
seem to have originated with him. Fiercely proud, he could neither admit his
emotional dependence on approbation nor transcend it."

Astute and Innovative

But he had a thoughtful side, too, and many considered him a highly astute
student of both domestic politics and international affairs. His abilities were
apparent in some of his innovative policies, like his efforts to share Federal
tax revenue with the states, to reorganize government and to overhaul both
welfare and health care, as well as in the eight books and countless speeches
and articles that he produced in the long years of his retirement.

Again and again, Mr. Nixon reinvented himself -- so much so that people talked
and wrote about "the new Nixon" and "the new, new Nixon."

Carried to prominence first by his roles in the Alger Hiss case and in the
"kitchen debate" in Moscow with Nikita S. Khrushchev, he was beaten in a
tinglingly close Presidential race in 1960 by John F. Kennedy, a man whose
coltish, patrician grace stirred profound envy in Mr. Nixon, who had grown up in
straitened circumstances and felt ill at ease all his life with everyone but his
wife of 53 years, Pat, who died last June, and their daughters.

Swallowing his pride, he stepped down a notch and ran for governor of California
in 1962 and lost to Edmund G. (Pat) Brown. In a spasm of fury, he allowed his
hatred of reporters to show, vowing that he had run his last race and telling
his questioners, "You won't have Nixon to kick around any more."

The Vietnam Factor

But, in fact, he had an extraordinary resilience. One of his most able aides,
Bryce Harlow, said of him: "He is a cork. Push him down and he pops right back
up. He verges on being indestructible." With skill, cunning, patience and grit,
he watched the Republican debacle of 1964 and then worked his way back to center
stage.

Vietnam gave him his opening. The unpopularity of the war forced Lyndon B.
Johnson to the sidelines, and obliged his would-be heir, Hubert H. Humphrey, to
run the race carrying a backbreaking handicap. But Mr. Nixon proved a strong
enough candidate to exploit the opportunity, winning a narrow victory.

Four years later, even in the face of the first disclosures of Watergate and its
ancillary scandals, a tide of votes from those whom he called "the silent
majority" gave him one of the great sweeps in American history. He carried 49
states, losing only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia.

Bowed but Not Broken

But fate had lifted him on high only to cast him low. Less than two years later,
his face wet with tears, he bade the remnants of his broken Administration
goodbye with words that seemed to draw a moral from his own searing experience:
"Always remember, others may hate you, but those who hate you don't win unless
you hate them, and then you destroy yourself."

Resignation would have broken most men, but it did not break Richard Nixon.
After a brief exile by the Pacific, he moved East, did some legal work and
gradually re-entered politics -- traveling abroad (five times to China alone)
and contributing profusely to the public discourse at home, even if few if any
Republican candidates sought his support in their campaigns.

By 1990, the wounds had healed enough for him to preside over the dedication of
the new $21 million Nixon library near his birthplace in Yorba Linda, a small
town in Orange County southeast of Los Angeles. Hailed as a statesman and a
peacemaker, he said he had "many memories, some of them good, some of them not
so good." President George Bush was there, and Gerald R. Ford, the President who
may have cost himself a full term by pardoning him, and Ronald Reagan, his
fellow Californian.

Until Mr. Nixon's death, the nation had five living ex-Presidents: Mr. Nixon,
Mr. Ford, Jimmy Carter, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush. Only one other time in American
history had that been so, during the first year of Lincoln's Presidency.

Almost until his final illness, Mr. Nixon worked hard, as he had all his life.
He read deeply -- biographies of Churchill, de Gaulle, Goethe, Orwell and Wilson
in the months before his 80th birthday, he told an interviewer -- wrote
constantly and displayed the energy of a man in his 50's as he roamed the world
over.

Last month in Russia, he met with opponents of President Boris N. Yeltsin, who
angrily called off his own scheduled meeting with Mr. Nixon. Once upon a time,
Mr. Nixon might have bristled, perhaps publicly. But even he had mellowed. He
made little of the rebuke, and when he fell ill, Mr. Yeltsin issued a supportive
statement.

NAME: Richard Milhous Nixon

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: VICTORY 1968 -- Having learned from his 1960 mistakes, Mr.
Nixon was able as never before to control the image he projected to voters. He
and his wife, Pat, celebrated his election to the Presidency at the
Waldorf-Astoria in New York. (White House Photograph); CHINA 1972 -- His most
notable foreign policy triumph was the re-opening of relations with China. The
beginning of a new era was symbolized by a visit to the top of the Great Wall of
China. (Reuters/Bettman); FAREWELL 1974 -- Mr. Nixon waved farewell from a
helicopter as he left the White House for the last time on Aug. 9, after his
resignation. (Associated Press)(pg. 13); Richard Milhous Nixon (Neal Boenzi/The
New York Times, 1985)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Mieczeslaw Maneli, Law Professor, 72

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 251 words


Prof. Mieczeslaw Maneli, an expert on international law and political science,
died on April 9 in New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. He was 72 and lived
in Forest Hills.

The cause was heart failure, his family said.

Professor Maneli was dismissed as department chairman on the law faculty of
Warsaw University in Poland in 1968 for political reasons. He taught law and
political science at Queens College, City University of New York, since then.

At his death, Professor Maneli, known as Mietic, was also chairman of the
Council for Study of Ethics and Public Policy at Queens College.

He was the author of 12 books, including "Freedom and Tolerance" in 1988 and
"Juridical Positivism and Human Rights" in 1983.

A native of Poland, he was a resistance fighter and Auschwitz survivor in World
War II. After the war he graduated from Warsaw University and started teaching
law in 1949.

In the 1950's and 1960's, he worked with the International Commission for
Supervision and Control in Vietnam as legal adviser and Polish delegate. The
commission tried to bring peace to Indochina, and he was an important liaison
between Hanoi and Saigon in that fruitless effort.

He was removed from the law faculty by order of the Communist Polish Government,
which called his behavior "in striking discord with socialist ideology."

Professor Maneli is survived by his companion, Stephane Silvers; a daughter,
Elizabeth Maneli of Forest Hills; a son, Lester of Houston, and two
granddaughters.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 24, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 866 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    10   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 2    16   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 3     5   WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that
           lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.

 4     5   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of
           a killer.

 5     1   "J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.)
           Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently
           committed suicide.

 6     5   HOMELAND, by John Jakes. (Bantam, $6.99.) The fortunes of a
           German immigrant family in late-19th-century Chicago.

 7     1   DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic
           adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in
           Regency England.

 8*    4   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett, $6.99.) Researching
           his ancestry, an American journalist learns about the
           history of Mexico.

 9     1   I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.)
           A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while
           covering a story.

 10    3   FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) An
           affair is renewed and the past reconsidered by people
           returning to their hometown.

 11    4   CAULDRON, by Larry Bond. (Warner, $6.50.) Economic disaster
           and nationalist hate groups besiege Europe; America enters
           World War III.

 12    1   PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Harper Perennial,
           $13.) Troubles befall a woman and her adopted Cherokee
           daughter.

 13    4   PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $5.99.) Spenser
           tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to a South
           Carolina town.

 14    2   SPANDAU PHOENIX, by Greg Iles. (Signet, $5.99.)
           Intelligence agencies vie for a diary full of
           still-invaluable secrets about World War II.

 15    1   CHRISTY, by Catherine Marshall. (Avon, $5.99.) A 1967 novel
           about a young schoolteacher in the Tennessee hill country.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    15   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 2    546  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3     4   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.)
           The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 4*   15   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 5    62   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 6     7   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night of torture and murder.

 7    132  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 8    25   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism a
           la A.A. Milne.

 9    47   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.)
           Menopause and today's women.

 10   146  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Communicating.

 11   32   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket,
           $6.99.) Anecdotes, opinions.

 12*  145  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 13*   4   IN THE NAME OF THE FATHER, by Gerry Conlon. (Plume, $9.95.)
           An Irish rebel's memoir.

 14   49   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The
           charms of rustic France.

 15*  19   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $10.) Aspects
           of Taoist philosophy.

 16*  12   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) Vietnam.

 17*   1   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton
           professor assays issues affecting black Americans.

 18*  18   A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little,
           Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the
           Reformation.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    162  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    169  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3    27   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.

 4     7   MONEY DOESN'T GROW ON TREES, by Neale S. Godfrey and
           Carolina Edwards. (Fireside/S&S, $11.) Ways of teaching
           children about money.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 9, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHILDREN'S BOOKS;
Bookshelf

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 346 words


HAND, HEART, AND MIND: The Story of the Education of America's Deaf People. By
Lou Ann Walker. Dial. $14.99. (Ages 10 and up) The consequences of a revolt of
students at Gallaudet University in 1988, with banners reading "Deaf Pride," is
at the beginning and at the heart of an informative, politically astute account,
including a bibliography, photographs and biographical sketches of prominent
deaf Americans.
RUB-A-DUB-DUB: Who's in the Tub? Written and illustrated by Jun Takabatake.
Chronicle Books. $10.95. (Ages 2 to 6) If you must take a bath, you could find
inspiration in a little boy who builds playmates out of soap bubbles, which are
then transformed into the real thing and crowd the tub.


THE THREE BILLY GOATS GRUFF. Written and illustrated by Tim Arnold. Margaret K.
McElderry. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8) The illustrations in this relatively benign
account of the goats and the troll beneath the bridge are watercolor with pen
and ink. Trit-trot.
COUNTING CRANES. Written and illustrated by Mary Beth Owens. Little, Brown.
$14.95. (Ages 4 to 9) This splendid conceptual companion to "A Caribou Alphabet"
is a counting book, showing some of the 131 whooping cranes in the
Canadian-American flock in an orderly sequence that describes their lives in a
seasonal orbit, as they move from Canada south to winter quarters in Texas and
back. Exquisite watercolors.
THE GOLDEN CARP:
And Other Tales
From Vietnam.
By Lynette Dyer Vuong. Illustrated by Manabu Saito. Lothrop, Lee & Shepard. $15.
(Ages 9 and up) Here are six traditional fairy tales, charmingly retold.
THE BAMBOO FLUTE. By Garry Disher. Ticknor & Fields. $10.95. (Ages 8 to 11) The
Great Depression extended to Australia, where, in 1932, Paul remembers the days
of his family's prosperity and dreams of music. Eventually, with help from a
mysterious swagman, he makes a flute.
NOT A COPPER PENNY IN ME HOUSE: Poems from the Caribbean. By Monica Gunning.
Illustrated by Frane Lessac. Wordsong/Boyds Mills Press. $14.95. (All Ages)
Daily life in lilting verse and vivid pictures.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Baseball Caps And First Amendment

SECTION: Section 14LI;  Page 27;  Column 5;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


In "Students' Baseball Caps Prompt a Principal to Balk," [March 27], Kenneth
Handler, the principal of Mineola Middle School, spells out his policy regarding
the wearing of baseball caps. He states: "Yes, I confiscate hats. I'm trying to
teach common courtesies and civil human behavior." Unfortunately, by his policy
and his action, Mr. Handler has chosen to ignore a 1969 U.S. Supreme Court
ruling that 'the Bill of Rights does not stop at the schoolhouse gate."

What a student wears to school is considered to be symbolic or expressive speech
-- black arm bands in the 1960's protesting the Vietnam War -- and is protected
by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. It has been
implemented appropriately since then in New York by each Commissioner of
Education.  Neither the courts nor the commissioners would make a distinction in
this matter between a middle school and a high school student.

The only legal restriction placed on dress and grooming in the public schools
are those which might adversely affect health or safety or substantially disrupt
the educational process. While Mr. Handler has not had any complaints from
parents regarding his personal standards, the reason might be that parents and
children might not be aware of the fact that their rights are being violated.

It would seem to me that Dr. Johnson, the Superintendent of Schools in Rockville
Centre, has expressed the appropriate concern and respect for students in
stating, "I'm more concerned about teaching than I am about dress codes."
DONALD PARKER
Port Washington
The writer is on the board of the Nassau chapter of the New York Civil Liberties
Union.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Afar;
An Indomitable Man, an Incurable Loneliness

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


To many Americans born before World War II, the death of Richard Milhous Nixon
seemed hardly believable, even though he was 81 years old and film clips had
shown him looking somewhat feeble during a recent trip to Russia. That only
alerted older Americans to look for another Nixon comeback.

He had, after all, played an improbably long, large -- sometimes unwelcome --
part in their lives and time, in a public career that lasted for nearly 50 years
after he first won election to Congress in 1946. And he had seemed indomitable
(or, to the many who did not love him, relentless), returning again and again to
prominence after defeats and a disgrace that would have finished other
politicians.

At his death, he had won his way painfully back from the Watergate scandal that
had driven him from the White House in 1974 to a relatively respected position
as elder statesman, political analyst, author and commentator. President Clinton
paid tribute to him as a wise counselor on foreign policy.

Richard Nixon's jowly, beard-shadowed face, the ski-jump nose and the widow's
peak, the arms upstretched in the V-sign, had been so often pictured and
caricatured, his presence had become such a familiar one in the land, he had
been so often in the heat of controversy, that it was hard to realize the nation
really would not "have Nixon to kick around anymore."

That famous remark, directed at the press with which he so often warred, was the
exit line in a self-proclaimed "last press conference" after he lost to Edmund
G. (Pat) Brown in a race for governor of California in 1962. And that defeat
came only two years after Mr. Nixon had lost to John F. Kennedy in the most
celebrated, and the closest, Presidential election of modern times.

Yet in 1968, despite those crushing blows, he was elected in another close
campaign as the 37th President of the United States. Four years later, Richard
M. Nixon won a second term in one of the biggest landslides on record.

Americans young enough never to have voted for or against him -- he did not seek
office after 1972 -- probably thought of Mr. Nixon mostly as the first President
forced to resign the nation's highest office. And that, no doubt, is how he will
be characterized in the thumbnail historical sketches of the future (it may be
as the only President forced to resign).

That description is accurate and perhaps fair enough, but it leaves out much
about the only American other than Franklin D. Roosevelt to have been nominated
on five national tickets, to run for President or Vice President. Each won four
times in those five elections, Mr. Nixon capturing two terms in each office.

It does not tell much, either, about the remarkable and contradictory record of
a man who won early fame as a determined Communist-hunter, then became the
President who conceived and carried out an "opening to China" that ended decades
of silence between the United States and the second-largest Communist power. An
unrelenting hawk in pursuing the war in Vietnam, he nevertheless, in 1972,
entered into the first significant arms-limitation treaty with what was then the
Soviet Union.

A Republican and a self-styled conservative, Richard Nixon was the only
President ever to impose wage-and-price controls in peacetime. He sponsored and
suffered the defeat of the Family Assistance Plan, essentially a guaranteed
annual income and still the most far-reaching reform of welfare ever seriously
debated. And in 1970, the Nixon Administration -- elected not least by a "white
backlash" against the gains of black Americans -- helped desegregate more
schools in the South than had any of its predecessors.

Those future sketches may not even include events in Mr. Nixon's career that
have achieved near-mythic status. Even before his epic contest with John F.
Kennedy in 1960, his so-called "Checkers" speech, rebutting charges of accepting
illicit contributions, was a political masterpiece that may have saved the
Eisenhower-Nixon campaign in 1952. It also became the butt of a generation's
jokes, and is still derided by persons who neither saw nor heard it, because of
its maudlin appeal to public sentimentality.

(The Checkers speech was named after a dog that had been given to the Nixon
family, a pet Mr. Nixon said the family loved too much to even think of
returning.) The speech attracted the largest television audience up to that time
-- a record not surpassed until Mr. Nixon and John F. Kennedy engaged in the
first televised Presidential debate in 1960.

To characterize Richard Nixon only as a President forced to resign would say
little about a career and a character steeped in controversy long before
Watergate. He was a tough and ruthless competitor who seldom hesitated to cut
corners or engage in questionable tactics, and many opponents never forgave what
they regarded as his smears and trickery. Though he made himself the heir
apparent to President Eisenhower, and campaigned in that role against Kennedy in
1960, Eisenhower tried to dump him as Vice President in 1956 and secretly sought
to thwart his Presidential nomination in 1960.

Nor does his resignation, which was preceded by two years of unrelenting
investigation and shrill publicity, tell much about a personality that was
clearly withdrawn and perhaps tortured. Mr. Nixon was a rare example of a lonely
introvert who rose to the top in the extroverted world of elective politics. The
unremitting effort to do so -- to convince the public that a shy and withdrawn
man was a genial backslapper -- must have cost him a great deal psychologically;
and it fixed on him the enduring suspicion that he never allowed Americans to
see the "real Nixon." He rarely did.

Perhaps partially because of a perceived need to conceal his real self, Mr.
Nixon was a secretive man, both personally and as President. His profound
insecurities seemed strangely to have been enlarged when he achieved the White
House, a goal he had tenaciously pursued, and became for a time the most
powerful man in the world. Perhaps he felt he had more to lose; and one reason
he tried to "stonewall" the Watergate break-in, leading to his downfall, seems
to have been an almost fanatic unwillingness to "give in" to the enemies he
imagined all around him.

Such insecurities may have been rooted in a lonely and emotionally deprived
childhood. A mother he and all who knew her regarded as a "saint" may have
provided less warm motherly love than saintly Quaker examples of determination,
hard work, discipline, emotional privacy, self-control. These were qualities
that marked Richard Nixon's life from adolescence in Whittier, Calif., to law
school at Duke University, to the White House, in the last 20 years of decline
and recovery, in his final desire to be subjected to no extraordinary
life-saving procedures. In all of that life, he remained essentially a man
alone, one who had always believed that people did not like him.

Bryce Harlow, a Republican who knew Mr. Nixon well and served him faithfully,
believed that in youth he had been "hurt very deeply by somebody he trusted. . .
. He never got over it and never trusted anybody again. But in life we get back
what we plow into it." Indeed, if Richard Nixon trusted no one, millions of
Americans never trusted him.

Arthur Burns, whom Mr. Nixon appointed chairman of the Federal Reserve, once
wondered "if he ever really had a good, close, personal friend." Rather sadly,
Mr. Burns decided not. "A friend like that could have saved him," he said --
from his lifelong isolation, surely, perhaps from his inability to trust, hence
to be trusted outside his family circle.

Henry Kissinger, whose name will always be associated with Mr. Nixon's, once
said to the journalist Hugh Sidey, "Can you imagine what Nixon would have been
had somebody loved him? . . . He would have been a great, great man had somebody
loved him."

Perhaps he might have been. There are those who believe he was. They probably
did not include Richard Milhous Nixon, who in the aftermath of Watergate,
uncharacteristically near tears, told David Frost that he had "let down my
friends . . . let down the country . . . let down the American people."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Vietnam: Memorabilia of a War Best Forgotten

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 267 words


Nineteen years after North Vietnamese tanks smashed through the gate of Saigon's
Doc Lap presidential palace and ended the Indochina War, ghosts of the conflict
linger in urban souvenir shops, museums and the bomb craters that still dot the
Red River Delta near Hanoi. Zippo lighters (or Asian imitations) -- adorned with
the G.I. adages of the 1960's and 1970's and lost or left behind by withdrawing
soldiers -- are briskly traded at shops specializing in war memorabilia in the
markets of Ho Chi Minh City. To Vietnamese, the sayings have little meaning, but
appreciative buyers of the lighters are foreigners, for the most part. Most
Vietnamese have little interest in war souvenirs, for the war is something to be
forgotten, not remembered.

To some of the farmers of what once was the Republic of Viet Nam, the lighters
are reminders of scorched-earth raids sometimes conducted by Saigon's troops and
Americans against Viet Cong-occupied hamlets, in which soldiers used Zippos
purchased from PX stores to set fire to thatched roofs.

In the countryside, unexploded bombs and munitions still claim limbs and lives
by the hundreds each year, and the death toll from the war continues to rise,
year after year. But to a large proportion of Vietnam's burgeoning population,
the conflict with the United States is a subject taught in history classes --
not something that still burns in personal memory. The glistening shell cases
and cartridges exhibited by museums -- their lethal contents long since
discarded -- are admired as objects of beauty rather than death.   MALCOLM W.
BROWNE

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Models of United States aircraft are constructed out of beer and
soda cans and sold as souvenirs on the streets of Ho Chi Minh City; Shell
casings and other war memorabilia are displayed at Reunification Hall, once the
Presidential Palace; From the air, bomb craters still dot the landscape on the
approach into Danang. (Photographs by EDWARD KEATING/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 753 words



International 3-18

ATTACK AND RETREAT AT GORAZDE
Despite a NATO ultimatum to the Bosnian Serbs, they continued their attack on
Gorazde. But United Nations officials said some Serbs began to pull back and
promised compliance as the deadline approached. 1

CLINTON'S NEW FOREIGN FOCUS
President Clinton has been forced to shift his focus to respond to the situation
in Bosnia and to try to salvage his Haiti policy, and it has brought a new level
of involvement for him in foreign policy.  14


The United Nations rejected a request for air strikes. 12

Russia dropped its reservations about a NATO response. 13

SOUTH AFRICA'S SEA CHANGE
After the South African elections, no African country will be ruled by a white
minority. More important, there will be alliances and shifts in power that South
Africans could hardly have imagined. 1

Nelson Mandela denounced some of his backers as criminals. 11

KOREA IS TOUCHY ISSUE FOR JAPAN
The issue of whether Japan would fully side with the United States in a
confrontation with North Korea over nuclear arms is touchy for the new Japanese
Government, and it could threaten the governing coalition.  3

Rwandan rebels say they accept a cease-fire.  9

A population meeting ended in disagreement over abortion. 18

Indonesians riot over Chinese economic influence. 4

A Chinese dissident was released for medical care. 6

American companies completed a trade fair in Vietnam. 18

Syria says Israeli feelers on peace do not go far enough. 8

National 20-34

REMEMBERING NIXON
Paying tribute to Richard M. Nixon, American and world leaders emphasized the
37th President's achievements in reconciling the United States with Communist
powers, rather than the ignominy of his resignation from office.  1

A living will allowed Mr. Nixon to maintain control over his care.  28

A LIFE OF EXTREMES
In three decades, Richard Nixon tasted crisis and defeat, victory and ruin, and
finally, a return to some measure of public esteem. A look at a politician who
made an enduring mark on the century.  29

AN INTEREST RATE DISPUTE
A dispute has surfaced about whether the Federal Reserve is unnecessarily
pushing up interest rates, keeping a million unemployed people out of jobs in
the belief that the action is needed to control inflation.  1

HOWARD PRESIDENT RESIGNS
The president of Howard University, criticized for allowing a Nation of Islam
officials to speak on campus and facing a move to oust him, resigned to lead the
University of Texas at Dallas.  20

PRINCIPAL REINSTATED
A Mississippi judge ordered the reinstatement of a principal who was suspended
because he let a student read a prayer over the school public-address system.
20

COUNSEL'S INFLUENCE
Six weeks after he joined the staff to stanch the Whitewater hemorrhage, Lloyd
Cutler's influence on White House strategy has become unmistakable, with Hillary
Clinton's breaking her silence and fielding every question reporters could come
up with about her finances.  22

KEEPING WHITEWATER ALIVE
Floyd Brown is a one-man war raging on many fronts. Having constructed a $3
million cottage industry devoted to keeping the Whitewater affair alive and in
the news, he deploys an array of weapons ranging from E-mail to stacks and
stacks of documents.  22

TIMBER OR RECREATION?
Smokey Bear has put down his shovel and picked up market surveys, focus groups
and other new tools of policy making as the Forest Service considers shifting
from old-fashioned forestry to recreation.  22

Metro 35-42, 46

DRUGS, WHOLESALE
They come wheeling off the Henry Hudson Parkway and the Major Deegan Expressway,
drug dealers, big and small, from New Jersey and upstate New York, from
Connecticut and Pennsylvania and sometimes farther south, cruising in to Harlem
to buy cocaine in what has become one of the biggest wholesale drug markets in
the country.  1

TREATMENT FOR MENTALLY ILL
New York State will soon begin a program for the chronically mentally ill that
delivers medical services directly to their homes, even if those homes are on
the street.  35

THE JUDGE IS IN
People love to sue New York: last year the city was hit with 10,000 new cases,
nearly a quarter of the court system's civil docket. So Judge Alfred Lerner of
Queens has been deputized to spend three days a week clearing the backlog of
cases in Manhattan.  35

Obituaries 44

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

First U.S. Trade Exhibit Is Held in Hanoi

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 662 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 23


Fifty American companies hoping to do business here today concluded the first
United States trade fair in Vietnam since the war ended in 1975.

Hundreds of thousands of curious residents paid 20 cents each to tour the
booths, called Vietnamerica Expo '94, and sample a few wares. High-school
teachers sent their students to the Giang Vo Exhibition Center to practice their
English with the visiting salesmen, often peppering the Americans with friendly
personal questions.

Among the exchanges at the four-day fair: Vietnamese visitors learned how to
withdraw fake money from American cash machines, and American entrepreneurs
learned that Vietnamese are not fond of potato chips.

There's No Free Snack

The exhibition had been organized before President Clinton lifted the United
States trade embargo on Vietnam on Feb. 3. And while the company representatives
were prepared to talk business, few had brought products for sale. At a General
Foods stand, visitors gawked at packages of Grape Nuts, Kool-Aid and
chocolate-drink mix, but there were no samples or sales.

"How do they expect us to like their food if they won't let us try it?" a
disappointed student said.

Despite its long isolation from the United States, Vietnam is well acquainted
with the electronic products familiar to most Americans -- Japanese-made
television sets, compact-disc players and videotape players. Even in Vietnam's
poorest, most remote hamlets, videotapes of Vietnamese movies and shows can be
bought or rented.

Large quantities of American-made products have been smuggled into Vietnam and
are well known, but expensive.

Coca-Cola and Lab Equipment

About 2 million bottles of Coca-Cola arrived in the country each year through
Singapore and Thailand before the end of the embargo. Laboratories in Hanoi are
equipped with computers and analytical equipment made by Hewlett-Packard and
other United States companies, all bought through intermediaries at greatly
marked-up prices.

Vietnamese visitors, accustomed to state-controlled marketing under Communism,
were startled by the vigorous competition at the fair. Pepsi-Cola, for instance,
which is not as well known in Vietnam as Coca-Cola, has moved quickly to capture
a share of the market. Pepsico imported the first Pepsi-Cola flavor concentrate
the day before the embargo was lifted and began distributing the drink an hour
after the White House announced the end of the trade ban.

"This fair has been a learning experience for everyone," said Timothy Edward
Minges, general manager of the Siam Snack Company, a unit of Pepsico based in
Thailand. "We've learned, for one thing, that the Vietnamese like sweetened
things, barbecue-flavored corn chips and many other American snacks, but not
potato chips."

Bridges and Barter

Many enterprises offered services and goods aimed at improving Vietnam's roads
and communications systems. At a display by the Vietnam Investment Information
Consulting Corporation, which is based in San Diego and helped organize the
show, visitors inspected models of a prefabricated bridge that can be quickly
put across a river or canal to carry heavy traffic.

In an indication of what United States businesses will face in Vietnam, Thomas
J. Flannery, a representative for the Ingersoll-Rand Company, which makes air
compressors used by the textile, pharmaceutical and plastic packaging
industries, said: "We are accustomed to starting business dealings on a barter
basis if necessary. We began doing business in China in 1980, accepting Chinese
anthracite coal in part payment for our products, and we're prepared to do the
same kind of thing in Vietnam, perhaps accepting Vietnamese oil."

"We have a long way to go," he added. "But I think things will go faster for
American business in Vietnam than they did in China."

But another exhibitor said, "Despite the heady expectations of some American
businesses, Vietnam is not going to be any El Dorado."


LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thousands of Vietnamese attended an American trade fair in Hanoi
last week, the first such event since the Vietnam War ended nearly 20 years ago.
A representative with I.B.M. explained his company's products at the Giang Vo
Exhibition Center, where the four-day gathering concluded yesterday. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Richard Nixon

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


If not the dominant politician of his time, he was surely the most durable. It
thus came as something of a mild surprise, when he died Friday evening at the
age of 81, that Richard Nixon had somehow failed to survive time itself.

It is, of course, the multiple offenses associated with Watergate for which Mr.
Nixon is immediately remembered -- the "dirty tricks" campaign, the conviction
of so many of his associates for perjury and obstruction of justice and,
finally, his own resignation to avoid an almost certain impeachment proceeding.
This betrayal of the public trust remains the granite flaw that forever bars Mr.
Nixon from the pantheon of great Presidents.

Yet he endured after that disgrace, just as he had survived President
Eisenhower's doubts about his fitness, a narrow defeat to John Kennedy in 1960
and a humiliating loss in his try for the California governorship in 1962. By
sheer will he clawed his way back to a semblance of respectability, turning
himself into an elder statesman and an adviser to Presidents, Bill Clinton
included. Throughout this cycle of victory, defeat, disgrace and resurrection he
provided Americans with a lodestar for their political beliefs: they admired or
detested him, but there was very little neutral ground.

Future historians will find it hard to ignore a man who so transfixed his
contemporaries. But what to make of him now?

With one or two exceptions, contemporary chroniclers agree that Mr. Nixon was at
his best on the international stage. Foreign policy was unquestionably his first
love and there were notable triumphs, most famously the opening to China and the
first strategic arms agreement with Moscow. But Salt I was not without serious
flaws, and his tortured exit from Vietnam remains hugely controversial; history
may give him and his chief strategist, Henry Kissinger, a more modest grade than
they have awarded themselves.

Conversely, most students have tended to underrate his domestic achievements. As
Tom Wicker observes in his book on Mr. Nixon, "One of Us," the 37th President
was hardly a visionary or crusader. He was, instead, a shrewd pragmatist with
exceptional antennae and the ability to turn public discontents to political
advantage.

The results were sometimes contradictory. Mr. Nixon's "Southern strategy" in
1968 and his appeals to a restless white middle class in '72 helped popularize
racial appeals as a national campaign tactic. At the same time, seeing little
choice, he ordered the Justice Department to continue methodically dismantling
the dual school system in the South.

Though he was no more an activist on the environment than he was on civil
rights, Mr. Nixon correctly sensed a growing public appetite for a cleaner
America and made that the centerpiece of his 1970 State of the Union address,
months before the first Earth Day. His support made it easier for Congress to
pass two seminal pieces of legislation, the Clean Air Act of 1970 and the Clean
Water Act of 1972. Mr. Nixon also sought to reshape the nation's welfare system
in much the same manner Mr. Clinton proposes today; with a little more effort
and a lot more help in the Senate he might have done so.

But policy issues do not account for our fascination with a man who combined
insecurity and ambition in explosive measure and was equally capable of
unexpected kindnesses and staggering vindictiveness. Nor do issues of policy or
ideology explain why, at the height of his powers and facing a weak opponent in
George McGovern, he encouraged a pattern of illegal behavior that ultimately
destroyed his Presidency.

A provisional answer may be found in a phrase Mr. Nixon often applied to
himself: "At bottom, I am a political man." He used these words proudly, as if
to mock the intellectuals and moralists he despised, but in the end they might
well serve as an epitaph. For if they were meant to suggest a talent for
maximizing political opportunities, they also implied the absence of any guiding
moral compass besides a burning dedication to political survival.

Mr. Nixon would have found such an assessment too narrow, but any fair reading
of the record suggests that Watergate was only the endgame of a career in which
he lavished as much energy on neutralizing or destroying his opponents as on
cultivating allies. Add to that a perfect memory for real and imagined insults,
and it is possible to see why he sanctioned the activities that brought him
down.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Nixon, Big and Small

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH;   Bob Herbert is on vacation.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


Like more than a few Americans of my generation, I learned to despise Richard
Nixon around the same time I learned to recite the Pledge of Allegiance. Yet
now, nearly 40 years later, an America without Richard Nixon seems inconceivable
and unimaginable, an emptier place. When the stroke hit, it was possible not
only to root for him to live but to feel genuine loss at the prospect of his
imminent death.

Not because he can be likened to his hero, Theodore Roosevelt, or even his
unenthusiastic ticket mate, Dwight Eisenhower. Far from it: Mr. Nixon was the
historical black hole into which the higher dreams of the assassinated Kennedy
brothers and Martin Luther King Jr. disappeared. But as a cultural archetype who
inspired and inflamed the American imagination for half a century, Richard Nixon
was a giant, right up there with Billy the Kid, Citizen Kane and Moby Dick.

No wonder he drove major writers like Norman Mailer, Philip Roth and Robert
Coover to imaginative feats. Reading Gore Vidal on Mr. Nixon is akin to reading
Shaw on Shakespeare. "In Nixon we are able to observe our faults larger than
life," Mr. Vidal wrote in 1983. "He turned being a Big Loser into a perfect
triumph by managing to lose the Presidency in a way bigger and more original
than anyone else had ever lost it before."

The faults that defined the Nixon character include hypocrisy, paranoia,
cynicism, spitefulness and self-pity. Open Bartlett's to the Nixon entry and you
will not find many patriotic epigrams but lines like "You won't have Nixon to
kick around any more" and "Well, I'm not a crook" and "When the President does
it, that means that it is not illegal."

A tour through "Safire's New Political Dictionary" reveals the extraordinary
Nixon legacy to American politics, from the dawn of spin doctoring to the
apocalypse of dirty tricks. His name is cross-referenced with such entries as
firestorm, inoperative, bug, chronic campaigner, cover-up, CREEP, enemies list,
play in Peoria, plumber, Saturday Night Massacre, slush fund, smoking gun,
stonewalling, used car salesman, "nobody drowned at Watergate" and "twisting
slowly, slowly in the wind."

Every Nixon hater has his own defining flash point of rage. My parents passed
down like treasured heirlooms their recollections of his red-baiting
Congressional campaign against Helen Gahagan Douglas, his bathetic Checkers
speech, his sanctimonious attack on Harry Truman's salty language (this from the
master of the expletive deleted!).

For my generation, 1970 may have been the peak. When four anti-war protesters
were shot and killed by Ohio Guardsmen at Kent State University, the President
who had promised in the '68 campaign to "bring us together" and get us promptly
out of Vietnam responded not with sorrow or regret but inhuman vindictiveness:
"When dissent turns to violence it invites tragedy."

And there was still Watergate to come.

So enormous were the passions he provoked that Mr. Nixon became an almost
geographical pole in the American psychic landscape, analogous to the rootless
Southern California that spawned him. He was the darkest doppelganger against
which we measured ourselves. And not just in weighty matters of ethics or
conscience. A generation of American boys learned the importance of a close
shave thanks to his famous debacle in the first 1960 debate. His legendarily
hapless escapades in romance (courting his future wife by driving her to dates
with other beaux) and comic self-promotion (his "Sock it to me!" cameo on "Laugh
In") defined the antithesis of cool.

When Mr. Nixon left the White House in disgrace in 1974, he said: "Those who
hate you don't win unless you hate them. And then you destroy yourself."

But his hatred of his enemies was precisely what led to the self-destruction of
Watergate. Did a final new Nixon emerge in retirement, mellower and wiser than
the disgraced politician? Let history decide.

What is certain is that many of his foes finally surrendered their own hatred --
if not to forgive, then at least to respect his remarkable persistence and
towering size. For an American who came of age with him in the second half of
the 20th century, making peace with Richard Nixon proved in the end an essential
part of growing up.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 37TH PRESIDENT: THE OVERVIEW;
Tributes to Nixon Underline Triumphs, Not the Downfall

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Paying tribute to Richard M. Nixon on the day after his death at the age of 81,
American and world leaders today emphasized the 37th President's epochal
achievements in reconciling the United States with Communist powers, rather than
the ignominy of his resignation from office.

A fierce and glowering anti-Communist early in his career as a member of the
House Un-American Activities Committee, Mr. Nixon as President began to wind
down the cold war with his opening to China and the negotiation of the first
nuclear arms-control treaty with Moscow. Then, from the shadows of old age, 15
years after Watergate, he watched the Soviet empire crumble.

President Clinton this morning issued a proclamation declaring a national day of
mourning on Wednesday, when Mr. Nixon's funeral is to be held in his hometown,
Yorba Linda, Calif. Mr. Clinton urged all Americans "to assemble on that day in
their respective places of worship to pay homage" to the former President.

Most Government offices will close on Wednesday, and flags on all Federal
buildings will be flown at half-staff for the next 30 days, but there will be no
memorial ceremonies in Washington, at the family's request.

No reason was given for that decision. But Mr. Nixon always felt more
comfortable in California or circling the globe than in Washington, several old
friends said today. And he certainly had no reason to remember Capitol Hill
fondly; he built his career there as a Representative and Senator, but the
evaporation of Congressional support sealed his fate in his hour of gravest
peril.

Mr. Nixon, who was driven from the Presidency by the Watergate scandal, which
made his impeachment all but certain, died at 9:08 P.M. on Friday at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan. Felled by a stroke last Monday, he
slipped into a deep coma on Thursday and never awakened. In compliance with
instructions in his living will, no extraordinary measures, like life-support
systems, were used to prolong his life.

Julie Nixon Eisenhower and Tricia Nixon Cox, Mr. Nixon's daughters, declined the
Government's offer of a memorial service in Washington and suggestions by the
Congressional leadership that his body lie in state in the Rotunda of the
Capitol, as had those of American leaders since the time of Lincoln, including
Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson.

The two women were at his bedside when the former President died, along with
their husbands and children. Mr. Nixon's chief of staff, Kathy O'Connor, said
they "are very upset and distraught" but "glad to know that he's at rest." Mr.
Nixon's wife, Pat, died of lung cancer last year.

President Clinton said of Mr. Nixon: "He suffered defeats that would have ended
most political careers, yet he won stunning victories that many of the world's
most popular leaders have failed to attain. On this solemn day, we recognize the
significant value of his contributions to our nation, and we pray that he left
us with enough of his wisdom to guide us safely into the next century."

The White House said Mr. Clinton planned to attend the funeral along with the
four living former Presidents, Ronald Reagan, Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter and
George Bush. A large number of foreign leaders are also expected.

Mr. Ford -- who succeeded Mr. Nixon on Aug. 9, 1974, with the comment, "Our long
national nightmare is over," and later pardoned him -- said in Rancho Mirage,
Calif., that Mr. Nixon was "one of the finest, if not the finest, foreign-policy
Presidents of this century."

President Reagan described Mr. Nixon as "one of the finest statesmen" in world
history. More measured, Mr. Carter called him a man of foresight whose
diplomatic skills set the stage for better relations among Washington, Beijing
and Moscow.

President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who had refused to meet Mr. Nixon on the
former President's recent and final trip to Moscow because Mr. Nixon had spent
too much time with opposition leaders, said he was "shocked by the death of an
extraordinary man -- one of the greatest politicians in the world."

In Hanoi, the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry marked with five words the passing of
the man who had broadened and intensified the Indochina war before bringing an
end to American involvement in Vietnam. A spokesman said, "May he rest in
peace."

Many considered the opening to China in 1972 Mr. Nixon's greatest achievement by
far, and President Jiang Zemin and Premier Li Peng of China hailed him today for
his "strategic foresight and political courage," crediting him with "opening up
a new prospect in the relationship between the two countries."

At a moment when relations between Washington and Beijing are once again
strained, with the Clinton Administration trying to decide whether to continue
China's favored trade status in the face of human-rights disputes, the
Government in Beijing also chose to make a symbolic gesture by releasing from
jail Wang Jungtao, a leader in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement.

Funeral Arrangements

Mr. Nixon's body was taken shortly after he died to a mortuary in the Newark
area. Kim Taylor, a Nixon staff member at the former President's office near his
condominium in Park Ridge, N.J., declined to identify the funeral home where his
friends and family will be invited to pay their respects. "The family deserves
some peace and quiet for a few days," she said.

Another spokeswoman for the family, Elizabeth Johnston, said that the Coxes
spent today at home in Manhattan and the Eisenhowers at home in Pennsylvania.

Officials in Washington, New York and California said Mr. Nixon's body would be
driven early on Tuesday to Stewart Air National Guard Base at Newburgh, N.Y.,
just a few miles north of West Point. A joint-service honor guard will meet the
hearse, Pentagon officials said, and a 21-gun salute will be fired.

The body will be flown to the Marine Corps Air Station at El Toro, Calif., on
one of the Boeing 707's that were known as Air Force One in Mr. Nixon's day,
when the President was using them. Mr. Clinton uses a pair of bigger, more
modern Boeing 747's.

At El Toro there will be another honor guard and another 21-gun salute, and then
the body will be taken to the Richard M. Nixon Library and Birthplace at Yorba
Linda, the only Presidential library not financed by the Government and the only
one that does not contain the originals of Presidential papers -- further
legacies of the Watergate imbroglio. They are in the National Archives because
Congress passed a law forbidding Mr. Nixon to have them.

The body is to lie in state in the library's lobby from Tuesday afternoon
through the night until late Wednesday morning.

Foreign guests, Mr. Clinton and the former Presidents and a planeload of members
of Congress are expected to be on hand when the funeral begins at 4 P.M Pacific
time (7 P.M. New York time). The Rev. Dr. Billy Graham will officiate, and
eulogies will be delivered by the President; Gov. Pete Wilson of California;
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, and Henry A. Kissinger, who
served Mr. Nixon as national security adviser and later as Secretary of State.

Mr. Nixon will be buried alongside Mrs. Nixon on the library grounds.

If a large number of foreign officials attend the funeral, and that seemed
probable tonight, the funeral may be the occasion for important diplomatic
activity.

Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said that for the time being,
Secretary of State Warren Christopher was still planning to leave Washington on
Sunday night for a one-week trip to London and the Middle East. But if the list
of foreign dignitaries attending the funeral grows, Mr. McCurry said, the plans
may change.


NAME: Richard Milhous Nixon

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 26, 1994, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A front-page picture on Sunday showing a flag flying at half-staff in Washington
carried an incorrect credit. It was by Reuters, not The Associated Press.


GRAPHIC: Photo: A flag flying at half-staff in honor of President Richard Nixon.
(Associated Press) (pg. 1)

Graph: "TRACK RECORD: The Nixon Vote" shows percentages of the vote for Nixon
during political races throughout his career. (pg. 28)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: KINGSBRIDGE;
Armory's Uncertain Future

BYLINE: By LYNETTE HOLLOWAY

SECTION: Section 14;  Page 11;  Column 1;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 592 words


In 1917, the National Guard's Eighth Coastal Artillery Regiment left its
rambling armory on 94th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan for a new site in
the Bronx where it would have more room and richer recruiting options.

The Bronx building, at 29 West Kingsbridge Road, is an architectural wonder,
with two grand three-quarter-round towers that highlight the stately
medieval-style exterior and a moat that runs across the front. It was designated
a city landmark in 1974, while the regiment's former home was demolished in the
1960's.

But now the Kingsbridge Armory is one of five around the state being closed as a
result of nationwide military cutbacks, and the building has fallen into
disrepair. After serving as the site of regiment events as well as boat shows
and bicycle races, it will be deserted by the Guard in September, though the
regiment will continue to use the more modern annex next door.

As in several other communities in the city, the Kingsbridge regiment's
impending departure has inspired many proposals on what to do with the building,
igniting much debate about the landmark's future.

Two proposals dominate the debate in Kingsbridge. Officials of School District
10 would like to see several schools and an array of social services on the site
to relieve crowded conditions in the district's schools. Another plan, supported
by State Attorney General G. Oliver Koppell when he was an Assemblyman from the
area, calls for converting it into a center for amateur athletics.

A nine-story red-brick structure with a 180-square-foot drill hall and an
800-seat auditorium, the armory covers an entire block between Kingsbridge Road
and 195th Street and Reservoir and Jerome Avenues.

The state, which will cede title to the building to New York City, recently
awarded a local nonprofit organization, the Bronx Overall Economic Development
Corporation, a $100,000 grant to come up with a plan on how best to use the
site. In about two weeks, the development corporation will form a committee of
residents and merchants who will spend a year working with consultants, drawing
up a proposal for uses of the building and finding ways to pay for roof repairs,
new electrical systems and other structural work, which could cost as much as
$40 million.

A small shelter on the Jerome Avenue side of the building that accommodates
about 90 homeless women in the winter will remain open for now, officials said.
But its future must also be decided. The committee's report will be submitted to
Borough President Fernando Ferrer. All current proposals will be studied, said
Yves Trillon, a project director of the development corporation.

"The Kingsbridge Armory is a tremendous landmark that now needs to be turned
into a tremendous resource for the community," Mr. Ferrer said. "We hope the
study will provide us with some ideas and some ways to make it work for the
community."

The construction of the giant armories in New York, beginning in the late 19th
century, reflected the growth in the size and quantity of military equipment and
in the ranks of the National Guard, which was frequently called on to deal with
riots and other civil disturbances of that era.

In those that remain today, style sometimes takes precedence over substance. The
moat in front of the Kingsbridge Armory, for example, would spill water into the
basement windows if filled.

"We certainly have our work cut out for us," Mr. Trillon said. "This whole
project is like dealing with several buildings in one."   LYNETTE HOLLOWAY

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The National Guard will be leaving the Kingsbridge Armory.
(Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

Map/Diagram: "Armory Roundoup"

Since the 70's, with anti-military sentiment aroused by the Vietnam War, and
facing growing budget constraints and increasing maintenance costs onthe hulking
buildings, the National Guard has been winnowing down the number of its
armories. Here is a map of New York City's armories and their current status.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37TH PRESIDENT;
In Three Decades, Nixon Tasted Crisis and Defeat, Victory, Ruin and Revival

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 13155 words


To millions of Americans, Richard Milhous Nixon was the most puzzling and
fascinating politician of his time. He was a man of high intelligence and
innovative concepts whose talents, especially in international affairs, were
widely respected by both friend and foe. Yet he was so motivated by hatreds and
fears that he abused his powers and resorted to lies and cover-ups.

Almost constantly in the public eye from the time he entered politics in 1946,
he propelled himself into a career that culminated a generation later when he
became the first President to travel to Communist China and the first to resign
from office. Over the decades, he evoked conflicting emotions among millions of
Americans.

Many felt an intense dislike for him on the ground that he rose to power through
what they regarded as demagoguery and defamation of his opponents. But among
many others he inspired an intense loyalty, particularly among those who
identified with his humble beginnings and with his hostility toward
intellectuals, liberals, socialists and others he regarded as archenemies.

Mr. Nixon wore his hatreds on his sleeve, and some of the most revealing
information about his character and motivations came from his friends and
associates. "Richard Nixon went up the walls of life with his claws," said Bryce
Harlow, one of his Presidential aides.

His career, driven by such tenacity, was a tumultuous roller-coaster ride of
victory, crisis, defeat, revival, triumph, ruin and, in later life, re-emergence
as an elder statesman of the world who traveled widely, wrote copiously and
offered advice freely.

"No one," he told an interviewer in 1990, "had ever been so high and fallen so
low."

Mr. Nixon's political life spanned the cold war. He began in politics as an
ardent anti-Communist, and he spent his last years crusading for American
political support and financial aid to Boris N. Yeltsin's Russia.

A Resignation, Not a Confession



Mr. Nixon never received the honors and accolades he would have earned had he
not resigned the Presidency in the face of certain impeachment for the cover-up
of a cheap political burglary of Democratic offices in the Watergate complex and
other illegal acts of domestic espionage, all documented by Oval Office tape
recordings.

Still, he never confessed to the "high crimes and misdemeanors" of which he was
accused in articles of impeachment, which were approved by the House Judiciary
Committee and which precipitated his resignation in 1974.

"When the President does it, that means it is not illegal," he told David Frost
in a celebrated television interview three years after he was pardoned by his
successor, Gerald R. Ford.

So strong was the stigma of the Watergate scandals that it tended to obscure Mr.
Nixon's accomplishments. In foreign affairs these included establishing
relations with Communist China, initiating detente and nuclear arms control
treaties with the Soviet Union, and opening the way for Egypt to break with the
Soviet bloc (and subsequently to make peace with Israel).

In the domestic arena, his record appears better through the prism of subsequent
events, some scholars say, than it did at the time. In his Administration, an
expansion of the food stamp program went a long way toward stamping out hunger
in America. The Environmental Protection Act authorized vast resources and
regulations for cleaning the country's air, land and water.

In fact, many of the Government regulations and expenditures for social programs
that Ronald Reagan cut when he became President in 1981 were the products of the
Nixon Administration rather than of the Democratic Presidents Mr. Reagan blamed.

Perhaps more important was Mr. Nixon's reshaping of the Supreme Court through
his appointment of a Chief Justice and three Associate Justices. He appointed
candidates for their ideological persuasion, particularly on such issues as
judicial restraint, tough law enforcement and relaxation of school desegregation
rules. As a result, the nine-member Court was transformed from the "liberal
Warren Court" to a body that was often split on the great issues of the day but
more attuned to conservative causes.

A Push for Peace, A Bungled Burglary

Yet his accomplishments were marred to some extent by his methods, his motives
and his ambiguities. Carrying out the "peace with honor" agreement to end the
long divisive war in Southeast Asia took five years from the time he was elected
to office on a peace pledge, years in which American society was scarred by
riots and rebellions against the efforts to force peace through bombings and
incursions into new territory.

By the end of 1968, 30,610 Americans and untold Vietnamese had died in the war;
over the next five years another 27,557 Americans and even more Vietnamese died.
The men who negotiated the peace, Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, were
selected for the Nobel Peace Prize; Mr. Tho declined.

In all matters Mr. Nixon centralized power in himself and a few aides in the
White House and sought to broaden the authority of the executive branch at the
expense of Congress and the courts. He tried to use the bureaucracy against
political foes. He entered his second term by interpreting his crushing defeat
of George McGovern as a mandate to scale back domestic government, even though
some of the programs involved grew out of the first Nixon term. But that effort
was barely under way early in 1973 when the Watergate disclosures weakened him.

Watergate in its broadest sense -- not only the burglary of Democratic
headquarters and subsequent effortsat a cover-up, but also the corruption of
Federal agencies for illegal purposes -- had such an impact on politics and
government that it remains a promontory on the landscape of American history.

In Watergate's wake Congress passed a proliferation of legislation intended to
restore ethics to elections and government, to make government more open to the
public, and to restrain agencies from abusing individual rights at home and
abroad.

Citizens seemed to be so offended by Watergate that for several years they voted
heavily against candidates of Mr. Nixon's party whether or not they had anything
to do with the scandals. A result, Democrats swept Congress in 1974 and Jimmy
Carter was elected President in 1976. The contest between Mr. Carter and
President Ford was so close that many students of politics believed Mr. Ford
would have won had he not pardoned Mr. Nixon, an act that prevented the kind of
criminal prosecution that sent many Nixon aides to prison.

It was Mr. Nixon's personality and character that most caught the attention of
Americans as, always accompanied by controversy, he went from Southern
California to the House of Representatives, to the Senate, to the White House as
Dwight D. Eisenhower's Vice President, to the Presidency, and to private citizen
as the first President to have resigned the office. In years between, he was
defeated in a race for the Presidency by John F. Kennedy in 1960 and, two years
later, in a bid for Governor of California by Edmund G. (Pat) Brown.

No public figure had been more observed, discussed and psychoanalyzed in public,
yet few professed to understand him.

"Though he was a remote and private man, we had all been drawn into his life
story," Garry Wills, author of "Nixon Agonistes," wrote after the resignation.
"Decade by decade, crisis by crisis, we were unwilling intruders on his most
intimate moments -- we saw him cry, sweat, tremble, saw him angry, hurt,
vindictive. The tapes even let us eavesdrop on those embarrassing conversations.
Although no one really knew him, we all knew too much about him. He was too
vividly present, and yet not present at all -- a collection of quirks, and not a
person; a conspicuous absence."

On another level, there were those who asserted that the apparent Nixon enigma
stemmed not from his character but from his fruitless efforts as President to
persuade the people to take a more pragmatic view of government, particularly in
foreign affairs, a view that neither the right nor left was quite prepared to
adopt.

Calling the Nixon era "a golden age of diplomacy," William Tucker, a writer and
magazine editor, wrote in 1981: "The Nixon approach was always hated by the far
left and far right -- groups that despite doctrinal differences see the world in
terms of absolute right and wrong. The right hated Nixon because he had
abandoned the anti-Communist cause; the left was unforgiving of the former
Richard Nixon, and resentful because he turned out to be such a constructive
diplomat. Watergate had little to do with it."

Americans did not know who Richard Nixon was in part because he had no fixed
ideology, no particular place on the political spectrum. He was a loner who had
no lasting alliances with other prominent Republican leaders. At one time or
another he was at cross-purposes with Dwight Eisenhower, Barry Goldwater, Nelson
Rockefeller, Ronald Reagan, Earl Warren and others.

His life was a series of contradictions. He preached the Protestant ethic of
hard work and moral living and was prim in dress and manner. Yet the White House
tapes that came to light in the Watergate investigation, as well as the
testimony of some of his associates, showed that he could be profane, amoral and
power-driven.

A Faith of Peace, A Policy of Force

Reared as a Quaker, Mr. Nixon said he was strongly influenced by that faith of
peace and contemplation. Yet he considered politics combat and election
campaigns an "arena." A foundation of his foreign policy was to appear ready to
use military force anywhere in the world.

Like Lincoln and Jackson, he identified with the common people, siding with
"middle America" against the well-to-do. But his own style of living was
extravagant, with two expensive homes in California and Florida subsidized by
wealthy friends and the Federal Government.

He entered the White House promising to decentralize authority but almost
immediately consolidated it in himself and a few aides at the expense of his
Cabinet.

He invited crises and, until the Watergate scandals closed in, thrived on them,
but he felt depressed after a victory, as he wrote in his book "Six Crises."

He entered politics by falsely branding his opponent for a House seat as an ally
of Communists and their sympathizers. Yet as President he opened relations with
the Communist Government of China and established a rapport with Soviet and
other Communist-bloc leaders that no previous President had achieved.

Some Nixon observers have sought to explain him as an early practitioner of "the
new politics," in which the dominant ingredients are a weak party structure and
the mass appeal of television.

California set the trend. There, Mr. Nixon was able to run for Congress without
working his way up through party ranks, as was the custom in most other states
in 1946.

Six years later, Mr. Nixon discovered in his celebrated "Checkers" speech that
on television he could move audiences without being subjected to questions and
checking of his facts. Thereafter, he used television whenever he could and
became a master of the controlled broadcast that conveyed the image he desired.

None of this, however, explains Richard Nixon. He was a man of enormous
complexity. Many volumes have been written about him in an effort to penetrate
his core. He himself provided the best clues.

'They'll Never Give Us Credit'



Kenneth W. Clawson was communications director for Mr. Nixon and a loyalist who
stayed with him to the end. Shortly after Mr. Nixon resigned and returned to San
Clemente, Calif., he sent for Mr. Clawson, who had grown up in Appalachia and
admired the Nixon style and determination.

Mr. Clawson found "the Old Man" depressed and nursing a bout of phlebitis, his
legs propped on his desk.

"They'll never give us credit," he said to Mr. Clawson, who wrote of the
conversation in The Washington Post in 1979. "Even now they try to stomp us, you
know, kick us when we're down. They'll never let up, never, because we were the
first threat to them in years. And, by God, we would have changed it all,
changed it so they couldn't have changed it back in a hundred years, if only . .
."

There was no explanation of who "they" were, and no need for one. They were the
liberals, the intellectuals, journalists, those born to privilege, the
anti-Nixon people in his own party, those Mr. Nixon had counted as his enemies
over many years.

"What starts the process, really, are the laughs, slights and snubs when you are
a kid," Mr. Nixon said. "Sometimes it's because you are poor, or Irish or Jewish
or Catholic or ugly or simply that you are skinny. But if you are reasonably
intelligent and if your anger is deep enough and strong enough, you learn you
can change those attitudes by excellence, personal gut performance, while those
who have anything are sitting on their fat butts.

"Once you learn that you've got to work harder than anybody else, it becomes a
way of life as you move out of the alley and on your way. In your own mind you
have nothing to lose, so you take plenty of chances, and if you do your homework
many of them pay off. It is then you understand, for the first time, that you
really have the advantage because your competitors can't risk what they have
already. It's a piece of cake until you get to the top. You find you can't stop
playing the game the way you've always played it because it is a part of you and
you need it as much as an arm and a leg."

Patting his swollen leg, he added: "So you are lean and mean and resourceful,
and you continue to walk on the edge of the precipice because over the years you
have become fascinated by how close to the edge you can walk without losing your
balance. This time there was a difference. This time we had something to lose."

That short conversation provides a thread that ran through Mr. Nixon's entire
life, a life lived on the precipice and, for the most part, sustained by skill,
determination and a good bit of luck.

EARLY YEARS
 Quaker Church, Football Field, Role in War, Taste of Politics

The future President was born Jan. 9, 1913, in Yorba Linda, Calif., then a
farming community of 200 people near Los Angeles. His ancestors on both sides
were farmers, artisans and tradesmen who came to America from Ireland in the
18th century.

Francis Anthony Nixon, Richard's father, was born on a farm in Ohio, left home
at the age of 14 to earn a living and arrived in California several years later,
in 1907. He found a job as a trolley-car motorman in the Quaker community of
Whittier, where he met Hannah Milhous, whose family had come there from Indiana
in 1897. Frank and Hannah were married in 1908.

After working in his father-in-law's orchards and in several other jobs, Frank
bought a general store and filling station in 1922. Richard was the second of
five sons.

"It was not an easy life, but it was a good one," Richard Nixon recalled in his
memoirs, "centered around a loving family and a small, tight-knit Quaker
community."

Childhood friends of Mr. Nixon's said he rarely smiled. In "The Presidential
Character," published in 1972, James David Barber cited a "lifelong propensity
for feeling sad about himself, with his Duke Law School roommate's observation
that 'he never expected anything good to happen to him, or to anyone else close
to him, unless it was earned.' "

He daydreamed of faraway places; worked hard at winning good grades in school;
lectured his brothers to be more conscientious; played football with zest even
though he was not good at it; pursued music, acting and debating and competed
for leadership positions in school, and went four times a week to a strict
Quaker church.

He was close to death and illness at an early age. A younger brother, Arthur,
died of tubercular encephalitis when Richard was 12. When Richard was 20, his
older brother, Harold, died of tuberculosis after a 10-year illness that drained
the family resources.

At the age of 3, Richard toppled from a horse-drawn buggy, and the wheel ran
over his head, inflicting a deep gash in his scalp that left an ugly scar.

"Out of his childhood Nixon brought a persistent bent toward life as painful,
difficult, and, perhaps as significant, uncertain," Mr. Barber wrote.

Some students of his career concluded that as an adult, Mr. Nixon would make his
investment in life not in values but in managing himself so he could accomplish
his next goal. And in the process, he was not as enigmatic as he was often
pictured. Rather, his behavior was consistent with his view of the world and was
perhaps more predictable than that of most politicians.

After he had become famous and served as Vice President, his mother was asked if
her son had changed over the years.

"No," she replied. "He has always been exactly the same. I never knew a person
to change so little."

The Upward Ladder: Fighting to Win

After graduation from high school, the young Nixon wanted to go to Harvard or
Yale. But there was no money for that. So he stayed four more years in the
community he wished desperately to escape and entered Whittier College. There he
sharpened his debating talents, was elected president of the freshman class and
of the student body for three years, and took acting lessons.

But it was his football coach, Wallace Newman, who influenced him the most. "I
admired him and learned more from him than any man I have ever known aside from
my father," Mr. Nixon said.

In his memoirs he said of Mr. Newman, "He had no tolerance for the view that how
you play the game counts more than whether you win or lose. He used to say,
'Show me a good loser and I'll show you a loser.' "

Graduating from Whittier second in his class, Mr. Nixon won a scholarship to the
Duke University Law School in Durham, N.C. There, he was so short of spending
money that he spent most of his time in study. He was elected president of the
Duke Bar Association and graduated third in his class.

Mr. Nixon tried to get a job in one of the big New York law firms, particularly
Sullivan & Cromwell, but he received no encouragement. The Federal Bureau of
Investigation also turned him down. He went back to California and was admitted
to the bar in November 1937; he almost immediately joined the firm of Wingert &
Bewley in Whittier.

In his spare time, he became active in civic groups, taught Sunday school and
acted in a little theater group. It was in the theater that he met Thelma
Catherine Ryan, called Pat because she was born March 16, a day before St.
Patrick's Day, in 1912. When they met, she was teaching typing and shorthand at
Whittier High School. They were married two years later, June 21, 1940, in a
Quaker ceremony.

When the United States entered World War II in 1941, Mr. Nixon took a job in
Washington as a lawyer with the Office of Price Administration, an experience he
loathed and would cite in later years as evidence of the failure of government
bureaucracy. After seven months he applied for and was granted a Navy
commission. He became an operations officer with the South Pacific Combat Air
Transport Command, charged with establishing cargo bases.

A Politician Is Born, Midwifed by Committee

At war's end he was surprised to receive a letter from a committee of California
Republicans asking if he was interested in running for Congress.

Although there had been little indication that Mr. Nixon had wanted to make
politics his career, he jumped at the chance. The five-term incumbent was Jerry
Voorhis, a liberal in the Truman tradition who had voted for Federal control of
tidelands oil and had worked for cheap credit and for public power; the
conservatives of Southern California wanted him out.

Mr. Nixon returned to California and, in competing with other candidates for the
committee's endorsement, said the issues would be "New Deal government control
in regulating our lives" versus "individual freedom and all that initiative can
produce."

"I hold with the latter viewpoint," he said. "I believe that returning veterans,
and I have talked to many of them in the foxholes, will not be satisfied with a
dole or a Government handout." That Mr. Nixon had little opportunity for contact
with servicemen in the foxholes was not important; he demonstrated a political
ability to say what his audience wanted to hear. He won the committee's
endorsement and the primary.

But when the campaign for the 1946 general election began, Mr. Nixon was far
behind his opponent. To overcome that, he developed a technique he would use
time and again: discredit your opponent.

Mr. Nixon issued a statement billing himself as a "clean, forthright young
American who fought for the defense of his country in the stinking mud and
jungles of the Solomons" while his opponent "stayed safely behind the front in
Washington."

This was coupled with another statement saying he represented no special
interest or pressure group and adding, in reference to the Political Action
Committee of the Congress of Industrial Organizations: "I welcome the opposition
of the PAC with its Communist principles and huge slush fund."

Mr. Voorhis's defense, that the PAC had not endorsed him and that it was not
Communist, did not deter Mr. Nixon, and when he arrived in Washington at the age
of 34, Representative Nixon received a cold shoulder from some members of
Congress who believed he had unseated a colleague unfairly.

The slight did not escape the notice of Mr. Nixon, who was already beginning to
see himself confronted by enemies.

Fame and Alger Hiss, Politics and the Pink Lady

It was the Alger Hiss case that made Richard Nixon a national celebrity.

In August 1948, Mr. Hiss, a highly regarded former State Department official,
was accused by Whittaker Chambers, a former Communist and then a senior editor
at Time magazine, of having given Mr. Chambers secret Government documents for
delivery to the Soviet Union in 1937 and 1938. Mr. Hiss denied the charges
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities and swore he did not know
"a man named Whittaker Chambers."

Because of Mr. Hiss's excellent credentials and Government record, the matter
might have been dropped had Mr. Nixon not doggedly pursued it as head of a
special subcommittee.

Mr. Hiss finally acknowledged that he had known Mr. Chambers as "George
Crosley," a freelance writer he had befriended in the 1930's. He continued to
deny, however, that he had been a Communist or had passed secret documents.

After Mr. Hiss filed a libel suit against Mr. Chambers, the rumpled, rotund
editor produced from a pumpkin on his Maryland farm five rolls of microfilm of
documents that he said had been passed to him by Mr. Hiss. They led to Mr.
Hiss's indictment on a charge of perjury, and after two trials he was convicted
in 1950.

The episode was an embarrassment to Democrats who had defended Mr. Hiss. Mr.
Nixon won wide praise for his persistence and astuteness in the case, but he
emphasized the enemies he made.

"The Hiss case proved beyond any reasonable doubt the existence of
Soviet-directed Communist subversion at the highest levels of American
government," Mr. Nixon wrote in his memoirs. "But many who had defended Hiss
simply refused to accept the overwhelming evidence of his guilt. Some turned
their anger and frustration on me."

The Hiss case made Richard Nixon famous, but it also turned him, he wrote, "into
one of the most controversial figures in Washington, bitterly opposed by the
most respected and influential liberal journalists and opinion makers of the
time."

In 1950, Senator Sheridan Downey, a Democrat, unexpectedly chose to retire. Mr.
Nixon, who had had his eye on the Senate seat for a couple of years, was
supported by major California newspapers and was unopposed in the Republican
primary. The Democrats, however, were split in a bitter primary contest in which
Representative Helen Gahagan Douglas emerged the winner to face Representative
Nixon.

Mrs. Douglas was a former Broadway and motion picture actress who was married to
the actor Melvyn Douglas. She was a popular liberal, a Fair Dealer who had
enthusiastically supported the Truman program.

From the beginning Mr. Nixon set out to discredit his opponent's loyalty to the
American system. He distributed more than half a million pink fliers that said
in part:

"During five years in Congress, Helen Douglas has voted 353 times exactly as has
Vito Marcantonio, the notorious Communist party-line Congressman from New York.
How can Helen Douglas, capable actress that she is, take up so strange a role as
a foe of Communism? And why does she when she has so deservedly earned the title
of 'the pink lady'?"

In fact, Mrs. Douglas was denounced by pro-Communist groups as a "capitalist
warmonger," and it was in this campaign that Mr. Nixon was first called "Tricky
Dick," an epithet bestowed by The Independent Review in an editorial and picked
up by Mrs. Douglas in her campaign.

The extreme charges against Mrs. Douglas turned out to be overkill: Mr. Nixon
won the race by 680,000 votes. But the campaign would supply Democrats with
anti-Nixon ammunition for years to come.

NATIONAL SCENE
A Young Man And a War Hero: A G.O.P Ticket With Balance



It seemed strange to some that Dwight Eisenhower, a war hero running for
President as a moderate, picked Richard Nixon as his running mate in 1952. But
politically it made sense.

Eisenhower was reputed within the party to be the candidate of the "Eastern
liberal establishment." He needed someone from the West or Middle West who could
appeal to disappointed conservatives.

Further, the retired general knew, as Mr. Nixon later wrote, "that to maintain
his above-the-battle position he needed a running mate who was willing to engage
in all-out combat and who was good at it."

And in many ways Mr. Nixon himself projected a moderate image as a spokesman
against corruption in government. At 39, he was young, bright and an effective
speaker.

He first caught the attention of Eisenhower supporters in addressing a
Republican dinner in New York three months before the nominating convention.
Former Gov. Thomas E. Dewey of New York, twice the party's Presidential nominee
and Eisenhower's chief backer, was reported to have told Mr. Nixon after his
speech: "Make me a promise. Don't get fat, don't lose your zeal, and you can be
President some day."

A Speech About Checkers, A Spot Secured

The 1952 campaign was barely under way when, on Sept. 18, a sudden crisis
loomed. The New York Post and other newspapers disclosed that 78 wealthy
California businessmen had quietly raised a fund of $18,235 to defray political
expenses for Senator Nixon.

Although establishment of such a fund would later seem mild, the news at the
time stunned much of the country. Many Democrats and some Republicans, including
Eisenhower's closest advisers, demanded that Mr. Nixon resign from the ticket on
ethical grounds.

Eisenhower himself was silent for several days, finally saying only: "Nothing's
decided. Nixon has got to be clean as a hound's tooth." Each wanted the other to
make the decision. After Mr. Nixon told the general by telephone that it was
time for the head of the ticket to make a decision, the Eisenhower people were
convinced that Mr. Nixon had to go. But the general gave him the opportunity to
state his case on national television.

By any measure, his defense was a virtuoso performance. He maintained that he
had done nothing wrong, disclosed his mortgages and other financing to show he
was in fact in debt, attacked Communism and asked people to tell the Republican
National Committee whether they thought he should resign.

His most moving, and best remembered, remarks were in reference to his wife and
a dog named Checkers.

"Pat and I have the satisfaction that every dime that we've got is honestly
ours," he said. "I should say this -- that Pat doesn't have a mink coat. But she
does have a respectable Republican cloth coat."

Then he said a man in Texas had given the family a cocker spaniel, "black and
white and spotted."

"And our little girl, Tricia, the 6-year-old, named it Checkers. And you know,
the kids love the dog, and I just want to say this right now, that regardless of
what they do about it, we're going to keep it."

Public response was overwhelmingly pro-Nixon. Eisenhower asked him to meet him
on the campaign trail in Wheeling, W.Va. When the Nixon plane landed, the
general hopped aboard.

"General, you didn't need to come out to the airport," the surprised Mr. Nixon
said.

"Why not," said the general, flashing his famous grin, "You're my boy."

After the Republican victory, Mr. Nixon turned out to be an active Vice
President under a President who preferred to operate quietly. President
Eisenhower was willing to delegate more tasks than most of his predecessors, and
the energetic Mr. Nixon had a knack of keeping himself in the limelight, no
manner how menial the assignment.

Probably his most important role was in foreign affairs. He visited 56 countries
as a good-will envoy, but, more important, he served on the National Security
Council, at the heart of policy decisions and intelligence. He was close to
Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, whose policy of "brinksmanship" fit
perfectly with Mr. Nixon's idea of bold and even risky actions abroad.

Mr. Nixon's travels abroad generated far more news than most trips by Vice
Presidents. Unlike most, he was not content to engage in ceremony and quiet
diplomacy. He invited crowds to engage him in dialogue, however tense relations
might be between their country and his.

Thus Mr. Nixon's 1958 trip in South America turned out to be one of the "Six
Crises" he would recall in his book. He managed sessions of crowd-mingling and
argumentative discussion in Venezuela and Argentina with few problems. But in
Peru crowds of students and others had been worked into an anti-Yankee,
anti-Nixon frenzy by speakers and signs.

'Are You Afraid Of the Truth?'

When a rock thrown from a crowd in Lima grazed the Vice President's neck and hit
a Secret Service agent in the teeth, Mr. Nixon shook his fist at the crowd and
asked, "Are you afraid to talk to me? Are you afraid of the truth?" He leapt
onto the trunk of his car shouting: "Cowards! Are you afraid of the truth?"

In a later confrontation someone spat in his face. "I felt an almost
uncontrollable urge to tear the face in front of me to pieces," he wrote later.
"I at least had the satisfaction of planting a healthy kick on his shins.
Nothing I did all day made me feel better."

Such confrontations paid off in public acclaim. On his return to the United
States, he was greeted by cheering crowds as a conquering hero.

And there was the celebrated "kitchen debate" with the Soviet leader, Nikita S.
Khrushchev, while Mr. Nixon was on a trip to Moscow in 1959 to open an American
exhibit at a fair. In the kitchen of a model home, the two leaders engaged in a
folksy dialogue on the relative merits of the capitalist and Soviet systems.

The two men stood jowl to jowl, the Soviet leader occasionally jabbing Mr.
Nixon's chest for emphasis. The outcome was inconclusive, of course, but Mr.
Nixon won acclaim at home for the forceful manner in which he defended the
American system.

There were also attacks from his opponents. Frequent Herblock cartoons in The
Washington Post showed him with a shadowy, hateful face; some showed him
climbing out of a sewer to give a campaign talk. The Duke faculty voted 61 to 42
against giving Mr. Nixon an honorary degree.

Richard Nixon could never give up politics, however. He had tasted power and the
excitement of living on the precipice, and he liked it. Pat Nixon, though she
would still try to persuade him to retire from politics, resigned herself year
after year to "another campaign."

AIMING HIGHER
 One Ballot, Four Debates, Two Defeats, And a Recovery



After the Eisenhower-Nixon ticket won again in 1956 by a wide margin, defeating
Adlai E. Stevenson for a second time, Mr. Nixon groomed himself for the 1960
Presidential nomination. A rival, Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York,
abandoned his efforts after Mr. Nixon's popularity shot up in the wake of the
"kitchen debate."

The Republicans nominated Mr. Nixon on the first ballot at their convention in
Chicago. Trying to appeal to the "Eastern establishment," he chose Henry Cabot
Lodge of Massachusetts as his running mate. The Democratic ticket was Senator
John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Senator Lyndon B. Johnson of Texas.

The campaign went badly from the beginning. For the first time in his career,
Mr. Nixon was on the defensive, forced to defend the Eisenhower record and to
erase his reputation as an unfair campaigner.

Eisenhower, who had always had trouble embracing Mr. Nixon, did not help. At a
news conference he was asked for an example of a major idea of Mr. Nixon's that
had been adopted by the Administration. "If you give me a week, I might think of
one," he replied. "I don't remember."

And the Nixon campaign itself was in many ways uncharacteristic. Mr. Nixon, who
had always seemed prepared to take on any opponent anywhere, held Senator
Kennedy and his family in awe in a way few of his supporters could understand.
He admired the Kennedy family's fighting spirit and their wealth and status.
Whatever the reason, he broke from his practice, and never made a slashing
attack on his opponent..

A noted debater, he was not at his best in the four television debates with Mr.
Kennedy. He was tense, and he declined the use of makeup: his dark beard and
pasty forehead, with beads of sweat, made him appear on television to be the
shadowy figure that cartoonists had depicted.

Throughout the campaign, the Vice President's serious, sometimes prim, demeanor
was overshadowed by the charisma of the young Senator. This seemed more
important than questions about an interest-free $205,000 loan from Howard Hughes
to Mr. Nixon's brother Donald or such issuesas which candidate would be toughest
against the Russians and which could, in Mr. Kennedy's words, "get this country
moving again" in the wake of a recession.

A Quiet Pledge: 'I Would Be Back'

Still, Mr. Nixon campaigned as doggedly as he ever had, and the outcome was
extraordinarily close. In the popular vote Mr. Kennedy led by 113,000 out of
68.8 million cast. It was Mr. Nixon's first defeat and the last he would accept
graciously. Many Republicans, believing that Democratic machines in Chicago and
Texas had stolen the election for Mr. Kennedy, wanted to contest the outcome.
But Mr. Nixon would not.

In his memoirs, he wrote that on the night of Mr. Kennedy's inauguration, when
happy Democrats were celebrating throughout Washington, he went alone to the
deserted Capitol and stood for several minutes on a balcony overlooking the
snow-covered Mall and the Washington Monument.

"As I turned to go inside, I suddenly stopped short, struck by the thought that
this was not the end, that someday I would be back here. I walked as fast as I
could back to the car."

At the age of 48, Mr. Nixon returned to California and entered the 1962 race for
Governor against the incumbent, Pat Brown, a Democrat seeking a second term.

It was another tumultuous campaign of charges and countercharges, but in the end
the voters seemed to recognize what Mr. Nixon admitted in his memoirs: he did
not really want to be Governor; he wanted to be President.

The night of his defeat he was in a foul mood. Mr. Nixon felt he had been abused
by the press, and when reporters kept insisting that he make a statement, he
marched into the press room and made an angry farewell-to-politics speech that
included the line, "You won't have Nixon to kick around anymore, because,
gentlemen, this is my last press conference."

Almost everyone believed that his political career was over. He had violated a
basic rule of American politics: Never appear to be a poor loser.

But after that night he began a slow, measured recovery that would lead to
victory in two Presidential elections. He wrote in his memoirs:

"I have never regretted what I said in 'the last press conference.' I believe
that it gave the media a warning that I would not sit back and take whatever
biased coverage was dished out to me. I think the episode was partially
responsible for the much fairer treatment I received from the press during the
next few years. From that point of view alone, it was worth it."

Ever restless, he moved to New York as a senior partner in a Wall Street law
firm whose name became Nixon, Rose, Guthrie, Anderson & Mitchell. The Nixons
settled in an expensive apartment on Fifth Avenue.

But Mr. Nixon spent little time as a lawyer. Rather, he worked at becoming
President. The crushing defeat of its 1964 nominee, Barry Goldwater, left the
Republican Party in a shambles. And it was Mr. Nixon who moved in and did the
drudge work needed to rebuild a constituency, attending the dinners, the
rallies, the conventions.

In 1966 he chartered a sputtering DC-3 to take him around the country to
speeches on behalf of Republican Congressional candidates. Although his plane
was modest, Mr. Nixon managed to appear Presidential, the head of a party that
was starting to capitalize on the weaknesses of the Johnson Administration as
public opposition to the Vietnam War mounted and as many people became fearful
of rising crime and civil disorder.

On Jan. 31, 1968, he formally announced his candidacy for the Presidency. He
rolled easily through the primaries. With the help of Southern conservatives,
attracted by a promise that he would ease off on school desegregation, he won
the nomination at the party's convention in Miami Beach on the first ballot,
defeating Governor Rockefeller of New York, a liberal, and Governor Reagan of
California, a conservative.

As in the 1950 Senate race, the cards fell Mr. Nixon's way. President Johnson
withdrew as a candidate for re-election because of the opposition to the Vietnam
War. Senator Robert F. Kennedy was assassinated in Los Angeles in June while
campaigning for the Democratic nomination. Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey was
nominated over an antiwar candidate, Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota, at
the Democratic National Convention in Chicago while the police and demonstrators
fought in the streets. But Mr. Humphrey was too closely tied to Mr. Johnson's
policies for many Democrats, and when he finally announced his independent
opposition to the war, it was too late to heal the wounds.

Millions of independents and moderates in both parties saw Mr. Nixon as a
suitable alternative to another Democratic administration. At the age of 55 he
seemed to have put the excesses of his youth behind him. His mastery of foreign
affairs and the prospects that he would bring an era of reforms after years of
hastily enacted "Great Society" programs at home appealed to many.

And in 1968 he was able to control as never before the image he projected to
voters. By then, candidates could be and were packaged and sold on television.
Campaign tours and rallies were useful mostly for showing on TV screens. The
reality of a campaign could be altered to project the desired image.

John D. Ehrlichman, later a top White House assistant, recalled the campaign in
his book, "Witness to Power." At an Oct. 31 rally in Madison Square Garden, for
example, Nixon supporters were bused in from distant suburbs to fill the hall,
while those off the street who looked as if they might boo or heckle the
candidate were directed down a corridor that led back to the street.

"The television audience," Mr. Ehrlichman wrote, "saw only the thunderous
cheering of a friendly, enthusiastic crowd of enlightened American voters."

Mr. Nixon won the popular vote by a narrow margin and got 301 electoral votes to
191 for Mr. Humphrey and 46 for Gov. George C. Wallace of Alabama, on a
third-party ticket.

FIRST TERM
 More Spending, More Control, More Justices, More War



When Mr. Nixon became President, he had never before wielded executive
authority. But he had been around power for so long and went to such great pains
to keep abreast of affairs at home and abroad that he knew exactly what he would
do.

Much of what he did in the domestic area was aimed at cementing his re-election
in 1972, several Nixon aides said. He began by appointing a broadly based
Cabinet that included elected officials like Gov. George Romney of Michigan as
Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and Walter J. Hickel, the former
Governor of Alaska, as Interior Secretary. He named Daniel Patrick Moynihan of
New York, who had been a liberal in the Kennedy Administration, as his chief
urban affairs adviser, and Henry Kissinger, an adviser to Governor Rockefeller,
as his chief foreign policy aide.

Despite his promises during the campaign and his Presidency to trim Government
spending, Mr. Nixon presided over an expansion in spending. One reason was that
he had to deal with a liberal, Democratic Congress. Another was that he did
believe in many innovations for Government aid, and in the 1970's there was a
strong public demand for such services.

He proposed a family assistance program that would have been more generous than
the traditional welfare then on the books, he backed safety and health
protection for workers and he called for housing allowances that would have
moved many families out of public housing by giving them money to rent their
own. His Administration built more subsidized housing units than any before or
since, and he agreed to environmental legislation, including the Environmental
Protection Act, that would pour billions into cleaning up the nation's air and
waters.

Although few noticed it at the time, Mr. Nixon's expansion of the food stamp
program would later be acknowledged as a remarkable breakthrough in social
policy by a President who preached austerity: by 1982 it was helping to feed 1
in 10 Americans.

Another innovation that had an important effect on the nation was the program
under which the Federal Government took several billion dollars each year from
its tax receipts and distributed it, with few strings attached, to local
governments. Looking to re-election, Mr. Nixon opted to give local officials the
maximum authority over use of these revenue-sharing funds.

A 1972 Strategy To Comfort the South

But much of this was little noticed at the time because of some of Mr. Nixon's
positions on civil rights and his efforts to win the support of Southern
conservatives breaking away from the Democratic Party.

He backed off on enforcement of school desegregation, supporting legislation and
executive action that would vastly reduce the use of busing as the chief tool in
achieving integration.

A cornerstone of this "Southern strategy" was his effort to change the makeup of
the Supreme Court. Two conservative nominees from the South were rejected by the
Senate, but Mr. Nixon was still able to reshape the court with four
appointments: Warren E. Burger as Chief Justice, and Associate Justices Harry A.
Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell Jr. and William H. Rehnquist.

In much of his Presidency, Mr. Nixon faced a troubled economy, and as pressure
from Congress and the public mounted for him to do something to check inflation,
he imposed wage and price controls in mid-1971.

The controls required him to set up the kind of bureaucracy he had hated in
World War II. And when they were lifted, after the 1972 election, prices shot up
again.

"What did America reap from its brief fling with economic controls?" Mr. Nixon
asked in his memoirs. "The Aug. 15, 1971, decision to impose them was
politically necessary and immensely popular in the short run. But in the long
run I believe that it was wrong. The piper must be paid, and there was an
unquestionably high price for tampering with the orthodox economic mechanisms."

It was a perfect example of how Richard Nixon would not let ideology stand in
the way of a goal he was trying to achieve.

Concentrating On Foreign Policy

Most of Mr. Nixon's energies, however, were spent in foreign affairs, and it was
his actions in that field that led to his greatest accomplishments and also, in
the view of some, to his undoing. His faltering efforts to end the Vietnam War
brought out, more than anything else, what H. R. Haldeman, his chief aide,
called his "dark side" -- paranoia about enemies real and imagined and violent
temper tantrums.

Mr. Nixon tried to fulfill his pledge to end the Vietnam War, which had dragged
on for four years, through what he privately called "the madman theory," and it
did not work. Recalling that Eisenhower had ended the Korean War with bombings
and a threat to use atomic weapons, Mr. Nixon sought to convey to North Vietnam
a message that he was so obsessed by Communist aggression that he would do
anything to force a settlement acceptable to the United States.

Neither the threat nor subsequent bombings and ground attacks into Cambodia by
American troops worked. The North Vietnamese knew that the United States no
longer had a great advantage over the Soviet Union in atomic weapons, as it did
in the Korean War, and that they had the advantage in their home territory. They
continued their struggle to capture South Vietnam.

American casualties continued to mount while the heavy costs fed inflation at
home and drained money from domestic programs. Even as Mr. Nixon gradually
withdrew troops from the war zone, opposition to American involvement grew. The
White House and the Presidency came under siege in a way they never had.

On one day alone, half a million people descended on Washington and found the
White House protected by a ring of buses parked bumper to bumper. On college
campuses, students disrupted classes, took over offices and held officials
hostage in a general rebellion against authority.

Inside the White House, Mr. Nixon raged at the protesters and frequently
asserted that the troublemakers should be put down by force. On May 5, 1971, he
and his aides discussed the possibility of recruiting "thugs" through the
teamsters' union to silence the dissidents.

"They've got guys who'll go in and knock their heads off," Mr. Nixon said on a
tape released several years later.

There was no evidence that the thugs were recruited, but the conversation
conveyed the siege mentality that would lead to a range of excesses, illegal
acts and corruption that would become known broadly as the Watergate scandal.

The Pentagon Papers, A Growing Anger



In many ways the seeds of the Nixon scandals were sown in the great debate over
the Vietnam War, several of the President's assistants said later, because it
was the public opposition, street demonstrations and leaks of classified
information about the war that caused Mr. Nixon and his aides to become, in Mr.
Nixon's word, "paranoiac" about their detractors.

Mr. Nixon was particularly disturbed when, on June 13, 1971, The New York Times
began printing the findings of a 7,000-page study of American involvement in
Southeast Asia from World War II until 1968, an investigation commissioned by
Robert S. McNamara when he was Secretary of Defense under President Johnson.

"Publication of the Pentagon Papers was certain to hurt the whole Vietnam
effort," Mr. Nixon wrote in his memoirs. "Critics of the war would use them to
attack my goals and my policies."

The Justice Department thus sought a court injunction to stop further
publication by The Times and other newspapers, which argued that the printed
excerpts in no way violated national security. In a historic decision, the
Supreme Court ruled that to stop publication would violate the First Amendment
right of the press to publish events of public interest.

Mr. Nixon's anger, however, was less directed at the press than at Daniel
Ellsberg, a former Government official who has said that he made the papers
available to the press as a way to engender opposition to American conduct of
the war.

Determined to punish Mr. Ellsberg, the President turned to his own aides to find
incriminating evidence, and thus began building a system of covert investigative
and protective actions outside the normal legal channels he distrusted. His
aides' deeds ranged from burglaries and wiretaps to the compiling of a White
House "enemies list" that included the names of many prominent officials and
journalists.

A Unique Team, A Handshake in China



It was considered all the more remarkable that while Mr. Nixon and the nation
were under great stress over Vietnam, he was able to carry out diplomatic feats
elsewhere in the world on a scale unmatched in the years before or since. Secret
negotiations that began soon after Mr. Nixon took office set the stage for
opening relations with China and for a major nuclear arms agreement with the
Soviet Union in 1972.

Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger made a singular team. They were in agreement on a
vision for world order, and Mr. Nixon was barely in office before he stripped
the State Department of much of its authority so that he and Mr. Kissinger, as
his chief foreign affairs adviser in the White House, could work without
interference.

Among their goals was what became the most historic part of the legacy of the
Nixon presidency, the reversal of a long history of enmity and the beginnings of
friendly relations with the country long deemed by Nixon to be a mortal enemy of
the United States -- Communist China.

It would be difficult to overestimate the extent to which Mr. Nixon's
rapprochement with China seemed at the time to contradict his long history of
unremitting anti-Communism. Since the creation of the Communist Government in
China, the United States, with Mr. Nixon's firm support, had maintained the
fiction that the Communists' main enemy, the Nationalist government of Chiang
Kai-shek on Taiwan, was the legitimate Government of all of China. For all that
time, the United States maintained not only diplomatic relations with Taiwan but
was committed to guaranteeing its security against Beijing.

Adding to the historic enmity between the two countries was China's domestic
situation in 1968. The country was in the midst of its Cultural Revolution, a
radical and violent upheaval, promoted by Communist Party Chairman Mao Zedong,
aimed supposedly at purifying the revolution. Among the country's major public
policies was bitter enmity toward the United States, for being the world's
leading "imperialist" power and for continuing its "aggression" against Vietnam.

Still, even before winning the Presidency in 1968, Mr. Nixon was exploring a
change in Sino-American relations. In October 1967, he wrote an article in
Foreign Affairs in which he stressed the short-term need to exercise "firm
restraint" against China and to maintain pressure to get Beijing to "accept the
basic rules of international civility." But Mr. Nixon also spoke of a long-term
goal of "pulling China back into the world community -- but as a great and
progressing nation, not as the epicenter of world revolution."

After taking office, Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger engaged in a subtle diplomatic
minuet with China, the two sides giving public hints of a desire for a better
relationship while passing messages to each other via Pakistan and Romania. "If
there is anything I want to do before I die," Mr. Nixon said in an interview
with Time Magazine in October 1970, giving one of his broader public hints of a
change in policy, "it is to go to China."

In July 1971, Mr. Kissinger made a secret trip to Beijing for talks with Chinese
Premier Zhou Enlai. That led in turn to Mr. Nixon's historic, five-day trip to
Beijing in February 1972.

In his memoirs, Mr. Nixon recalled looking down at the tarmac after Air Force
One arrived in Bejing and seeing Mr. Zhou standing hatless in the cold waiting
to greet him. Remembering that the Chinese leader had been deeply offended when,
in 1954 in Geneva, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles had refused to shake
his hand, Mr. Nixon conspicuously thrust out his hand as he approached Mr. Zhou.

It is not too much to say that the handshake inaugurated a new era in
international diplomacy. Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger had decided that relations
with China would, as Mr. Kissinger put it in his memoirs, enable the United
States to "take account of other power centers and strive for an equilibrium
among them."

In practice this meant several things, including easing tensions in Asia
generally. But most important, the new policy involved greater leverage for the
United States against the Soviet Union and thus enhancing what Mr. Kissinger
called a better "world equilibrium."

A Focus on Moscow Results in a Treaty

Full, formal diplomatic relations were not established between China and the
United States until 1978 during the Carter administration. But the Nixon
initiative, while changing the global balance of power, had other immediate
practical effects. It opened communications and commerce between the United
States and the world's most populous nation. After Mr. Nixon's televised
one-week visit there, many thousands of Americans would explore vast regions of
Asia closed to them for almost three decades; millions more at home would read
and see accounts of a society that had undergone drastic change.

And it did not cause a worsening of relations with the Soviet Union, as some had
predicted it would.

In fact, a determination to pursue detente with Moscow became the overriding aim
of American foreign policy, and the President's China trip was followed in May
by the first of three summit meetings that Mr. Nixon held with Leonid I.
Brezhnev and other Soviet leaders.

The major achievement was an agreement in 1972 to limit the use of the defensive
weapons known as antiballistic missiles, an effort to stop what Mr. Nixon said
"inevitably would have become a defensive arms race, with untold billions being
spent on each side."

Yet the President and Mr. Kissinger came under wide criticism for subordinating
everything to the relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union.

"Nuclear proliferation, North-South economic relations, Africa as a whole, and
relations with traditional allies were often ignored until they developed a
'Soviet dimension,' whether imagined or real," Leslie H. Gelb, diplomatic
correspondent for The New York Times, wrote in summing up the Nixon-Kissinger
achievements. And officials of both political parties were offended by the
secrecy and duplicity they detected in much of the Administration's foreign
policy and in the dealings with countries like Chile and Angola. Mr. Nixon and
Mr. Kissinger were often accused of failing to support human rights around the
world out of deference to their pursuit of detente.

But in 1972, what stood out in the public eye was that the man who had spent
much of his life as a hard-nosed anti-Communist had scored a breakthrough with
the Communist world that enhanced the chances of peace.

RE-ELECTION
 Promising Peace, Shaping Images, Building Power, Eyeing Scandal



Indeed, Mr. Nixon's foreign-policy initiatives became the cornerstone of his
re-election campaign. Opposition to the Vietnam War had abated somewhat as Mr.
Nixon canceled the draft, continued to withdraw American troops and held out the
promise of a peace treaty.

There was much about his first term that had broad public appeal, and the
Democrats seemed to do everything they could to help him.

Most important, they nominated Senator George McGovern of South Dakota for
President. By appealing to a range of interest groups on the left, the unabashed
liberal prevailed in enough state primaries and caucuses to win a majority of
votes at the national convention, where the old "party bosses" who once
controlled the nomination had been excluded.

With the advantage of being in office, Mr. Nixon was able to exceed his 1968
performance in controlling the image he wished to portray on television, that of
a strong, moderate President who could get things done, backed by enthusiastic
crowds shouting, "Four more years!"

And voters at the center were so distrustful of Mr. McGovern and his liberal
supporters that he never seemed to be within striking distance of victory.

On June 17, five men employed by the Committee for the Re-election of the
President were arrested in a burglary at the Democratic National Committee
headquarters in the Watergate apartment-office complex in Washington, and two
others were later arrested. White House officials, including the President,
dismissed the burglary as a stupid act by overzealous campaign workers, and the
defendants said no one close to Mr. Nixon had been involved.

The Democrats' efforts to turn the incident into a campaign issue had little
effect, and Mr. Nixon's victory was overwhelming: the President took 60.7
percent of the popular vote. Only Massachusetts and the District of Columbia
voted for Mr. McGovern.

But he later said a melancholy settled over him on that victorious night. Before
his second inauguration, he disappeared from public view for days at a time,
planning his next four years and brooding over the refusal of North Vietnam and
South Vietnam to ratify the peace treaty that Mr. Kissinger thought he had
secured shortly before the election.

Ending a Long War And Controlling the Peace



In December, the President ordered the extensive "Christmas bombings" of North
Vietnam, which he justified in the face of widespread public criticism as
necessary to drive the North Vietnamese back to the bargaining table. An
agreement was finally signed on Jan. 27, 1973, ending the longest war in United
States history.

Although many believed that the terms were no better than might have been
obtained when Mr. Nixon first took office, Mr. Nixon and Mr. Kissinger
disagreed.

The "peace with honor" settlement, which included the return of American
prisoners, was supposed to protect the independence of South Vietnam. (Just more
than two years after the agreement was signed, however, North Vietnamese troops
took over the country, and the remaining Americans barely escaped from Saigon.)

With four years remaining to make his final imprint on history, Mr. Nixon set
out to remake the Presidency into an even stronger, more centrally controlled
institution than he had made it in his first term.

He began to punish the journalists who had offended him by denying them access
to certain functions, snubbing in particular reporters from The Washington Post,
which had aggressively reported the Watergate burglary.

There would be virtually no more elected officials in the Cabinet; only tried
and true Nixon staff people would be nominated to head departments.

Mr. Nixon's relations with the Democratic Congress, far from harmonious in the
first term, worsened as he refused to spend money appropriated for some purposes
and to circumvent Congressional authority in other areas.

Presidential scholars like Thomas E. Cronin said Mr. Nixon had "systematically
gone about trying to strengthen the Presidency in a great number of ways,
frequently by circumventing the Constitution or expanding on past practices that
were ambiguous or questionable."

His aims included strengthening the hand of the White House in foreign policy
and reducing the Federal domestic programs that had proliferated since World War
II, returning much authority to the states.

Mr. Nixon had barely embarked on that course, however, when he became so
involved in defending himself in the Watergate scandals that he had no time or
authority left for making over the Government.

A Mystery Unfolds On a National Stage



The United States has never experienced another period like the one from March
1973 to August 1974, when the overriding concern about the Government was
whether the President and his closest aides had ordered a burglary and sought to
cover up their role in it, and whether in fact they had engaged in other illegal
acts to promote the goals and punish the enemies of Richard Nixon.

It was like living in an oversized mystery novel.

The role of government and the unfolding of policy was almost forgotten in the
process as the scandals were played out on television and in the press.

No President had been forced from office in the history of the Republic, not
even Andrew Johnson, who was impeached by the House on political charges in the
debate over Reconstruction but was spared conviction by one vote in the Senate.

And no President had ever been so exposed to public view. Intimate conversations
in the Oval Office, thanks to Mr. Nixon's elaborate tape-recording system, were
laid bare for national scrutiny, providing not only the eventual evidence of
wrongdoing that caused his downfall but also the unsavory view of the man and
the men around him that led many to believe, for the first time, that the
President could indeed do wrong.

Though the burglary of the Democratic headquarters at the Watergate complex took
place in June 1972, it was not until the following March that the scandal began
to unfold.

At that time, Judge John J. Sirica of Federal District Court threatened long
jail terms for the defendants, and James W. McCord, who had been convicted on
burglary charges in January, responded by promising to tell all in return for
leniency. Mr. McCord implicated John W. Dean 3d, the White House counsel, who,
also fearful of a long prison term, began to talk to investigators.

Mr. Dean's full story was disclosed in the summer in televised hearings before
the select committee of the Senate that had been set up to investigate the
matter, with Senator Sam J. Ervin as chairman. In flat, unemotional tones, Mr.
Dean told a startling story of White House involvement in Watergate from the day
of the burglary onward, of Mr. Nixon's knowledge of a cover-up and of his
participation in it.

Between the time that Mr. Dean began to talk to investigators and his public
testimony before the committee, Mr. Nixon dismissed Mr. Haldeman and Mr.
Ehrlichman, both prime targets in the investigation, calling them "two of the
finest public servants I have ever known." At the same time, he announced that
Defense Secretary Elliot L. Richardson, a respected member of the Republican
Party's moderate wing, would become Attorney General and would have the
authority to name a special prosecutor for the Watergate case.

Then, on July 16, Alexander P. Butterfield, a former aide, disclosed to the
Senate Watergate committee that Mr. Nixon had secretly taped conversations in
his Oval Office almost from the beginning of his Presidency.

There began a long series of struggles by Congressional committees and
prosecutors to obtain the tapes for evidence, with Mr. Nixon resisting on the
theory that a dispute within the executive branch or a dispute between Congress
and the President was not subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal courts, and
that the President's private counsels were protected in order to maintain the
efficient operation of government.

As the dispute over the tapes continued through September, a parallel but
unrelated crisis erupted: Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, a former Governor of
Maryland, turned out to be a major embarrassment at the worst possible time for
the President.

Agnew Is Out, And Ford Is Tapped

In July 1973, Federal prosecutors accused Mr. Agnew of taking money from
contractors who solicited business with Maryland; the prosecutors said the
practice continued even when he was Vice President. While Mr. Nixon was fighting
the Watergate charges, Mr. Agnew was fighting accusations of old-fashioned
fraud.

Finally, on Oct. 10, after prosecutors had built what appeared to be an airtight
case against Mr. Agnew, he agreed to resign and in return was permitted to plead
no contest to one count of tax evasion. Two days later, Mr. Nixon appointed
Representative Gerald R. Ford of Michigan as Vice President.

His selection of the well-liked House minority leader was seen as a way to avoid
another confrontation with Congress, which had to approve the choice. But as the
charges unfolded week after week, month after month, Mr. Nixon seemed to lose
much of his political judgment. The "Saturday Night Massacre" of Oct. 20, 1973,
was a case in point.

After Archibald Cox, the special Watergate prosecutor, refused to go along with
a Nixon plan for access to the White House tapes, the President ordered Attorney
General Richardson to dismiss Mr. Cox.

The Attorney General refused, and resigned. His deputy, William D. Ruckelshaus,
refused, and was dismissed. Finally Solicitor General Robert H. Bork, appointed
Acting Attorney General, dismissed Mr. Cox.

To many Americans, the action was a naked use of power against the judicial
processes, and it caused a major erosion of support for the President. Calls for
his resignation mounted. Dozens of Watergate-related bills were introduced in
Congress. Several impeachment resolutions were referred to the House Judiciary
Committee.

In many ways, the President seemed not to care. Mr. Cox, a Harvard Law School
professor, had been stacking his staff with "Kennedy liberals" determined to get
him, he said. "Given the terms of his charter," Mr. Nixon said in his memoirs,
"it would be only a matter of time before they had bored like termites through
the whole executive branch."

The Unexplained Gap, The New Prosecutor



The President quickly relented, however, on the subpoenaed tapes -- after
disclosing that two of the nine tapes were missing and a third contained an
unexplained 18 1/2-minute "gap" -- and he announced that a new special
prosecutor would be appointed.

Soon the new prosecutor, Leon Jaworski, wanted more tapes. The Senate Watergate
committee wanted tapes. The House Judiciary Committee wanted tapes.

Had it not been for the tapes, most authorities on the Watergate period say, Mr.
Nixon almost certainly would have finished his term. Years later he said he
wished he had destroyed them but had refrained because he thought he could use
them for his own legal defense -- never believing he would have to give them up.

At a convention of editors in Orlando, Fla., on Nov. 17, 1973, he said: "People
have got to know whether or not their President is a crook. Well, I'm not a
crook."

When his popularity in the public opinion polls reached a historic low, he tried
various means of restoring it. One effort was trips abroad to demonstrate his
mastery of diplomacy -- to the Middle East, where Mr. Kissinger's shuttle
diplomacy had laid the groundwork for peace between Egypt and Israel, and to the
Soviet Union, for arms reduction talks with Mr. Brezhnev. Watergate was little
understood in those countries, and he was enthusiastically received.

Nothing worked.

RESIGNATION
 Threatened By Impeachment, The President Decides to Leave

On March 1, 1974, the Federal grand jury indicted seven former Nixon aides in
the "continuing" cover-up of Watergate, including Bob Haldeman, John Ehrlichman
and former Attorney General John N. Mitchell, who had run the '72 campaign. At
the same time, the jurors asked that some of its evidence be turned over to the
House Judiciary Committee for its impeachment investigation. It was later
disclosed that the grand jury named Mr. Nixon an unindicted co-conspirator.

The pressure mounted on the President, from those who wanted proof of his
innocence as well as those who wanted proof of his guilt, to release more
evidence. In April, he went on television to announce that he would make public
edited transcripts of White House conversations concerning Watergate, totaling
1,308 pages. Peter W. Rodino Jr. of New Jersey, the Judiciary Committee
chairman, said that that would not do; the tapes themselves were needed. But the
transcripts alone, incomplete though they were, hurt the President greatly.

The term "expletive deleted" entered the language to denote profane and vulgar
expressions not deemed suitable for release in the transcripts. And it became
clear that the President was a man who used "Jew" as an epithet.

Hugh Scott, the Senate Republican leader, said the transcripts showed a
"deplorable, shabby, disgusting and immoral performance" by the President and
his aides. John Rhodes, the House Republican leader, said the President should
consider resigning.

The tapes and other evidence from the investigations eventually showed in great
detail these aspects of the "dark side" of the Nixon Presidency that had been
concealed from public view. Among them were these:

*Mr. Nixon's involvement in the cover-up. Not only did he propose paying hush
money to the Watergate defendants to keep them from implicating the White House;
he also ordered a halt to the investigation by the F.B.I.

*Illegal burglaries. Mr. Nixon was so disturbed by leaks of official information
that a "plumbers group" was set up in the basement of the White House to plug
the leaks. Among their illegal operations was the burglary of the office of a
California psychiatrist who was treating Daniel Ellsberg, the man who had
disclosed the Pentagon Papers.

*Invasion of privacy. After Mr. Nixon's secret bombing of Cambodia in 1970,
White House officials, acting under his and Mr. Kissinger's orders, had taps
placed on the home telephones of at least 17 journalists and officials suspected
of unauthorized disclosures.

*Corruption of Government agencies. Mr. Nixon and his aides drew both the F.B.I.
and the Central Intelligence Agency into the Watergate cover-up. For instance,
as acting director of the F.B.I., L. Patrick Gray 3d destroyed, for White House
aides, an envelope of documents believed to bear on the Watergate burglary.
President Nixon also personally ordered the Justice Department not to appeal, as
it had planned to, an antitrust court decision involving the International
Telephone and Telegraph Company. And the articles of impeachment drawn by the
House Judiciary Committee charged that Mr. Nixon and his aides tried to get the
Internal Revenue Service to punish those the President disliked.

*"Dirty tricks." Up to a point, sabotage of an opponent's campaign had been
common in American politics for many years. But operations set up by the Nixon
White House and his election committee exceeded anything known in the past. Some
of the more elaborate plans were never carried out, but others were: for
example, falsely accusing Mr. Humphrey and Senator Henry M. Jackson of
Washington, another Presidential hopeful, of sexual improprieties, and hiring
picketers to disrupt rallies with stink bombs in the Florida Democratic primary
of 1972.

*Abuse of campaign funds. Money for Mr. Nixon's re-election poured in from
wealthy corporate heads and others, far more than any candidate had ever been
known to receive. The oil industry alone gave $5 million. Some of it was
diverted to "dirty tricks" or other espionage and used as "hush money" for the
Watergate burglars.

One number in particular indicates the depth of the scandal: 19 Nixon aides and
associates would serve prison terms.

In late July, the House Judiciary Committee, with television cameras rolling and
millions of Americans watching, deliberated articles of impeachment against the
President of the United States. At the end of the month, with some Republicans
joining the majority Democrats, the committee charged that "in violation of his
constitutional duty to take care that the laws be faithfully executed," Richard
Nixon had "prevented, obstructed and impeded the administration of justice."

Another article charged him with abuse of power, and a third concerned his
defiance of Congressional subpoenas.

It seemed almost certain that the full House would impeach the President. And
his chances of avoiding conviction by the Senate were beginning to seem little
better than Andrew Johnson's.

The same week, the Supreme Court had ordered the President to turn over to Judge
Sirica the records of 64 conversations that might provide evidence for the trial
of his former aides.

And in early August, in response to that ruling, he released the tapes that came
to be known as the "smoking gun" -- recordings of three conversations with Mr.
Haldeman on June 23, 1972, six days after the Watergate burglary, that showed
conclusively that Mr. Nixon had ordered a halt to the F.B.I. investigation.

The President acknowledged that he had kept this information from his supporters
on the Judiciary Committee and even from his own lawyers, and took full
responsibility for the "serious act of omission."

On Aug. 7 the President met with his family and aides, and that night, following
constitutional procedure, Mr. Nixon informed Secretary of State Kissinger that
he had decided to step down. Vice President Ford was told the next morning.

At 9 P.M. on Aug. 8, the President appeared on television and announced that he
would resign at noon the next day.

"Throughout the long and difficult period of Watergate," he told the nation, "I
have felt it was my duty to persevere, to make every possible effort to complete
the term of office to which you elected me. In the past few days, however, it
has become evident to me that I no longer have a strong enough political base in
Congress to justify continuing that effort."

At 11:30 the next morning his letter was delivered to Mr. Kissinger. It said.
"Dear Mr. Secretary: I hereby resign the office of President of the United
States. Sincerely, Richard Nixon."

He said a tearful farewell to the staff, urging those who had worked for him to
be proud of their record in government and to guard against bitterness. A short
time later, for the last time as President, he and Mrs. Nixon, still surrounded
by all the trappings of power, boarded Air Force One and flew home to San
Clemente. Mr. Ford was sworn in to serve the two and a half years remaining in
the Nixon term.

LATER YEARS
 A Pardon, An Obsession: History To Be Written



Mr. Nixon was 61 years old when he went into forced retirement at his seaside
home in California. Out of office, he could have faced the same sort of
prosecution for Watergate crimes as his aides were undergoing, but on Sept. 8,
President Ford unexpectedly granted him an unconditional pardon for all Federal
crimes he "committed or may have committed or taken part in" while in office.

Mr. Ford said that Mr. Nixon had suffered enough and that a protracted criminal
trial of a former President would only distract the nation from healing the
wounds caused by the Watergate scandal.

With the full pension and staff accorded all former Presidents, Mr. Nixon began
work on his memoirs. From then on, every word he wrote, every public act, was
directed to rehabilitating his record for history.

He began to appear before audiences where he knew he would be received warmly.
He returned to China to enthusiastic welcomes and soon began popping up all over
the world.

In 1977 he appeared in a series of television interviews with David Frost; it
was Mr. Nixon's first national exposure since his resignation. Once again, many
Americans were transfixed by his audacity and eager to hear what he would have
to say. But there was little new. He said he had committed a series of tactical
or judgmental errors, but not the high crimes or misdemeanors he was charged
with.

Over the years, asked if he was sorry or would apologize to the American people
for Watergate, Mr. Nixon repeatedly said no. Asked again in April 1984, in a
television interview with a former aide, Frank Gannon, he replied:

"My answer to that question and to those who say, 'Will you apologize?' 'Are you
sorry?' is simply a fact: There's no way that you could apologize that is more
eloquent, more decisive, more finite, or to say that you are sorry, which would
exceed resigning the Presidency of the United States. That said it all. And I
don't intend to say any more."

Mr. Nixon became a prolific writer. His memoirs, published in two volumes in
1978, told the story of a reasonable and conscientious man beset by
extraordinary difficulties. A 1980 book, "The Real War," discussed world
affairs. The Nixon byline appeared on Op-Ed pages in The New York Times and
other newspapers. In 1982 he published "Leaders," a gossipy book about the world
leaders he knew and admired most -- Churchill, de Gaulle, Khrushchev, Zhou Enlai
and others.

Five more books followed, most of them about foreign affairs. A sixth, "Beyond
Peace," on the role of the United States beyond the cold war, is scheduled for
publication by Random House early this summer.

In 1979, the Nixons sold their California home and moved to a town house on East
65th Street. In 1981 they moved to Saddle River, N.J., and later to Park Ridge,
N.J.

Over the years after his resignation, much of the public acclaim Mr. Nixon
worked for and hoped for materialized. He was lionized in France and in Oxford,
England, on a 1978 tour of Europe.

But his political stature was never fully revived. He was barred from practicing
law in both California and New York. National Republican leaders, remembering
that Watergate had cost them many elected offices, refrained from including him
among the party's notables at their national conventions.

In 1992, for the first time since he left the Presidency, Mr. Nixon was
mentioned at a Republican National Convention. On the final night of the
convention in Houston, his face was shown on the giant screens in the Astrodome,
and it drew a cheer from the faithful celebrating George Bush's nomination.

With the fall of the Soviet Union, Mr. Nixon made aid to Russian and the former
Soviet republics his own personal crusade. In 1992, he pushed President George
Bush into taking more forceful steps to help the Russian government. And in
1993, President Clinton invited Mr. Nixon to the family quarters of the White
House to discuss Russia.

Last June, Pat Nixon, who had been ill for several years, died of lung cancer,
but Mr. Nixon continued to write and travel.

But however much he seemed rehabilitated politically, however active he was in
international affairs, Mr. Nixon never completely escaped the shadows.

When his library opened in Yorba Linda in 1990, there was a marvelous
celebration, where he was praised not only by President Bush but also by former
Presidents Ford and Reagan.

But no one forgot that the Nixon library was different. Unlike the libraries of
his predecessors and successors, Mr. Nixon's did not contain his official papers
and was not under the supervision of the National Archives.

From the day he resigned, he had fought arduously to keep the documents and
tapes of his Presidency under seal. Ever wary of scrutiny, Richard Milhous Nixon
did not want to make the record of his Administration open to the public.

NAME: Richard Milhous Nixon

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos/Chronology: A HISTORIC FAREWELL: 1974 -- Richard Milhous Nixon,
the 37th President of the United States and the only one to resign the office,
made a final farewell on Aug. 9 as he boarded a helicopter on the White House
lawn for the last time. (George Tames/The New York Times) (pg. 29); CHECKERS:
1952 -- Mr. Nixon used television to defend himself against charges that
threatened his position as Eisenhower's running mate. In the speech, he
mentioned that his wife, Pat, had a "respectable Republican cloth coat," and
said his family had no intention of giving up their dog, Checkers. (Associated
Press); KITCHEN DEBATE: 1959 -- At an American exhibit at a fair in Moscow, Mr.
Nixon and the Soviet leader, Nikita S. Khrushchev, engaged in a folksy dialogue
on the relative merits of the capitalist and Soviet systems. (Associated Press);
DEFEAT: 1960 -- Although a noted debater, Mr. Nixon was not at his best in four
televised debates with John F. Kennedy. He was tense, and he declined the use of
makeup: his dark beard and pasty forehead, with beads of sweat, made him appear
on television to be the shadowy figure that cartoonists had depicted.
(Associated Press); VICTORY: 1968 -- Having learned from his 1960 mistakes, Mr.
Nixon was able as never before to control the image he projected to voters. He
and his wife, Pat, celebrated his election to the Presidency at the
Waldorf-Astoria in New York. (Carl T. Gossett/The New York Times) (pg 30);
CHINA: 1972 -- His most notable foreign policy triumph was the establishment of
relations with China. The beginning of a new era was symbolized by the sharing
of a toast with Zhou Enlai in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing.
(Associated Press)' VIETNAM: 1969 -- His efforts to end the war came to naught
for years, and opposition to the war caused deep divisions in America. He was
greeted by troops in Saigon. (White House photograph); DETENTE: 1972 -- Mr.
Nixon initiated detente and nuclear arms control treaties with the Soviet Union.
He and Leonid I. Brezhnev signed a major arms limitation treaty in Moscow.
(United Press International) (pg 31); INNER CIRCLE: 1970 -- Mr. Nixon entered
the White House promising to decentralize authority but almost immediately
consolidated it in himself and a few White House aides, like H. R. Haldeman,
left, and John D. Ehrlichman, at the expense of his Cabinet. (The Nixon
Archive); WATERGATE: 1974 -- The coverup of a cheap political burglary of
Democratic offices in the Watergate complex ultimately cost Mr. Nixon the
Presidency. Peter W. Rodino Jr., seated near flag, presided at House Judiciary
Committee hearings. (Mike Lien/The New York Times) (pg. 32); RESIGNATION: 1974
-- The Watergate scandal reached a climax on Aug. 9, when Richard Milhous Nixon
became the first president to resign the office. He made a tearful farewell
speech to his staff before leaving the White House for good. (Mike Lien/The New
York Times) Two days earlier, he embraced his daughter Julie after deciding to
resign. (White House photograph); ELDER STATESMAN: 1994 -- He said he was not
content "to just fade away" and continued to travel ceaselessly. Last month he
visited Ukraine during a tour of former Soviet republics. (Associated Press)
(pg. 33)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography; Chronology

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM'S WEALTH OF MUSEUMS

BYLINE: By SUSAN BROWNMILLER;   SUSAN BROWNMILLER's "Seeing Vietnam" will be
published by HarperCollins in May.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2528 words


THE lighting is dim, the glass cases are dusty, and the descriptions on faded
3-by-5 index cards are typed in quoc ngu, the romanized alphabet that the
Vietnamese use for their written language. These minor inconveniences should not
be a deterrent. Vietnam's extensive and amazingly varied museum collections are
a boon for travelers who are passionate about art and artifacts of mysterious
lost civilizations, or who wish to acquire local perspective on the events of
the recent past.

My museum touring in Hanoi began out of a sense of duty -- streets, shops, and
open-air markets were exerting a stronger call. But one rainy day, during my
three-week trip to Vietnam more than a year ago, I took shelter in the History
Museum in the center of the old French Quarter with Mr. Kha, my earnest,
inexhaustible guide. We were the only visitors. Floorboards creaked, sounds
echoed strangely. The resident curator, who happened to come by, joined us.

Situated conveniently near my hotel, the spiffed-up Metropole, the History
Museum opened in 1930 in a neo-Vietnamese villa as the Musee Louis Finot under
the auspices of the Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient, the umbrella organization
for French archeological digs in Indochina. It specializes in artifacts of the
Dong Son civilization, also known as Lac Viet, whom modern Vietnamese claim as
direct antecedents.

The Dong Son people, named for the district south of Hanoi where their cultural
treasures were first unearthed, thrived in the Red River Delta and as far south
as central Vietnam from the fifth to the second centuries B.C. Seafarers,
hunters and rice growers, the Dong Son were brilliant metalworkers.

A grouping of huge bronze drums are the most exciting pieces of Dong Son art in
the collection, etched with scenes of deer hunts, images of the sun, fishing
boats and birds. The handles, I noticed when I looked more closely, were
decorated with tiny sculptures of copulation: frogs on frogs, and humans on
humans. Eroticism may or may not have been the intent; the drums are usually
thought to have religious significance.

The Dong Son civilization lost its spirited originality, and much of its
identity, when the Chinese invaded the Red River Delta in the second century
B.C. A modern mural depicting a watershed Vietnamese uprising -- the Bach Dang
River campaign and victory of A.D. 939 -- occupies one of the museum walls.

After I had my fill of the Dong Son bronzes, I moved on to the glass cases that
displayed Vietnamese pottery from the Ly and Tran Dynasties. When Vietnam
emerged as an independent kingdom in the 10th century, local artisans were
inspired to produce a remarkable range of glazed ceramics. Early pots have
incised, painted flowers and leaves in brown glaze on a white background or
monochromatic glazes of white, chocolate brown or bright apple green.
Blue-and-white designs featuring chrysanthemums, peonies, bamboo, fish,
waterbirds, fireflies and fighting dragons appeared in the 15th century, when
Muslim traders brought in cobalt from the Middle East.

Vietnamese pottery was produced for export in China's shadow, but according to
John Guy in "Ceramic Traditions of South-East Asia," the designs had a highly
individual exuberance. More important, according to Mr. Guy, the potter's art in
Vietnam is a sophisticated, unbroken tradition in the nation's cultural history.
The kilns of Bat Trang, a walled village a short drive from Hanoi, have been
churning out blue-and-white bowls, teacups, and covered jars continuously for
500 years. Chemical pigments have replaced the original cobalt.

A few days after our museum trip, Mr. Kha and I drove to Bat Trang, an entire
village of narrow mud lanes, artisan workshops, treadle wheels, and small
cross-draft kilns. Moistened pats of charcoal, straw and manure, used for fuel,
were drying in rows on the brick walls. Women stoically mixed and stirred vats
of wet clay with their feet. For 20 cents I purchased a blue-and-white "copy"
antique, with imitation fine crackle and chocolate-brown wash on the underside.
Real antiques are for sale in Vietnam, but it's foolish to buy them. Customs
inspectors at the airports know what they're looking for.

An outdoor museum in the middle of Hanoi, Van Mieu, or Temple of Literature, is
not far from the modern sports stadium. Strolling with Mr. Kha through the
extensive 11th-century ruins -- a gate, a pond, a temple, and the walls of
several pavilions -- I began to understand something of the city's sense of
entitlement and pride in its patrimony.

Van Mieu, a Mandarin university based on the Chinese Confucian model, was
erected in 1070. Scholars lived in its wooden dorms, walked its paved
courtyards, studied in its famous library, and declaimed original verse from the
Poet's Balcony before they underwent six weeks of grueling baccalaureate
examinations. Graduates had their names inscribed in Chinese characters on stone
tablets in the courtyard. Eighty-two of the steles, each resting on a stone
tortoise, stand like gravestones today.

Van Mieu was the site of several pitched battles between the French and the
Vietminh in the independence wars of the 1940's and 1950's, when much of it was
destroyed. The 82 stone steles in the Van Mieu courtyard are going to have a new
roof as part of a restoration project.

Of the museums I visited in Hanoi, I was most enlightened by the Museum of Fine
Arts, a museum with a major identity problem -- a classic example of cultural
imperialism.

By executive order of Ho Chi Minh, an inveterate museum-goer during his 30 years
of exile, Hanoi's Fine Arts Museum opened its doors in 1956, two years after the
French lost the battle of Dien Bien Phu. It is housed in an old colonial
building that used to be the French Ministry of Information.

I arrived at the building, traversed the predictable examples of folk art on the
ground floor and climbed to the third floor to find room after room of
watercolors, pastels, and oils from the 1930's and 1940's, executed during
French colonial rule in the French Impressionist manner -- the poignant,
dutiful, charming results of the French "civilizing mission" in Indochina. I
walked through a roomful of Vietnamese Cezannes, canvas after canvas of
romantic, hazy, pastoral visions of the languorous tropics. In an adjoining
room, I found some Vietnamese Mary Cassatts, well-to-do, thoroughly Europeanized
ladies in cool summer frocks with their perfectly groomed children.

ON the second floor, the museum housed the large, strident oils from the 1960's
and 1970's, the Vietnamese adaptations, under Soviet patronage, to the artistic
credo of socialist realism. Sturdy, heroic peasants laboring in the fields.
Sturdy, heroic soldiers moving forward in battle, hauling heavy artillery up a
mountain. Now and again, on both floors, there were luminous touches of
traditional gold lacquer.

A short taxi ride from the Fine Arts Museum, I found Lenin Park, a city dump
before 1960, now Hanoi's largest stretch of green, although by no means its
finest. Inside the park, I had my first encounter with a familiar sight
throughout Vietnam: hardware left over from the "American" war and hauled to a
popular location to tell the story. I never grew totally accustomed to seeing
planes, tanks, helicopters and so on displayed in museum courtyards and outdoor
recreation spots, although eventually I could reel off their names, saying, "Oh,
right, there's the Phantom, the SAM and the Huey."

Lenin Park was heavy on Soviet weapons. Nine antiaircraft guns were trained on
the twisted fuselage and tail of a B-52. I counted an SA-2 surface-to-air
missile on its launcher, a MIG-21, an armored truck and an early-warning radar
unit.

A few years ago the Museum of Modern Art in New York presented an exhibition of
antiwar imagery by American artists. Some of them had constructed their pieces
out of faux wreckage, blinking lights, audiotapes, and beeping TV screens. The
noisy snow was intended to jangle the nerves. I was strangely untouched. Here I
was facing the real thing, shrouded in silence. It was powerful art.

My reverie was interrupted by some teen-agers bent on practicing their English,
chanting: "Hell-o. How are you?"

Every major city in Vietnam has a war museum and a museum of the revolution.
They are not sentimental favorites with most French and American tourists.
Perversely, I liked them. It was good for the soul to get the other side's
perspective. In a compound of old French Army barracks on a street called Dien
Bien Phu, Hanoi's Army Museum featured a huge diorama of that famous victory,
and a rare collection of old Vietminh posters. Aside from some Hanoi
schoolchildren, I had the place to myself. Well, almost. The louver-shuttered
offices on the museum's second-floor veranda were humming with American Defense
Department personnel, part of the ongoing P.O.W.-M.I.A. search operation.

On the advice of other travelers, I flew to Da Nang to spend a few hours in the
glorious Cham Museum. In the second century A.D., Vietnam's narrow central
region belonged to the kingdom of Champa, a Hinduized, seafaring
Malayo-Polynesian people who dotted the landscape with ornate towers of red
brick and sandstone when they weren't raiding their neighbors, the Viets and the
Khmers. By the 15th century, the Chams had been squeezed southward into near
extinction as the Viets moved down the peninsula in an inexorable migration that
was not unlike the big push westward in the United States.

In 1915 the Ecole Francaise d'Extreme-Orient built a museum in Da Nang, then
called Tourane, to house a selection of sandstone friezes and sculptures that
collectors unearthed -- that is, chiseled and sawed from their niches -- at the
abandoned ruins of the departed Chams. Other treasures were crated and shipped
to Paris, where some are displayed today at the Musee Guimet, but Da Nang is
still the best place in the world to see what beauty the Chams had wrought.

Monumental in size, exquisite in detail, Cham art is an eclectic mix of Hindu
deities and legends that gradually incorporated Buddhist themes as the Cham
people underwent a religious conversion. The museum's three connecting galleries
around a graceful courtyard follow the Cham civilization from the 7th through
the 14th century. Unshuttered windows bathe the sandstone statues and friezes in
natural light. I strolled past awesome sea monsters, mythical lions, smiling
elephants, prancing apsaras, proud Shivas, and a lot of lingams -- huge
phalluses of stone.

Cambodia's temples of Angkor, which I'd visited the year before, gave me a basic
framework for what I was seeing. I wasn't knowledgeable enough to distinguish
Cham art from Khmer art but I could appreciate certain related features. Sacred
Cham towers and sanctuaries were smaller and friendlier than the epic symmetries
of Angkor Wat, but like their Khmer neighbors, they invested cosmic significance
in phallic representations. Apsaras, the dancing, bare-breasted maidens, were
the ubiquitous representation, in both cultures, of female beauty.

A coy young elephant god resting on a pedestal in the first gallery -- Ganesha,
son of Shiva -- was the statue I wanted to take home. This Ganesha was a baby
elephant, too young to have tusks. The perfectly preserved piece carved by an
unknown Cham artist in the seventh century had been found at My Son, 70 miles
south of Da Nang, the most important of the historic Cham sites.

During the war, French archeologists lodged a protest with Washington after the
finest Cham towers were reduced to rubble by B-52 strikes.

FROM Da Nang it was only a 15-minute drive to Hoi An, a bustling international
trading port in the 17th century called Fai Fo by Portuguese merchants who
sailed there from Macao. The old part of town is being restored and preserved.
Chinese temples and Vietnamese shophouses coexist with an 18th-century covered
bridge reputedly built by a community of Japanese traders. The entire effect was
like a Colonial Williamsburg. I adored it.

Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, was the last major city on my itinerary. One
afternoon I was whiling away the hours in a garden cafe run by the Rex Hotel in
the center of town. Waiters wearing white jackets were serving drinks in a
formal parterred courtyard composed of meticulously raked pebble paths. In the
background a Huey, a tank and an F-5 jet peeped through a tangle of vines and
flowers. The courtyard belonged to a gleaming white mansion that had been the
residence of the former French lieutenant governor. The mansion is now the
city's Museum of the Revolution, which explained the hardware.

After finishing my drink, I decided to visit the museum over the mild
protestations of young Tuyen, my guide in Ho hi Minh City, who insisted that
nobody was interested in "that stuff" any longer. Inside I found an arresting
photograph. At first I wondered what was so remarkable about three haystacks in
a field. Then I noticed a pair of legs under each haystack. The photo was taken
during the Tet offensive of 1968. The haystacks are three Vietcong fighters.
"Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane."

On the morning I was scheduled to leave the country, I paid a quick visit to
Reunification Palace, the presidential mansion of the South Vietnamese republic
preserved as it was in 1975 before the abrupt departure of President Nguyen Van
Thieu.

Running late, I barreled through the wrought-iron gates. It was instructive to
see how the Thieus lived in stately splendor propped up by American aid. There
were topiary gardens, gaming rooms, trophy rooms, carpeted reception halls with
sleek lacquer tables, fine porcelains, sterling silver place settings and
crystal chandeliers.

A command post was in the finished basement. On the top floor there was a
black-and-white television monitor showing a French-made documentary about the
war. I took a seat in the viewing room, fretting about the time.

"How far into it are we?" I said to the European couple down the row. The minute
the film was over I dashed downstairs.

"Don't worry," called an amused and cultured European voice. "The last
helicopter won't leave without you."



ECLECTIC DISPLAYS
Basics

It is best to visit Vietnam's museums with a tour guide who can translate the
legends and descriptions into English. Admittance charges, if any, are minimal.


 Hanoi

History Museum, 1 Pham Ngu Lao. Open daily except Monday, 8 A.M. to noon and
1:30 to 4 P.M.

Fine Arts Museum, 66 Nguyen Thai Hoc.  Open daily except Monday, 8 A.M. to noon
and 1:30 to 4 P.M.

Van Mieu (Temple of Literature), 11th-century ruins near the Fine Arts Museum
and the sports stadium. Open daily except Monday.

Army Museum, 1 Dien Bien Phu. Open daily except Monday, 7:30 A.M. to 11:30 A.M.

 Danang

Cham Museum, Tran Phu and Le Dinh Duong. Open daily, 8 A.M. to 11 A.M. and 1 to
5 P.M.

 Ho Chi Minh City

Museum of the Revolution, 27 Ly Tu Trong.

Open daily except Monday, 8 A.M. to 11:30 A.M. and 2 to 4:30 P.M.

Reunification Palace, 106 Nguyen Du.

Open daily 8 A.M. to 10 A.M. and 1 to 5 P.M., except when there are official
receptions.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sandstone statues at the Cham Museum in Da Nang. Hanoi's Fine
Arts Museum is housed in a colonial-era building. (Photographs by David
Portnoy/Black Star, for The New York Times)(pg. 14); For 500 years, artisans
have made porcelain in the village of Bat Trang. (David Portnoy/Black Star, for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

When a Buried Truth Wants Out, Is It Real?

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 14CN;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2053 words


SIX men and a woman sat around a kitchen table in Hamden the other day telling
similar stories. All professionals, they talked about raising their families,
watching their children grow up to lead successful lives. Though they might have
made some mistakes as parents, they said, overall their kids seemed well
adjusted.

But then came the nightmare.

Well into adulthood, they said, their children, troubled, started to see
therapists. And the therapists convinced them that their problems were caused by
childhood sexual abuse inflicted upon them by their parents.  The therapists
then urged the children to cut all contact with their parents.

One couple reported receiving a letter from their 42-year-old daughter a year
ago stating she was severing ties because she had concluded that her father had
sexually abused her from the time she was an infant until the age of 12.

The father said he had offered to take a lie detector test and meet with his
daughter's therapist, but had received no response. The couple has not been able
to visit their two grandchildren.

"For the first six months you cry," the mother said, tearing at a tissue.
"There are no words to describe the shock. It takes over your whole life. It's
like losing a member of your family. Only the grief goes on and on."

A False Memory Foundation

The parents belong to the False Memory Syndrome Foundation, which opened a
Connecticut chapter in January. Started in 1992 by Dr. Pamela Freyd of
Philadelphia, a former educator, the foundation acts as a support network for
parents who say they were falsely accused of abuse and has called for stricter
regulation of the therapy industry, which it says is infested with charlatans
who convince their clients of memories that do not exist. In the past two years,
organization says, it has received more than 7,000 phone calls from families
seeking assistance.

In a recent telephone interview, Dr.  Freyd, estranged from her accuser daughter
for more than two years, said that since so many people enter therapy without
memories of abuse but acquire them during therapy, an evaluation of therapeutic
methods is long overdue. "This phenomenon," she said, "has a life of its own and
it has gotten out of control."

Indeed, the topic of memories recovered 10, 20 or 30 years after the event has
become a staple of television talk show programs and feature articles. Anquished
parents reveal stories about being accused of everything from sexual molestation
to bizarre satanic rituals.

On the other hand, the aggressive public relations tactics of the False Memory
Syndrome Foundation have infuriated many therapists who say the organization is
slandering the profession, making it appear as if all therapists are suspect.
They say the foundation is out to discredit victims by perpetuating the
stereotype that women are gullible and believe everything their therapists tell
them.

"The False Memory Syndrome people are incredibly hostile and leave very little
room for thoughtful conversation," said Karen Olio, director of the New England
Health Services, in Norwalk, who counsels trauma survivors. Nevertheless, many
therapists agreed that the profession needs to take a hard look at the validity
of recovered memory therapy and develop tighter regulations to ferret out
questionable practices.

Both sides said that the frequency of child abuse is tragic, too often goes
undetected at the time of the occurrence and produces trauma that can cause
victims to repress what happened. And given the complex and painful nature abuse
accusations, arriving at an objective conclusion is never easy.

Even among members of the False Memory Foundation, Mrs. Freyd said, it is
difficult to determine if someone is in denial or intentionally lying about
their child's claims. Therapists too say that they have no way of knowing if a
client is fabricating stories.

What is clear is that the issue has polarized and scarred both the adult
children and their parents, perhaps beyond reconciliation.

Of major concern are the methods some therapists use to help people retrieve
repressed memories, particularly hypnosis.

According to literature distributed by the foundation, the most common scenario
involves a woman in her 30's or 40's who seeks psychological help for an
unspecified depression. In encouraging the patient to search out the possible
cause of the depression, the therapist suggests and supposedly convinces the
patient that she experienced childhood sexual abuse, the literature says.

In many cases, the therapist concludes that the trauma caused the patient to
"dissociate" and develop multiple personality disorder. Critics of the recovered
memory therapy say it lacks a scientific foundation and that the frequent
diagnosis of multiple personality disorder is nothing less than irresponsible.

A 1985 report from the American Medical Association, noting that memories are
malleable, called memories obtained through hypnosis less accurate and reliable
than those retrieved without hypnosis, and said that it was impossible for the
hypnotist to distinguish between accurate recollections and pseudomemories.

Dr. John Salamone, an associate professor in the psychology department at the
University of Connecticut who researches the neurological aspects of memory,
said traumatic incidents can be repressed but that certain clues elicited by a
therapist may help to restore the memory.

However, he added: "When it comes down to recovering memories on an individual,
case-by-case basis the process becomes very difficult. In that regard, the
therapist is in an unenviable position."

Some therapists worry that the memory debate itself will be used against people
who are in the position to make legitimate assertions that early abuse took
place. Others say it is too simplistic to suggest that therapists may have a
Svengali-like influence over their clients, manipulating them into believing
memories that never existed.

"If I suggested to my client that she was sexually abused when she knows that
there's no basis for that claim she would be furious with me," said Ms. Olio of
the New England Mental Health Services. "Because if you suggest something that
contradicts a person's history there's a sharp reaction."

Big Doubts on Satanism

Critics of the recovered memory therapy are particularly skeptical about stories
involving satanic ritual abuse. For the past couple of years, television talk
shows have reported dozens of stories about those who say they have recovered
memories of being lured into satanic cults as children and forced to sacrifice
animals, eat aborted fetuses or engage in other bizarre behaviors.

However, law enforcement authorities in Connecticut and elsewhere say they have
found little reliable evidence over the past 30 years to support those claims.

"If there's been all of these heinous crimes taking place then there should be
some tangible evidence and there simply is not," said Master Sargent Scott
O'Mara, a spokesman for the state police and a former investigator for the
sexual assault division.

Dr. David Sakheim, a clinical psychologist from South Windsor and co-editor of
"Out of the Darkness: Exploring Satanism and Ritual Abuse" (Lexington Books,
1992), said that clients who have made claims of ritual abuse often have
symptoms that mirror those of Vietnam veterans or Holocaust survivors.
Sometimes, he said, memories of one trauma may symbolize some other trauma.

"When someone is severely abused as a kid it comes back as a series of memories
or feelings," he said. "So many times the client is confused as to what kind of
abuse took place."

Suing the Parents

Some of the purported victims of long-past sexual abuse have brought legal
actions against members of their families. (In Connecticut the statute of
limitations permits the filing of civil suits up until the time the victim is 35
years old.)

George Carson, a retired engineer from Bloomfield who organized the Connecticut
chapter of the False Memory Syndrome Foundation, said that his 30-year-old
daughter sued him in 1992, charging she had suffered sexual abuse that began
when she 3 years old and extended into adolescence.

Mr. Carson, who denies abusing his daughter, said that his lawyer advised him to
settle out of court because of the financial costs and emotional trauma. He said
the ordeal cost him nearly $21,000 in court costs and attorney's fees and that
he advises other parents in his situation to try to settle the problem in
mediation. If it then goes to court, he said, the findings of the mediator
should be made part of the court record.

From another perspective, Susan Fink, a lawyer from Naugatuck who specializes in
child sexual abuse cases, said she discourages adults who have recently recalled
memories of abuse in childhood from taking legal action against the perpetrators
-- also because of the costs and the amount of corroborating evidence needed to
prove a case.

"Many times these people come to lawyers with the hope of some therapeutic goal
where they're looking for an apology or vindication," Ms. Fink said. "I tell
them upfront that taking it to court is not a nice process."

Suing the Therapists

At the same time, more and more adult children have recanted, reunited with
their families and brought legal action against their therapists.

Jan Downing, a special education teacher from Newbury, Mass., said she had
initially gone to a therapist in the mid-1980's to seek help in coping with her
son's behavior problems.  She had had a good relationship with her parents, she
said. But within the first few sessions, "He told me I was an adult child of an
alcoholic and compared my childhood to growing up in a concentration camp. If I
resisted he would rephrase my realities for me."

Though she had no recollections of such scenes, the negative suggestions sent
her into a deep depression, which contributed to a growing dependence upon her
therapist, Mrs. Downing said. "After a period of time the therapist started to
explore with me the possibility that I had been sexually abused by my father,"
she said. "I had no memory, yet he said I had all the symptoms."

At her therapist's suggestion, she cut all ties with her family and began
writing her parents "horrible" letters. Her parents were devastated, she said.
After six years of therapy, Ms. Downing, the mother of three children, said she
was so depressed she underwent a series of hospitalizations that lasted weeks at
a time. Her therapist kept telling her, she said, that unless she retrieved
memories of sexual abuse she would never get better.

Finally, she began to have memories of sexual abuse that included her father.
But when her mother died in the early 1990's, Mrs. Downing said, she began to
question the validity of her memories and the methods of her therapist. She
eventually decided that her therapy was a sham.

Mrs. Downing, 43, has filed a lawsuit against her therapist and is trying to
rebuild her life, with the loving support of her father and brothers.  Her
greatest pain, she said, was not having been able to resolve the issue before
her mother died.

R. Christopher Barden, the Boston lawyer who is representing Mrs. Downing, said
he has talked to hundreds of women across the country who have undergone
recovered memory therapy and that their stories are strikingly similar. He
called the psychological technique one of the biggest consumer frauds of recent
times.

"The trick for the therapist is to convince these people that they have multiple
personality disorder or have experienced satanic ritual abuse, keep them in
therapy for six years and make a million off of them," he said. "It's pure New
Age quackery."

Dr. Sakheim, of South Windsor, said that the False Memory Syndrome Foundation
had done a valuable service by bringing to light abuses within the therapy
industry but that for both sides to continue to polarize the issue of childhood
abuse only deepened the wounds for everyone involved.

"We need to go beyond saying that the daughter is crazy and must be lying or
that the father is the monster," he said, "and begin to deal with the
fundamental issues of how we as a society treat our family members.  Because
either way, something is terribly wrong here."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Black Aviation Group Encourages Youths' Dreams of Careers in Flying

BYLINE: By ARTHUR Z. KAMIN

SECTION: Section 14NJ;  Page 1;  Column 4;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1381 words

DATELINE: WALL TOWNSHIP


YEARS ago, Gail L. Thompson and Paul Mitnaul both dreamed of becoming airline
pilots. And both did learn to fly, with Ms. Thompson qualifying in small planes
and Mr. Mitnaul earning his wings -- and medals for valor -- as a fighter pilot
in World War II.

But they abandoned their dreams, mostly because both people happen to be black.

Now, Ms. Thompson of Hazlet, an architect, and Mr. Mitnaul of Cranbury, a
retired engineer, are trying to pass their dreams on to a younger generation
facing walls of bias that are at least not as high or thick as those in years
past.

Ms. Thompson is the vice president for design and construction for the New
Jersey Performing Arts Center Corporation in Newark. She is also president of
the Dr. Albert E. Forsythe New Jersey Chapter of the Negro Airmen International
Inc., an organization that promotes aviation among blacks. The national
organization has about 1,000 members, with 40 or so in New Jersey.

Career Path for Military Pilots

Mr. Mitnaul, who worked at what was the R.C.A. Laboratories in West Windsor
Township, is a past president of the New Jersey chapter. He trained with the
celebrated Tuskegee Airmen at a segregated Alabama school for black pilots
during World War II. He became an officer and flew combat missions in Italy.

Mr. Mitnaul said he wanted desperately to become an airline pilot after he left
the service at war's end. After all, it was a natural career path for military
pilots. But no one wanted to hire him because he is black, he said.

Now, his and Ms. Thompson's goals are to encourage young people to remain in
school and enter the aviation field. They want to further black participation in
flying and encourage broader opportunities, urging government and industry to
become sensitive to the needs, attitudes and interests of blacks.

The Negro Airmen, founded in New York in 1967, also work to foster recognition
of blacks' contributions to American aviation. And they aim to provide a bond of
unity and fraternity among black pilots throughout the world.

The New Jersey chapter -- named for Dr. Albert E. Forsythe, a physician and a
pioneering New Jersey black aviator, who died in 1986 -- consists of current and
former military fliers, airline, helicopter and test pilots and those who
operate small planes. There also are members in aviation-related careers:
mechanics, air-traffic controllers and an airport manager.

One member, Josephine Adams of Edgewater Park in Burlington County, who is a
social studies teacher at a junior high school, recently started her training
and has logged eight hours in the air on the way to her pilot's license. "I
never thought I would have this opportunity," she said.

Ms. Thompson noted that there are now about 70,000 airline pilots in the United
States, but only 650 of them are black, including 10 women. "Who knows?" she
said. "I might be a pilot for Delta or United today if things had been
different."

'Never Had Chance'

Mr. Mitnaul recalled: "We just never had a chance. After air combat, I thought I
could accomplish anything. I was young and confident. I handled everything they
threw at me. But believe me, the airlines were afraid to hire pilots of color
after the war. Our war records and our flight experience did not mean anything."

Dr. Cleophus A. Robinson 2d of Willingboro, the supervisor of case management
for the New York State Office of Mental Retardation and Development
Disabilities, agreed. He is a retired Air Force colonel who flew jet fighters in
Korea and in Vietnam and holds the Distinguished Flying Cross. He is the
chapter's treasurer.

"It wasn't easy for us," Dr. Robinson said. He was a cadet in one of the first
integrated Air Force flying classes, in 1951. Among 52 aspiring pilots in that
group, two were black. Of the 19 cadets who graduated, Dr. Robinson was the only
black.

His wife, Leonia C. Robinson, a retired special-education teacher, is also
active in Negro Airmen and handles many of the social activities for its members
and for the students at a summer encampment at Mercer County Community College
in Mercerville.

"Give my husband credit," Mrs. Robinson said. "He never gave up. He never quit.
He was determined to succeed -- no matter what obstacles were placed in front of
him, often purposely."

Teen-Agers in Career Programs

Two of their five grandchildren, Shavonne Robinson, 15, and Sulena Robinson, 17,
students at Camden High School, are among the 125 New Jersey teen-agers who take
part in the career-education programs held throughout the year by the Negro
Airmen. The group meets monthly at Allaire Airport here, and members often fly
in from airports around the state, bringing the young students with them.

The curriculum ranges from introductory airplane rides to tours of military and
civilian airports and includes technical training in aircraft components and
aerodynamics, career seminars on aviation job opportunities and courses in
aviation history that spotlight the accomplishments of blacks and women. There
is also a trip to the Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution in
Washington.

An aviation careers education academy, sponsored by the chapter with the Federal
Aviation Administration, is scheduled for high school students from Aug. 1 to 6
at Mercer County College.

The college is well suited to such training, since it offers an undergraduate
aviation curriculum, Ms. Thompson said. And she credits the Organization of
Black Airline Pilots and its New Jersey members for coming up with the idea for
the academy and providing it with academic and financial support.

Reaching Out to the Young

Many members of the Negro Airmen give up their vacations to help at the academy,
Ms. Thompson said. They rent two 15-passenger vans and pick up the students
daily to transport them to the college. "The students are always there long
before the van arrives," Ms. Thompson said. "Attendance is perfect."

There is a concentrated effort to bring in young people from poor families,
including those who are homeless.

The Negro Airmen organization is financed through membership dues, corporate and
airline contributions and fund-raising activities like dinner dances.

"I can't wait for the meetings and the academy," said Elita Haupt, 16, of Red
Bank Regional High School in Little Silver, who added that she may want to fly
as a hobby rather than as a career. She said she got into the program when her
guidance counselor knew she wanted to do "something interesting and exciting."
Ms. Thompson, who grew up in Red Bank, has become her "wonderful role model,"
she said.

A Staunch Supporter

Martha Hill of Red Bank has happily observed the difference the program has made
in the grades of her 15-year-old son, Thurstan, at Red Bank Regional.

"His marks are getting better all the time," she said. "Thurstan lives for
airplanes and flying. Thanks to the Negro Airmen and what they are doing,
Thurstan wants to be an aerospace engineer."

One of the staunchest supporters of the Negro Airmen programs is Frances T.
Forsythe of Newark, the widow of Dr. Forsythe, whose medical practice was in
Atlantic City and later in Newark.

He began flying in 1932 and, in his own plane, traveled coast to coast a year
later. He also flew to Canada and, in 1934, made a historic good-will flight
that ended in Trinidad. That mission was re-created this year, its 60th
anniversary, by about 30 Negro Airmen pilots from as far away as California who
wanted to pay tribute to his memory. Dr. Forsythe, who was 89 when he died, is
the only black in the New Jersey Aviation Hall of Fame.

"In those days," Mrs. Forsythe said, "it was difficult for any pilot to make
such a long flight, given the lack of airports and the primitive conditions at
the few that existed. For a pilot of color to undertake such a flight was
something of a miracle."

Mrs. Forsythe attends all Negro Airmen meetings and events and gains great
satisfaction, she said, from sharing with the students the flying and the
medical achievements of her husband. Dr. Forsythe, she remembered, often had to
treat his patients at home because he was denied privileges in a hospital.

"I want them to know what it was like at a very different time in America," she
said.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hoping to encourage black teen-agers to pursue careers in
aviation, New Jersey members of Negro Airmen International Inc. often invite
young people to fly with them. Top, Gail L. Thompson, who heads the state
chapter, explains controls to Elita Haupt, and above, shows how she examines her
plane each time before takeoff. (Pg. 1); Some members of Negro Airmen
International say they were denied careers as pilots because they are black.
During a flight, Alan Hoes Jr., left, instructed Omar McPherson, 16. (Pg. 6)
(Photographs by Julio A. Ibarro Jr. for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Can They Go Home Again?

BYLINE: By Brigitte Berger;   Brigitte Berger is a professor of sociology at
Boston University. She is the author of "The War Over the Family: Capturing the
Middle Ground."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3059 words



THE HOMELESS
By Christopher Jencks.
161 pp. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press. $17.95.

HOMELESSNESS, once held to be the personal misfortune of a small number of men
down on their luck, has exploded into one of America's most politically
sensitive and divisive social issues. In the short span of two decades, the
presence of disheveled and often desperate people on the streets of the nation's
cities has become too painfully visible to be ignored. Yet the phenomenal
increase in their numbers appears to defy all public measures that have been
undertaken to stem the tide.

As can be expected with a problem of this magnitude, homelessness evokes strong
responses from both liberals and conservatives, with each camp determined to
heap blame on the other. The liberals believe the homeless are essentially
victims of basic flaws in our socioeconomic system, and they call for more and
better social programs. The conservatives argue that existing Federal programs
are not just ineffective but positively harmful, hurting the very people they
are intended to help. Add to this muddle the groups of crusading advocates given
to bandying about outlandish claims concerning the number of homeless people --
faithfully reported by the news media -- and the result is one sorry mess.

In his new book, "The Homeless," Christopher Jencks, the John D. MacArthur
Professor of Sociology at Northwestern University, sets out to bring clarity and
sense to the public debate. He systematically reviews and evaluates a large body
of research literature on the homeless and, in less than 200 pages of tersely
written and tightly argued text, he deftly leads the reader through a maze of
assertions. Mr. Jencks has a special knack for enabling readers to follow each
step of his intricate argument without overwhelming them with the pyrotechnics
of complicated analyses of data (which, for the most part, are relegated to two
lengthy appendixes). He writes lucidly and compellingly and, what is more, he
does not pull his punches.

After having read the book and reviewed its documentation, this reviewer is
impressed not only with Mr. Jencks's ability to stay clear of much of the
contentiousness surrounding the homeless, but with the basic soundness of his
arguments as well. "The Homeless" is undoubtedly a major achievement. Still, it
is safe to predict that vociferous opposition to Mr. Jencks's exposition of some
complicated truths will not be long in coming.

THE subjects of Mr. Jencks's book are the "visible homeless," that is, "everyone
who slept in a public place or a shelter during a given week." Using data put
together from several sources, he estimates their number at between 300,000 and
400,000 as of March 1987 (the date of the most comprehensive survey he cites).
If pushed, he is willing to raise the number to 500,000, in either case a far
cry from earlier claims of more than three million. This well-reasoned estimate,
incidentally, should cause considerable discomfort to the drafters of a recent
much-publicized Clinton Administration report claiming to document the existence
of seven million homeless Americans waiting for Governmental action. I think one
can readily say that after the dust has settled, startling figures of this sort
will come to seem little more than particularly telling testimony to the
continuing utility of mythical numbers.

Mr. Jencks calculates a four-fold increase in the homeless population between
1980 and 1988, a time when municipalities, states and Federal agencies
strenuously sought to stop the spread. In trying to explain this startling rise,
he examines possible linkages between homelessness and a vast range of factors:
the deinstitutionalization of the mentally ill during the 1970's, the crack
epidemic of the 1980's, changes in the housing market, budget cuts, rent
control, joblessness and marriage. He comes up with some challenging insights
and, finally, with a complex mixture of causes for homelessness that suggest no
easy solutions. His findings defy not only the wisdom of the average sidewalk
sociologist, but also the arguments of many established researchers.

Mr. Jencks discovers, for example, that a sizable portion of the homeless --
more than 25 percent -- suffer from some form of mental illness. But in contrast
to those who condemn the emptying of mental hospitals in the 1970's, he points
out that only a "small minority" of the mentally ill who were released ended up
on the streets.

Also, contrary to many advocates for the homeless, he does not believe the
experience of homelessness caused the high incidence of mental illness. And
rather than criticize either the deinstitutionalization campaign of civil
libertarians or the fiscal restraint of conservatives, Mr. Jencks stakes out
ground in between. He says: "Almost everyone agrees that what happened to the
mentally ill after 1975 was a disaster. Both liberals and conservatives blame
this disaster on their opponents, and both are half right. It was the insidious
combination of liberal policies aimed at increasing personal liberty with
conservative policies aimed at reducing government spending that led to
catastrophe.

"It is important to remember, however," he goes on to argue in the manner
typical of him, "that while liberals succeeded in curtailing involuntary
commitment and deinstitutionalizing most of the mentally ill, their conservative
opponents failed to cut government spending on mental patients."

Mr. Jencks places much of the responsibility for the scandalous neglect of the
mentally ill who are homeless on the callous refusal of state legislators to
appropriate money saved from the closing of hospitals to outpatient programs.
While families took back most of the deinstitutionalized patients into their
homes, a small minority of the mentally ill ultimately ended up on the streets.

In looking at the linkage between homelessness and drugs, Mr. Jencks reaches
similar conclusions. It is the overuse of alcohol and drugs that causes
homelessness, not the other way around: "Heavy use makes marginally employable
adults even less employable, eats up money that would otherwise be available to
pay rent and makes their friends and relatives less willing to shelter them." He
estimates that about a third of single adults in shelters are regular users of
crack. Yet at the same time Mr. Jencks emphasizes that not all users of alcohol
and drugs end up on the streets.

URNING to conservative contentions that by giving the homeless free shelter we
are, in effect, helping them buy more alcohol or drugs, Mr. Jencks acknowledges
that such claims surely contain a grain of truth. But he goes on to say that
"even when shelters are free, fewer than half of all homeless single adults use
them on an average night. This makes it hard to believe that eliminating
shelters would persuade many homeless drug or alcohol users to spend their
limited funds on renting a room."

And again, in the typical Jencksean mode, he scrutinizes liberal calls for more
services to stem drug addiction. Examining the evidence on how well such
programs work, he concludes that "experience does suggest that while some
services work some of the time, many are ineffective. When advocates fail to
mention this risk, taxpayers should check their bank balance."

Throughout the book Mr. Jencks voices his distrust of the effectiveness of a
plethora of social programs. The following statement is representative:
"Unfortunately, programs that try to improve people's skills, modify their
chemical intake or deal with their psychoses have rather mixed records of
success. Changing people is hard, and doing it on a large scale is harder." (He
does go on to say, however, that "the problem with services for the poor is not,
as some cynics claim, that they never help. The problem is that we seldom know
which ones are helping.")

The question of whether changes in the housing market have been responsible for
the spread of homelessness is one that has been enormously politicized in recent
years. True to form, Mr. Jencks takes both political camps to task, and in the
course of his investigation he deflates the claims of a number of highly
regarded policy studies as well. He first disputes the popular tendency to
identify the fate of neighborhoods with the fate of individuals: "Readers who
have watched inner-city neighborhoods decay over the past generation may find it
hard to believe that poor tenants' housing really improved during this period. .
. . Boarded-up buildings and weed-filled lots show that fewer people want to
live in a neighborhood, not that the people who used to live there now live in
worse housing."

He then argues that "vacancy rates in low-rent private housing have been quite
stable"; that there exists a "weak connection between rent burdens and
homelessness," and that, contrary to cherished liberal beliefs, subsidies for
low-income housing steadily grew under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush
(as a result of liberal Congressional politics). Yet this growth in subsidies
and the continued availability of improved low-rent housing did little to stop
the spread of homelessness.

Like most housing economists, Mr. Jencks hesitates to fault private
entrepreneurs for any lack of cheap housing. It is more appropriate, he
believes, to look at the effects of changes in building code requirements that
raised housing standards.

In a particularly blunt subchapter, "Partisan Liberalism Run Amok," Mr. Jencks
takes on the findings of Mayor David Dinkins's 1991 commission on homelessness
in New York City. That commission maintained that the Federal Government had
historically been the provider of low-cost housing, but that it had abandoned
the field. The result, the commission said, was a dire lack of affordable
housing in the city.

Mr. Jencks counters: "Even if we set aside the canard about cutbacks in
low-income housing programs, the claim that the Federal Government was
historically the main provider of low-cost housing is breathtakingly wrong.
Private landlords have built and operated most of New York's cheap housing ever
since the Dutch bought out the Indians. What changed during the 1970's and
1980's, as anyone could see driving through the South Bronx or Brooklyn, was not
that the Federal Government abandoned the low-cost housing business but that
private landlords did so."

And he does not hesitate to question the legitimacy of the work of the Dinkins
commission (and by implication the work of commissions in general): "The
repetition of liberal fairy tales in a report signed by eminent businessmen does
raise intriguing questions. Did the members of the commission read the report?
Did they believe what it said? Did they ask anyone in their employ to check it
for accuracy? If they did not, was this because they did not think accuracy
mattered?"

After examining the issue of cheap housing from all sides, Mr. Jencks is ready
to deplore the disappearance of skid row, with its single-room-occupancy and
cubicle hotels. (Cubicle hotels offered rooms without windows.) An earlier
generation of "helping professionals" fought passionately against these types of
residences. But Mr. Jencks wants to revive skid rows so that the poor can find
rooms they can afford. He argues that while "many Americans will balk at
bringing back the cubicle hotels, on the grounds that no affluent society should
require anyone to live in such conditions . . . this does not mean we should
accept cubicle hotels as the last word in low-income housing. It just means we
should proceed incrementally."

Although many of Mr. Jencks's findings and proposals fly directly in the face of
the received wisdom, his data on the connection between homelessness and
marriage confirm what most ordinary Americans have long known, namely that
"married couples hardly ever become homeless as long as they stick together,"
even if they are poor. In general he finds little evidence for the argument that
the new homelessness is a consequence of "family breakdown." Once again, he
points out that most people from broken homes do not become homeless. Yet his
data do suggest that the decline in marriage was the major reason for bringing
more single women and their children into shelters: "It was the fact that
unskilled women not only married less but continued to have children that pushed
more of them into the streets."

As the reader can see, Mr. Jencks's research shows that homelessness is a
complicated, multifaceted problem in which many factors are tragically
intertwined. "Those who end up on the street," he writes, "have typically had
all the disadvantages. Most started life in families with a multitude of
problems; indeed, many came from families so troubled that they were placed in
foster care. Many had serious health and learning problems. A large number grew
up in dreadful neighborhoods and attended mediocre schools. After that, most had
more than their share of bad luck in the labor market, the marriage market or
both. It is the cumulative effect of all these disadvantages . . . that has left
them on the streets."

In a brief final chapter Mr. Jencks suggests a number of stopgap measures, or
"partial solutions," to deal with homelessness. Some, especially his ideas for
stricter supervision of the mentally ill and even the return of the
much-maligned cubicle hotels, make eminent sense and may find a hearing even in
today's divisive political climate. Others, like his suggestion for rent and
food vouchers in social service programs, are likely to be well received in
conservative circles but rejected by liberals. And vice versa: Mr. Jencks's firm
insistence on the role of the Government, on using its financial resources to
find solutions to many of the problems of the homeless, may win liberal applause
but conservative criticism. To this reviewer, the modesty of Mr. Jencks's
expectations is refreshing in an era of exaggerated claims.

IF there is a serious flaw with either Mr. Jencks's research or the proposals
flowing from it, it must be found in his total neglect of the role of "mediating
structures," that is to say, those social institutions that connect the
individual to the larger society: the neighborhoods, the churches and other
voluntary groupings that have traditionally been the mainspring of America's
strength. Any policy approach that fails to include the vital contributions of
these social, rather than governmental, resources is, I fear, condemned to
render only partial solutions to the heart-wrenching problem before us. It is
odd that a sociologist of Mr. Jencks's stature would ignore precisely those
mediating structures that alone have the capacity to provide lonely individuals
with a stable anchorage, and to give purpose and meaning to their lives.

Despite this shortcoming, "The Homeless," with its challenging findings, is a
bold book. It demonstrates as conclusively as any study can that neither social
policy nor society -- and least of all the homeless themselves -- will be served
well by emotive arguments designed to buttress purely political agendas. Mr.
Jencks, with his masterly exposition of complex data and his discriminating,
well-balanced assessments, goes a long way toward restoring confidence in the
capacity of the social sciences to transcend politically loaded policy analysis.
He also goes a long way toward restoring a modicum of realism to public debate.



NOT FOR KNEE JERKERS

Christopher Jencks is a risk taker. His new book, "The Homeless," asserts that
it is the combination of personal vulnerability and political indifference that
has left people on the streets. Yet he also suggests that the homeless are not
merely passive victims of circumstance but people who make choices like everyone
else, however limited those choices might be. Such a claim could, assuredly,
jeopardize Mr. Jencks's liberal credentials, but the author is more concerned
with the issues than with how his critics perceive him.

"It's fair to say there have been mixed reactions to a lot of my arguments," he
said in a recent telephone interview from his home in Evanston, Ill., where both
he and his wife teach at Northwestern University, "and the book isn't out yet."
He believes that a stereotypical liberal position would probably be that he is
saying the wrong thing. But most liberals, he is convinced, are not
stereotypical. "There is a certain kind of knee-jerk liberal and conservative
position on almost every subject," he explained, "but the number of people who
actually take these positions is relatively modest; most people pause to think
about things." This might not have been as true 10 years ago, he thinks,
"because when a problem is new, people sort of reach into their knapsack of
political ideology first. Then, after a while, the more they learn and the more
they watch, the more nuanced their perception of the problem gets. I mean, we do
learn something from experience, don't we?"

Mr. Jencks, who is 57, says he has not grown more conservative with age. "I
wouldn't say that my views have changed very much over the years," he reflected.
"I mean, they have always been a mixed bag. I'm conservative about some things
and quite leftish about others. I remember writing once that I thought of myself
as a cultural conservative and an economic and political incrementalist, or
something like that, anyway. These things," he added, "have something to do with
one's background."

Mr. Jencks recalls his involvement with the liberal Institute for Policy Studies
in Washington in the early 1960's: "It's hard for us to remember how
dissatisfied liberals were with Kennedy in those days. They groused just the way
they grouse now with Clinton. It was a similar situation, with Kennedy as a sort
of middle-of-the road Democrat and the liberal wing of the party constantly
complaining. These were people deeply committed to arms control, and Kennedy was
building up the military." By the time Mr. Jencks left Washington to lecture at
Harvard in 1967, the Vietnam War had overwhelmed everything else. "I felt like
the political ambiance in Washington had closed in; it was pretty grim," he
said. "Lots of people with identical backgrounds going on to be bohemians." He
chuckled. "So you see, background isn't destiny."   LYNN KARPEN

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Christopher Jencks. (KEN LEVINSON)(pg. 20)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Asweat With Dreams

BYLINE: By Robert Pinsky;   Robert Pinsky's verse translation of Dante's
"Inferno" will be published later this year.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2166 words



THE COLLECTED STORIES
By Grace Paley.
386 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$27.50.

ARDENT and ironic, sexual and funny, tuneful and candid, practical and
idealistic, the stories of Grace Paley, delicious in themselves, also have a
surprising historical significance.

"The Collected Stories" brings together in one volume three previous
collections: "The Little Disturbances of Man" (1959), "Enormous Changes at the
Last Minute" (1974) and "Later the Same Day" (1985). These collections have been
much prized for their wit, penetration and art. Brought together, they record a
redeeming strain in the life of our much-lamented 20th century, reflected mainly
in the character of American immigrant daughters who strive -- though the author
never puts it this way -- to realize the most hopeful moral, esthetic and
political ideas of the century.

In a characteristic Paley joke, the recurring, somewhat autobiographical
character is named Faith, a significant transformation of the author's own first
name. Faith and her friends believe in a better world for all, even while they
are griping and moaning about their personal difficulties. Members of the
traditional left, they are neither prigs nor Stalinist robots. On the contrary,
the stories may remind some readers of a remote cultural time when the
"progressive" style and the feminist sensibility, and opposition to racism, were
marked by the self-deflating humor that is a form of conviction.

Adult characters in these stories often have more brains than money, more
passion than wisdom, more wit than understanding. They are aware of this
condition, and proceed from it with a stubbornly erotic imagination. Ms. Paley
shows that the aspiration to make society more just is rich in comedy as well as
in nobility. Both qualities run through the adventures of her characters, as
they deal with men, children, political meetings, aging, divorce, ambition --
all the erotic and ethical brew stirred by the conversation of young mothers in
a city park or of old friends visiting a dying woman.

The stories present this material with a bright, unsentimental eye and with Ms.
Paley's distinctive evocations of the lyrically yakking cadence of New York City
speech. Her narrator's idiom is poetic, syncopated, sometimes recalling Gerard
Manley Hopkins or Emily Dickinson as much as Bernard Malamud; in an old-age
home, "ladies leaned on sticks stiffly, their articulations jammed with
calcium." Or consider the odd, trochaic melody and the bizarre image buried in
this sentence: "Faith's head is under the pillow nearly any weekday midnight,
asweat with dreams, and she is seasick with ocean sounds, the squealing wind
stuck in its rearing tail by high tide."

What is more, Ms. Paley makes her material seem specially suited to the story
form, of which she is a deft, almost insouciant master. If certain kinds of
novels are like supertankers, steadily carrying acres of crude energy from
continent to continent, and certain kinds of lyric poems resemble spy planes
bolting through the stratosphere, Ms. Paley's stories are like nimble skiffs,
coursing from one engaging harbor to another.

Her distinctive, sure-footed command of the short-story form brings to fictional
material a quality that must be called poetry. By this I mean not mere verbal
sauce of some rich or creamy kind but the ability of language to dance with
playful, lordly authority about the contours of reality, intimate yet somehow
aloof.

For example, in "The Loudest Voice," an enchanting, outrageous early story about
a grade school Christmas pageant, the stage set depicts "an old hayloft, where
Celia Kornbluh lay in the straw with Cindy Lou, her favorite doll. Ira, Lester
and Meyer moved slowly from the wings toward her, sometimes pointing to a moving
star and sometimes ahead to Cindy Lou." Then comes the following paragraph,
where the names of the children weave through the drama they are enacting in a
way that is comic, but also deepens the mystery of both elements (the girl with
the loudest voice narrates both the pageant and the story about the pageant):

"It was a long story and a sad story. I carefully pronounced all the words about
my lonesome childhood, while little Eddie Braunstein wandered upstage and down
with his shepherd's stick, looking for sheep. I brought up lonesomeness again,
and not being understood at all except by some women everybody hated. Eddie was
too small for that and Marty Groff took his place, wearing his father's prayer
shawl. I announced 12 friends, and half the boys in the fourth grade gathered
round Marty, who stood on an orange crate while my voice harangued. Sorrowful
and loud, I declaimed about love and God and Man, but because of the terrible
deceit of Abie Stock we came suddenly to a famous moment. Marty, whose
remembering tongue I was, waited at the foot of the cross. He stared desperately
at the audience. I groaned, 'My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' The
soldiers who were sheiks grabbed poor Marty to pin him up to die, but he
wrenched free, turned again to the audience, and spread his arms aloft to show
despair and the end. I murmured at the top of my voice, 'The rest is silence,
but as everyone in this room, in this city -- in this world -- now knows, I
shall have life eternal.' "

The wit of having the boy "stare desperately" at the audience has to do with how
the adverb might characterize both Marty and Jesus, but also with the root of
the word "desperate" in the Latin for "hope" and its relation to the hope and
despair of that "famous moment." At a level above the simple incongruity or
cuteness of the occasion, above even the narrator's amused retrospection, is
poetry, inhabiting such phrases as "whose remembering tongue I was" or "arms
aloft to show despair and the end." In other words, poetry enables the story to
show what it can while also conveying the mysterious existence elsewhere of what
cannot be shown.

This gift of Ms. Paley's (she has written poetry as well) distinguishes her from
even such brilliant writers as Philip Roth, whose writing has every virtue
except poetry; in a way, Mr. Roth must write alternate realities for his
characters in order to provide a rough equivalent within the bounds of his
talent, which is so entirely a prose talent. The comparison may come to mind
because of Ms. Paley's story "The Used-Boy Raisers," in which the main character
-- she is preparing breakfast for her husband and former husband, both lapsed
Roman Catholics -- delivers a comic, impassioned speech of secular Diaspora
patriotism, a main theme in Mr. Roth's recent book "Operation Shylock." The two
husbands, incumbent and ex, are shocked on behalf of Israel: "They're your own
people, Pallid accused, dilating in the nostril, clenching his jaw. And they're
under the severest attack. This is not the time to revile them." (In a
characteristic, somehow good-natured barb, the two husbands are called Pallid
and Livid.)

Ms. Paley has the ability to show how emotions are framed within other emotions
-- a belief, say, containing a passion, and itself subject to the context of a
conviction. Eros contains politics in her work, and politics contains eros.
Similarly, she can write about writing itself without seeming parochial or
self-regarding, because she is always aware of context: writing has its place in
the world of lovemaking. Literary terms like "self-reflexive" are too bloodless
to evoke the breathing immediacy of Ms. Paley's inspection of what she is doing,
even as she does it. This is the memorable beginning of "A Conversation With My
Father":

"My father is 86 years old and in bed. His heart, that bloody motor, is equally
old and will not do certain jobs any more. It still floods his head with brainy
light. But it won't let his legs carry the weight of his body around the house.
Despite my metaphors, this muscle failure is not due to his old heart, he says,
but to a potassium shortage. Sitting on one pillow, leaning on three, he offers
last-minute advice and makes a request.

" 'I would like you to write a simple story just once more,' he says, 'the kind
Maupassant wrote, or Chekhov, the kind you used to write. Just recognizable
people and then write down what happened to them next.' "

The paragraph that comes before the old man's request has already made clear the
ways in which it cannot be answered and the ways it will be. That is, the homey
quality of "around the house" and the eccentric precision of "still floods his
head with brainy light" do not impede the characterization of this pedantic,
courageous, bossy, soulful and pragmatic old man. On the contrary, the intensity
and wisecracking quality of the style makes the character all the more vivid,
because the style, in this case, is the daughter and her feelings. The
understated phrase "last-minute advice" is a marvel of piercing lightness.

The story she writes for her father, several times over, has a heartbreaking
quality that becomes a matter for debate between them. Gradually, we readers
realize that though "A Conversation With My Father" is only six pages long, it
is to have tremendous sweep. Not simply an anecdote about a dying old man or
about writing or about the woman of the story-within-a-story, who seems to ruin
her life for her child, the story we are reading becomes encompassing:
everyone's story. After arguing about the latest version his daughter has
written, the father puts his oxygen tubes into his nostrils and says, "No."

The daughter cannot leave it at that. "I had promised the family to always let
him have the last word when arguing, but in this case I had a different
responsibility. That woman lives across the street. She's my knowledge and my
invention." At this point, the reader cannot assign any easy summary to either
side of the debate, an argument that the daughter pursues. The story has turned
into a kind of universal parable, a conundrum about the possibilities and
limitations love brings to any life. And the old man gets the last word
nonetheless, the closing words of the story: " 'How long will it be?' he asked.
'Tragedy! You too. When will you look it in the face?' "

The knowledge and invention of such writing give remarkable scale to these
stories, so that they seem to crystallize brief moments in which whole lives
reveal their inner truth. The external facts of Ms. Paley's narratives are
unremarkable. A woman runs into her former husband in the park, and they slip
off to make love; a circle of women who met when they all had small children
visit the one who is dying, and they talk about their grown children; an old
couple undertake to raise their crazy daughter's child; a group of Americans
sympathetic to mainland China are scolded by their Chinese tour guide for
excessive curiosity and photography. These ingredients are the unremarkable clay
and water of Grace Paley's time and place. What she has given them is the breath
of art.



A CERTAIN OBLIGATION

When asked if she is especially fond of any of the 45 pieces in her "Collected
Stories," Grace Paley responded with what she called "an old Jewish joke": "A
son comes down the stairs wearing one of the two ties his mother has bought him.
His mother says, 'You didn't like the other one?' " Ms. Paley has a similar
reaction whenever anyone tells her that he loves one of her stories. "I'll say,
'What's wrong with the rest?' "

As her conversation shows, Ms. Paley is like her fiction: warm, funny, salty and
often opinionated. The last trait has served her well. In the late 1940's, a
teacher told her that "he didn't think I really knew how to write a story," she
recalled during an interview in the apartment she keeps in Greenwich Village.
"He also said I used bad language." But Ms. Paley persevered, through years of
child raising and political involvement, and through a divorce. "Everything you
do is screamed at by what you haven't been doing," she explained. "But it speaks
to everything else, too."

Speech is something that infuses Ms. Paley's fiction. It is filled with voices
-- frequently raised, frequently ethnic. "I often begin with someone saying
something," she observed. "People's voices have a certain resonance for me." But
that doesn't mean that she borrows them from life. "Faith is really not me," she
said of a recurring character. "But she could be a great buddy of mine."

Ms. Paley says she is writing more stories and poems, but her fans should stop
hoping for a novel. "I tried. It didn't come out good. So why should I?"

Living in Vermont with her second husband, the writer Robert Nichols, Ms. Paley
is now as involved with history as with fiction. "I'm 71 years old, and I think
you have a certain obligation," she said. So she lectures at schools on subjects
ranging from the Vietnam era to feminism, and also sometimes teaches writing. "I
got accustomed to working around young people," she added. "I'm a very
accustoming person."
   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 24, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Richard Nixon: Petty Schemes and Grand Designs

BYLINE: By Garry Wills;   Garry Wills is author of "Nixon Agonistes" and other
books, most recently "Certain Trumpets."

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 17;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: EVANSTON, Ill.


Some say Ronald Reagan ended the cold war, spending the Russians to death in the
arms race. Others say Mikhail Gorbachev ended it, with reforms that failed, but
not before revealing the failure of the Soviet system. But if one person must be
chosen for contributing most to the end of Soviet-American conflicts, my
candidate is Richard Nixon. His recognition of what he called for years "Red
China" brought put into the open what had been denied religiously on both sides
-- that Communist solidarity was a myth (one on which we based our wars in Korea
and Vietnam).

From that time on, the reality grew ever less escapable -- that the Soviet Union
was an embattled underdog.  Coping with thousands of miles of border with China,
with disaffection in the satellites and in neighbor states like Yugoslavia and
Romania, the U.S.S.R. was clearly (in Richard Barnet's phrase) the only country
in the world "ringed by hostile Communist powers."

It took finesse, secrecy and all the skills of "Tricky Dick" to achieve the
overnight change in Sino-Soviet-American relations. This move made it safe for
Mr. Nixon to pursue detente and arms control with the Soviets. Admittedly, he
had to continue the fighting in Vietnam, though his new ties with China removed
the point of it: his right-wing supporters, shocked enough at the "betrayal" of
Taiwan and the "surrenders" of the second Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty,
would not let him back off from student demonstrators. So Henry Kissinger had to
invent incredible arguments about "credibility" as the reason for fighting.

Nonetheless, the China move had begun the large shift in power relations that
meant we had prevailed in the cold war. It was the most stunning diplomatic coup
of the postwar era, enough to make Mr. Nixon a giant in the long perspectives of
history.

Yet Richard Nixon had the unhappy gift of shrinking to dwarf size as rapidly as
he had towered up among the giants. The man who yearned to trade statesmanlike
apercus with world leaders also liked to steam away resentments among cronies
who specialized in petty political treacheries.

His friends thought that this connoisseur of small thuggeries was a shy and
sensitive man, on whom political roughhousing had been forced.  That was
certainly Mr. Nixon's own view. He felt that he labored under disadvantages that
more favored people -- handsome stars like Jack Kennedy, folksy heroes like
Dwight Eisenhower -- did not experience. He needed an extra edge -- especially
since he had witnessed the steelier side of "Jack" and "Ike," who were
effortlessly ruthless. He had to go to "mean school" all his life.

He wanted tough guys around him, to even the odds. He stiffened his own efforts
at malice by gazing on the natural vindictiveness of John Mitchell or Charles
Colson. He was always trying to unlearn the niceness his mother had taught him
with the help of people he hoped were bad enough for the job -- his mentors,
from Murray Chotiner to John Connally.

The division between his natural sweetness and this diligently acquired meanness
is what made Mr. Nixon so fascinating. It was symbolized in his famously
uncoordinated gestures. No sooner had he made some large free motion with his
right hand than his left hand twitched in some furtive swipe at a foe. Some
Americans loved him for the enemies he made, not reflecting that his worst enemy
was himself.

His grievances had a basis in fact.  He was accused of having framed Alger Hiss
-- but Mr. Hiss was guilty. He was accused of having a political "slush fund" in
1952 -- but the fund was innocent. He was accused of manipulating emotions in
the "Checkers" speech -- but he was being manipulated off the ticket by Ike. He
always thought himself more sinned against than sinning -- though he certainly
worked hard to even the account, and swelled the credit column considerably in
his Presidential years.

He had served an exasperating period as errand boy to President Eisenhower. This
can be a soul-withering experience, as Lyndon Johnson discovered during his
tenure under Kennedy, and Hubert Humphrey discovered under Johnson. But Johnson
had to suffer this for only three years, and Humphrey only for four. Mr. Nixon
spent eight years being ignored (when not belittled) by his superior.  When the
President tried to dump him, he could survive only by a humiliating refusal to
take "hints" delivered with a two-by-four.

He was obsessed with such mistreatment. He felt that privileged Ivy Leaguers had
supported Mr. Hiss from mere class solidarity, snubbing the uncharismatic grind
from Yorba Linda. He was so intimidated by Kennedy glamour that he first
deployed his Watergate-style gumshoes to discredit John Kennedy (with cables
faked by E. Howard Hunt and Chuck Colson) and Edward Kennedy (with Tony
Ulascewicz and others sent to exploit the scandal of Chappaquiddick). Though I
do not believe he knew about the Watergate break-in, he had to obstruct the
investigation of it, since it would lead to all the prior dirty tricks his
secret teams had been up to (like rifling a doctor's files to smear the war
critic Daniel Ellsberg).

The wonder is that a man so easily wounded in his amour-propre could soldier on
through setbacks, contumely and disgrace. He rose again, eerily, from each
stumble or knockout, apparently unkillable. He raised undiscourageability to
heroic scale.

What kept him going? Partly it was a zest for the game that had bruised him so
badly. As a football player in college, he had been a clumsy lineman used as a
live dummy by practicing teammates. Yet he loved sports and played ball games in
his mind all his life. He loved politics in the same way. He "war-gamed" every
conceivable campaign, for anyone who would take his advice -- better advice for
others than he gave himself, since he presumed others did not need the extra
margin of petty scheming forced on him.

And he liked best of all to move chess pieces on the international scene. What
if, in a surprise move, one slid China all the way across the board to check the
Soviets? In some areas of politics, he seemed to know almost everything about
anything -- except about himself. His strengths and weaknesses fed upon each
other.  He was a small bitter man and a very grand diplomat. Who can read that
riddle? Some of us have spent much of our lives trying to read it, with little
better success than his own.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Clinton and Nixon, a Rarefied Bond

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


They hardly seemed made for each other.

One was in his 80's, the other in his 40's, one a Republican, the other a
Democrat. One was a straight arrow, painfully shy, a classic loner,
conspicuously formal in dress and manner (though under pressure, as the
Watergate tapes showed, he could swear like a stevedore); the other, a devotee
of Elvis and the Beatles, gregarious to a fault, experimented with marijuana in
his youth, developed a reputation as a lady's man and much prefers sweats to
suits.

Their intellectual interests were different, too; Bill Clinton is a domestic
policy man par excellence and Richard M. Nixon's forte was always international
affairs. And yet, after a fairly elaborate courtship, conducted through
intermediaries, the two men formed a bond early in the Clinton Presidency that
lasted until Mr. Nixon's death in New York on Friday.

The respect and rapport that developed between them has been reflected in Mr.
Clinton's generous statements and actions this weekend.

The President announced that he would fly to California for Mr. Nixon's funeral.
He told his aides that if the family wanted it (as it turned out, they did not),
Mr. Nixon would be given a state funeral in Washington, Watergate and his
consequent resignation notwithstanding.  He ordered a day of national mourning,
with all Federal offices closed, in keeping with long tradition.

He paid unstinted verbal tribute, saying Mr. Nixon had managed "to leave his
mark on his times as few figures have done in our history."

Some of the President's aides were a little surprised. The Vietnam policies the
young Bill Clinton protested against were Richard Nixon's policies and the draft
that he at first tried so hard to avoid was overseen by Mr. Nixon. His wife,
Hillary Rodham Clinton, worked as a lawyer for the House Judiciary Committee as
it weighed impeachment charges against Mr. Nixon.

But David R. Gergen, who worked in the Nixon White House and works in the
Clinton White House, said the President wanted "to do this in a first-rate way."
He was under no legal or political compulsion to go all-out. But as he said on
television on Friday night, an-
nouncing the former President's death from the darkened White House Rose Garden,
"It's impossible to be in this job without feeling a special bond with the
people who have gone before" -- the other 41 members of one of the world's
exclusive fraternities.

Lloyd N. Cutler, who served Jimmy Carter as White House counsel and now holds
the same job under Mr. Clinton, said that even Mr. Carter, who won in 1976
largely by condemning the moral and political standards of the Nixon era,
developed a rapport with Mr. Nixon and drew close to him.  The same thing
happened with Mr. Carter and Gerald R. Ford, whom Mr. Carter beat in a close,
bitter election.

"It's what all of them do for each other -- they give each other cover," Mr.
Cutler commented.

In the present case, there was a telling precedent. When former President Lyndon
B. Johnson died in January 1973, Mr. Nixon was President.  He had been
re-elected, after a divisive campaign against Senator George McGovern, only two
months before. Mr. Nixon not only attended the funeral at National City
Christian Church in Washington but also went to the Capitol to view the body
lying in state.

Although several Clinton aides said there had been little discussion about the
politics of the matter, one top White House official said the President "had
everything to gain and nothing to lose by acting magnanimously and assuming a
proper Presidential dignity." Clintonites could hardly condemn him for doing so;
Nixonians, most of them presumably unfriendly to the present incumbent of the
Oval Office, just might soften their opposition.

More than anything else, however, it was Russia -- long a preoccupation of Mr.
Nixon, now one of the biggest problems facing Mr. Clinton -- that sealed their
relationship. A couple of weeks ago, the former President sent to the White
House a letter analyzing the situation in Russia on the basis of his recent
visit there. Mr. Clinton told aides at the time that he had never read anything
as good on the subject, and after Mr. Nixon's death, he said on television, "I
was incredibly impressed with the energy and rigor he brought to analyzing this
issue."

Admired Lucidity

Mr. Gergen said that Mr. Clinton "loved the lucidity of Nixon's mind." Shortly
after he heard of the former President's stroke last Monday, he told Mr. Gergen
on the phone, "I hope it hasn't affected his mind."

As is so often the case in politics, each of the men had something the other one
wanted: Mr. Clinton, the foreign-policy neophyte, gained credibility through his
association with Mr. Nixon, the elder statesman, and he mentioned it often. Mr.
Nixon, determined to do all he could to edge closer to the center of power as a
final step in his self-rehabilitation campaign, had a better chance with Mr.
Clinton than with his Republican predecessors, who were wary of association with
a Republican who had sullied the party's name.

In addition, Mr. Nixon always liked the role of mentor. Many of those closest to
him, in the White House and afterward, were much younger than he, and Mr.
Clinton, one of the youngest Presidents, fit that mold. Mr. Clinton loves being
a protege.

But things did not start out at all well. In February 1992, Mr. Nixon said in an
interview in The New York Times that Mr. Clinton would have to take care with
Mrs. Clinton's campaign role, because "if the wife comes through as being too
strong and too intelligent, it makes the husband look like a wimp."

Unfortunately, he said, far too many voters agreed with Cardinal Richelieu's
epigram, "Intelligence in a woman is unbecoming."

Neither Mr. Clinton nor his wife liked that much, and when Mr. Nixon sent Mr.
Clinton a two-page, handwritten note after the 1992 election, talking of the
special relationships among Presidents past and present, he received no reply.
Friends said he was hurt. He feared, one of them said, that Mrs. Clinton had
kept Mr. Clinton from answering or that an anti-Nixon member of the Clinton
staff had stolen the former President's letter.

About the same time, he told Roger Stone, a political consultant who maintained
ties to the former President, that Mrs. Clinton was "what we used to call a
'red-hot' in the 1930's -- a real lefty like Eleanor Roosevelt."

At any rate, Mr. Stone enlisted Dick Morris, a consultant who worked on five
Clinton campaigns for governor of Arkansas, to help bridge the gap.  Tony
Coelho, a former California Congressman, now on Wall Street, Robert S. Strauss,
the former Democratic Party chairman, and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the
minority leader, also weighed in with appeals to Mr. Clinton.

With the Washington establishment doing its part, the new Nixon applied a bit of
pressure worthy of one of the old Nixon. Mr. Stone said the former President
passed the word that he was working on an article for The Times's Op-Ed page
about Mr. Clinton's foreign policy that could either be gentle or not so gentle.

The White House called back within 24 hours, and contact was made. Mr. Nixon was
soon praising Mr. Clinton's "gutsy support" of President Boris N. Yeltsin and
attacking the "advocates of inaction" in Russian affairs.

But even then, Mr. Nixon's support was far from unqualified. In his final book,
"Beyond Peace," excerpts from which are to be published in Monday's issue of
Time magazine, the former President criticized Mr. Clinton's actions on Somalia
("a lesson in how not to conduct U.S. foreign policy"), China ("imprudent") and
Bosnia ("one of America's most unfortunate and unnecessary foreign-policy
failures").

"If the U.S. had been willing to lead," Mr. Nixon wrote, "a number of steps
short of the commitment of ground forces could have been taken early in the
Bosnia crisis to blunt Serbian aggression. Our failure to do so tarnished our
reputation as an even-handed player on the international stage."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Nixon and President Clinton at the White House in 1993.
(White House Photo)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Paths to Scandal: A special report.;
Stories of Courage and Sacrifice, Corruption and Betrayal in Blue

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD with JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 4050 words


Like all police officers who ride a patrol car together, they would do anything
for each other. Last April, Jorge Alvarez proved that. He and Randolf Vazquez,
partners on the midnight shift at the crime-infested 30th Precinct in northwest
Harlem, came upon a drug-crazed individual firing at another man on West 151st
Street. They scrambled out of their patrol car, as other drug dealers in the
neighborhood joined the battle.

"It was like Vietnam out there," said a police officer who subsequently arrived
on the scene. "Bullets were whizzing by your head."

Several shots from Mr. Alvarez and Mr. Vazquez felled the first gunman. As Mr.
Vazquez began to reload, the gunman, despite severe wounds, staggered to his
knees and aimed at Mr. Vazquez. Without hesitation, Mr. Alvarez dived in front
of his partner and fired at the man, killing him and saving Mr. Vazquez's life.

Now the pair's close bond has unraveled with Mr. Alvarez's decision to turn his
partner in as part of the corruption scandal engulfing the 30th Precinct. The
path these partners took constitutes perhaps the most peculiar of the stories
among those charged in the biggest roundup of New York City police officers on
corruption charges in nearly a decade. But their story, and that of others
arrested in the case, may provide a window into what drives officers to step
over the line into lawlessness.

The charges against the officers in the 30th Precinct outlined shocking
effrontery. They were accused of forcing drug dealers to pay them protection
money for not arresting them or of stealing drugs and cash from dealers or of
selling pilfered drugs themselves. They would stop cars of dealers and strip
them of drugs and money, the authorities said; they would pat down dealers
looking for "felony keys" of places likely to harbor lucrative stashes and then
rob the places. A bodega within the precinct's borders is said to have served as
a veritable bribe bank where dealers left weekly deposits with the owner and the
officers showed up to make withdrawals.

The investigation was begun two years ago by the Manhattan District Attorney's
office, and was later joined by investigators for the United States Attorney's
Office and the Mollen Commission, appointed by Mayor David N. Dinkins in 1992 to
investigate allegations of corruption. A drug dealer informant and the bodega
owner helped the case, as did three officers who cooperated with investigators
by wearing wires: George Nova, Alberto Vargas and Mr. Alvarez. These three have
pled guilty. Mr. Alvarez faces seven years in prison; Mr. Vazquez faces a
possible life sentence. Like Mr. Alvarez, Mr. Vargas gave up his partner on day
patrol, Ruben Garza, and Mr. Nova gave up his partner in anticrime, John Arena.

Investigators themselves have not assembled a full picture of the 12 officers.
They remain uncertain of just when and why any went "bad." They do believe that
the officers did not work together as part of any crime club but in small
clusters of two or three. Some were believed to be thieves of convenience: money
was available and they took it. Others were apparently looking for money.

One of the oddities is that a number of the arrested officers were among the
spangled names of the precinct, honored men looked up to as role models by
younger recruits. Stephen Setteducatto was one of the precinct's arrest leaders,
who, one officer said, "could find a collar in a phone booth." George Nova,
Josue Rivera and John Arena had been elevated to the precinct's elite anticrime
unit because of their performance. By that time, investigators say, they were
already partaking of illicit sweets of the street.

Best Cover: Do Your Job Well

It is also pointed out with some sarcasm by 30th Precinct officers that the best
cover for a corrupt cop is, on the surface, to do your job extremely well. No
one suspects a hero of being a crook.

All of the arrested officers come from humble, working-class backgrounds.
Michael Walsh, noteworthy among the dozen for being accused of the single
biggest heist, $100,000 in cash, was the son of a dairy worker. Russell Litwenak
Jr. was the son of a factory worker. Alberto Vargas was the son of a bartender.
John Arena was raised by a single mother. Josue Rivera's parents divorced and he
was brought up in the Bronx by his uncle and aunt, Julio and Elizabeth Jogler.
His uncle is a police officer in the 46th Precinct. "Whatever I did, he wanted
to imitate," a tearful Mr. Jogler said. "I was the one who talked him into
becoming a cop."

Nine of the officers are in their 30's. Two -- Mr. Litwenak and Mr. Setteducatto
-- are in their 40's and are 20-year veterans. Mr. Setteducatto is something of
the odd man out. He was not accused of stealing drugs or taking bribes. Instead,
his arrest revolves around one incident during which he is said to have stolen
cash from a safe that had been seized and brought to the precinct. He was a
popular figure, in charge of the Precinct Club that planned recreational and
social activities. Two months ago, he had left the precinct in preparation for
retirement. He was going to move to North Carolina.

"I've rescued people from burning buildings," Mr. Setteducatto said yesterday in
an interview, refusing to discuss charges against him. "I helped people in my
community and the communities I've worked."

Officers in the 30th Precinct speak of the "erosion theory," about the wear on
the mind of years of seeing towering stacks of money confiscated, years of
seeing impudent teen-age dealers who drive flashy cars and wear expensive
jewelry and who the system never seems to keep behind bars. They talk about how
many years you can watch $1 million in confiscated cash come into the 30th
Precinct and not want just a little for yourself.

"Cops are like the beach," one sergeant said. "They get eroded by the waves of
crime and inducements out there. We all ask ourselves: How long can you put
someone in a Class A precinct like this where there is so much crime and
temptation before someone wears away and gives in to it? Fortunately, most cops
don't wear down. Some cops go 35 years and don't erode. But there are also cops
who erode in two years."

Financial pressures undoubtedly hammered away at many.

In 1990, Mr. Rivera bought a house in New City, N.Y., that left him with a
$183,000 mortgage and a $2,399 monthly payment. In 1990, the Internal Revenue
Service put a lien on his income for $5,447 in owed taxes. At one point, his
wife, Jana, did day-care for children in the neighborhood to bring in extra
money. They drove a 1982 Datsun with 200,000 miles on it. In February of 1993,
their mortgage holder sued them for nonpayment. Last summer, their house was
foreclosed on and they moved to an apartment in New Rochelle. Soon afterward,
they separated. Around the same time, the state put a lien on Mr. Rivera for
$4,053 in taxes.

Interviews with a wide array of police officers, supervisors, acquaintances,
relatives and investigators, virtually all of whom spoke on condition of
anonymity, gave the broad contours of the lives of some of the arrested
officers, a partial understanding of the road to the dark side of the law.

Partners
Under Fire, Under Pressure

Jorge Alvarez and Randolf Vazquez came from similar New York origins. Mr.
Alvarez, 33, was reared in the Bronx. His father was a building superintendent.
After Mr. Alvarez graduated from high school, he worked for United Parcel
Service and later as a banquet waiter at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. In 1982, he
joined the police force.

Mr. Vazquez, 37, grew up in Queens. His father was a silk-screen maker, his
mother a sales clerk. He apparently considered following in the path of his
father, going to the High School of Art and Design, but he dropped out. He held
several jobs: as a security guard, a stock clerk at department stores and a
bartender and host at Adam's Apple, a Manhattan singles bar. In 1985, he joined
the police force and was assigned to Central Park, where, as one officer put it,
"You look at squirrels, trees and girls in bikinis. No way you become corrupt."

A Taste of Illicit Fruit

In the summer of 1991, when the 30th Precinct was in need of officers, Mr.
Vazquez was sent there, although it was not his choice, and his life began to
unravel. He was paired with Mr. Alvarez. Fellow officers suspect Mr. Alvarez of
showing Mr. Vazquez the sweet rewards of corruption. Investigators believe that,
like a number of others on the midnight shift, Mr. Alvarez had succumbed to
stealing money from drug dealers and selling stolen drugs as early as four or
five years ago.

According to the complaint against Mr. Vazquez, he fell into similar crimes. In
one instance, the complaint says, Mr. Vazquez and Mr. Nova recovered four ounces
of cocaine thrown from a car window. They are said to have sold the drugs to a
dealer named Ralphie, and split the proceeds. On another occasion, he and Mr.
Nova were chasing two suspects. One dropped some cocaine. The complaint says the
officer halted their pursuit, grabbed the drugs and sold them to a dealer named
Macuri.

Last July, investigators from the Manhattan District Attorney's office
videotaped Mr. Alvarez during a sting operation. He stopped a car and discovered
bundles of money. Much of it he stuffed into his pants. Investigators say that
the videotape shows him sitting in the driver's seat, leaning over to reach the
glove compartment. A packet of cash fell down his pants leg onto the car floor.
He scooped it up and shoved it into his sock.

In September, Mr. Alvarez was brought in by investigators and agreed to
cooperate in exchange for eventually pleading guilty to third-degree grand
larceny.

Mr. Vazquez lives with his family in New Windsor, N.Y. On Friday, a moving van
was parked outside the two-story house. When he came to the door, Mr. Vazquez
said he had nothing to say.

Mr. Alvarez lives in Port Jervis, N.Y., with his wife and three children. He
fishes and raises terriers. His parents live in a building on West 70th Street,
and they also own a house next door to Mr. Alvarez in Port Jervis. Six months
ago, right after Mr. Alvarez agreed to cooperate with investigators, both houses
were put up for sale. They are still on the market.

The heroism demonstrated by Mr. Alvarez haunts the minds of officers who knew
the pair. "You have to look back and wonder whether Jorge did Vazquez a favor or
not," said a supervisor in the 30th Precinct. "Maybe the best thing would have
been if Vazquez had died right there. He would have been a hero. His family
would have received his full pension. Now, his family is disgraced. The man is
looking at life in prison. Who would want to be him?"

'He's Been an Example'
An Officer With 'the Knack'

Since he was little, George Nova wanted to be a policeman.

He was born in Washington Heights 27 years ago, and grew up on West 157th
Street. His father was a maintenance man. He had two brothers and a sister, as
well as a half brother, Roberto Gonzalez, who was convicted in 1985 of selling
drugs.

After working briefly for two drug stores, Mr. Nova applied to the department in
1986. The next year, he was assigned to the 30th Precinct. "He's been an example
for everyone on the street," said Jose Torres, 20. "He used to protect everyone
on the street."

Supervisors and fellow officers envied him. He received 17 citations for his
work, and was part of the anticrime unit. (He had just one command discipline,
given for a minor infraction, lending his shield to a friend to use with a
Halloween costume.)

He was known as an aggressive cop with an uncanny sense of crime. He made many
drug and gun arrests. "He brought in some tremendous seizures of money,
sometimes up around $100,000," a supervisor said. He received a commendation
once for recovering drugs and nearly $43,000 in cash from a car he stopped for
running a red light. "He was a great cop," said a supervisor at the precinct.
"It's mind-boggling how someone could be so good. He just had the knack."

The First Under Scrutiny

At the same time, investigators say he was the most crooked of the lot. And thus
it is small wonder that he was the first to come under suspicion.

Investigators found that there were more than two dozen civilian complaints
against Mr. Nova, most of which had to do with drug and corruption allegations.
Internal Affairs investigators in the Police Department were said to be aware of
complaints against him going back to 1988. An informer in the neighborhood told
the Mollen Commission that Mr. Nova was shaking down dealers for protection
money. And so, more than two years ago, he was put under surveillance.

Authorities said Mr. Nova accepted weekly bribes from drug dealers, which he
picked up at the bodega bank. The money was left in plain brown paper bags, to
seem as if he was leaving with a container of coffee. Authorities said he
admitted collecting as much as $2,000 a week. Furthermore, they said, he
confessed to often stealing money and drugs from suspects by breaking into drug
dens, as well as selling drugs through dealers.

Investigators called their inquiry "Operation Domino," for they felt that if one
officer fell, others would tumble. Around September, Mr. Nova was brought in by
Mollen Commission investigators and, when confronted with the case against him,
agreed to cooperate. He was the first domino.

John Arena, Mr. Nova's partner, who was accused of stealing drugs and money with
Mr. Nova, apparently trusted him to the end. But he came ever so close to
unmasking Mr. Nova. He told him in late September 1993, at which point Mr. Nova
was wearing a wire, that he had purchased a wire-detecting device from a spy
store and had used it at the precinct's annual barbecue, according to
investigators. Mr. Arena said he detected no wires. He offered to lend the
device to Mr. Nova to insure he didn't get caught. Mr. Nova gave it to
investigators, along with other evidence on his partner.

'Abusador'
A 'Goose' With A Mean Streak

Around the precinct house, they called him "Goose." At first, it was "Fat
Goose," but then just "Goose." Officers found him polite almost to the point of
being obsequious. "He was always a 'Yes, sir,' 'No, sir,' type of person," said
a supervisor who knew him for years. "He was a people's people." But out on the
streets, those who crossed his path called him "Abusador" and "Thief" because
they found him so violent and corrupt.

Alfonso Compres grew up within the violent borders of the drug culture. He was
born outside of San Francisco de Macoris in the Dominican Republic, a city that
has gained repute as a haven for drug traffickers. His family brought him and
three younger siblings to New York when Mr. Compres was 12, and they settled on
162d Street, one of the grittier, drug-fueled streets of Washington Heights. His
father found work as a sewing machine operator in the garment district.

After high school, Mr. Compres spent a decade working as an assembler in a
factory in New Jersey and at a photo-print store. Then, in 1990, at the age of
29, he joined the police force, assigned to the 30th Precinct.

Because of Mr. Compres's seemingly gentle nature, his superiors felt he was
ideal for community police work, in which an officer walks a beat alone and
fraternizes with residents to deter crime. He was assigned one of the most
drug-infested beats in the precinct, patrolling from 138th Street to 141th
Street and from Broadway to Riverside Drive.

According to investigators, Mr. Compres quickly turned bad, insisting on
protection money from drug dealers. Investigators say that an informer told them
that dealers would leave $70 apiece at the bodega for Mr. Compres. He is said to
have collected about $2,000 a month in illicit payoffs.

And Mr. Compres exhibited a savage violent streak. If dealers didn't pay,
investigators said, he beat them. In perhaps the most striking accusation
against any of the dozen, Mr. Compres is accused of coming up behind a dealer
waiting for an elevator, striking him on the head and shooting him in the side,
before making off with the cocaine he was carrying.

Just two months ago, Mr. Compres moved from Washington Heights and bought a home
in Monroe, N.Y. Unlike the others, he appeared to have a contingency plan. The
complaint against him quotes him telling an informer that, if caught, he might
"spend five years in jail and would come out of jail with money." Then he would
return to the Dominican Republic.

'Good Collar Man'
Caught Up In the Culture

It seems as if Christopher DiLorenzo came to police work because nothing else he
tried panned out.

Born in 1963, he grew up in Woodside and Astoria, Queens. His mother, a
passenger service agent, raised him along with three sisters and a brother. He
apparently never knew his father.

In high school, he was chronically truant, and later dropped out. For two years,
he worked at a Queens deli. He was a customer service agent for T.W.A., but was
laid off. He worked as a carpenter, but quit after a couple of months. After a
year of shiftlessness, he was hired in 1984 as a handyman and chauffeur for Paul
Mellon, the philanthropist. He left after nearly a year, and was unemployed for
two years before joining the police force.

He became an officer in January 1986 and went straight to the 30th Precinct.
Fellow officers described him as a "good collar man," who worked the midnight
shift and would only speak if spoken to.

Fairly early in his career, investigators believe, he became entwined with drug
dealers. In July 1989, the police said, he helped a drug dealer named Roy
Tellier get released from a Long Island jail. Mr. Tellier grew up in Woodside
with Mr. DiLorenzo and was being held on a probation violation for a
drug-possession conviction. Mr. Tellier and his two brothers, Robin and Rene,
are known to the police as the "Crash and Carry Gang," who rob fur salons,
jewelry stores and art galleries by crashing a van through the front windows.

According to investigators, Mr. DiLorenzo for years stole money and drugs from
dealers, and that for at least two years he received regular protection payments
from dealers operating on West 146th Street. Two years ago, the authorities say,
he stopped a Ford Taurus on Riverside Drive, searched the car and found a trap
that contained a gun and cocaine. He and Mr. Vargas reportedly kept one kilogram
of cocaine and, after Mr. Vargas sold the drugs to a dealer for $26,000, the two
of them split the money. On another occasion, he and Mr. Vargas reportedly
searched an apartment and found cocaine. The suspect offered them $1,000 not to
arrest him, which they took. After pretending to flush the drugs down the
toilet, Mr. DiLorenzo reportedly took the cocaine, too, and sold it to another
dealer.

In mid-March, Mr. DiLorenzo chatted with Officer Vargas, then wearing a wire,
about widening reports that the precinct was under investigation.

"The ship has sunk," Mr. Vargas said.

Mr. DiLorenzo seemed unfazed. "Think about it," he replied, according to
investigators. "Between me and you they can get us for what, maybe one or two
brutality charges, tops."



POLICE
Defendants in Blue: Who They Are

Jorge Alvarez, 33, born in Havana, Cuba and reared in the Bronx... graduated
from Power Memorial High School in Manhattan in 1979; no college education...
worked as banquet host at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel before joining the police...
married to Ana L. Alvarez... pleaded guilty to charges that he stole more than
$3,000 from a suspect and is cooperating with the authorities.

John Arena, 32, born in Manhattan... graduated from Park West High School in
1981; attended Manhattan Community College for three semesters... joined police
in July 1983... is accused of illegal searches, stealing money and drugs from
apartments, selling drugs and taking bribes from drug dealers.

Alfonso Compres, 33, born in the Dominican Republic... immigrated with family to
New York when he was 12... graduated from George Washington High School in
1979... worked in a factory in Fairfield, N.J., and later in a photo store
before joining the police force in April 1990... known on the street as
"Abusador" and "Goose"... is accused in one case of bashing a dealer in the
head, stealing a bag of cocaine and shooting him in the stomach... also accused
of robbing other dealers, intimidating a witness and tampering with evidence.

Christopher DiLorenzo, 30 born in New York City and grew up in Woodside and
Astoria, Queens... attended William C. Bryant High School in Long Island City,
but dropped out in 1979... earned GED in 1982... held jobs as a customer service
agent for TWA, a carpenter in Long Island, a handyman and chauffer for Paul
Mellon... joined the force in 1986... accused of stealing money and drugs from
dealers and then reselling the narcotics to other traffickers.

Ruben A. Garza, 34, grew up on Sedgwick Avenue in the Bronx... graduated from
Power Memorial High School in 1978... worked as elevator operator, an ambulance
driver and an electrician in Queens before joining the force in July 1983...
accused of stealing drugs and reselling them.

Russell B. Litwenak, Jr., 45, reared in Paterson and Clifton, N.J... graduated
from Clifton High School in 1968... worked as a hospital cook, a clerk in a
camera shop and a drive-in theater ticket taker before joining the force in
1973... laid off between 1975 and 1980... reinstated in 1980 and sent to the
30th Precinct... arrested earlier this year in a sting operation for allegedly
stealing money from an apartment.

George Nova, 31, grew up on West 157th Street... attended George Washington High
School between 1980 and 1984 but dropped out... received GED in 1985... was a
pharmacy worker and youth counselor before joining force in July 1986...
received 17 citations for excellent police work but was reprimanded in March
1991 for lending his badge to a friend at a costume ball... pleaded guilty to
distributing stolen narcotics and illegal searches in a deal with prosecutors...
agreed to help investigators after he was taped by investigators accepting
payoffs from dealers.

Josue Rivera, 32, grew up in the Bronx on Hermany Avenue... graduated from
private school, All Hallows Institute in 1979... attended John Jay College of
Criminal Justice but dropped out and joined the Marine Corps... discharged as
corporal... worked as security guard in San Diego before joining the police in
July 1987... received 14 citations, including a commendation... won spot in
anticrime unit... accused of accepting payoffs from dealers in return for
protection.

Stephen G. Setteducatto, 42, grew up in Brooklyn... graduated from Westinghouse
High School in 1970... worked for three years as a shipping clerk before joining
department... laid off during fiscal crisis. received 20 citations for excellent
police work, including one commendation... accused of stealing money from a safe
containing drug money that was brought to the precinct.

Alberto Vargas, 32, reared on Gleason Avenue in the Bronx... dropped out of
Adele E. Stevenson High School in the 11th grade and later earned G.E.D...
worked as a waiter, a stock clerk, a driver, a maintenance man, and a city jail
guard... joined police in December 1984.in a deal with prosecutors, he pleaded
guilty to distribution of narcotics and income tax evasion and provided
information on his partner, Ruben A. Garza.

Randolf K. Vazquez, 37, grew up in Queens... attended the High School of Art and
Design, but dropped out in 1975... worked as security guard, stock clerk,
bartender and bank guard before joining the police in 1985... was partners with
Alvarez... accused of the sale and possession of drugs.

Michael G. Walsh, 33, grew up on 65th Street in Queens... graduated from Power
Memorial in 1979... moved with mother and siblings to Texas, where he attended
school for three semesters at Tarranto County Junior College before dropping
out... worked at Western Hills Inn in Euless, Tex., and then for Higman Towing
Company as a deckhand... joined the police force in July 1986... has eight
citations for good police work... is accused of stealing and selling cocaine.
   JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The bonds between many police officers who face the dangers of
the city together have been ripped apart by the corruption scandal that has
engulfed the 30th Precinct in Harlem. A barricade was put outside the entrance
last week after the arrest of several officers. (Steve Berman for The New York
Times)(pg. B4)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

G.O.P. Rivalry May Mean Loss Of Council Seat

BYLINE: By JONATHAN P. HICKS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


The special election for a City Council seat on Staten Island on Tuesday pits
two politically prominent families against each other and also will determine
whether the Republican Party can retain the dominance it has held for years in
that district.

The election, in the Council's 51st District along the south shore of Staten
Island, is being held to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Alfred
C. Cerullo 3d, a popular Councilman appointed last month as the city's consumer
affairs commissioner by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani. A win by a Republican would
maintain the seven Republican seats on the 51-member City Council.

Politicians and political experts suggest that the front-runner among the six
candidates is Vito Fossella Jr., 29, a lawyer who spent much of the last three
years working on Mr. Giuliani's campaign. He has been endorsed by a wide array
of Republican leaders, including Mayor Giuliani, Mr. Cerullo, Representative
Susan Molinari and her father, Guy, the Staten Island Borough President.

Mr. Fossella is the nephew of Frank Fossella, a prominent Staten Island Democrat
who represented the community on the Council for four years, ending in 1985. Mr.
Fossella's father served in a number of city posts under Democratic mayors.

He is being challenged sharply by CaraMia Hart, 28, a former assistant district
attorney in Manhattan and the daughter of George Hart, the late Republican
leader in Staten Island in the 1980's.

The leading Democratic candidate in the race appears to be Anthony J. Pocchia, a
lawyer and veteran of the Vietnam War who has been active in a number of civic
organizations. Mr. Pocchia, 48, said he hoped that the Republican candidates
would sufficiently split the vote to enable him to win.

The major issues being discussed in the race are methods of overseeing or
curbing the rapid development in the area and ways to solve school overcrowding.

The district is a conservative one, where Republicans account for just under
half of the electorate -- the highest percentage of registered Republicans in
any Council district.

In recent days, the race has been heating up. Mr. Fossella has been criticized
for moving from an adjacent Staten Island district to run for the Council seat
and has been harshly attacked, largely by Ms. Hart, for accepting campaign
contributions from the real-estate industry. In doing so, she is seeking to
appeal to voters who have been annoyed with rapid real-estate development.

Mr. Pocchia was endorsed yesterday by The Staten Island Advance.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Mr. Comeback

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Late one night in the White House, working on a speech, Richard Nixon tried to
encapsulate his more recent predecessors in a single word or phrase: "Truman --
a fighter. Eisenhower -- a good man. Kennedy -- charisma. Johnson -- work. Me --
what?"

I did not have a good answer that night in 1970; I do now. Nixon -- an inspiring
resilience.

In the 60's, he rose up after his political obituary and employed his unique
combination of grit, guile and greatness to seize the moment that had been
denied him before. He expressed the secret of overcoming adversity in a private
note to Ted Kennedy after Chappaquiddick: "A man's not finished when he's
defeated; he's finished when he quits."

Nixon liked "the comeback theme" because it identified his return from defeat
with the careers of Churchill and de Gaulle. During another break in speech
collaboration, he recalled a meeting with de Gaulle at which Nixon aides took
notes. "They got everything down of substance. But then de Gaulle said, in a
kind of an aside, 'All the countries of Europe lost the war, but only two were
defeated.' They never wrote that down. And that's the one thing I'll never
forget from that meeting."

He instructed those of us in the Five O'Clock Group to "get the word out" about
his 60's comeback, which made the media all the more resistant to our
image-making. But as Henry Kissinger once said of a selling argument, "it had
the added advantage of being true."

We had no idea how true it was, or how soon the essence of Nixon's character
would be put to the test again.

From the pinnacle of success -- the vote of confidence of a 49-state landslide
-- he plunged to the nadir of forced resignation. After Watergate, he stood
naked to his enemies, who had become legion.

Stripped of power, denuded of honor, deserted by supporters rightly dismayed at
the cover-up, he had no reservoir of public trust and no visible means of
defense. His only assets were his mind, his pride and his hard-bought
experience.

I visited him at San Clemente during one of the most depressing moments. It was
April 29, 1975, the day the capital of South Vietnam fell to the Communists, and
he took personal responsibility for the debacle. "Terrible day for freedom, and
all my fault," he said, his phlebitis-inflamed foot elevated on a cushion. "The
fall of Saigon is the direct result of the way I messed up Watergate."

Then the second and even more difficult comeback began. He thought, he traveled,
he wrote. He took no fees for speeches and ended the public expense of Secret
Service protection. Despite the glares of the guardians against his feared
"rehabilitation," he slowly, over two decades, worked his way back first to a
tentative acceptability, then to grudging respect, finally to an honored role as
leader to opinion leaders and adviser to Presidents.

How did he resurrect himself? By learning a great lesson and by living an
example.

The lesson was the need to rise above the us-against-them ethos of the political
gutfighter. "Those who hate you don't win," he told his White House staff on his
way out, "unless you hate them -- and then you destroy yourself." Nixon-haters
go to their graves hating him; he goes to his grave knowing better than to hate
them.

The example he set in his subsequent full generation of peace was that of a man
who again refused to accept personal defeat.

Richard Nixon, in becoming America's greatest ex-President, proved there is no
political wrongdoing so scandalous that it cannot be expiated by years of useful
service; no humiliation so painful that it cannot be overcome by decades of
selfless sagacity; no personal doldrums so deep that they cannot be dispersed by
a gutsy engagement with life.

That's why, to sum up Nixon in a phrase, this former aide would choose: an
inspiring resilience. By resolving a second time to earn his way to political
redemption -- and then by doggedly, brilliantly triumphing in that second
comeback -- he justified the faith of all those millions who ever believed in
him.

Defeat be not proud; in Richard Nixon, ruination met its master.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Beware the Superpower Syndrome

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel;   Ronald Steel is professor of international relations
at the University of Southern California.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1080 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Having tried to appease the interventionists while not getting sucked in to a
war in Bosnia, President Clinton's options narrow dangerously. Halfhearted
bombing doesn't scare the Serbs. Anything more threatens to undermine Russian
reformers, split NATO and make the U.S. a full participant in the war.

We are learning the hard way that there can be no "peacekeeping" until there is
a peace to keep. Having managed to survive the cold war without ever exchanging
a shot with the Soviets, we now find ourselves on the verge of war with Serbia,
a country with a population about equal to that of the Los Angeles basin. This
happened because the cold war rules are obsolete and we haven't worked out any
new ones. From this mess some cautionary lessons emerge.

1. Don't make promises you can't deliver. In the heat of his Presidential
campaign Bill Clinton chastised George Bush for not coming to the aid of the
Bosnian Muslims. Mr. Clinton vowed to be more forceful. Now, hoisted on the
petard of his own oratory, he finds the situation in Bosnia -- as in Haiti --
far more complicated.

2. Don't use the United Nations for cover. Either the U.S. has a compelling
interest in aiding the Bosnian Muslims or it doesn't. The problem can't be
avoided by fobbing it off on the U.N., and then complaining when things go
wrong, as they did in the Somalia fiasco, that the U.N. made us do it. The U.N.
can do only what its members authorize. To ignore this simple fact is to weaken
and discredit the organization.

3. Don't let the media set the agenda. Wherever TV cameras go, it seems, foreign
policy comes lapping obediently behind. Images of hunger got us into a mess in
Somalia we never understood. Images of war may yet get us into a Balkan conflict
we understand even less.

The President's job is to decide where our interests lie -- not to win the
applause of pundits who urge him to let the bombs fly. If he does act, and the
policy fails, the very same pundits will surely turn against him the way they
turned against Lyndon Johnson when the war in Vietnam got ugly.

4. Don't become a victim of abstractions. Interventionists argue that the U.S.
must show "leadership" -- by which they mean taking the Bosnian side. If our
European allies don't like it, they must be pushed into line. But other nations
will follow us only if persuaded that we know the right course. If the leader
marches heroically off a cliff to demonstrate his "credibility," they will stay
behind and watch.

5. Don't use NATO as an excuse. Unless NATO can show its muscle against the
Serbs, the Administration's critics argue, the alliance will lose its
"credibility." Yet presumably the purpose of NATO is to protect its members from
wars, not to get them into one. Interventionists should argue on the merits of
their cause, not because they need to find a job for NATO after the cold war.

6. Show some respect for history. Our historical memory is measured in months;
in the Balkans it goes back for centuries. Grievances there are older than our
own nation. In the mixed salad of Yugoslavia every group has fought every other
one, committed atrocities, signed truces, intermarried and fought again. This
feud didn't begin when we became aware of it.

7. Be wary of analogies. Strategists explain every war in the vocabulary of
previous ones. Ho Chi Minh, and later Saddam Hussein, were Adolf Hitler. South
Vietnam was Czechoslovakia. Interventionists now tell us that anything less than
a victory for Bosnia amounts to another Munich. The Serbs are Nazis; their
leaders are reincarnations of Hitler. Dominoes are set to topple all across
Europe unless we come rushing to the aid of the Muslims. This is precisely the
kind of thinking that critics of the American involvement in Vietnam once
ridiculed. Now many of them use the very same argument in a cause they favor.

8. Get over the superpower syndrome. Hard though it may be to believe, there is
not an American solution to every problem. In fact, there are a good many
problems for which there may be no solution at all. The public supported wars
against Communists because it believed that U.S. security was threatened. But
with Communists now gone, the days of knee-jerk public support for military
interventions are over.

9. Avoid interfering in other people's civil wars. The Bosnians, who broke away
from the Yugoslav federation only three years ago -- against the opposition of
the Serbs, who make up more than a third of Bosnia's population -- may well have
the right to an independent state, but arguably no more so than the South
Vietnamese, or even our own Confederacy. They have no claim on the world to
defend it for them. We should be wary of becoming the midwife of breakaway
states.

10. Resist exaggerated rhetoric. Terrible things are taking place in the
Yugoslav civil wars, but this is nothing new in the region. Atrocities have
always taken place, and as recently as the 1940's the Serbs were among the main
victims.

This war is about territory and also about ethnicity. Muslims, Croats and Serbs
are being evicted from their homes or even killed because they are of the
"wrong" ethnic group. Horrifying as this is, it is not "genocide" and this is
not the Holocaust.

11. Be careful of selective morality.  If there is a moral case for intervening
in Bosnia, there is an equally compelling one for intervening in Rwanda, where
more than 100,000 people have died. Last week, the U.S. supported a Security
Council resolution to cut back its peacekeeping force in Rwanda from 1,700 to
270 troops. On what moral grounds do we decide that one war is intolerable while
another can be ignored?

12. Anticipate the consequences of your actions. We used the U.N. and NATO as a
cover for minimal intervention without thinking through what would happen if the
Serbs did not comply. As a result we face disarray in both organizations. Now
the Administration is told that it must lift the embargo and arm the Bosnians.
Every people should have the right to defend themselves. But if we do this, we
must first set the limits of our involvement. We must recognize that it is their
war, not ours; theirs to lose as well as to win. But once engaged, would we be
willing to stand aside if "our side" was being defeated? Or would we only be
pulled deeper in?

This is the world after the cold war. No evil empires, no easy formulas, no
knee-jerk public support. Tread cautiously because you are on shifting ground.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37th PRESIDENT: WATERGATE;
Nixon's Darkest Chapter, By Those Who Lived It

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: LONDON, April 25


On the stage sat Jeb Stuart Magruder, a former campaign aide of President
Richard M. Nixon, and in the audience, Leonard Garment, his longtime friend and
counselor. Across the room was Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor
whose persistence in pursuing the scandal two decades ago so enraged Mr. Nixon
that he had him dismissed.

Barely three days after the death of Mr. Nixon, aging aides and adversaries
alike gathered today at the University of London, not to listen to funeral
eulogies and tributes, but to share their own sharp and painful memories of
Watergate, the darkest chapter of the Nixon Presidency.

"It would be difficult to think of a less seemly moment to hold a conference on
Watergate," said Gary L. McDowell, director of the university's Institute of
United States Studies, which had organized the program, along with the British
Broadcasting Corporation, several months ago.

But to have canceled it, he said, would have been worse, because that "would
have implied that the sum total of Richard Nixon's extraordinary career was, in
fact, encapsulated in the word Watergate."

Dean and Bork, Too

The two-day conference, "Watergate Revisited," was organized to preview a
five-part, five-hour documentary series on Watergate that will appear on the BBC
next month and be broadcast on the Discovery channel in the United States in
August. The conference today drew about 100 spectators, most of them students.

Other participants are to include John W. Dean 3d, the former White House
counsel who revealed the cover-up that ultimately brought down Mr. Nixon, and
Robert H. Bork, who as Acting Attorney General carried out Mr. Nixon's order to
dismiss Mr. Cox, after Attorney General Elliott L. Richardson and his deputy
quit rather than comply.

Twenty years after Mr. Nixon resigned the Presidency, the documentary and the
discussion today vividly recalled the atmosphere of the times, when America was
deeply divided over the war in Vietnam, and the Nixon White House had embarked
on a secret campaign to identify and punish those it believed were trying to
damage the country.

The series uses extensive interviews with Watergate protagonists like G. Gordon
Liddy, who organized the break-in at Democratic Party headquarters in the
Watergate complex, as well as former White House aides, including H. R.
Haldeman, who died last year; Mr. Magruder; Mr. Dean and John D. Ehrlichman, who
at one point describes Mr. Nixon as a "compulsive conspiracy theorist."

New Puzzle Piece

While the bones of the story are familiar, the documentary's producers, Brian
Lapping Associates, say they have turned up one piece of new evidence: a White
House memo buried in the National Archives. The memo, they say, demonstrates
that Mr. Haldeman had prior knowledge of $300,000 set aside in 1972 by Mr.
Nixon's re-election campaign to finance a political intelligence operation run
by Mr. Liddy, which led to the Watergate break-in.

Mr. Magruder said today that the documentary accurately described the atmosphere
inside the White House in which he said paranoia and arrogance had conspired to
make "good people do evil things."

But Mr. Garment took issue with what he called "a distortion of the much more
complicated story of the Nixon Presidency."

"As a partisan," he said, "I am happy Nixon lived long enough to realize that
the judgment of those who detested him was not the judgment of history."

Remembering Abuse of Power

But Stanley I. Kutler, a law professor at the University of Wisconsin who was
the BBC's historical consultant on the series, said he believed it was
critically important to recall and remember Watergate and its abuses of power,
especially now, in light of Mr. Nixon's death.

"I think from what we know now that it is much clearer how we can tie Nixon's
pursuit of political intelligence to the Watergate affair," said Mr. Kutler,
author of "The Wars of Watergate" (Alfred A. Knopf, 1990).

"When these films are shown in the U.S. next August, it will bring back a
perspective that has been sadly lacking over the last three days," said Mr.
Kutler, suggesting that there has been a tendency to diminish or de-emphasize
the significance of Watergate in obituaries and retrospectives on the late
President.

Other participants also said it was appropriate to dwell on Watergate so soon
after President Nixon had died.

"We are with the death of Richard Nixon at the end of an era," said Hugh Brogan,
a professor at the University of Essex who was moderator of the panel discussion
this afternoon.  "While we are all trying to understand his place in history,
and his significance, the place of Watergate cannot be left out of that
discussion."

In wrestling with the legacy of Watergate to the Nixon Presidency, a questioner
addressed Mr. Magruder this afternoon, marveling how different things might have
been had Mr. Liddy and the burglars who were caught inside the Watergate complex
not been so incompetent.

"I guess I'd still be in Washington, probably a senator by now," laughed Mr.
Magruder, who instead spent seven months in Federal prison for his role in the
scandal. Since 1981, he has served as an ordained Presbyterian minister.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Quayle Sounds Ready To Return to Politics

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Dan Quayle has spent a lot of time in the last 18 months thinking about Murphy
Brown, about the Republican loss of the White House and about how he became the
most ridiculed politician in modern American history.

But what weighed most heavily on his mind the other morning was eggs Benedict.
The former Vice President grew impatient as waitresses at the Congressional
Country Club in suburban Maryland, one of his favorite golfing spots, ignored
him for more than half an hour as he tried to order.

"We'll be here all morning," he complained. "They're just the slowest. I don't
know about you, but I'm hungry."

Finally, his breakfast arrived. And Mr. Quayle, in his first long interview
since leaving the White House, talked for nearly two hours about flaws of the
Bush White House and, more pointedly, of the Clinton White House.

Clinton Agenda Attacked

At times he sounded like a Presidential candidate as he attacked Bill and
Hillary Clinton as pushing a "very radical agenda" and made his case for how the
Republicans could win the White House in 1996.

If he decides to run, he said, he is confident he can beat Bob Dole, the Senate
minority leader, Jack F. Kemp, the former Housing Secretary, or anyone else who
might seek the nomination.

Government chefs, limousines and airplanes are no longer at Mr. Quayle's beck
and call. The entourage is gone. But he is coming back. In the coming weeks, the
former Vice President plans to make the rounds on "Larry King Live" and other
television programs. And he plans to travel to three dozen cities to promote
"Standing Firm," his soon-to-be-released score-settling memoir, and to gauge the
nation's interest in his political future.

Unlike many politicians who try to gloss over past embarrassments, Mr. Quayle is
trying to figure out why he was so reviled. He said he interviewed several
reporters, including Dan Rather, the CBS News anchor, and most told him that his
image was inalterably set in the few days after he made his debut at the
Republican National Convention in August 1988. That was when he panicked and
stumbled through questions about whether influential friends helped him avoid
active duty in the military during the Vietnam War.

As much as he says he wants to be President, Mr. Quayle knows that he has a long
way to go to erase his image as a lightweight who would tote golf clubs on
foreign trips and who mangled the slogan of the United Negro College Fund,
saying, "What a waste it is to lose one's mind."

Bothered by Caricature

He was particularly deflated one night last week after a reporter told him that
students who heard him speak at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va., were
surprised that he sounded intelligent.

"There's millions of people that have this caricature," he said glumly. "And it
does bother me."

Mr. Quayle seemed to adopt the worst of his former boss's subject-less syntax as
he described his four years in the shadow of George Bush: "Best of times and
worst of times. Looking back, I would do it all over again. Would not enjoy a
lot of it. Would not enjoy the ridicule and abuse -- the emotional, visceral
antagonism toward me."

Still, the former Vice President sounds ready to return to the fray, saying he
will run for no office again except President. He said the advisers who think he
should let time pass before seeking the Presidency forget that he beat the odds
when he was elected to the House in 1976, and that four years later, at the age
of 33, he became the youngest Senator ever elected from Indiana.

"Hey, I know what my liabilities are," he said. "I know what they're saying,
what some of my friends say. You just go back out there and show them who you
are. Show them the real Dan Quayle."

Now 47, Mr. Quayle is graying at the temples, but he still looks youthful and
far calmer than he did when he first appeared on national television, clinging
to the Republican ticket as he endured slights like an unsuccessful effort to
have his name shrunk on a Bush-Quayle bumper sticker.

Mr. Quayle, who moved back to Indiana after the 1992 election, has stayed out of
the public eye except for occasional speeches and the dedication of a Quayle
museum in his hometown of Huntington, Ind. Most of his time has been devoted to
writing newspaper columns and the book, and last year he formed a financial
services company in Indianapolis.

While he said he was bound by his publisher not to discuss specifics of his
book, he offered a sly smile when asked whether his biggest target was James A.
Baker 3d, Mr. Bush's friend and Secretary of State who led efforts to push the
Vice President from the ticket. "We have a whole chapter title 'Dump Quayle,' "
he said. "I respond to that in great detail."

The spiciest chapters may well be the ones devoted to his biggest humiliations.
The chapter about his inability to spell "potato" is entitled, "Baked, Mashed
and Fried." And there are chapters entitled "Murphy and Me" and "Meeting the
Media."

When the conversation turned to President Clinton, Mr. Quayle said he was amused
that Mr. Clinton, after attacking him on "family values" during the campaign, is
now mimicking him on the subject.

He said he did not regret that in a speech on values he mentioned a fictional
television character, Murphy Brown, who was having a baby out of wedlock. "I put
it in there to get attention," he said.

Looking back, Mr. Quayle said, he was pleased that he got the debate moving. But
he said he wished senior White House officials had defended him, and added,
"There were some political miscalculations on my side."

He said he would decide in the fall whether to run, and cited "the most
committed" contenders for the Republican nomination right now as Senator Phil
Gramm of Texas and Lamar Alexander, the former Governor of Tennessee and Mr.
Bush's second Secretary of Education.

Of his own Presidential prospects, he said, "If I chose to run, I have no doubt
that I'll win."

Seeking to establish his credentials by saying he visited 47 countries as Vice
President, Mr. Quayle was particularly harsh on Mr. Clinton's foreign policy. He
said he was outraged that the President allowed the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to take the lead military role in stopping the fighting in Bosnia.
"It's unbelievable that NATO goes out ahead of the President, develops a
consensus and tells him," he said.

Health Care Plan Opposed

On domestic matters, Mr. Quayle raised fundamental differences with Mr.
Clinton's proposals for more Government involvement, particularly on health
care. "This is a very radical agenda that he's got for America -- and health
care is just the beginning of it," he said.

In the interview, Mr. Quayle said he doubted that the Clintons did anything
illegal in their Whitewater real estate dealings more than a decade ago. Their
problem, he said, is arrogance.

"What they have is a moral certitude that what they say -- and, more important,
what they do -- is morally right," he said. "That kind of arrogance is something
people can detect, and is very harmful."

A major reason that the Bush campaign did not make an issue of Whitewater, Mr.
Quayle said, was that two of Mr. Bush's sons had their own problems with savings
and loans associations. "Our campaign didn't obviously have the stomach to make
an issue of it," he said, citing fears that Democrats would "unfairly criticize
one of the President's children."

Mr. Quayle also sought to play down the far more highly visible role of his
successor, Vice President Al Gore. "He's not doing much different from what I
did," he said. Noting that he still hears potato jokes, Mr. Quayle defended Mr.
Clinton on one count: the controversy over his high-price haircut from
Christophe. "The haircut thing was sort of a gaffe," he said. "Believe me, those
things happen."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former Vice President Dan Quayle, sounding at times like a
Presidential candidate, at a breakfast interview at the Congressional Country
Club. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 26, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Tests Show Giant Deer Is a New Species

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section C;  Page 6;  Column 4;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 338 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Scientists have reported finding a second new mammal species, the giant Muntjac
deer, in an area of Vietnam that one called a "lost world."

The World Wildlife Fund reported last week that the discovery was made in Vu
Quang Nature Reserve in northern Vietnam, where another new mammal species, the
Vu Quang ox, was discovered in 1992. Scientists from the fund, working with
Vietnamese colleagues, discovered the deer, which has a red grizzled coat and
weighs 90 to 110 pounds.

It got the name "giant" because it is one and a half times larger than any other
known muntjac species. It also has larger antlers, eight inches long and bowed
inward.

The deer is a popular food, second only to wild pig, for villagers in the Vu
Quang area, the wildlife fund said.

Confirmed by Genetic Tests

The two Vietnamese species are among seven new species of land mammal discovered
around the world in this century, the wildlife fund said. The fund said that
genetic tests confirmed the giant Muntjac as a new species last week.

Vu Quang was described by a British scientist, John Mackinnon, as "a lost world
that modern science has never before looked at." It escaped the bombing and
pesticides that devastated much of Vietnam's countryside during the Vietnam War.

The reserve was originally set aside and protected as a memorial to a Vietnamese
hero who rebeled against French rule and found refuge there. It is about 175
miles southwest of Hanoi near the border with Laos.

The Vietnam Government, helped by the World Wildlife Fund, has expanded the Vu
Quang reserve from 40,000 to 150,000 acres in the last two years and has banned
logging and sport hunting.

Scientists working in the area have also found evidence of a new species of
fish, two previously unknown bird species and an unknown tortoise with a
striking yellow shell.

The Vietnamese Minister of Forestry, Nguyen Quang Ha, said, "The Vietnamese
Government is doing its utmost to protect Vu Quang, which is obviously very
important for endemic species."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37TH PRESIDENT: THE OVERVIEW;
Rainy Prologue to Subdued Funeral for Nixon

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., April 26


In a scene worthy of "King Lear," the usually sunny California sky unleashed
thunder, lightning, rain and hail today as Richard M. Nixon's body returned to
his birthplace in a plain wooden coffin covered by a flag.

The former President's two sad-eyed daughters, Tricia and Julie, accompanied by
their families and the Rev. Billy Graham, followed the coffin through the raging
elements and delivered him to the Nixon library, where he will be "planted," as
he dryly put it to a friend a couple of years ago, under an oak tree outside the
little wooden bungalow where he was born.

As the hearse rolled down Yorba Linda Boulevard, with two small American flags
on its hood reminiscent of the flag pin that Mr. Nixon always wore in his lapel,
an elderly disabled veteran threw her own small flag at the car in tribute. With
the rain acting as an adhesive, the flag remained stuck to the window as the car
pulled up to the library.

The family had arrived at 12:30 P.M. at El Toro Marine Corps Air Station after a
simple 15-minute departure ceremony and a 21-gun salute this morning at the
Stewart Air National Guard Base in Newburgh, N.Y. The coffin was carried west on
the same Air Force plane that delivered the 37th President into exile in
California in 1974, after the Watergate scandal forced him to resign.

But if the thing forever to be yearned for, with Richard Nixon, was affection
and approval, he was bathed in that today, as thousands of people shivered and
huddled under umbrellas, clutching bouquets and flags and presents and poems,
for the chance to catch a glimpse, or a picture, or a video, of the military
pallbearers carrying the coffin past the citrus trees into the library as "Hail
to the Chief" played. The solemnity of the moment was marred a bit when the
music from the military band was drowned out by the sound of seven television
news helicopters crisscrossing the sky.

Mr. Nixon would lie in state throughout the night, until the funeral on
Wednesday afternoon.

At five minutes past 3, the long line of people, who had been waiting since
early morning, began filing into the library scented with roses, carnations,
chrysanthemums and lilies. They passed a large color photograph of Mr. Nixon in
his prime, smiling and thumbs up, along with pictures from some of the
triumphant moments in Mr. Nixon's turbulent career: standing on the Great Wall
of China, with Anwar el-Sadat at the pyramids, and more recently with Boris N.
Yeltsin before the Russian leader snubbed him earlier this year.

As an honor guard stood sentry by the coffin, people of all ages -- some in
strollers, some in wheelchairs -- filed into the entrance as hailstones the size
of peas bounced off the sidewalk. As they passed the closed coffin, some made
the sign of the cross, others doffed their hats or placed their hands over their
hearts. They had checked their cameras at the door.

File of the Silent Majority



The largely white, middle-class crowd seemed subdued and quiet, conjuring up
images of the great Silent Majority that Mr. Nixon so often appealed to in
moments of political peril.

The former President would have appreciated this crowd. Jack Brennan, his chief
of staff during the first years after his resignation, told reporters today that
Mr. Nixon had designed his funeral with precisely these people in mind,
specifying a plain wooden coffin and rejecting the idea of a grand state
ceremonial in Washington. To Mr. Nixon, these were the sort of people who stood
by him while the people in Washington deserted him.

"The blue-collar guys were more his type of people, even though the world didn't
think so," Mr. Brennan said. "He wanted the simple stuff. He had an affinity for
the blue-collar people, the 'dese, dem, dose' guys."

Whether they liked him or not, Mr. Nixon had an outsized presence in the lives
of those that came to pay last respects today.

The scene was almost like a cathartic picnic, as people sat in lawn chairs
before the foul weather began, and the children played games like solitaire and
tic-tac-toe. Many came from the little towns in Orange County where Richard
Nixon spent his youth -- Whittier, Fullerton, Dana Point, Placentia, Yorba Linda
itself.

Near the spot where the motorcade would soon go by, Denis Jana stood, holding up
a picture of himself and a smiling Richard Nixon at the Acropolis in 1967. The
history teacher at National University in San Diego had met Mr. Nixon, dressed
formally in a suit as always, sightseeing in Greece.  And now he wanted to hold
up the picture taken before a Presidency marred by Vietnam and Watergate.

Mr. Jana also had a framed picture of a signed form letter he had received from
President Gerald R. Ford, thanking him for his letter in support of the Nixon
pardon.

And, on top of that, he was handing out copies of a poem written by his
9-year-old daughter, Jennifer-Erin, who was at his side, munching on crackers.

"Swallow it," he barked at her. "Spit it out. Recite your poem for these
people."

She obliged proudly, finishing the recitation with this couplet:

"Now he goes to his darling Pat.

We will remember him with a top hat."

Caroline Morse of Escondido said she had stayed up all night Friday after Mr.
Nixon died, unable to sleep, jotting down a poem on scraps of paper by her bed.
She had the finished product, framed, which included a note to Mr. Nixon's
daughters and four grandchildren: "It is never easy to lose a parent. Please
take heart."

"I don't think a single person ever sat in the Oval Office who did not make a
mistake," she said. "Nixon was nailed to the cross because of Watergate. But he
was held to a higher standard. Look who's sitting in the Oval Office now."

There were a few in the crowd who were not Nixon partisans.

Dee Flanagan, a 33-year-old nurse from Long Beach, said her father was a
doorkeeper at the Senate when Mr. Nixon resigned and that she had come "to get
closure on the whole Nixon ordeal."

"He was a liar and a crook, and the Ford-Nixon sweetheart deal on the pardon
paved the way for Reagan and Bush to let people off in Iran-contra," she said,
adding "History is getting all glossed over here."

Even many in the crowd who had come to bid him good-bye, readily acknowleged his
foibles.

"I disagree with some of his paranoia in Washington, his personal police force,
his certain regal quality," said Dan Payne of Newport Beach. "But I think he did
a splendid job in the last 20 years recouping himself. He didn't just lie over
and die."

Mr. Nixon brought forth Shakespearean references from both his admirers and
detractors. "He strutted his hour upon the stage," said Ms. Flanagan, quoting
from "Macbeth." "Now he is no more."

Mike Yoder of Fullerton said: "I keep thinking about 'Hamlet': 'Take him for all
he's worth. He was a man. We shall never see his like again.' That's a
paraphrase, that's not exact, but that's what I keep thinking about Nixon."

As the once-exiled leader's daughters brought him to his burial place, the storm
began howling and raging, recalling the scene in "King Lear" when one of Lear's
daughters turns the King out into the storm, with the admonition: "To willful
men, the injuries that they themselves procure must be their schoolmasters."

Many in the crowd seemed flabbergasted at the freakish tempest. When the hail
began falling, a member of a group of Chinese mourners commented, "When a great
man dies, there are always storms."


LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The coffin of former President Richard M. Nixon is carried to
an Air Force plane at Stewart Air National Guard Base at Newburgh, N.Y.,
yesterday for the flight to the El Toro Marine Corps Air Base in California.
(Andrea Mohin/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Richard M. Nixon's daughters, Tricia
Cox, left, and Julie Eisenhower at the El Toro Marine Corps Air Station in
California yesterday, where their father's coffin was loaded into a hearse for
the trip to Yorba Linda. (Associated Press) (pg. A14)

Map shows the location of Yorba Linda, California. (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37TH PRESIDENT: In School;
Remembering Nixon? For some students, he might as well be George Washington.

BYLINE: By Michael Winerip

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: MINEOLA , L.I.


America's high school seniors were born after Richard M. Nixon resigned. Ronald
Reagan is the first President most remember. These students expect Presidents to
be involved in scandals. The three Presidents they've seen have all been accused
of cover-ups and lying.

It can make the young cynical and affect the way they judge history. And it
makes Mineola High School students quite sympathetic about Mr. Nixon's Watergate
problem.

"All the Presidents have scandals and this one was just recorded," said George
Lally, the student council president, who, like most of those interviewed here
yesterday, called Mr. Nixon a good President. "Everyone made a bigger deal of it
because it was recorded."

"Politics is full of corruption," said Ken O'Brien, the senior class president.
"It's just that most of them get away with it."

"Watergate?" said Joe Rumore, who will be attending Hofstra University next
year. "One minor little thing. I'm sure it's happened to a lot of people. A
lot."

Sean Ambrose, a senior who likes death metal style music ("groups like Slayer
and Morbid Angel,") said, "Nixon got a raw deal." His classmate in fourth-period
American government, Scott Kalberer, agreed: "Watergate was way overblown. I
think it wasn't anything that any other President wouldn't have done."

"The man caught a tough break," said Charlie Stanton, a ninth grader.

"No President is perfect," said John DeAlmeida, a senior taking an advanced
placement government course. "Clinton with Whitewater. Bush and Reagan had
Iran-contra. What Nixon did wasn't so bad. It's not like he killed anybody."

What to make of this? Are we producing a crop of citizens who are so cynical
that they will use murder as the standard for judging the Presidency? It is hard
say whether Mineola High stands for anything more than Mineola High. Any time
you select one school to conduct interviews, you may get a skewed view. Mineola
is a suburban, middle class, primarily white school district sitting in the
center of Nassau County, where Republicans outnumber Democrats 3 to 2. And this
is the home county of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who has given new meaning to
the relativistic nature of political ethics.

Still, it does seem striking: Of four dozen high school students interviewed
individually here on the day before Mr. Nixon's burial, just two spoke harshly
of the only man ever to resign the Presidency.

Many were apologetic about how little they knew, saying they hadn't studied Mr.
Nixon much in school. He is a distant figure to them. As Ken O'Brien pointed
out, "My Mom wasn't old enough to vote for him." Few have discussed his death in
any detail with their parents, although Ken said: "My Mom's happy. She's a mail
carrier and has Wednesday off."

Students mentioned his opening of relations with China before they mentioned
Watergate. "I'm not one of those who's running around saying, 'Nixon's a crook,'
" said Lindsay Edward. "Well maybe he was a crook, but he handled the situation
in China very well." Watergate? "All I know -- it was a big controversy," said
Lindsay. Woodward and Bernstein? "No I don't know who they were."

Woodward and Bernstein? "Sorry," said Susan Hwang, a ninth grader who was
impressed when President Clinton sought Mr. Nixon's advice on foreign policy.

Watergate? "Something to do with embezzling money?" asked Carol Montesarchio, a
senior.

Charlie Stanton, who's in ninth grade advanced global studies, rated Mr. Nixon
higher than George Washington. "Washington didn't do something big," Charlie
said, "it's just he was the first. Nixon did something memorable. Many American
jobs depend on Chinese relations."

Several credited him with getting the country out of Vietnam. Daniel Taber
didn't feel Mr. Nixon had waited too long to withdraw American troops. "It was
an unnecessary war," Daniel said, "but it would have been even more unnecessary
if we pulled out too soon."

"He helped us get out of Vietnam, didn't he?" asked Tara McPartland, a senior.
"I'm totally against war." Asked if George McGovern might have acted sooner,
Tara said, "I don't believe in 'what ifs.' Maybe President Nixon could have done
it faster, but he did it."

They are skeptical of TV, the newspapers, their teachers and books. Jean Paul
Gamarra, a senior who plans to become a teacher, believes it's unfortunate that
people will remember the negative about Nixon. "The social studies books tell
you what was wrong, not what was right," he said. "The mistakes stick out
because they don't want people to make the same mistakes."

Vinnie Gentile, who will attend Cornell next year, admires Mr. Nixon for
resigning. "He tried to bring some integrity back to the Presidency," said
Vinnie. "People look at it quickly and see the scandal. You have to be a student
of history and really study it to appreciate all he accomplished."

Jill Henriksen said her journalism teacher has told them "he's a liar and all
that stuff." But Jill said: "I personally don't agree with it. He couldn't have
done all those bad things."

One of the few dissenters here was Daniella Davidson. "A crook," she said. "I
never heard of anybody liking him much until now. When you die, suddenly
everybody's your friend. People feel guilty saying anything bad about the dead."

Richard Nixon is the first President to die in their lifetimes. They believe
President Clinton was right to declare a national day of mourning.

"He was a President and a human being and you've got to mourn the man," said
Vinnie.

"It's a matter of courtesy," said John DeAlmeida. "The flying of the body to
California, the 21-gun salute, inter him and that's it."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Fossella Wins S.I. Election for City Council

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 255 words


Vito Fossella Jr., a 29-year-old lawyer from a family active in Staten Island
politics, won a special election yesterday for a vacant City Council seat. He
received 4,190 votes, 48 percent of the total, in a six-way race for the 51st
Council District seat.

He will replace fellow a fellow Republican, Alfred C. Cerullo 3d, who resigned
after being appointed Consumer Affairs Commissioner by Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani. Mr. Giuliani endorsed Mr. Fossella.

The election results maintain the 7 Republican seats on the 51-member Council.
The district, along Staten Island's south shore, has the highest percentage of
registered Republicans of any Council district in the city.

A Democrat, Anthony J. Pocchia, 48, was second with 1,825 votes, or 21 percent.
He is a lawyer, Vietnam veteran and civic leader and was endorsed by The Staten
Island Advance.

CaraMia Hart, 28, another Republican lawyer from a politically prominent family,
placed third, with 1,391 votes, or 16 percent. She is the daughter of George
Hart, a former Staten Island Republican leader.

Jayne Gastaldo had 666 votes, or 8 percent; John LaFemina, 397 votes, or 5
percent, and Dorothy Landau-Crawford, 281 votes, or 3 percent.

Mr. Fossella, a Giuliani campaign worker, is the nephew of Frank Fossella, the
Staten Island Democrat who served on the City Council from 1981 to 1985 and held
several city posts under Democratic mayors.

Under the new City Charter, Council races are nonpartisan. Candidates were not
listed under traditional party titles.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AT WORK WITH: George Fowler;
Twists and Turns of a Religious Life

BYLINE: By LENA WILLIAMS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1643 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE


ASK people in this buckle of the Bible Belt their opinion of George Fowler and
they either roll their eyes to the heavens or stammer for words to describe him.

Mr. Fowler is a former Trappist monk who adhered to an oath of silence for 17
years, only to spend the next 20 preaching against the "generally oppressive
world" of organized religion. He is a former Catholic priest who was
excommunicated after marrying a former nun, a theologian who once warned those
guilty of sin that they would burn in hell, only later to describe his actions
as a form of religious abuse.

Even Mr. Fowler says his life has been a walking contradiction.

"I'm not opposed to religion or churches, as such," he explained during a
typically frenetic day that carried him from a call-in radio show to a
counseling session and to the typewriter to put the finishing touches on his
nationally syndicated column, "When the Old Way Isn't Working." "But I'm
outspoken against the practice of handing out counterfeit medicine that's
keeping people from finding a healing that works. I shout as loudly as possible
about organizations having made religion into a matter of keeping laws and
paying for alleged sins."

Two years ago, Mr. Fowler, 64, a slightly built, gray-haired man who breezes
around the capital of country music in a white Chrysler Le Baron with red
leather seats, left Seattle, a city he described as "blase" about religion.

He moved to Nashville, where he says people are "passionate" about their
religious beliefs.

He immediately riled the local residents when his newspaper column began
appearing three times a week in The Tennessean. In it, Mr. Fowler attacked the
Catholic Church's celibacy requirement for priests, the "scare tactics" used by
the religious right to promote sexual abstinence, religious competitiveness and
traditional fundamentalist doctrine about the nature and role of Jesus.

When he wasn't stirring up the locals with his opinions, he was working with
Jeff Lehr, a cooking instructor, compiling 125 recipes and 162 meditations to
include in the cookbook "Teaching Your Heart to Dance" (The Wimmer Company,
1993; paperback due in October from Simon & Schuster under a new title, "Feed
Your Soul"). Mr. Lehr came up with the idea for the cookbook; Mr. Fowler
provided the spiritual tie.

"Food, thought and feeling serve together to nourish us," the authors write in
the prologue. "The tastiest and most nutritious foods join deep spiritual
understanding to enhance each other as they nourish the whole person."

The recipes include a culinary variety of soups, stews, pastas, sandwiches and
desserts. A stir-fried beef, venison or buffalo dish is served with the
following thought: "Be especially careful of your words. Words are creative. If
you deride yourself, for example, you will find yourself changing to merit that
derision."

He has sold a series of meditative texts for use on 10 airlines, including
USAir, and is seeking a publisher for his autobiography "The Dance of a Fallen
Monk."

"An abbot, an admiral, a Roman cardinal and a long queue of relatives will say
I've blundered often," he writes in the autobiography. "I agree, but never for
the reasons they give. I see my life as a study in blundering, what it is and
what it isn't." In a chapter on his life as a Jesuit priest in San Francisco in
1967, he writes: "Within hours of arriving in the Haight, I was offered incense,
flowers, hugs and free sex. The abbot would have been gratified to know that I
turned down the sex, but anxious and alarmed that I was there to accept the
rest."

And Mr. Fowler has established the National Foundation for Healing Religious
Abuse, where he works with Dr. Richard B. Taran, a clinical psychologist,
counseling individuals he describes as suffering lingering effects of abuse
inflicted in the name of God, church or religion.

"Religious abuse is an attack in the name of God on the integrity and
inviolability of an individual's spirit, mind, body and freedom," he said.

He treats clients with remedies that are part New Age, part Old Testament: "To
seek solace in meditation; to understand and experience spirituality as distinct
from simply accepting what others tell you."

"Better to have a good divorce than a bad marriage," he advised a woman who felt
her five failed marriages were God's way of punishing her for past sins by not
giving her a truly religious man. Mr. Fowler said she was suicidal when she
showed up at his office near Music Square.

Another client said that as a teen-ager he was so shamed, in the name of God, by
his father, a minister, for masturbating that he does not have a healthy adult
sex life. Mr. Fowler counseled: "Catholicism teaches that genitals are solely
for begetting children. A more updated appreciation of human psychology suggests
they can be used, too, for the development of love, both for oneself and
another, by the divine gift of pleasure."

Mr. Fowler, usually quietly intense, becomes fervent when he discusses religious
dogma.

"There's a difference between humility and being mousy," he explained before
taking the microphone for an hourlong appearance on the Les Jameson show on WLAC
Radio. "Christianity shouldn't be mousy. If you're mousy, it means you're still
living in fear and dancing around things."

One caller said she "takes exception" to everything Mr. Fowler says.

"Listen to me George, you're putting information out there to give people ways
to avoid God," she said, without pausing to let Mr. Fowler get a word in. "You
say you were a monk, but you're a false prophet."

Mr. Fowler smiled as the phone went dead, then offered a lengthy rebuttal.

"I'm not attacking religion," he emphasized. "I see myself as a religious
consumer advocate. If you look at what religion has done in the West in the last
2,000 years, it's a pretty ugly picture. Today's world and our survival as a
race demand a broader perspective, far beyond the competitive bigotry and
doctrinaire narrow-mindedness that institutionalized religion has perpetuated
thus far."

Dr. Mark Coppenger, vice president for convention relations for the Southern
Baptist Convention, takes issue with Mr. Fowler's view of organized religion.
"We've forgotten that church is the body of Christ," he said, adding, "It is not
an option for Christians to go along without church membership." He also said
that "the churches of ease and comfort" are seeing declining membership, while
those that "uphold God's standards" and condemn licentious behavior are growing
in number.

Mr. Fowler says his teachings are lessons he had to learn for himself through
study, meditation, practice and experiencing life in both the spiritual and
secular worlds.

There is a bit of the counterculture in him. He prefers not to wear ties, which
he likens to "nooses," similar to the Roman Catholic collars he disliked
wearing. The all-white scapular worn as a novice monk has been replaced by a
casual wardrobe. He speaks in a soft, singsong voice -- the result, he suggests,
of days spent chanting for 20 hours.

Raised on a ranch in Conrad, Mont., he was 5 when his mother, who had lost a
child to crib death and had vowed never to have another, died of a hemorrhage
following her third abortion. His father later remarried but, up to his death,
blamed himself for the death of his wife.

"A few months before he died, he told me that he thought he smelled liquor on
the doctor's breath the day he took Mom for that abortion," recalled Mr. Fowler,
who has an older sister, two stepsisters and a stepbrother. "He had lived with
that all his life."

After graduating from high school, Mr. Fowler spent two years in naval submarine
service and attended Carroll College, a private men's college in Helena, Mont.,
before entering Trinity Abbey, a Trappist monastery in Huntsville, Utah.

He remembers feeling completely fulfilled by monastic life. Then the nightmares
began.

"For two months, every night I dreamed I'd left the monastery, met a woman,
married her and had sex; the four things I vowed not to do," Mr. Fowler
recalled. "From then on, I started praying every day, asking, 'What should I do
now?' I'd taken vows to stay in the monastery for the rest of my life, but was
that the final word?"

Not for Mr. Fowler.

He was granted permission to leave the monastery to study at the University of
San Francisco. The year was 1967. Two years later, he met the woman of his
dreams, Lori Zapf, a nun who was attending the Graduate Theological Union at the
University of California at Berkeley. They were married 11 weeks later and
immediately excommunicated by the church.

Mr. Fowler found himself "in desperate need of work." His resume shows how far
he has traveled from the monastery. He taught the work of Teilhard de Chardin,
the Jesuit philosopher, at Holy Names College in Oakland, studied at the Jung
Institute in Zurich, went to work for the Defense Department as a counselor for
Vietnam veterans and eventually as manager of security design for the Trident
submarine's nuclear weapons program.

In the kitchen of his modest home in Nashville, chopping onions for dinner, Mr.
Fowler joked and doted on his wife of 25 years, the woman whose "healing touch"
helped him recover from a recent bout with prostate cancer. His care at a
Catholic hospital left him in remission and humbled.

"That was hard to swallow," he said of having to turn for help to the church he
had abandoned. "I had no money. It was hard to go back and say, 'I need your
help.' But it was therapeutic. God bless them for what they gave me."

The situation made him recall the words of a lifelong model: "John Cardinal
Newman said something I really love: 'To be perfect is to change often.' I
wasn't born with the answers. What you do is go on and keep renewing. But those
ensconced in the status quo miss the point."


NAME: George Fowler

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: George Fowler sees himself as a religious consumer advocate.
(pg. C1); George Fowler and his wife, Lori, a former nun. (Rollin Riggs for The
New York Times) (pg. C10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Living Will

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


It is difficult not to imagine that the last 20 years of his life had been
leading up to this week, this day, this moment. And as he had so many times
before, against all odds, with many setbacks, Richard Nixon won.  Today he will
be laid to rest amid a wave of revisionist history that has rendered him almost
unrecognizable, like one of those pastel portraits done by street artists, all
the harsh features smoothed away, designed to flatter and to sell.

He had read his own obituary once, in the newspapers of Aug. 9, 1974, and it was
not nearly so nice. Smart as he was, perhaps he set about to alter it. In two
decades, he succeeded.

So in the days after his death politicians, commentators and ordinary citizens
were full of praise.

They spoke of his detente with the Soviets and the opening of China to the West.
They somehow forgot the bombings of North Vietnam and Cambodia, the thousands
upon thousands of Americans and even more Vietnamese who died in the senseless
war he had promised to end and instead prolonged.

They spoke of his ability to come back after crushing defeats and his wise
counsel as an elder statesman. They somehow forgot how he tried to destroy
Daniel Ellsberg by digging up dirt on the man who had leaked the Pentagon
Papers, and how his rigidity and demagoguery helped widen rifts in the deeply
divided nation he had pledged to bring together.

They spoke of how indomitably he had worked his way back from disgrace. They
somehow forgot how very much he had to expiate.

They forgot how he ordered a halt to the F.B.I. investigation just days after
the Watergate burglary, how he privately suggested paying hush money to the
burglars but publicly denied any involvement in a cover-up. They forgot his
attempts to subvert due process in the Saturday Night Massacre, to stonewall
investigators seeking the tapes he'd made of his Oval Office conversations. They
forgot the unexplained 18-minute gap on one of those tapes. "When the President
does it," he said afterward, "that means it is not illegal."

And they forgot how his actions fomented a cynicism about government that
endures to the present and has transformed the American character, perhaps
forever.

In an effort to avoid speaking ill of the dead, many lied by omission in
remembering Mr. Nixon, turning Watergate into a subordinate clause. Only that
television hard guy Sam Donaldson captured the surrealism of all this when he
told former Senator Howard Baker, "in listening to you discuss President Nixon,
I almost forget that there was a Watergate."

Only an anonymous caller to CNN captured the tenor of times past when he said:
"Richard Nixon was responsible for the deaths of every man, woman and child in
Vietnam from January 1969 until he resigned in disgrace. He also killed four of
my brothers and sisters at Kent State, and he did all of this in the name of law
and order while he and his henchmen were breaking every law in the land."

The former President was a complex man whose record of accomplishment in office
was considerable and whose personality was often unreadable. But his complexity
has been smoothed out in the remembering, replaced with encomiums and evasions.
His family and his friends will remember him fondly. But because his personal
history is our national history, we must remember him accurately.

The microfilm tells the truth of the enormity of the trauma of August 1974. My
colleague Anthony Lewis wrote then of Mr. Nixon: "He denied his country the
empathy and release it desired. For he made clear he had not changed. He was
still trying to escape reality." And an editorial in The Arkansas Gazette
thundered, "Now Richard Nixon's name will live in obloquy, at least pending some
distant work of revisionists which challenges the imagination."

In death he has done both, escaped reality and challenged the imagination with a
portrait, eked out over the years in political exile through his own tenacity,
political savvy and hard work, that softens and shades, conceals and refines.
Such a denouement serves him well, but history very poorly indeed. The misdeeds
of ordinary men can be buried with them, and their lives described in
half-truths that are really half-lies.  But not a public man. Particularly not
this one.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37th PRESIDENT: THE OVERVIEW;
Nixon Buried on Note of Praise and Reconciliation

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1556 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., April 27


To the heroic strains of "Victory at Sea," the theme that comforted Richard
Milhous Nixon through his darkest moments, the nation paid final tribute today
to the former President who fascinated, confounded, infuriated and enthralled
Americans for half a century.

Gov. Pete Wilson, who was an advance man for Mr. Nixon's 1962 California
campaign for governor, said in his eulogy, "It's hard to imagine a world without
Richard Nixon." Indeed, it was hard to imagine that there would be no more
comebacks or reincarnations, no more new Nixons, same old Nixons or mellower
Nixons.

President Clinton, a Democratic President who came of political age amid the
scalding years of Watergate and Vietnam, urged Americans to let Mr. Nixon's
Sisyphean penance earn him final forgiveness: "May the day of judging President
Nixon on anything less than his entire life and career come to a close."

The four living former Presidents, Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan
and George Bush, and their wives looked on from the first row of seats at the
first funeral for an American President since Lyndon B. Johnson's in 1973.
Hillary Rodham Clinton, who early in her career worked as a lawyer for the House
committee that investigated Watergate, was seated next to the President.

Mr. Nixon's coffin, covered with an American flag, rested on a catafalque during
the funeral at the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace. The skies were lowering
and gray.

Choking back tears during his eulogy, former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger said that despite the "gruff pose" of Mr. Nixon, he would have been
delighted by the outpouring of concern and praise from friends and adversaries
this last week, in what he termed "the culmination of an astonishing life."

President Clinton smiled and nodded in agreement.

Mr. Kissinger described Mr. Nixon as "one of the seminal Presidents" in his
conduct of foreign policy. "He stood on pinnacles that dissolved in the
precipice," he said. "He achieved greatly and he suffered deeply. But he never
gave up. In his solitude he envisaged a new international order that would
reduce lingering enmities, strengthen historic friendships and give new hope to
mankind. A visionary dream and possibilities conjoined."

The Rev. Billy Graham said in his sermon to the 3,000 guests that Mr. Nixon had
given his final wave and thumbs-up sign to his doctor in New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center after he was felled by a stroke as he was
reading the galley proofs of his last book on foreign affairs.

"It was an example of fighting on and never giving up," Mr. Graham said of the
man whose darker and better angels cast such a compelling shadow on the American
character and consciousness.

The funeral was an oddly animated sort of "class reunion," as one former Nixon
White House worker called it.

Peter Flanigan, an economic adviser to President Nixon, said to Clifford M.
Hardin, who had been the Secretary of Agriculture, "It was a hell of a ride."

"The old man must be looking down and taking a delicious revenge," said Gen.
Vernon A. Walters, a military aide in the Nixon White House, guessing that Mr.
Nixon would have delighted in the adulation and lionizing of the last few days.

There, on the lawn in front of the bungalow where Mr. Nixon was born, people who
had not seen one another for 20 years gathered to pay their respects before the
burial following the service: aides who suffered with Mr. Nixon through the
Watergate scandal and others who went to jail for their parts in it. There were
secretaries from the Nixon White House press office, advance men for the 1960
campaign and old Hollywood cronies like Buddy Ebsen, Bob Hope and Red Skelton.

20 Years of Resentment

Former Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, who resigned in 1973 after pleading no
contest to a charge of tax evasion, was swept up in the vivid mood of what some
called reconciliation and others revisionism.

"I decided after 20 years of resentment to put it all aside," Mr. Agnew said
before the ceremony began.

Through the eulogies, benedictions and homilies, the word "Watergate" was never
mentioned. Even President Clinton only alluded to Mr. Nixon's "mistakes." Names
that had faded into the scandalous past of Watergate were back: Herbert W.
Kalmbach and Gordon C. Strachan and Charles W. Colson, the Nixon loyalists; and
Elliot L. Richardson, the Attorney General who resigned in the Saturday Night
Massacre.

Before the funeral began, the guests mingled happily, creating a living tableau
of history. Adm. James B. Stockdale, the former prisoner of war in Vietnam who
ran for Vice President on the Ross Perot ticket in 1992, rubbed shoulders with
Farah Diba, the glamorous one-time empress of Iran. Former Vice President Dan
Quayle walked past George McGovern, whom Mr. Nixon defeated in one of the great
political landslides, in 1972. Adnan Khashoggi, the Saudi Arabian financier, and
G. Gordon Liddy, one of the overseers of the Watergate burglary, his head now
shaved, were also there.

In his eulogy, Mr. Clinton quoted from Mr. Nixon's 1968 speech accepting the
Republican nomination. He spoke of "the force of a driving dream" that had
carried the former President from his humble beginnings here onto the world
stage and added: "He made mistakes and they, like his accomplishments, are part
of his life and record. But the enduring lesson of Richard Nixon is that he
never gave up being part of the action and passion of the times."

He said that judging by their last phone conversation and the letter he had
received from Mr. Nixon last month, he was sure that Mr. Nixon's "spirit was
very much alive to the very end."

Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, in beginning his eulogy, said he believed that "the
second half of the 20th century will be known as the age of Nixon." The American
people, he said, "love a fighter, and in Dick Nixon they found a gallant one."

He recalled that Mr. Nixon once told his daughter Julie, "I just get up every
morning to confound my enemies." At that Julie, a few feet away, broke into a
wide, delighted grin.

Senator Dole's voice cracked as he quoted Mr. Nixon as saying, "In the end what
matters is that you have always lived life to the hilt." Right at the end,
Senator Dole lost control and sobbed as he walked away from the lectern.

'Never Left California'

Governor Wilson said, "Dick Nixon's heart, shaped by the grit and mores of this
small town, never left California."

In the front row on one side sat the Nixon family, including daughters, Julie
Nixon Eisenhower and Tricia Nixon Cox, their husbands and Mr. Nixon's
grandchildren: Jennie Eisenhower, 15; Alex Richard Eisenhower, 13; Melanie
Eisenhower, 9, and Christopher Nixon Cox, 15. His only surviving brother, Edward
Calvert Nixon, 63, was there, too.

On the other side of the front row were the four former Presidents: Mr. Ford,
who spoke of "our long national nightmare" as he succeeded the disgraced Mr.
Nixon; Mr. Carter, whose candidacy to oust Mr. Ford was buoyed by American anger
at Mr. Ford's pardon of Mr. Nixon; Mr. Reagan, whose national conventions viewed
Mr. Nixon as a political albatross, and Mr. Bush, who as national chairman
worked to put the Watergate legacy behind the Republican Party in the 1970's.

A total of 47 senators, 64 representatives and 11 former members of Congress
made the journey from Washington today aboard Air Force One and five other Air
Force planes.

On Air Force One, Mr. McGovern captured the ambiance, telling reporters: "My own
career has been so intertwined with his that I really had the feeling that an
old friend has left the scene. That may seem hard to believe in view of the
bitterness of that 1972 campaign, but I made my peace with him years ago."

Mr. Nixon's black stone headstone in the garden, placed next to that of his
wife, Pat, who died of lung cancer last year, used a quote from his first
inaugural address: "The greatest honor history can bestow is the title of
peacemaker."

Sensing Love in the Heart

Mrs. Nixon's headstone reads: "Even when people can't speak your language, they
can tell when you have love in your heart."

A band from the Marine Corps Air Station at El Toro, Calif., and the United
States Navy band Sea Chanters from Washington provided the music, including the
"Battle Hymn of the Republic" and "America the Beautiful."

Joining Mr. Graham in officiating was Capt. William L. Perry, the Navy's chief
of chaplains. Mr. Nixon served in the Navy in the Pacific during World War II.

At the end of the service, planes from the 388th Fighter Wing at Hill Air Force
Base in Utah flew low over Yorba Linda in the missing-man formation. A 50-gun
salute was fired by Marine howitzers from Camp Pendleton, near San Diego. Taps
was sounded by a lone bugler, Paul Johnson, musician first-class of the Navy.

Two American flags that had covered the wooden coffin, folded into triangles so
that the blue field and the white stars were on the outside, were presented by
an Army officer to Tricia Cox and Julie Eisenhower. Mrs. Eisenhower wiped away
tears with a tissue, and Edward Nixon broke down as the family left the service.

After the funeral, a reception was held in the rotunda of the Nixon library. The
crowd quickly dispersed, many for dinner in the Los Angeles or Newport Beach
area.

NAME: Richard M. Nixon

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A flag that draped Richard M. Nixon's coffin being presented to
his daughter Julie Nixon Eisenhower yesterday. His daughter Tricia Nixon Cox was
at left in front of the house where their father was born. (CNN)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37th PRESIDENT: PAYING RESPECTS;
Beneath Hazy Moon, Chilly Wait for Last Farewell

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., April 27


There were so many nocturnal images of this saturnine President: visiting the
Lincoln Memorial once before the sun rose to talk to Vietnam War protesters;
brooding about Watergate and listening to the music from "Victory at Sea" as the
rest of Washington slept; snacking on ketchup and cottage cheese. So it seemed
fitting for the quiet streets of Yorba Linda to pulsate all night under an
alabaster moon with a hazy penumbra, with the sounds of people paying homage to
Richard M. Nixon.

"He goofed, but I didn't see any halos above anybody else's head then in
Washington or around here tonight," said Jim Schiffman of Redlands. It was after
two in the morning, and Mr. Schiffman, a relatively recent arrival in the line
far from the Richard Nixon Library and Birthplace, had another five or six hours
before he could view the coffin and pay his respects.

It was a long, chilly wait, a time for some to relive or make memories. For
others, it was a lark, a rare entertainment for a suburban Southern California
town. For a few, it was good riddance. For all, it was a chance to stake a small
historical claim for themselves and their children, the first time in nearly a
quarter-century to participate in the passing of a President.

Officials at the library estimate that in the 20 hours Mr. Nixon's closed coffin
remained there, secured by an ever-changing honor guard, 42,000 people filed
past. On an uncharacteristically clear and crisp California night, they kept on
coming.

By 3 A.M., more people were abandoning the line than were joining in. They left
hardier citizens, shivering as they snaked their way down the steps, around the
fountain and onto Eureka Street, then down Yorba Linda Boulevard. There, the
line curved through two cul-de-sacs and out Casa Loma nearly to the Imperial
Highway, the main road leading here, which was bumper to bumper with more
mourners and curiosity-seekers creeping into town.

In the middle and the rear of the line, few appeared to be bracing for an
ordeal; though many rubbed their eyes, it appeared to be more from fatigue than
sorrow. The small talk was decidedly apolitical, the crowd surprisingly
nonpartisan, with numerous Kennedy, Humphrey and McGovern voters on hand. In the
language of "Laugh In," where Mr. Nixon appeared in his almost endearingly
awkward "Sock it to Me" cameo, the event was a "happening."

But toward the front, things turned more subdued, even solemn. For those who
loved Mr. Nixon, like Sharon Yocum of Dana Point, who often spotted him at a
Mexican restaurant in San Juan Capistrano during his exile in nearby San
Clemente, the experience proved more emotional than expected. As she stood
before Mr. Nixon's coffin, she shook her head, removed her glasses, wiped her
watering eyes, then stumbled back into the procession. "Lots of memories," she
explained quietly as she left, holding a mass-produced thank-you card from the
Nixon family.

The visitors were Mr. Nixon's kind of people, largely working class. The people
in suits -- former associates and former press tormentors -- would not arrive
until daylight. Library volunteers greeted each with a cheery good morning and a
thank you for coming. They also reviewed the ground rules: no pictures, no
talking inside, no head coverings.

One by one, the visitors -- most in casual clothes, a few in good Republican
cloth coats -- removed hoods, kerchiefs, cowboy hats and backward baseball caps.
Mothers hastily brushed children's tousled hair with their hands.

A Sea of Flowers

Inside, the room was filled with the faint sounds of feet shuffling on a
circular red carpet and compact disks playing classical music over a public
address system. There was also the overpowering sweet smell of the florist's
shop. One of hundreds of arrangements, given a place of honor behind the coffin,
were red and white antheriums from President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia. A
wreath of carnations -- also red and white, his nation's colors -- came from
President Lech Walesa of Poland. "In memory Pres. R. Nixon, a Great Friend of
Poland," it said.

On the side was a heart-shaped arrangement of blue flowers, modeled after the
patches Bebe Rebozo's girlfriend designed during one of Mr. Nixon's crises to
cheer up his dejected volunteers. Nearby was a circular wreath of pompons
festooned with a large blue ribbon. "The Silent Majority," it said. On a table
by the door were hundreds of home-grown bouquets. Many contained roses, the
favorite flower of Mr. Nixon's wife, Patricia. Many others contained notes.

John and Denise Gemma of Whittier asked, "How will the leaders of the world
replace the wisdom of your counsel?" Linda Jones of Yorba Linda left a
needlepoint sampler, with its closing verse:

A golden heart stopped beating

Hard-working hands to rest

God broke our hearts to prove

He only takes the best.

Elizabeth Goodloe of Bakersfield recalled meeting Mr. Nixon, then a young Navy
lieutenant, in the early 1940's at the Raleigh Hotel in Washington. "At that
time Pat always said 'Watch him'!" she recalled. "He's going places!"

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mourners gathered late Tuesday outside the Richard Nixon Library
and Birthplace, right rear, in Yorba Linda, Calif., to view the coffin. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 37th PRESIDENT: HENRY KISSINGER;
'Courage in the Face of Wrenching Domestic Controversy'

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 812 words


Following is the eulogy delivered yesterday by former Secretary of State Henry
A. Kissinger at the funeral of former President Richard M. Nixon in Yorba Linda,
Calif., as transcribed by The New York Times:

During the final week of Richard Nixon's life, I often imagined how he would
have reacted to the tide of concern, respect, admiration and affection evoked by
his last great battle. His gruff pose of never paying attention to media comment
would have been contradicted by a warm glow and the ever so subtle hint that
another recital of the commentary would not be unwelcome. And without saying so,
he would have conveyed that it would mean a lot to him if Julie and Tricia,
David and Ed were told of his friends' pride in this culmination to an
astonishing life.

When I listened ---- when I learned the final news by then so expected, yet so
hard to accept, I felt a profound void. In the words of Shakespeare, "He was a
man, take him for all in all, I shall not look upon his like again."

In the conduct of foreign policy, Richard Nixon was one of the seminal
Presidents. He came into office when the forces of history were moving America
from a position of dominance to one of leadership. Dominance reflects strengths;
leadership must be earned. And Richard Nixon earned that leadership role for his
country with courage, dedication and skill.

'He Dared Confrontations'

When Richard Nixon took his oath of office, 550,000 Americans were engaged in
combat in a place as far away from the United States as it was possible to be.
America had no contacts with China, the world's most populous nation; no
negotiations with the Soviet Union, the other nuclear superpower. Most Muslim
countries had broken diplomatic relations with the United States, and Middle
East diplomacy was stalemated. All of this in the midst of the most anguishing
domestic crisis since the Civil War.

When Richard Nixon left office, an agreement to end the war in Vietnam had been
concluded, and the main lines of all subsequent policy were established:
permanent dialogue with China, readiness without illusion to ease tensions with
the Soviet Union, a peace process in the Middle East, the beginning via the
European Security Conference of establishing human rights as an international
issue, weakening the Soviet hold on Eastern Europe.

Richard Nixon's foreign policy goals were long-range. And he pursued them
without regard to domestic political consequences. When considered our nation's
interest at stake, he dared confrontations despite the imminence of elections
and also in the midst of the worst crisis of his life.

And he bore, if with some pain, the disapproval of longtime friends and allies
over relaxing tensions with China and the Soviet Union. He drew strength from
the conviction he often expressed to me: the price for doing things halfway is
no less than for doing it completely, so we might as well do them properly.
That's Richard Nixon's greatest accomplishment. It was as much moral as it was
political.

Reconciliation at Journey's End

To lead from strength at a moment of apparent weakness, to husband the nation's
resilience and thus to lay the basis for victory in the cold war. Shy and
withdrawn, Richard Nixon made himself succeed in the most gregarious of
professions and steeled himself to conspicuous acts of extraordinary courage in
the face of wrenching domestic controversy. He held fast to his basic theme that
the greatest free nation in the world had a duty to lead and no right to
abdicate.

Richard Nixon would be so proud that President Clinton and all living former
Presidents of the United States are here, symbolizing that his long and
sometimes bitter journey had concluded in reconciliation.

I wish that in his final hours I could have told him about Brian McDonald, who
during the Cambodian crisis had been fasting on a bench in Lafayette Park across
from the White House until, as he said, President Nixon redeemed his pledge to
withdraw American forces from that anguished country in two months. A promise
which was, in fact, kept.

Across the chasm of the decades Brian called me the day Richard Nixon fell ill
and left a message, "When you talk to President Nixon, tell him that I'm praying
for him." So let us now say goodbye to our gallant friend. He stood on pinnacles
that dissolved in the precipice. He achieved greatly and he suffered deeply. But
he never gave up. In his solitude he envisaged a new international order that
would reduce lingering enmities, strengthen historic friendships and give new
hope to mankind. A visionary dream and possibilities conjoined.

Richard Nixon ended a war. And he advanced the vision of peace of his Quaker
youth. He was devoted to his family, he loved his country and he considered
service his honor. It was a privilege to have been allowed to help him.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry A. Kissinger, who was Secretary of State in the Nixon and
Ford Administrations, bowed to the coffin of former President Richard M. Nixon
after delivering a eulogy to him yesterday at the funeral in Yorba Linda, Calif.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 37th PRESIDENT: SUMMING IT UP;
In the End, the Words Were Those He Sought

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: YORBA LINDA, Calif., April 27


As Richard M. Nixon must have hoped it would, his funeral turned into a rite of
reconciliation today, bringing to a fitting end his 20-year struggle to
rehabilitate himself after the disgrace of resignation.

The nation's secular leader, President Clinton, and the closest thing the
country has to a national religious leader, the Rev. Billy Graham, came to Yorba
Linda to preside at the service, as if to signify a national readiness to let
bygones by bygones -- if not to forget Watergate, which would be impossible,
then to set it in the context of the accomplishments that also marked the Nixon
years.

Quoting a hymn that he said he had heard in church last week, Mr. Clinton said,
"Grant that I may realize that the trifling of life creates differences, but in
the higher things we are all one."

Mr. Nixon struck something of the same note in 1990 when he returned to this
small Orange County town, where he was born "in the house my father built," as
he wrote in the first sentence of his memoirs. Dedicating the library built by
his friends next to the house, near the shady spot where he was buried today, he
said he had "many memories, some of them good, some of them not so good."

Talk of His Good Side

In the five days since the 37th President died in New York last Friday night at
the age of 81, politicians, historians and ordinary Americans have spoken a
great deal about his intelligence, his doggedness, his grasp of foreign affairs
and his love for his family, and very little about his ruthlessness and his
divisiveness.

There is less talk about Richard Nixon as an evil schemer and more of him as a
tortured soul whose damaged personality never gave him a moment's real repose or
chance to savor his successes.

His intimates have long spoken that way. In a 1986 interview with Prof. Kenneth
W. Thompson of the University of Virginia, the late Bryce Harlow, one of the
savviest Republican operators of Mr. Nixon's era, said this:

"I suspect that my gifted friend, zomewhere in his youth, maybe when he was very
young or in his teens, got badly hurt by someone he cared for very deeply and
trusted totally -- a parent, a relative, a dear friend, a lover, a confidant.
From that experience and from then on he could not trust people."

Some people view all of this as an outburst of hypocrisy. There have been a few
primal screams of rage at the red-baiting Nixon, the Nixon of the enemies list,
the Nixon who carried the war into Cambodia, the foul-mouthed Nixon of the
Watergate tapes. But in 1994 they are the exception, not the rule, as they were
20 years ago.

Part of the change stems, of course, from the elegiac nature of the occasion.
Few like to speak ill of the dead. Many former foes had been softened, too, by
Mr. Nixon's extraordinary persistence in immersing himself in the great events
of the time and refusing to yield the global stage even after his public
humiliation as the only man in the annals of the White House to be forced to
quit.

As Gladstone said of Disraeli, Richard Nixon was "a man who was never beaten."

"Every reverse, every defeat is to him only an admonition to wait and catch his
opportunity of retrieving and more than retrieving his position," Gladstone
said. People like people who fight back.

The passage of time since the dramatic events of the early 1970's -- the trip to
China, detente with the Soviet Union, the glacially slow withdrawal of the
United States from Vietnam, the shooting at Kent State and the unfolding of
Watergate and the other "White House horrors" -- has also prompted a new toting
up of the debits and the credits. And that has proved a lot more flattering to
Mr. Nixon if still more than a little conditional.

Brought Widespread Changes

With the smoke of battle dispersed, it has been possible to see more clearly the
changes the former President wrought, including the transformation of the
Republican Party, with power shifting from the Eastern moderates to Southern and
Western conservatives; the development of television as a powerful political
tool, with the direct appeal of the Checkers speech in 1952 and the campaign
debates in 1960, and the fraying of the bonds of trust that once linked the
American public and their leaders.

In his new book, "Nixon: A Life" (Regnery), Jonathan Aitken, a Conservative
member of the British Parliament, offered this upbeat judgment:

"Because of his Shakespearean complexity, he will probably continue to polarize
biographical opinion after his death, just as he polarized political opinion
throughout his career.

"His life has so far rolled for more than 80 years like a long and fascinating
river, occasionally passing through strange, ill-smelling pools, sometimes
babbling along the shallow currents of political expediency, yet most often
flowing into mysteriously still waters in which there lie hidden depths."

But there is something more at work here than mere revisionism. The nation has
been hardened by its steady diet of scandal. Watergate has spawned so many other
gates, most recently Whitewatergate, that it no longer seems unique to many
people.  The plea "Give him a break!" is heard at least as often as that older
cry, "Get rid of the bum!"

If Americans are now more ready to forgive, that is at least partly because
their leaders have given them so much to forgive.

Clinton Is Beneficiary

A beneficiary is President Clinton. Like Richard Nixon, he has qualities that
lead many to doubt his veracity or at least his candor.

To his enemies, Mr. Nixon was "Tricky Dick;" to his enemies, Mr. Clinton is
"Slick Willy." He has been criticized for avoiding service in Vietnam, for his
reported relationship with a singer, Gennifer Flowers, and for his and his
wife's financial dealings, but many have quickly forgiven him.

Travel from city to city in the United States today, and a remarkable number of
people speak of Mr. Clinton's troubles in more or less the same words: "Come on.
We all make mistakes. We all have to get on with life."

Mr. Nixon said many years ago, "I let the American people down," and he also
acknowledged that Watergate was "a burden I shall bear for every day of the life
that is left to me." But if he got on with life, the burden of humiliation grew
lighter.

Serious Listeners Grew

The news media and the policy-makers grew more willing to pay heed to his ideas.
The tributes poured forth last weekend, and this week the grounds of the Nixon
Library quickly filled with television vans, food trucks, bleachers, portable
toilets and white tents.

It looked as if an itinerant carnival had set up shop.

All day long, old Nixon friends and aides fairly glowed with pleasure at what
many of them termed a vindication. Ron Walker, the former President's top
advance man, said the mood was far from funereal. "I would describe most of us
as euphoric," he said.

The long story ended for the only California-born President of the United States
in a beautiful garden in this town of 57,000 an hour's drive southeast of Los
Angeles. He was buried near the white iron gazebo used for the Rose Garden
wedding of his daughter Tricia, next to his wife, Pat, and not far from a tree
grown from a cutting that she took from a spreading magnolia on the White House
lawn.


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 29, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

A news analysis article yesterday about the legacy of Richard M. Nixon misstated
the date of his Checkers speech in some editions. It was in 1952, not 1960.


TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Justices Appear Sympathetic To Anti-Abortion Protesters

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


The Supreme Court appeared sympathetic today to an argument made on behalf of
anti-abortion protesters that a judicial order intended to keep demonstrators
from harassing a Florida clinic's patients and staff was so broad as to violate
the First Amendment.

Even some Justices who support the right to abortion expressed concern about the
scope of the challenged injunction, which keeps demonstrators from entering a
36-foot buffer zone around the Aware Woman Center for Choice in Melbourne, Fla.
The state court's injunction also bars demonstrators from making uninvited
approaches to individual patients within 300 feet of the clinic and from
gathering within 300 feet of staff members' homes.

Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg suggested at one point that injunctions had to be
scrutinized with "particular care," given the "long history" of injunctions
being used to curb civil rights marchers, student demonstrators and labor union
picketers.

Solicitor General Drew S. Days 3d, who was defending the Florida injunction on
behalf of the Clinton Administration, said during his argument that courts had
to be able to issue orders of this type and to tailor them to the particular
problems presented by each case.

Protesters' Objective

"Yes, but doesn't that ability have to be accompanied by special solicitude for
free speech rights?" Justice Anthony M. Kennedy interjected. "Certain people are
being singled out."

Both Mr. Days and Talbot D'Alemberte, the lawyer representing the Melbourne
clinic, argued that the purpose of the injunction was not to limit speech but to
keep the demonstrators from achieving their stated aim of shutting down the
clinic.

Judge Robert B. McGregor of the Florida Circuit Court in Seminole County issued
the order in April 1993 after a more narrowly drawn injunction failed to control
the noisy crowds that gathered regularly after Operation Rescue and other groups
made the clinic the target of sustained protest in 1991.

"It's not a matter of what's being said," Mr. D'Alemberte told the Court. "It's
what these defendants have done." But Justice Antonin Scalia disputed Mr.
D'Alemberte's assertion that the injunction was neutral with respect to the
actual content of the demonstrators' speech.

"You know what kind of speech you're stopping," Justice Scalia said. "Any
injunction against this group is de facto content-directed."

Hurtful, but Constitutional

When Solicitor General Days described the demonstrators as having tried to
intimidate the clinic's patients and staff, Justice Scalia said: "Calling names
is designed to hurt. Calling President Nixon a murderer during the war in
Vietnam was designed to hurt. But it wasn't unlawful."

The Justices' evident concerns provide no guarantee of how the Court will
actually rule in this case, Madsen v. Women's Health Center, No. 93-880. Several
Justices expressed frustration with the way the lawyer for the protesters,
Mathew D. Staver, presented his challenge to the injunction. He tended to speak
in generalities, when the Justices wanted facts.

"Your argument is so confusing," Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said to Mr. Staver
at one point.

And Justice David H. Souter took issue with an assertion by Mr. Staver that the
injunction barred his clients from speaking within a 300-foot zone around the
clinic. "The indication is to the contrary," Justice Souter said after he
instructed Mr. Staver to read aloud the disputed portion of the injunction. The
provision bars a physical approach to any clinic patient "unless such person
indicates a desire to communicate."

Judicial 'Overkill'

Justice Souter said that this language clearly indicated that demonstrators
could speak and hold signs and leaflets as long as they did not single out and
approach particular individuals. "I don't see anything that prevents your
clients from talking," he said.

Mr. Staver said the protesters were not seeking to block the clinic's entrance
or to make excessive noise, conduct that other portions of the injunction
prohibit. The injunction's constitutional flaw was that it engaged in
"overkill," he said, adding, "Instead of using a surgeon's scalpel, it cuts with
a butcher knife."

In deciding the case, the Court will not necessarily take an all-or-nothing
approach to the injunction. It can examine specific provisions separately.
Abortion clinics around the country have obtained dozens of injunctions, each
somewhat different, depending on local circumstances.

The Melbourne injunction was obtained for the clinic by the Feminist Majority
Foundation, an abortion-rights group in Arlington, Va., that provides lawyers
and volunteers for clinics that become targets of protests. The Florida Supreme
Court upheld the injunction while an Atlanta-based Federal appeals court, the
United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, ruling in a parallel
lawsuit, declared it unconstitutional.

Depending on how broadly the Supreme Court rules, this case could have an impact
on a bill known as the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, which has
passed both houses of Congress in slightly differing versions and will soon
receive final Congressional approval. The bill makes it a Federal crime to
obstruct an abortion clinic or to interfere with patients or staff.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

15 Vials of Sperm: The Unusual Bequest of an Even More Unusual Man

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk;  Law Page

LENGTH: 2391 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 28


Over the last few years, Deborah Ellen Hecht has become a familiar and
exasperating figure at California Cryobank Inc.

Six times in 1991, as her lover contemplated suicide and fatherhood
simultaneously, she accompanied him to the Cryobank, nestled on the second floor
of a faux Art Deco-era brick building here, where he made deposits of his sperm.
And she has revisited the sperm bank often since the day in October 1991 when
that man, Bill Kane, a figure at once astoundingly brilliant and confoundingly
mysterious, killed himself at the age of 48 in the penthouse suite of the Mirage
Hotel in Las Vegas.

Ms. Hecht wants desperately to have Mr. Kane's child, by artificial
insemination. But his former wife and their two children contend that such a
birth would be bad for them, bad for society and bad for the baby. The opposing
sides have battled in court for more than two years, during which the sperm has
remained tantalizingly, agonizingly out of Ms. Hecht's reach, stored in
860-liter silver tureens of liquid nitrogen.

Mr. Kane was a former Fulbright scholar and honors graduate of Princeton
University and Yale Law School, a man equally fluent in Greek mythology, tax
shelters and computer programming. For a time, he made a very good living in
law, banking and real estate. But he convinced many that he led another life as
a soldier and military strategist, someone who had won the Medal of Honor in
Southeast Asia, helped catch Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega and, as a "dollar a
year" consultant to the Pentagon, assisted in masterminding the Persian Gulf war
from his home computer in Malibu.

Told that he maintained a hot line to the White House, was friendly with Oliver
L. North and had helped George Bush design a new world order, Mr. Kane's friends
and co-workers never knew where James Bond left off and Walter Mitty began.
Beguiled by his charm, awed by his brilliance, many simply accepted what he
said; his obituary in the Princeton Alumni Weekly spoke of his "intense
involvement" in Operation Desert Storm.

But with respect to his sperm, Mr. Kane was not at all shadowy. In his contract
with the Cryobank, in his will (which also directed the destruction of any
document "that could compromise the security interests of the United States")
and in a suicide note to Ms. Hecht, he was absolutely consistent and forthright.
And he reiterated his desire in a final letter to his two grown children:
William Everett Kane Jr., known as Everett, and Katherine Kane, both of
Pasadena.

"It may be that Deborah will decide -- as I hope she will -- to have a child by
me after my death," he wrote them. "I've been assiduously generating frozen
sperm samples for that eventuality. If she does, then this letter is for my
posthumous offspring, as well, with the thought that I have loved you in my
dreams, even though I never got to see you born."

For Courts, Puzzles Without Precedent

In bequeathing his sperm, Mr. Kane bequeathed many questions as well, and the
California courts have been wrestling with them ever since he died. Is sperm
"property" that can be transferred by will? Should society permit people to
produce children posthumously? How can estates ever be closed if heirs can come
along years, or even decades, into the future?

The courts here have been unable to find any American precedent to help them
resolve these issues. "We are forging new frontiers, because science has run
ahead of common law," Judge Edward M. Ross of Los Angeles County Superior Court
wrote in December 1992.

In that decision, Judge Ross directed that the sperm be destroyed, as Mr. Kane's
children had requested, but he stayed his order pending an appeal. Last summer
an appellate court reversed him, ruling that the sperm was a kind of property
that could pass by will and that the Kane children had "failed to establish a
state interest sufficient to justify interference" in Mr. Kane's decision.

The State Supreme Court then declined to hear the case. And last month a probate
judge in Los Angeles ruled that under a division-of-property agreement signed by
the parties after Mr. Kane's death, Ms. Hecht, a 39-year-old Santa Monica
gemologist, was entitled to at least 3 of the 15 vials of sperm he left behind.

"My job," said that judge, Arnold Gold, "is not to legislate good taste but
uphold and interpret the law."

Ms. Hecht's lawyer, Marvin Rudnick of Pasadena, hailed the decision. "One
hundred years from now," he said, "people will ask how clever was the legal
system in 1994 dealing with these modern medical issues. It took us two years,
but the court did the right thing."

Everett and Katherine Kane, who were 4 and 1 1/2 years old, respectively, when
their parents separated in 1975, say they will appeal. Their lawyer, Sandra
Irwin of Pasadena, is also their mother, who was married to Mr. Kane from 1966
to 1976 and has since remarried.

The younger Kanes contend that permitting Ms. Hecht to bear a child by their
father would violate the integrity of their family and open his estate -- valued
at nearly $1 million on his death but reduced to virtually nothing by legal fees
and creditors' demands -- to additional claims. It would also, they say, violate
state law prohibiting "anatomical gifts" for non-therapeutic reasons and the
transfer of tissues not screened for the AIDS virus.

In any case, they say, Ms. Hecht does not deserve to have Mr. Kane's child
because, far from preventing his suicide, she facilitated it for financial gain,
trying to speed her inheritance by buying him a suicide manual, "Final Exit,"
and a one-way ticket to Las Vegas, which he had already chosen as his place of
death. In court papers, the children call her conduct "morally repugnant to all
decent human beings." Having failed to persuade prosecutors to go after her,
they have sued her for wrongful death.

'Isn't It Silly -- I Actually Talk to It'

Ms. Hecht says that she tried to dissuade Mr. Kane from killing himself but that
various battles had left him too discouraged to be stopped.

And when Ms. Hecht speaks of battles, she is being literal, or very nearly so.
At various points, without ever being quite specific, Mr. Kane claimed to have
worked for the Defense Intelligence Agency, the Central Intelligence Agency and
one or another branch of the armed forces. By his own account, he felt
unappreciated for all he had done for his country, and also apprehensive that
unnamed and unknowable enemies abroad would seek revenge against him for some of
his clandestine work.

Whether or not anyone in the intelligence establishment could ever be expected
to confirm Mr. Kane's accounts of such service even if true, the fact is that no
one ever has. (A Defense Intelligence spokesman said in an interviewed that the
agency had no record of Mr. Kane's employment.)

In any event, his family and some friends say it was all nonsense. They agree
that he was suffering from depression but say it stemmed from the loss of his
job several years ago as a real estate specialist with Calfed, a savings and
loan association; from his inability to find new work; from a particularly
expensive legal fight against a former business partner, and from his long abuse
of alcohol and cocaine.

Ms. Hecht says it was partly Mr. Kane's depression -- and the fear that her
stress in coping with it would cause a miscarriage -- that kept her from trying
to conceive while he was still alive. Now, given her victory in the probate
court last month, she says her dream of having his child may soon finally come
to pass.

"Isn't it silly -- I actually talk to it," she said the other day as she stood
outside the Cryobank and peered at the two baby rattles in the backseat of the
raspberry-colored Lincoln that Mr. Kane gave her as a birthday present three
years ago. "Hang on there," she said with maternal gentleness to the child not
yet conceived. "You're getting closer. You'll be here soon."

Financially, Ms. Hecht is strapped. Her outstanding legal fees amount to
$150,000, and she has trouble paying the rent on her small, incense-filled flat
in Santa Monica. A Chinese nephrite urn containing Mr. Kane's ashes is on the
shelf. Taped to the mirror is one of his hairs, whose DNA could come in handy
should there be any question of the sperm's provenance.

But finances aside, Ms. Hecht, approaching age 40, says she is ready to become a
mother for the first time. She eats and sleeps right, she says, and exercises
"religiously," all to slow her biological clock.

The Cryobank, however, will release nothing until final resolution of the court
fight.

The Grand Finale Of a Mind-Gamer

His family and friends alike believe that Mr. Kane, a man who spent a lifetime
embellishing his biography and playing mind games even with those he loved --
even while bidding them farewell -- would have thoroughly enjoyed the spectacle
he has unleashed. Bill Kane, they say, laughed all the way to the sperm bank.

"He was an extraordinarily brilliant man, and this was his grand finale," said
Ms. Irwin, his former wife. "He did a number on everyone who ever cared about
him in his entire life in one fell swoop. He left things in such a way that no
one would forget his death."

At Princeton, where he graduated cum laude from the Woodrow Wilson School of
Public and International Affairs, Mr. Kane was known for his intelligence, his
political conservatism, his courtliness and what William MacGregor, a classmate
who is now a public relations executive in New York, calls his "flocks of
stories." Many were swashbuckling tales of fighting against guerrillas in Latin
America or skirmishing in jet fighters above the jungles of Laos, Cambodia,
Thailand and Vietnam.

Mr. Kane had taken some time off after his sophomore year at Princeton. Ms.
Irwin says he spent that time in Europe, but Mr. Kane later told friends that he
had been flying F-4's over Southeast Asia. There are no records of his military
service, however, and Ms. Irwin, who was married to him when some of his
adventures ostensibly occurred, calls him "a draft dodger."

No one ever checked his credentials very closely, though. "He was such an
extraordinary guy, you couldn't quite exclude the possibility," said another
Princeton classmate, Howard Fredman, who is now a Los Angeles lawyer.

Mr. Kane graduated from Yale Law School in 1970 and, over the next 20 years,
practiced law in San Francisco, worked for banks in Tokyo and London and then
became an entrepreneur in California, amassing a small fortune -- perhaps $4
million, friends say -- from real estate syndications. He met Ms. Hecht in 1985,
and they began living together in 1987.

To her and others, he talked of taking on occasional undercover assignments to
help old confreres in the intelligence community. He boasted of being paid $1
million by a wealthy Jew to track down a Nazi war criminal in South America.
While defending himself in court against one of a number of lawsuits that he
fought in recent years -- this one brought by a former business associate
alleging forgery -- he startled everybody, his own lawyer included, by
requesting a recess on grounds of national security.

Increasingly, as his career faltered, as his money slipped away, he spent his
time at his rented home in Malibu, sitting at his computer or talking on a
telephone that he said was linked to the White House, the Pentagon and the
military's Cheyenne Mountain strategic complex in Colorado. When it lit up, he
told secretaries, it meant a national emergency. "I am your superior officer!"
one overheard him yelling into the phone. "You do what I say, or I'll have you
exiled to Greenland!"

War in One Desert,
Suicide in Another

Mr. Kane grew particularly active -- or his imagination ran particularly wild --
during the Persian Gulf war. Secretaries heard him giving direction over the
phone on where to look for Scud missiles. As Princeton classmates assembled in
1991 at their 25th reunion, he regaled them with accounts of his gulf war
exploits. In his last letter to his children, he spoke of his role in the
bombing of Iraqi soldiers along a freeway as they fled Kuwait.

His son calls such claims "total bull."

"It's one thing to be talking to people on Compuserve late at night; it's
another entirely to be directing air strikes with absolutely no geographical
familiarity with the region," Everett Kane said. "But he had this incredible
ability to weave together stories, and you really had to work to find the
inconsistencies."

Friends say Mr. Kane seemed deflated once the war ended. To various people, he
expressed fears that jealous Army officials would discipline him for wartime
excesses or, as he wrote his children, that he would become a target of "a few
thousand little ragheads whose cousins and brothers died out on that highway."
With his financial problems mounting -- when he died, a $650,000 house in
Monterey accounted for most of his assets -- he began speaking of suicide. He
also began depositing his sperm at the Cryobank.

On Oct. 21, 1991, he wrote his long farewell letter to his children. It included
several new biographical references -- recollections of his own birth, his
career as a child evangelist, his descent from Sephardic Jews -- and an
explanation for what he was about to do.

"I lived more in these 48+ years than most anyone I have ever encountered," he
wrote. "I would rather take my own life now than be ground into a mediocre
existence by my enemies."

At the Mirage Hotel, where he gambled away $20,000 in what was apparently a
last-minute bid for solvency, he took a handful of sleeping pills, then placed a
plastic bag over his head. The police found a handwritten note to Ms. Hecht and
another informing the hotel's managers that his decision had nothing to do with
the quality of their service.

Ms. Hecht's wish to have Mr. Kane buried with military honors, including a
fly-over by jets, was thwarted because the armed services could find no record
of him. Instead, she placed images of jets on the cover of the funeral program,
plus the words "Bill Kane: Father, Visionary, Philosopher, Warrior, Hero,
Gentleman, Lover, Genius."

Knowing the mystery of the man, noting the name of the hotel where he had died,
some mourners passing by the coffin looked twice, just to be sure it was really
Mr. Kane inside.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: When Bill Kane attended the 25th reunion of his Princeton class
with Deborah Ellen Hecht, he regaled old friends with an account of his exploits
as a mastermind of the Persian Gulf war. Like many of his stories, in which he
resembled James Bond, it was all fiction, his family says.; Ms. Hecht,
determined to have Mr. Kane's child, has waged a court fight against his family
for the sperm he left her in his will. (Scott Robinson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Howard Sochurek, A Photographer, 69

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 219 words


Howard Sochurek, a photographer for Life magazine on assignment throughout the
world and later a pioneer in computer-assisted imaging, died on Monday in
Jackson Memorial Hospital in Miami. Mr. Sochurek, who lived in Boynton Beach,
Fla., was 69.

The cause was liver cancer, said his wife, Tania.

Mr. Sochurek joined Life in 1950 and worked in the Soviet Union, the Middle
East, Mongolia and Vietnam. He also served in the magazine's bureaus in New
York, Chicago, Detroit, New Delhi, Singapore and Paris.

He was with Life for two decades. In Korea, he parachuted behind enemy lines to
photograph American troops in combat. In Vietnam, he covered the fall of the
French garrison at Dien Bien Phu.

He became a freelance photographer in 1970 and was one of the first to use a
computer to color and manipulate photographs and other images. His
computer-enhanced images of X-rays and CAT-scans led him to extensive
photographic work in the medical field. Physicians and drug and other medical
companies used his photographs in textbooks and advertisements.

Mr. Sochurek graduated from Princeton University in 1942 and in 1960 was awarded
a Neiman fellowship to study at Harvard University. He was an Army veteran of
World War II.

He is survived by his wife and a daughter, Tania DeChiara of New York.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Curious Flood of Praise for Richard Nixon;
Saddened by the Loss

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 349 words


To the Editor:

Having had the privilege of serving President Nixon as Deputy Assistant for
Congressional Relations (1971-74), I am saddened once again by the loss of this
brilliant and singular man. "Once again" because first the "Beltway," obsessed
with Watergate's histrionics, helped deny the world his leadership.

I hope all Americans, especially the young, remember that today's world is a
safer place because of Nixon's Presidency. The collapse of Communism, decreased
tension in the world's nuclear arsenals, Middle East peace talks, Federal
revenue-sharing, Government involvement in environmental concerns, Federal
antidrug programs, the all-volunteer military and much more -- all had their
embryonic beginnings with his leadership 25 years ago.

We are reminded continuously of the darker side of his Presidency. We should
also remember the context of those times -- an unending war in Southeast Asia,
an unpopular draft at home, the growing military strength of our great
adversaries, and the leaking of classified documents.

Clearly elements of the Watergate episode were contrary to our Republic's
democratic spirit. However, one wonders how today's "Beltway" would have handled
Lincoln's Civil War suspension of constitutional liberties or F.D.R.'s secret
involvement in Europe's conflict before Pearl Harbor. One now clearly
comprehends how our nation's chief executive becomes immobilized. The "besieged
Presidency" began with Lyndon Johnson's Vietnam and continues with Bill
Clinton's Whitewater.

Having seen firsthand both the good and bad of the Nixon years, I am very
thankful we had such a man at the right time to change our nation's course in
history. Destiny has never given us perfect leaders. But only Richard Nixon,
with his political role beginning in 1947, could have made such a great
difference in reshaping the world's future. Our country and every President
since his tenure has benefited because of his service as our 37th President. He
was truly the last of this century's great leaders.

BRETT M. KLYVER
Kihei, Hawaii, April 25, 1994

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

He Who Once Rebuilt New Haven

BYLINE: By BILL RYAN

SECTION: Section 14CN;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


IN the 50's and 60's, when many older American cities were crumbling, Mayor Dick
Lee of New Haven knew what to do. During eight consecutive two-year terms from
1953 to 1969, he established a national reputation as a visionary of urban
renewal, with a Midas touch to back it up. He was the man who could go down to
Washington, on a first-name basis with John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson, and
return with thick bundles of Federal money for projects he had dreamed up for
New Haven, mostly involving tearing down old buildings and getting someone in
the private sector to put up new ones.

He supervised the building of two new public high schools and a dozen elementary
schools and was an early proponent of putting up cluster housing that low-income
families could buy rather than rent.

Mr. Lee also cemented his image as a master of Irish charm; a self-educated man
who once headed the Yale News Bureau, although he had never spent a day in
college; the man to get as a speaker, because he could enrapture an audience
with dozens of stories and the timing of a vaudevillian.

A Call From Johnson

Today, Dick Lee -- practically no one has ever used his formal name, Richard C.
-- is 78 and retired from two additional careers, as an executive of United Way
and then of a bank. He has not changed much. He still has the gift of gab and
the telling punch line, sometimes two.

"In 1966, I was the first mayor in the country to come out against the Vietnam
War, and I knew I'd hear from Lyndon," he said. "One night, we're sitting down
at supper, and the phone rings. And my son David, who was a little kid then,
answers it, and we could hear him say: 'This is dinner hour, and Mommy doesn't
allow us to talk on the phone at dinner hour. You'll have to call back.' His
mother asked who it was, and he said it was the President who wanted to talk to
Daddy."

Within seconds, the phone rang again. It was Lyndon Johnson again. He was
unhappy, not about being hung up on by a child but about the audacity of the
child's father. "I see you have the only city in the United States with its own
foreign policy," the President said.

Mr. Lee saw nothing wrong with that, he said. He still doesn't. To him, New
Haven has always been a special place and should be entitled to a foreign policy
or two.

He has never considered moving anywhere else, he said. He and his wife, Ellen,
still live in the graceful stucco home with the sunken living room he purchased
30 years ago for $42,000 in Westville, one of the city's best sections.

City's Problems Hit Home

But Mr. Lee is very conscious that his city has been in decline since the great
age of redevelopment. Its center has been devastated by businesses moving out,
and New Haven is afflicted by high crime rates and fear that are not limited to
the poor neighborhoods. Several weeks ago, Ellen Lee was mugged and her purse
stolen -- in her backyard, just after she had driven her car into the garage.

What has happened to New Haven reflects the migrations in America during the
past two decades, Mr. Lee said. Poor people, mostly black and Hispanic, move
into the city because they have nowhere else to go, while the white middle class
flees to suburbia.  When he was Mayor, New Haven was predominately a white city.
That is no longer true. "It's a different city today," he said, noting that the
public-school population is about 85 percent nonwhite.

But that doesn't bother him, said Mr. Lee, who was always known as a colorblind
politician. "I went to grammar school in what was the city's black neighborhood
then," he said.

In the summer of 1967, New Haven was added to the list of cities that had
experienced the agony of riots. This one disturbance, although it came long
after many other cities had succumbed to violence, shook Mr. Lee badly.

The New York Times sympathized with him in an editorial: "To a bitter minority
of New Haveners, their city is still no model. But their lawless actions do not
mean the city's efforts have been a failure, much less that it is pointless to
extend them." Despite the city's troubles, the editorial said, "New Haven and
its Mayor are still a model for the nation."

Although New Haven is far from a model city today, Mr. Lee said he was confident
that it would somehow find its way again.

"Cities have been surviving since the Roman Empire," he said. "They are bastions
of civilizations, the depositories of great books and museums that cannot ever
be found in suburbs. And they have great universities like Yale and Harvard. The
Peabody Museum here, children flock to it. This city has to survive."

But turning the city around is going to be difficult and take time, he said.
"The problems we have here are not going to disappear overnight," he said.
"They'll take 25 years, maybe longer, to correct."

The perilous situation of the state's cities has been building for 25 years, Mr.
Lee said, since the Federal Government started to reduce its aid in the late
1960's. "What has happened since is years of retrogression on the national level
in the effort to reclaim cities and their residents," he said.

Help for all Connecticut cities must come from some sort of regional
governmental structures involving the core cities and their suburbs, Mr. Lee
said. Coming from the elder statesman of the cities, that is almost
revolutionary talk, and he admitted that he probably would not have felt that
way 25 years ago.

In retrospect, the abandonment of county government in Connecticut in 1958 "was
a grave error," he said. The counties offered frameworks for regional
government, "and we had a golden opportunity to press for it while the suburbs,
in term of political power, were relatively weak," he said. "We need something
like it today. We have to adjust. We have to make hard decisions."

Mr. Lee said he was fully aware that the idea of regional government was not
usually applauded in Connecticut, where town lines are regarded as sacrosanct,
and relations between cities and suburbs have sometimes been full of hostility.
But he noted that two major American cities, Atlanta and Indianapolis, became
stronger by absorbing the suburbs around them.

And he said he was confident that some sort of regional approach would emerge in
Connecticut when the cities' crime and economic problems reach deeper into the
suburbs. "It will occur when everyone recognizes that the crisis now viewed as
urban becomes part of all areas surrounding the cities," he said.

While staying out of politics, Mr. Lee keeps working to preserve his city. He is
also one of the five proprietors of the Common and Undivided Lands in New Haven,
a position established by the General Assembly of the Colony of Connecticut in
1646 to protect the 18-acre New Haven Central Green. The green remains an
enduring symbol of New Haven. And so does Dick Lee.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: It will take perhaps 25 years, says Dick Lee, former mayor, but
New Haven can recapture its dynamism. The trick is to include the suburbs. (Carl
David LaBianca for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
A Nixon Legacy Devalued By a Cold War Standard

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN most of the obituaries and retrospectives about the life and times of
President Richard M. Nixon, his foreign policy achievements were hailed as the
centerpiece of his Presidency. But oddly, all of these eulogies either ignored,
or mentioned only in passing, what may have been one of the most enduring of Mr.
Nixon's foreign policy initiatives: his decision in 1971 to take the dollar off
the gold standard and demolish the Bretton Woods monetary system -- bidding both
farewell with that memorable line about the Italian currency: "I don't give a
(bleep) about the lira."

Bretton Woods was the town in New Hampshire where, in July of 1944, American and
British officials gathered to set up a monetary system that would restore global
trade and economics after the war. The Bretton Woods system was based on the
conviction that the world should not return to the laissez-faire chaos of the
1930's, when exchange rates were allowed to float and fluctuate wildly. The
Bretton Woods agreement established that the dollar would be the fixed center of
a new economic solar system. Each country would declare a value of its currency
against the dollar, and it would be allowed to float only 1 percent up or down.
The dollar would be linked to gold at a rate of $35 an ounce. Any country that
piled up dollars could come to the teller window at Fort Knox and redeem them
for gold at that fixed rate.

For about 25 years the system worked fine, until the Vietnam War and Great
Society programs triggered serious inflation in the United States. As America's
trade deficits with Europe and Japan grew, and dollars started piling up abroad,
the Western allies rushed to redeem their dollars for gold before they were
eroded by American inflation. President Nixon imposed wage and price controls to
dampen inflation, but he also decided that he would devalue the dollar to make
American exports cheaper and stimulate export-led growth. Since Bretton Woods
barred such a devaluation, Mr. Nixon devalued Bretton Woods. He unilaterally
abrogated the treaty, closed the gold window, and soon thereafter let the dollar
float. In Japan, they called it the "Nixon Shocku."

"It fell to Nixon to seal the fate of the Bretton Woods system," said Richard N.
Gardner, author of the standard history of Bretton Woods and now the American
Ambassador to Spain. "While this may have been inevitable, to ignore its
long-term impact would be a major historical oversight. Nixon moved us into a
very different monetary universe of floating exchange rates, something we are
still coping with today. That is a world of greatvolatility of currencies, which
complicates international trade and investment and encourages speculation."

One major positive to come out of Nixon's move was that it forced the key
industrial democracies to work together in a "Group of Seven" to coordinate
interest rates, monetary and fiscal policies -- and even diplomacy -- to
maintain a modicum of currency stability.

The reason this Nixon initiative gets short shrift is because news and history
tend to be written in the context of a Super Story -- a large narrative drama
that sets the broad context in which events are judged. The international Super
Story of the Nixon era was the cold war; news was deemed significant or
insignificant in relation to where it fit in that East-West drama. The opening
to China and detente naturally assumed a high profile; economics was secondary.
Most journalists and editors, having been suckled on the cold war, naturally
gravitate to news about national security, not economic security.

"For the last 45 years we were in a war -- the cold war -- and everything was
subordinated to the requirements of waging that war," said Michael Mandelbaum,
an expert on cold war history at Johns Hopkins University. "In that context, the
sorts of things that Richard Nixon cared about -- national security issues --
were defined as high politics, and the proper preoccupation of Presidents and
journalists, while international economics was defined as low politics, and the
proper preoccupation of faceless bureaucrats. People write histories about wars,
not bookkeeping, and they run for President to be warlords, not accountants."

Now that the cold war is over, though, the Super Story may be changing. Regional
crises -- like Bosnia and Haiti -- still grab headlines, but they must now
compete with a new Super Story -- the one about a world that is becoming more
and more economically intertwined. In that world, the President is as much
Merchant in Chief as Commander in Chief. President Clinton's efforts to secure a
global trade agreement -- known as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade --
and the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada have loomed
very large in this new dollar drama, and it is a safe bet that neither will be
overlooked in his obituary.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry Morgenthau Jr., left, Secretary of the Treasury, and John
Maynard Keynes, adviser to the British treasury, during the Bretton Woods
conference in 1944. (Alfred Eisenstaedt/Life Magazine, Time-Warner, Inc.)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All-Volunteer Military Was a Highlight of Nixon's Presidency;
'Morally Bankrupt' Age

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 183 words


To the Editor:

Perhaps my disgust at the unending effort to revise Nixonian history is due to
my most singular memory of the man: While I was being beaten up by police and
Secret Service agents for peacefully protesting the Vietnam slaughter at a Nixon
re-election rally in 1972 at Nassau Coliseum, Mr. Nixon turned to his faithful
supporters and proclaimed that "The age of permissiveness is over."

Mr. Nixon has now been forgiven for his efforts to subvert constitutional
government, to say nothing of the many thousands of human beings whose senseless
deaths were the direct result of his needless prolonging of the Vietnam War.

But despite the fawning coverage of his death, many of my generation will
persist in remembering the Nixon Administration as, in former Senator George
McGovern's words, the "most morally bankrupt," the "most morally corrupt," the
"trickiest, most deceitful . . . in our entire national history" (quoted by
Patrick J. Buchanan, then a Nixon aide, in a Times Op-Ed piece on McGovern of
Nov. 24, 1972).

MATTHEW J. CHACHERE
Brooklyn, April 25, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All-Volunteer Military Was a Highlight of Nixon's Presidency

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 337 words


To the Editor:

The individuals who were asked by the media for their recollections about
Richard Nixon have, as best I can tell, wholly neglected his role in ending the
draft and establishing the all-volunteer armed forces, which was so highly
commended for its performance in the Persian Gulf War.

The economist J. Kenneth Galbraith wrote: "The draft survives principally as a
device by which we use compulsion to get young men to serve at less than the
market rate of pay. We shift the cost of military service from the well-to-do
taxpayer who benefits by lower taxes to the impecunious young draftee." But so
long as the takings were confined to a minority in the lower middle classes,
Congress went along with the renewals of the draft authority.

When the fighting in Vietnam escalated in 1965 and 1966, accompanied by larger
draft calls, students on the college campuses voiced their opposition. The
Johnson Administration set up a Presidential commission headed by Burke Marshall
that recommended that the Selective Service draft be replaced by a lottery. It
helped, but students could still avoid being drafted by running to England,
Sweden and Canada, or by securing medical deferments or employment in critical
occupations.

In his run for the Presidency in 1960, Mr. Nixon said he would end the draft as
soon as feasible. On Oct. 23, 1968, during his second run, he repeated this
pledge when he said, "It is not so much the way they are selected that is wrong,
it is the fact of selection."

Shortly after his inauguration Nixon established the President's Commission on
the All Volunteer Force, headed by Thomas S. Gates. The Gates Commission report
was presented to Nixon on Feb. 20, 1970.

The record of the Nixon years must include his role in ending compulsion and
expanding freedom of choice. Thanks to his actions, the United States armed
forces are stronger and more efficient.

WALTER Y. OI
Rochester, April 25, 1994
The writer was a senior staff economist on the Gates Commission.

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Less Strategic Now, Grenada Is to Lose American Embassy

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


Little more than a decade after the United States invaded Grenada, ousting a
left-wing Government that Ronald Reagan said was turning the tiny Caribbean
island into an outpost of Fidel Castro's Cuba, the Clinton Administration plans
to close its Embassy there to save money.

With the end of the cold war, the Administration has decided that the island,
which recently resumed diplomatic relations with Cuba, is of little strategic
importance.

"This action is to be taken only in response to budgetary pressures and in no
way reflects on Grenadian-American relations or on the commitment of the United
States Government to our friends in the region," the State Department said when
it announced the closing recently.

The island's dwindling significance today is in marked contrast to how it was
described on Oct. 25, 1983, when Mr. Reagan sent 7,000 troops to end political
violence and, he said, to rescue American students at St. George's University
Medical School.

The State Department told Congress last month of its intention to shut the
modest Embassy compound and transfer its functions to the Embassy in Barbados,
150 miles to the northeast. The Embassy in Barbados had responsibility for
Grenada until just after the 1983 invasion.

State Department officials said on Friday that closing the Embassy in Grenada,
as well as the one in Antigua and a regional office of the Agency for
International Development in Barbados, is part of an effort to shift resources
to Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.

Congress, which can overrule the State Department, has until May 13 to decide if
it wants to keep the Embassies open. Grenadian officials are lobbying members of
Congress and the Administration for a reprieve.

"Because of the special relationship that exists between our two countries,
Grenadians would feel terribly let down if the American Embassy were to close
its doors in St. George's," Prime Minister Nicholas A. Braithwaite wrote to
President Clinton on April 22.

The Lobbying Begins

Representative Donald M. Payne, a New Jersey Democrat who is head of the
Congressional Black Caucus Task Force on the Caribbean, has also asked Mr.
Clinton to reconsider the decision.

State Department officials are waiting to see if any groundswell emerges in
Congress that will stay their hand. "You know how these things go," said a State
Department official. "It ain't over till it's over."

Mr. Payne's office said 1,500 Americans are in Grenada at any given time:
tourists, business executives, retirees -- and about 500 students at the medical
school, which reopened after the invasion.

A lush, hilly island 90 miles north of Venezuela, Grenada has been declining in
importance as a diplomatic post. There are only two Americans assigned to the
Embassy.

State Department budget-cutters considered closing the Embassy last year but
decided that to do so in the year marking the 10th anniversary of an invasion
intended to "liberate" Grenada from Communism would have been poor public
relations.

"It would have looked odd to close it within a few years of the operation," said
State Department official who spoke on condition of anonymity. "But it was
becoming harder to justify keeping it open. It's really not an active post in
terms of any of the normal criteria: political and economic reporting, narcotics
or consular affairs."

19 Americans Died

The invasion in 1983 led to the deaths of 19 American soldiers and sailors, 110
Grenadian militia and 71 Cubans, many of whom were armed construction workers
with no formal military training.

Mr. Reagan explained the invasion of the 133-square-mile island, which has a
population of 85,000, by saying that Cuba was turning the country into an
outpost of Soviet expansionism and that an airstrip was being built that could
be used by Russian warplanes. A month ago, on April 4, Mr. Braithwaite's
Government announced it was re-establishing diplomatic relations with Cuba,
which were broken at the time of the United States invasion.

Mr. Reagan used the success of the invasion -- the troops secured the island in
two days -- to proclaim the primacy of United States fighting forces, whose
image and morale had been battered by the defeat in Vietnam and by the
disastrous attempt to rescue American hostages in Iran three years earlier. The
Pentagon awarded 9,802 decorations after the invasion, including 813 Bronze
Stars.

"Our days of weakness are over," Mr. Reagan said, alluding to the invasion. "Our
military forces are standing tall."

But declassified Defense Department documents later showed that the invasion
suffered from poor planning and a lack of equipment. At one point, because
ground troops and the Navy's shipboard command had incompatible radios, an Army
officer had to use his personal credit card to telephone his office in North
Carolina to coordinate Naval air support.

The documents also noted that the medical students were not in danger.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Grenada showing location of St. George's. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Patents;
A way to disinfect drinking water without the risk of chlorine's potentially
harmful side effects.

BYLINE: By Teresa Riordan

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


CHLORINE, widely used in developed countries to disinfect drinking water, is a
mixed blessing. It efficiently and cheaply cleanses water of disease-carrying
microbes, but the byproducts have long been suspected as carcinogens and agents
of environmental damage.

Now the inventors of a water purifying system designed for NASA's long space
missions say their technology can be used in remote areas on Earth to make
drinking water safe without chlorine.

Last month NASA named the new technology its "Invention of the Year." And last
week Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet of Vietnam endorsed an order for 10,000
purifying units based on the NASA system to be used in his country, according to
officials at Vector Environmental Technologies Inc., a company based in Sparks,
Nev., that has just started selling the units.

Rather than chlorine, a gas that is easily bubbled into water, the inventors
rely on iodine to purify the water.

Solid at Room Temperature

"People have used iodine for a long time to purify water, but it hasn't been
convenient" for large-scale purification efforts "because it's solid at room
temperature and not terribly soluble," said Gerald V. Colombo, an inventor and
engineer for the Umpqua Research Company in Myrtle Creek, Ore. Umpqua has the
exclusive rights to the patented technology, which it has sublicensed to Vector.

In this system, the iodine is suspended in a bed of tiny plastic beads made of
an ion-exchange resin. The water is disinfected as it passes through the beads.
Normally this process would eventually deplete the beads of their iodine, but
the inventors devised a way for the unit to recharge the resin bed with iodine:
Water passing through the system is occasionally diverted through a channel of
iodine crystals to produce a concentrated iodine solution. The solution is then
funneled back to the beads, which soak it up.

Vector said a unit capable of processing five gallons a minute for about 1 cent
a gallon would weigh about 1,000 pounds and stand 5 feet tall by 3 feet wide. D.
Duane Dunk, executive vice president of Vector, said the company intended to
sell the units initially in developing countries, where water-borne diseases
like cholera pose serious health risks.

Although the iodine can be pulled out of the water before it leaves the system,
Mr. Dunk said it also could be left in. He added that it might be an effective
way to partly alleviate the estimated 400 million cases each year worldwide of
iodine deficiency, which can cause goiter ailments, birth defects, impaired
mental function and spontaneous abortions. (Using conventional methods unrelated
to the iodine process, the unit can also be equipped to remove pesticides, lead
and other undesirable elements, Mr. Dunk said.)

Seeking E.P.A. Approval

Iodine deficiency is not a concern in the United States, where iodine is added
to table salt. But Vector said it was hoping to get Environmental Protection
Agency approval so it could sell the units domestically for purifying water in
rural areas that are not connected to water processing plants and as backup
systems during natural disasters that contaminate water supplies.

Gerald V. Colombo, Clifford D. Jolly and Richard L. Sauer received patent
5,176,836.


Enzyme Technique
To Protect Plants

Plants naturally produce an enzyme called chitinase (pronounced KITE-in-ace),
which seems to ward off potentially devastating fungal diseases. Seeking to
heighten this natural resistance and consequently reduce the need for
pesticides, researchers in recent years have used genetic engineering to create
plants that manufacture increased amounts of the enzyme.

The DNA Plant Technology Corporation, based in Cinnaminson, N.J., was recently
granted its third chitinase-related patent, getting what appears to be broad
patent protection on virtually all types of crops genetically engineered to
produce more chitinase. The most recent patent covers grains and tropical
fruits. The second patent covers most fruits and vegetables. The first, a more
narrow patent, covers certain genes that produce the chitinase.

While some researchers have suggested that chitinase may successfully combat
fungi only in combination with other enzymes, Robert Serenbetz, president of DNA
Plant Technology, said the company believed "genetically modifying plants with
just chitinase alone" would be enough to effectively combat some important
fungi.

The company said it had begun field testing on tomatoes genetically altered to
produce more chitinase and was studying the technique's use with peppers, peas
and tropical fruit.

DNA Plant Technology was assigned patent 5,290,687.

New Device Deflects Headlights' Glare

It is a problem that vexed Edwin Land, the inventor and founder of Polaroid: How
can the sometimes dangerously blinding glare of headlights from an oncoming
automobile be eliminated?

Mr. Land devised an elegant solution in which drivers wore glasses that
polarized light one way while the light from headlights was polarized the other
way.

"It blocked the glare of the headlight, but the problem was it also blocked all
the rest of the light, so you couldn't see," said Sadeg M. Faris, an inventor in
Hawthorne, N.Y., who holds dozens of patents related to superconducting
electronics and other areas. Dr. Faris said he had found a better solution, for
which he received a patent last month.

His invention uses a liquid-crystal screen hinged to the visor on the driver's
side, a small videocamera hanging just below the rear-view mirror and an
infrared sensor at the back of the camera that is aimed at the driver.

The video camera, trained on the road and aided by the infrared sensor, which
informs it of the position of the driver's eyes, would electronically tell the
liquid crystal to act as a filter by darkening individual pixels -- minuscule
dots of color -- at the point where the headlights hit the windshield, according
to Dr. Faris.

"This is a very dynamic situation," Dr. Faris said. "As the car moves and your
head moves, the pixels adjust accordingly."

Dr. Faris said that his company, Reveo Inc., had not assembled a prototype but
that he thought such a product would retail for about $400.

"It may sound complicated, but the ingredients are pretty simple," he said. He
received patent 5,305,012.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Poet's Values: It's the Words Over the Man

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1525 words

DATELINE: BLOOMINGTON, Ind., April 27


Yusef Komunyakaa, who won the Pulitzer Prize for poetry three weeks ago, is
still receiving congratulations from acquaintances as he walks the hallways and
quadrangles of the Indiana University campus here. People seem surprised to see
him, as if he had been in hiding, calling out to him "Hey! Man of the hour!" and
the like.

You would know he was a shy man just from the way he acknowledges his
well-wishers, an embarrassed-seeming bow of the head, an abbreviated wave of the
hand. And indeed, in the pantheon of poet stereotypes -- the vitriolic,
passionate drunkard is one; the wry, acerbic loner another -- Mr. Komunyakaa, a
professor of English, is more the dreamy intellectual, a Wordsworthian type
whose worldly, philosophic mind might be stirred by something as homely and
personal as a walk in a field of daffodils. Still, there's a way he gives off
the sense of a cauldron, bubbling beneath the surface. He's not happy talking
about himself.

A Distinctly Southern Voice

"I'm happier talking about the process of writing, yes," he said. He's a
dark-skinned man, with a broad nose and a dusting of salt-gray in his hair. His
voice is a quiet country rumble, distinctly Southern, with a Cajunish tinge that
betrays a childhood spent in Bogalusa, La. "Skeered," he'll say for scared;
"paw-em" is how says the word poem.

"I'm even happier to have people read my work," he said. "I'm uncomfortable with
the focus on the poet and not on the poem."

At 47, Mr. Komunyakaa (pronounced koh-mun-YAH-kuh) is something of a paradigm of
the contemporary poet-academic. He is the author of eight books, including "Neon
Vernacular" (Wesleyan University Press), the collection of new and selected
poems for which he was awarded the Pulitzer, and he has been teaching a full
load of graduate and undergraduate courses at Indiana since 1986. He taught at
the University of New Orleans before that. He acknowledges poetry to be the most
inaccessible of literary forms, requiring a commitment from readers that not
many are willing to make. But he himself is committed to the relentless plumbing
of ideas and the language needed to express them.

Poets need to be of eccentric and independent turn of mind, and Mr. Komunyakaa
seems just that. He's pleased by ambiguity, complexity, resonance without
clarity. His poems, many of which are built on fiercely autobiographical details
-- about his stint in Vietnam, about his childhood -- deal with the stains that
experience leaves on a life, and they are often achingly suggestive without
resolution.

"I think of my poems as personal and public at the same time," he said. "You
could say they serve as psychological overlays. One fits on top of the other,
and hopefully there's an ongoing evolution of clarity."

In the language of his poems, too, is a sense of struggling to embrace
complexity, images layered on images to create depth rather than simple
revelation. He occasionally wishes he were a painter, he said, because the
images in his poems often come from pictures that arise in his head and he has
to work, experimenting, to approximate them.

"I like connecting the abstract to the concrete," he said. "There's a tension in
that. I believe the reader or listener should be able to enter the poem as a
participant. So I try to get past resolving poems."

Even in conversation he gravitates to anecdotes that are at once poignant and
elliptical.

Take the story of his name. It is probably of West African derivation, the poet
said, although he isn't sure. According to family legend, it was brought to this
country by his grandfather.

"He slipped into this country from the West Indies, most likely Trinidad," Mr.
Komunyakaa said. "He was a stowaway, I suppose. And the story was that he was
wearing one boy's shoe and one girl's shoe."

Learning About Tools

He is the oldest of five children, "and the only one who reads poetry," Mr.
Komunyakaa said. His father, who died in 1986, was a carpenter. Their
relationship was clearly complicated.

"He taught me to learn the tools, that tools make a job easier, and I see that
as paralleling the technique of poetry," Mr. Komunyakaa said. Relations between
the two weren't smooth, however, and a poem in the new collection, "Songs for My
Father" depicts the older man as both a hard worker and an angry, abusive
philanderer. The poet's mother, when her marriage was over, moved to Phoenix,
where she still lives.

Bogalusa, in the lowland toe of the Louisiana boot, north of Lake Ponchartrain
on the Mississippi border, is a mill town. "Culturally it's desolate," Mr.
Komunyakaa said. "It was a place where there was vegetation all over. In spring
and summer, there was almost a psychological encroachment of it, as if
everything was woven together. Growing up, I was always going into the woods and
pulling things apart, the muscadine vines that had overtaken the oaks. There was
a chemistry going on in the landscape, and I identified with it, so I kind of
look for that wherever I go."

His first books were volumes of an encyclopedia his mother bought in a
supermarket. He read the Bible through twice when he was a young teen-ager; then
at 16, in a tiny church library, he came across James Baldwin's book of essays
"Nobody Knows My Name," which inspired him to write.

On the Line in Vietnam

In 1969, Mr. Komunyakaa joined the Army and went to Vietnam. He served as an
"information specialist," reporting from the front lines and editing for a
military newspaper, The Southern Call, and winning a Bronze Star. When he
returned home, he went to college, at the University of Colorado, then to
graduate school at Colorado State University and the University of California at
Irvine. In the peripatetic fashion of poets looking for a way to make a living,
he pursued fellowships and teaching jobs in New England and, finally, New
Orleans. It was there he met his wife, Mandy Sayer, an Australian novelist and
short-story writer, whom he married in 1985. And it was there he embarked on the
most fruitful period of his career.

"It took me 14 years to write poems about Vietnam," he said. "I had never
thought about writing about it, and in a way I had been systematically writing
around it."

While he was renovating a house in New Orleans in 1983, he said, he wrote his
first Vietnam poem, periodically climbing down a ladder to write down lines in a
notebook. "And it was as if I had uncapped some hidden place in me," he said.
"Poem after poem came spilling out."

And indeed they still do. In the new collection, a poem called "At the Screen
Door" describes the experience of a soldier returning home a changed man in ways
he doesn't quite understand. He's watching a woman -- his wife? his mother? --
from outside the house; she doesn't see him yet. It ends this way:

Who is it

Waiting for me, a tall shadow

Unlit in the doorway, no more

Than an outline of the past?

I drop the duffle bag

& run before I know it,

Running toward her, the only one

I couldn't have surprised,

Who'd be here at daybreak

Watching a new day stumble

Through a whiplash of grass

Like a man drunk on the rage

Of being alive.

Evidently, some demons lie not so dormant beneath Mr. Komunyakaa's serene
exterior, and the impression was underscored when, apropos of nothing in
particular, he began to speak about violence. It is endemic, of course, in
American cities, like Phoenix, where his mother lives, he said. But it is even
more deeply rooted in rural America.

"I grew up with guns around me," he said. "The rituals of violence. People
hunting. Killing hogs, rabbits. Pragmatic violence. At the time it seemed
pragmatic, but now I question it. In our culture we celebrate violence. All of
our heroes have blood on their hands. I have a real problem with that."

In an interview that had otherwise been meandering and quiet, this was a moment
of focus and fire. There's a poem in it, perhaps.



CHILDREN AND GUNS

The day after Christmas

Blackbirds lifted like a shadow

Of an oak, slow leaves

Returning to bare branches.

We followed them, a hundred

Small premeditated murders

Clustered in us like happiness.

We had the scent of girls

On our hands & in our mouths,

Moving like jackrabbits from one

Dream to the next. Brandnew

Barrels shone against the day

& stole wintery light

From trees. In the time it took

To run home & grab Daddy's gun,

The other wing-footed boys

Stumbled from the woods.

Johnny Lee was all I heard,

A siren in the flesh,

The name of a fallen friend

In their wild throats. Only Joe

Stayed to lift Johnny's head

Out of the ditch, rocking back

& forth. The first thing I did

Was to toss the shotgun

Into a winterberry thicket,

& didn't know I was running

To guide the paramedics into

The dirt-green hush. We sat

In a wordless huddle outside

The operating room, till a red light

Over the door began pulsing

Like a broken vein in a skull.

-- "Shotguns," a section of Yusef Komunyakaa's poem "A Good Memory," from "Neon
Vernacular" (Wesleyan University Press), copyright 1993 by Mr. Komunyakaa;
reprinted by permission of the University Press of New England.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yusef Komunyakaa (Mary Ann Carter for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Politics Of Hate

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


At her press conference last month Hillary Rodham Clinton turned aside a
question about the politics of personal destruction. "I can't really help it,"
she said, "if some people get up every day wanting to destroy."

The way Mrs. Clinton put it reflected the pain that she and the President have
surely felt at the level of personal attack leveled at them in recent months.
Whitewater is only part of it. Below the mainstream press there is a flow of
poison directed at the President and his wife: in the comments of talk-show
bigots, in extreme-right magazines and newsletters.

The politics of hate is hardly new in this country. Thomas Jefferson's opponents
painted him as an atheist in league with French Revolutionary terrorism. Again
and again in our history those who disagreed with some person or group have
painted them as not just wrong but treasonous: "The paranoid style in American
politics," the historian Richard Hofstadter called it.

The style was exemplified by Richard Nixon's tactics of smear and division.
Running for the House and then the Senate at the beginning of his political
career he portrayed his opponents as pro-Communist. He did the same as Vice
President, using the Red Scare against Democrats in the mid-term elections of
1954. His hate showed in the Watergate tapes.

At his death most people chose to emphasize the positive in Mr. Nixon's life,
such as the rapprochement with China. But the bile he injected did lasting
damage to our political life, reducing the level of trust and making Americans
more cynical about all leadership.

The bitterness of the Red Scare period, and even of Vietnam, had seemed to fade
in recent years. Certainly Presidents did not have to cope with high levels of
personal vilification. President Reagan had virtually a free pass from the
press, which among other things was evidently afraid to take on such a beloved
figure.

Now here we are again. Scandal sheets print charges about President Clinton's
sex life, and they are taken up by television networks and some serious
newspapers. Talk shows peddle rumors that Vincent Foster, the White House lawyer
and Clinton friend who committed suicide, was actually killed in a secret
hideout.

As a general rule political leaders deserve no sympathy when they have a hard
time. After all, they asked for the job. Harry Truman said it: "If you can't
stand the heat, get out of the kitchen."

But there is a difference between the heat of policy criticism and personal
vilification. I have criticized a great deal that Mr. Clinton has done as
President. But it is another thing to attack him as a human being, questioning
his good faith.

"I'm afraid we've fallen into the bad habit of making our kings and then killing
our kings," David McCullough, the historian and biographer of President Truman,
told Lloyd Grove of The Washington Post last month.

"The President carries the world on his shoulders. So for Clinton to have this
kind of constant sniping and growling at him, it's worse than disrespect.
Because it's not desrespect for the office, it's disrespect for the man, and
it's lack of decency for another human being."

Why the savaging of Bill Clinton? Some of it is his own fault for being less
than straightforward. Some is condescension toward a Southerner, as was true
with Jimmy Carter. Some is resentment of the independence and intelligence of
Mrs. Clinton. But much is ideological: the anger of the right that a centrist
Democrat is in the White House.

The extreme right has powerful voices in the United States today, among other
things dominating radio talk. Its most important voice is the editorial page of
The Wall Street Journal, which pounds away at President Clinton so shrilly that
it often seems on the edge of clinical hysteria.

The Journal's editor, Robert L. Bartley, was on NBC's "Meet the Press" in March.
David Broder of The Washington Post told him that his editorials read as if "You
really don't accept the legitimacy of Bill Clinton's being in the Presidency."
Mr. Bartley replied: "Well, he won the election with 43 percent of the vote."

Mr. Bartley, here is some news for you: In your heroine Margaret Thatcher's
three great election victories, her Conservative Party averaged 42.9 percent of
the vote; Abraham Lincoln in 1860 had 40 percent.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1004 words



International   A3-15

SOUTH AFRICAN BATON PASSED
President F. W. de Klerk conceded defeat with dignity in South Africa's
election, and Nelson Mandela of the African National Congress accepted victory
with equal grace as vote counting continued. A1
THE CELEBRATIONS BEGIN
As Nelson Mandela claimed his presidential victory, joy swept the black ghettoes
of South Africa, with crowds singing and dancing, fireworks and applause.  A1
The spirit of the election, not the letter, its author says. A14
More violence in Natal after a respite for voting. A15
AID PACKAGE FOR PALESTINIANS
The World Bank announced a $1.2 billion aid package to help the Palestinians
achieve self-rule in the Gaza Strip and Jericho, with programs ranging from
sewers to housing to health facilities. A1
Israeli and P.L.O negotiators will meet their deadline. A7
U.N. EFFORT ON RWANDA
The United Nations is asking African nations if they would send troops to a
peacekeeping operation in Rwanda, with another attempt under way to start peace
talks. A3
DISAPPOINTMENT IN HUNGARY
Hungary invited foreign investment as Communism fell, but with a presidential
election coming and with the economy lagging, many are accusing the Government
of selling the country's patrimony. A12
A PRIME MINISTER'S BUSINESS
With Silvio Berlusconi set to become Italy's next Prime Minister, his future
seems clear. What is less clear is the future of the company he owns, Fininvest,
which has struggled with $2.3 billion in debt. D1

The Polish Airlines modernization attracts American carriers. D6
A German controversy over a ruling to ease drug laws. A12
No progress on human rights in a U.S.-China meeting. A8
Washington is reconsidering whether to use force in Haiti. A3
Goa Journal: On the wrong track in India.  A4

National   A16-20, B8

RULING ON CITY WASTE
The Supreme Court ruled that toxic residue created by burning waste in municipal
incinerators must be treated as hazardous and not dumped in ordinary landfills.
A1
SETBACK FOR INCINERATORS
Experts said the Supreme Court decision could hamper cities planning to build
incinerators by increasing the cost of design and giving fodder to opponents of
the plants.  A18
KEVORKIAN IS ACQUITTED
A Michigan jury cleared Dr. Jack Kevorkian of charges that he had violated a
state law prohibiting assisted suicide by helping a terminally ill man take his
life.  A1
MORE DELAYS FOR AIRPORT
The troubled Denver International Airport is still not ready for business,
officials said, and no new opening date has been set.  A16
FEW OPT FOR IMPLANT
More than a year after the contraceptive Norplant was made available to students
at a Baltimore high school, few girls have taken up the offer.  A16
SHORTER LIST FOR COURT
President Clinton and his senior aides narrowed the search for a Supreme Court
nominee to three or four candidates after a long meeting, Government officials
said.  A16
FIRST LADY'S ROLE IN TRAVEL AFFAIR
An investigation into dismissals at the White House travel office portrayed
Hillary Clinton as having a more active role in the shake-up than previously
reported.  B8
A DEMOCRATIC DEFECTOR?
Washington Talk: Senator Richard Shelby of Alabama has long been considered a
Democrat on the verge of crossing the aisle. The talk has recently grown louder.
B8
PUSHING FOR GUN BILL
President Clinton tried to persuade wavering members of the House to support
legislation to ban the manufacture of 19 types of semiautomatic weapons.  B8
ADS FOR HEALTH PLAN
Supporters of a Canadian-style system of government-financed health insurance
announced a new advertising campaign, hoping to build on their success in a
recent grass-roots campaign on behalf of the idea in California.  B8


Metro Digest   B1

DEATH OF A FAMILY
For 27 years Abraham Meyers drove without a license, accumulating a long list of
suspensions and arrests. On Sunday his car hit four members of a family, killing
three. A1
Business Digest D1
Arts/Entertainment C15-20
A meeting of the Arab museum world.  C15
Action-film producer on her life and works.  C15
Music: Two concerts by Faust.  C16
Diedre Murray.  C16
"Dominican Roots." C19
Dance: Boston Ballet in a new work by Tharp.  C15
Books: Grace Paley's stories.  C19
Television: Update on the new Russia.  C20
Fashion B9
Coming back around to Blass.
Science C1-14
Fossil evidence shows how the whale returned to the sea.  C1
Male hormones help shape women, too, in mind and body.  C1
A scientist who leaped from yeast studies to cancer research.  C1
Theory seeks to explain why immune defenses fail in AIDS.  C3
Scientists are seeking more new species in Vietnam.  C4
Q&A C5
Genetically engineered mice turn out human antibodies.  C6
Personal Computers C8
Peripherals C9
Obituaries B10
Richard Scarry, best-selling author and illustrator of children's books.
Oliver Cope, a surgeon and professor at Harvard Medical School.
Sports B11-17
HOME RUN MYSTERY
Baseballs are flying out of major league ball parks in record numbers and people
are searching for the reasons why.  A1
Baseball: O'Neill in a groove. B11
9 unearned runs in third inning sink Mets. B13
Basketball: The deep Knicks. B11
Pacers sweep Magic. B15
Columns: Berkow on violence. B11
TV Sports B14
Football: Moore's new role. B14
Hockey: Rangers' Noonan reflects his roots. B14
Devils fighting for fans, too. B14
Sharks continues upset run. B14
Horse Racing: The Derby's dress rehearsal. B11
Sports People B16
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23
Editorials
Shaking up the schools.
Demand action on weapons.
Horror in Rwanda, shame in U.N.
Letters
Russell Baker: Gone with the Unum.
A. M. Rosenthal: Are Arabs ready for peace?
Yirmiyahu Yovel: Understanding terrorism.
Richard Rhodes: Atomic spies, or atomic lies?
Amy Knight: The man who wasn't there.
$500 million.

Chronicle B7 Chess C14 Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Scientists Hope More New Species Will Be Discovered in Vietnam

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Science Desk;  The Environment Page

LENGTH: 1155 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


LURKING in the dense rain forests and mountains of Vietnam, many previously
unknown animal species may remain to be discovered, and naturalists hope to
identify some of them before the rapid expansion of human settlement drives them
to extinction.

The recent discovery of two new hoofed creatures in the Vietnamese wilderness
has spurred the search for others.

Last month the Swiss-based World Wildlife Fund for Nature announced the
discovery of a new species of muntjac or barking deer in Nghe Tinh Province in
Vietnam. The new muntjac is distinguished from other muntjacs by its large size
(about 100 pounds) and long, curving canine teeth.

The deer was the second new species to be discovered in the Vu Quang Nature
Reserve, which lies southwest of the city of Vinh near the border of Laos. In
May 1992, scientists identified a new species of wild cattle, the Vu Quang ox,
whose sharp, backward-pointing antlers are somewhat similar to those of a goat.

But both species are so elusive that scientists from the Ministry of Forestry
and from the World Wildlife Fund have never seen live specimens. The new barking
deer and the Vu Quang ox are known only from heads, horns and skins collected by
local T'ai tribal hunters.

"It's really sad that these species are seen only as dead hunting trophies,"
said David L. Hulse, an American conservationist who is the World Wildlife
Fund's representative in Vietnam.

[Across the border in Laos, however, scientists carrying out a biological survey
under the auspices of the Wildlife Conservation Society have found a live male
muntjac deer in captivity, Dr. Alan Rabinowitz, the Asia director for the
conservation group, said in New York.]

Tests Show Uniqueness



 Tissue recovered from the skins of both the muntjac and the Vu Quang ox has
been subjected to DNA analysis, establishing that the animals belong to
previously unknown species; the Vu Quang ox represents a new genus as well as a
new species.

In the hope of learning more about these two new species, and perhaps
discovering others, photographers under contract to the World Wildlife Fund plan
to set up "photo traps" along forest trackways in the Vu Quang Reserve.
Automatic cameras concealed along well-traveled tracks will be triggered by
pressure-sensitive switches on the ground or infrared photoelectric cells, and
scientists will periodically bring exposed film to Hanoi to look for
discoveries.

The superficial similarity of this automatic sensing system to the network of
sensors dropped by American planes along the Ho Chi Minh Trail during the
Vietnam War has made some Vietnamese officials apprehensive, Mr. Hulse said, but
he believes the project will receive approval. The Ho Chi Minh Trail was a
network of trackways and roads extending from North Vietnam through Laos into
the south, by which Hanoi infiltrated troops and supplies to its units fighting
the South Vietnamese forces during the 1960's and 1970's. The old trail lay
within a few dozen miles of the Vu Quang Reserve.

The scientists have no guarantee that their photo traps will be any more
effective in capturing images of animals than were the sensors laid by the
Americans in halting traffic on the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

Mr. Hulse, referring to a type of wild cattle, said: "We tested the system on
one trackway used by local gaurs, and when we retrieved the film, there were no
exposures, even though the camera was working perfectly. Then we found that the
gaurs somehow realized something alien was present. They would approach only to
a certain distance from the camera and would then leave the trail to avoid the
photo trap."

Problems With Elephants



 Because Communist forces occasionally used elephants as pack animals along the
Ho Chi Minh Trail, elephants became targets for air strikes by United States and
South Vietnamese planes, and the war reduced elephant herds. More serious for
the elephants these days, Mr. Hulse said, is Vietnam's population explosion,
which is rapidly overwhelming the habitat needed by elephants, tigers and other
animals.

Some elephants, which are ordinarily peaceable creatures, have recently rampaged
through several Vietnamese hamlets, causing damage to houses. "It's a sure sign
that elephants are becoming confused, disoriented and desperate because of the
logging and other human activity that's cutting into their ranges," Mr. Hulse
said.

A visiting Indian elephant expert, Shanthini Dawson, is assessing Vietnam's
elephant population, which is believed to have declined to 300 to 600.

Tigers are still hunted in Vietnam for their skins, claws and the bones, which
are believed by some Chinese to have therapeutic properties. The hunting,
coupled with the declining habitat, has reduced the tiger population to about
200, said Dr. Vo Quy, a conservationist at the University of Hanoi.

Another endangered target of local poachers is the Vietnamese rhinoceros. A
Vietnamese rhinoceros horn can be smuggled across the Chinese border and sold
for about $5,000 as medicine. The World Wildlife Fund has printed automobile
bumper stickers in Vietnamese, urging people to protect "our" rhinos, but this
is a country where private ownership of automobiles is still rare.

A Monkey in Danger



 Vietnamese poachers also illegally sell pangolins, rare monkeys, and other
mammals to buyers in China. The Tonkin snub-nosed leaf monkey, a small primate
with distinctive black and white markings, has been hunted almost to extinction,
and only about 140 of these animals are believed to remain alive in the wild. A
minimum of 200 will probably be needed for the species to survive, said Roger
Cox, a South African conservationist working with the wildlife fund.

The Vietnamese handicraft industry consumes enormous amounts of tortoise and sea
turtle shells for jewelry and trinkets, and some of these reptiles are now
endangered. The yellow terrapin, once found in the Vu Quong Reserve, has become
extremely rare, and other victims of hunting are such marine turtles as
hawksbills, oliver ridleys, leatherbacks and green turtles.

But conservationists see some hope.

Vietnam has established nine national parks, in which animals are protected by
about 80 forest guards.

"The trouble is," Mr. Hulse said, "conservation is losing young people, who
would rather find well-paid careers as traders than go in for science or
protection of the environment."

Still, the possibility of developing national parks as "ecotourist" attractions
for free-spending foreign visitors may help save some endangered wildlife, he
said.

"We have to try everything we can," he said. "We'll never be able to prove that
conservation efforts have helped, but if some forests are still standing, it's
all to the good. I think it's possible for human beings to live in forests
without destroying the local ecology. It takes the right management and some
restraint, that's all.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 987 words



International A3-15

ACCORD ON GAZA AND JERICHO
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman,
reached agreement in Cairo on the final details of of Palestinian self-rule in
the Gaza Strip and the West Bank town of Jericho. The accord cleared the way for
a signing ceremony today.  A1

Caution prevailed in Gaza as negotiators discussed terms.  A15


Jericho sedately spruced up in preparation for the transition.  A14

SOUTH AFRICA, THE SURVIVOR
News analysis: The rainbow memory of South Africa's first open elections may
dissolve in political rivalry and a realization that most people voted along
racial lines. But for now, citizens are buoyed by evidence of their own
resilience; South Africa has endured crises that would have crippled another
nation.  A1

Nelson Mandela conferred on forming a new government.A8

CLINTON WARNS HAITI'S ARMY
In an effort to step up the pressure on the Haitian military leadership,
President Clinton warned that "it is time for them to go" and refused to rule
out military action unless they resigned.  A10

Diplomats doubt sanctions will help restore Haiti's ousted leader.  A11

U.N. CHIEF WANTS RWANDA INQUIRY
As fighting raged in the Rwandan capital, the United Nations Secretary General
asked his new human rights commissioner to play a major role in trying to
investigate and stop the massacres.  A9

BACKING FOR PERU'S LEADER FADES
President Alberto Fujimori seems to be losing some of the support he had
mustered by cracking down on the Shining Path rebels and reigniting the economy.
Voters seem paricularly unhappy over the Government's handling of a human rights
case involving a military hit squad.  A3

U.N. ADMITS SERBS ARE RESISTING
Ten days after Serbian forces were supposed to have complied with a NATO
ultimatum to withdraw from the Bosnian town of Gorazde, a United Nations
official acknowledged that problems remained over their compliance.  A13

Mr. Clinton defended his handling of foreign trouble spots.  A12

Blumenau Journal: An affluent Brazilian region raises barriers.  A4

National A16-21

GUN BILL GIVEN LITTLE CHANCE
A bill to ban the sale of 19 assault weapons faced almost certain defeat as a
vote approached.  A1

OPEN BATTLE OVER THE C.I.A.
A struggle long fought in secrecy erupted publicly as Congressional overseers of
the C.I.A. battled its director and pushed a plan to put spy catching in the
hands of F.B.I.  A1

PRIME-TIME HEALTH CARE SLOT
A leading health-care philanthropy bought two hours of prime time on NBC, asking
the network to produce an ambitious examination of health care reform.  A1

COMPROMISE EMPLOYER MANDATE
In a compromise, the A.M.A. said companies with 100 or more employees should be
required to buy health insurance for workers.  A20

DEBATE OVER ASSISTED SUICIDE
Dr. Jack Kevorkian's acquittal has resolved his legal status, but the debate
over assisted suicide remains unsettled on many fronts.  A16

EVERGLADES BILL BECOMES LAW
A new Florida law resolves a long-running dispute over agricultural pollution of
the Everglades.  A16

SPACECRAFT MISSION IS RESCUED
Under Congressional pressure, the Pentagon found $3.2 million to allow the tiny
Clementine spacecraft to complete its mission.  A18

U.S. THREATENS CANCER STUDY
Federal officials threatened to cut off funds to a flawed breast cancer project
unless the project's leadership is revamped.  A18

RU-486 AS 'MORNING AFTER' PILL
The French abortion pill will be tested as an emergency contraceptive for the
first time in North America, university officials announced.  A18

ASSIGNING WOMEN TO NAVY SHIPS
The Navy's new top admiral said he would try to accelerate the assigning of
women to all ships.  A20

AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL BILL HALTED
The Administration, facing opposition from Congress, halted plans for
legislation creating a Government corporation to operate the nation's air
traffic control system.  A21

TIMES LIBEL SUIT DISMISSED
A Federal appeals court, reversing its own opinion, threw out a libel suit
against The New York Times.  A21

Education Page B8-9

Threats to reduce donations to the United Negro College Fund.  B9

Colleges break the $100,000 mark for a four-year degree.  B9

Metro Digest B1

LOSERS IN THE CITY BUDGET
Mayor Giuliani refused to give the schools system an extra $4.2 billion that
Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he needs to build new schools to relieve
overcrowding over the next five years.  A1

MILITARY RECRUITING HAMPERED
New York's Court of Appeals became the first top state court to rule that school
boards can ban military recruiters from their schools because of the Pentagon's
policy of discrimination against homosexuals.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-12

Vietnam: A taste trip from north to south.  C1
A night chefs wear sequins.  C1

Health Page C13

Personal Health: Hazards of twisting the neck.
A clinic pays Medicaid patients to keep appointments.

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

A country-music mecca in Turkey, Tex.  C15
Mostly Mozart may end.  C15
Contemporary-art auction at Christie's.  C19
Ticket brokers are subpoenaed.  C20
Theater: "Moonshot and Cosmos." C15
Music: Alfred Brendel recital.  C15
Books: Memoir of a First Mother.  C21
Television: Kuralt stays put.  C22

Sports B10-16

Obituaries B7

Ashley A. Boone Jr., movie marketing executive.
Jean Brown, art collector.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Free at last!
Cynical ploy by House Democrats.
Kernels of truth.

Letters

Bob Herbert: Fasting for Haiti.
Anna Quindlen: Life after death.
Margaret Thatcher: Stop the Serbs. Now. For good.

Chronicle B8

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In School;
What the faculty agonized over, students take as a matter of course at UMass

BYLINE: By Michael Winerip

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 5;  National Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


It has taken years of work for professors to put into place a cultural diversity
course requirement for University of Massachusetts/Boston students.

"The Diversity Subcommittee of the Academic Affairs Committee is responsible for
approving whether courses meet cultural diversity content standards," said Prof.
Estelle Disch, the college's coordinator for diversity awareness.

Beginning with the class of '96, students in the College of Arts and Sciences
must take at least two courses that have been approved as meeting the cultural
diversity guidelines.

"If a professor submits a course for approval that deals with gender one week
and social class another, but these issues are not infused, we'd have to say
no," said Professor Disch. "We'd want the issues of diversity addressed every
week."

The diversity push began in 1989 when several professors formed the Diversity
Awareness Working Group and held 20 Diversity Awareness Workshops. There was
much debate on how strict diversity guidelines should be. "Some of us wanted a
central committee to certify which teachers were qualified to teach cultural
diversity," said Professor Disch. "Totally nixed."

There was a proposal that all certified diversity courses would have to deal
with seven formally identified diversity areas: race, class, sex, age, sexual
orientation, physical ability and culture. "That was nixed, too," said Professor
Disch.

"We were constantly amazed at the number of meetings we had to attend in order
to get the diversity requirement passed," she said. "The usual governance
meetings were the tip of the iceberg. Lobbying individual faculty members over
long lunches or phone calls became a way of life."

Supporters got help from the Ford Foundation, which gave $150,000 to train
faculty to teach these issues.

Some professors still resisted, including Peter Ittig, a business teacher who
called the requirement "part of the political correctness party line." But the
Diversity Awareness Working Group's advance work paid off. The requirement
passed faculty and university governing bodies and took effect in the fall of
'92.

And the reaction on campus today? "Doesn't seem to come up," concedes Professor
Ittig.

While the cultural diversity/political correctness debate is usually written
about in the context of flare-ups at elite schools, that is probably not
typical. About a quarter of all colleges now have diversity requirements,
according to the American Council on Education. UMass/Boston, a working-class,
commuter university with 29 percent minority enrollment, may be more typical.
Here most students work to put themselves through college. Students take a
practical view of education.

"This diversity thing is good," said Tim Weineck, a white junior. "You need it
to function. You at least have to know where they're coming from, their mindset
so you don't insult -- whatever. Here it's in your face; you have to deal with
it."

"I came from white-bread America," said Dennis Gilson, who works for the City of
Boston. 'My boss is an African-American woman. I'm conservative, but I believe
these courses are great. Out in the work area, if you can't get along, you won't
do well."

Esther Kingston-Mann, a history professor who teaches one of the 80 approved
diversity courses in the College of Arts and Sciences, says the requirement
makes for better teachers. "When I was in college we used this textbook, 'The
History of the Modern World,' and it was really a history of Europe," she
recalls.

She teaches modern world history, and says it took four years to teach herself
the material she needed to incorporate Africa, Asia and South America into her
course. "I feel it's dishonest to teach a modern world history course that's
only about Europe," she says. "I don't want to do it. I don't think it has
anything to do with political correctness to say you want a more complete,
accurate view of the world."

The professors say they are constantly amazed by how differently their students
see the world. The other day in Peter Kiang's "Asian Minorities in America"
class, the topic was media stereotypes, and Danielle Ngo, who was born in
Vietnam, said: "In the old Vietnam war movies, you'd watch and there weren't
Vietnamese -- they'd have any Asians playing Vietnamese. Now they're a little
better about getting Vietnamese to play Vietnamese. It's better for our race."

In music history, Prof. Reebee Garofalo teaches the strengths and weaknesses of
each musical form, and the dangers of being too quick to say one takes more
talent than another. In one case study, he showed a tape of Pat Boone singing
"Ain't That a Shame," the song Fats Domino made famous. "Notice Pat Boone
snapping his fingers," said Professor Garofalo. "He gets the wrong beat. He's
got it backwards.

For his philosophy course on multiculturalism, Prof. Larry Blum took students to
see "Schindler's List." Evonti Anderson, who is black, saw it a second time,
with two friends from the Nation of Islam. "Afterwards we talked about seeing
how the Jews caught hell," said Mr. Anderson. "We weren't the only ones being
done to in the world."

"Sometimes you only look at your own struggles," said James Paschall, another
black student taking the philosophy course. "I wish we could take what we learn
in Professor Blum's class and let it cover the world."

"Maybe I'm being idealistic," said Michelle Berrong, who is paying for college
by working working as a dental assistant. "But these courses might reduce some
of the hate and tension in the world. That does sound too idealistic, doesn't
it?"

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam: A Taste Trip From North To South

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 2819 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


CREME caramel is as easy to find in Ho Chi Minh City as it is in Paris.
Baguettes poke out of baskets in every market and on every street corner, and
from Haiphong, northern Vietnam's largest port, to the Mekong delta, in the
south, French pastry look-alikes adorn bakery windows.

Everywhere, too, the crumbling French colonial architecture lends a European air
to this hauntingly beautiful country. From the aquamarine waters to the
vibrant-green rice paddies, from the mountain ranges to the deep jungles,
Vietnam comes in hundreds of shades of green, one more seductive than the next.
No wonder the French, whose century-long rule of Vietnam ended in 1954, still
love it and are returning in droves as tourists. Americans are on their way and
their welcome will be warm.

When a tourist is asked "Where you from?" and the answer is "America," the
questioner breaks out in a grin and often responds with "Bravo!" or "Glad you
are back."

Americans began to trickle back to Vietnam even before the embargo was lifted
earlier this year -- some in search of their past, others simply curious about a
country they had known only through pictures of war and devastation during the
12 years the United States was involved in the civil war. If they know anything
about Vietnamese culture, it is probably through the food served at restaurants
opened by refugees from that war who settled in the United States.

The food reflects the country's history and geography, blending the flavors of
China, France and India -- through Thailand, Laos and Cambodia -- in a way that
is unique to Vietnam. Made with ingredients that reflect a yearlong growing
season, meals always combine cooked foods with fresh greens and herbs. The
cuisine is aromatic and spicy but subtle, with clean, bright flavors. There are
noodles and bean curd from China; curries from India, and potatoes, asparagus,
watercress, artichokes, avocados, corn and tomatoes from Europe.

Central to the cooking are lemon grass, shallots, scallions, cilantro, lime
leaves and galangal, a relative of ginger. The food is almost always accompanied
by nuoc cham, a condiment made with nuoc mam (fish sauce), garlic, sugar, hot
peppers and lime. For color and texture, carrots, papaya, kohlrabi or white
radish is added.

The regional differences in Vietnamese food have generally been lost in their
overseas voyages, and there has even been a blurring of the lines in Vietnam.
Compared with the food in the north, the southern food is spicier, sweeter and
oilier and also contains more exotic fruits and vegetables, like the incredibly
sweet durian, a fruit so overwhelmingly scented it should be opened outdoors.

As one travels south from Hanoi, the first place Western vegetables show up is
in Hue, once the imperial city and still famous for its pagodas and the Perfume
River, which divides it. The temperate climate of the highlands around Hue is
more hospitable to asparagus and artichokes than is the intense heat of the
south.

Food overflows the stalls in the fabulous markets found in every city. Rice,
whether as grain, flour, paper, cakes or noodles, is the diet staple. The
Vietnamese love both pho and banh cuon, or ravioli, for breakfast and lunch. Pho
(pronounced fah) is a rich beef, pork or chicken broth filled with rice noodles
and meats or fish balls. The pho is served, like so much Vietnamese food, with
sparkling fresh greens -- coriander, scallions bean sprouts, slices of
incendiary peppers and the ubiquitous nuoc mam, which is to Vietnam what soy
sauce is to China. The banh cuon are made from rice flour and filled with a
ground pork mixture.

For the culinary tourist, perseverance is essential, particularly in the north,
where good restaurant food exists but generally not in places for tourists. Some
of the best food is found in the unlikeliest of places: at a seaside restaurant
after a swim in the China Sea, or at a one-room shop-house in Hoi An, near Da
Nang.

But only the most daring tourist is likely to try Vietnamese specialties like
dog, snake wine, Java mouse, braised goat testicle, over-easy fried fox meat and
grilled porcupine. Fortunately, a visitor is unlikely to be offered any rice
paddy rats, considered a delicacy because they dine only on rice.

As Vietnam begins to fill up not only with tourists but also with entrepreneurs,
the availability of good food has been increasing. Fancy new restaurants --
Vietnamese-French, French, Italian, Thai, Chinese and American -- are springing
up every day in Ho Chi Minh City. There are still beggars, some tiny children,
throughout the countryside, on every street corner, even in restaurants.

For now, most of Vietnam looks as it must have when it was a French colony:
Hanoi is stolid and gray; Ho Chi Minh City, sunny and bustling. Though most
Americans over 35 associate Hue, Haiphong, Da Nang and the Mekong delta with
bombs, mines and the Tet offensive, no signs of devastation were evident during
our two-week trek.

Ho Chi Minh City is 30 years behind Taiwan and Thailand, frequent travelers say,
and Hanoi is 30 years behind Ho Chi Minh City. But this country, with a 90
percent literacy rate, could become just like its neighbors. There may not be
much time left to see the banyan trees and the frangipani without skyscrapers or
pollution.

Only Ho Chi Minh City, which locals continue to call Saigon, is beginning to
show the signs of the joint ventures with businesses from industrialized
countries. The waterfront is lined with cranes; many buildings are topped by
signs in English; the first-class hotels, some of them quite new, have long
limousines parked in front. Many places are now accepting American credit cards.

Throughout the country, the barely passable roads are clogged with bicycles,
cyclos (bicycle-driven rickshaws), motor scooters, motorcycles, some trucks and
an occasional water buffalo. In Ho Chi Minh City new cars are being added to the
mix. Many of the motor scooters and bicycles are ridden by young women in the
traditional ao dai -- pants and long fitted tunics slit up the sides, worn with
long gloves and straw hats to shield them from the sun.

Dodging traffic is an acquired skill.  In one near accident, someone barely
escaped a collision with a bicyclist and a load of spring onions that the laws
of physics say it is impossible to carry. But lots of unlikely items are carried
on bicycles and motor scooters -- tree trunks and live pigs on their backs,
trussed on a sling behind the driver, on their way to market.

The Communist Government began to develop a market economy in the late 1980's,
and everyone, it seems, has something to sell, even if it's only three glutinous
rice balls stuffed with sugar or a puff of tobacco from a long bamboo pipe.

Tiny one-room restaurants, sometimes with outdoor seats, are everywhere. Often,
especially in the north, the tables inside are put together after the last
customer is served and are covered with mats and turned into beds for the
family.

In Hoi An, an old fishing village near Da Nang, we stopped at the Caolau Cafe,
one of these all-purpose rooms, for a snack of banh loc, steamed tapioca cakes
filled with shrimp or meat. When complimented on the food, the owner invited us
to come back for a dinner cooked by his mother. After too many greasy,
undistinguished meals arranged by the official tour guides, this offer was
clearly one to accept.

The meal was worth every dong, which added up to $5. Among the dishes were a
fascinating stir-fry of fish, tree ears, tomato, onion and sour Chinese cabbage
and another of ground peanuts, hot pepper and water spinach, which is a more
delicate version of Western spinach.

The kitchens at many of these restaurants, particularly in the north, are quite
primitive. Most of the cooking and preparation is done by people squatting,
working over braziers and chopping or cleaning over boards or large plastic bags
set on the floor. The closer to Ho Chi Minh City, the more erect the workers and
the more familiar the kitchens become.

Unlike the former Soviet Union, where many ingredients are scarce, Vietnam has a
12-month growing season and plenty of food. Two pounds of tomatoes cost 25
cents, but the average annual income is only $200.

Depending on the part of the country, there are two or three rice harvests. The
entire process is done by hand, most of it by women wearing the traditional
conical hats to protect them from the sun. In many places the rice kernels are
spread out to dry on the shoulders of the highways.

It isn't a shortage of food that makes it a challenge to find a good restaurant
in the country, especially in the north; it's the lack of trained chefs. "For a
long time the people were lucky to have enough rice to fill them up," said
Germaine Swanson, who was born in Vietnam. The owner of Germaine's a Pan-Asian
restaurant in Washington, she was the leader of our group of five women.

"There was a lack of interest in cooking," she continued. "Now it is better, but
the cooks who worked for wealthy families, for French families or in the
restaurants are either too old or gone. In the north, particularly, there are no
chefs. There is no sense of cooking."

There is, though, a history of and a love for snacking. Street food has always
been part of the culture. It is sold from baskets hung from a pole balanced
across the shoulders, at the markets, from the one-room home-cum-restaurants and
from restaurants that spring up magically each morning on sidewalks and
disappear late at night, but not before the dishes are washed in tubs on the
sidewalk.

There isn't much refrigeration in Vietnam, so people shop every day, and there
is at least one large market in every city along with many smaller neighborhood
places.

Some markets are in shed-type buildings; many are open air. Even though the
floors are dirt, the buildings decrepit and the space small, the women sweep
their places clean with a footlong broom many times a day. The only real
drawback to hygiene-minded Westerners are the flies in some of the markets. One
enterprising vendor solved the problem with lighted incense sticks in her sugar.

The largest markets, where everything from chicken wire to snakes is sold, are a
riot of beautifully arranged colors, textures, shapes and sizes. Many vendors
specialize: one sold only pigs heads. The food is astonishingly varied: grated
green papaya, dried sea cucumbers, mounds of sliced fried shallots, live ducks
and chickens, live fish and shrimp the size of small spiny lobsters, Mekong
champagne and four-foot-high plastic bags filled with tree ear fungus, but also
Kiss Me toilet paper and French's mustard. Even before the embargo was lifted
earlier this year, American products found their way into the country.

Eating in the markets is not only common but also often more rewarding than
eating in a restaurant. Anywhere, though, it is best to eat only cooked food
unless, like some fruits and vegetables, it can be peeled; to drink bottled
water; to carry your own chopsticks, and to wash out all bowls and glasses with
hot tea. It was at one of the markets in Hanoi that a couple of us tried betel
nuts, made famous by Bloody Mary in "South Pacific," who was so named because
the betel nuts turn the mouth red. Betel nuts are the fruit of a tree that
provides a mild stimulant. Both of the experimenters got lightheaded and had red
mouths. They also attracted quite a crowd of vendors, laughing and pointing at
the crazy Westerners.

Nothing is wasted here. In Da Lat, a charming city in the mountains that is
always filled with honeymooners, coconut is grated at the market and the shells
are turned into brushes or used as fuel or as ladles or as containers for honey.

Some cities have their own specialties. There was a trip to West Lake in Hanoi
for the banh tom, which are shrimp cakes made with shrimp, grated sweet potatoes
and rice flour. More interesting was the opportunity to gawk at the
million-dollar houses that are being built around the lake for Vietnamese and
foreign business people who are making money in joint ventures.

In Hue a restaurant run by a family of deaf-mutes was justly famous for banh
khoai, pancakes made of rice flour with shrimp, pork, bean sprouts and turmeric,
served with nuoc cham, green figs, peanut sauce, green banana and hot peppers.
Hoi An is known for its delicious square-sided rice noodles made with special
well water available only there.

Vietnamese sweets do not appeal to all Americans. But aficionados of gelatinous
food like tapioca become addicted to the glutinous rice and the tapioca flour
cakes stuffed with bean paste or sugar cubes, and they can find them in every
city. The Vietnamese reserve them for special occasions, preferring for dessert
some of their extraordinary fruit like mangosteens, loquats, lychees, saboutiers
(like pears), jackfruit, mangoes and oranges with dark green skins.

There's only one drawback to such a sensuous trip through Vietnam: it is
impossible to recapture the flavors, textures, colors or sights and sounds back
home. They are never successfully transplanted.

Favorites On the Menu

HERE are some of the most popular dishes in Vietnam. Many are available in
Vietnamese restaurants in the United States.

CHA GIO Spring rolls made of rice paper and filled with crab, pork, bean
sprouts, mung bean threads (vermicelli), carrots and onion, deep fried and
served with nuoc cham, a dipping sauce.

MUC XAO Squid sauteed with onion, garlic, tomatoes, leeks or French celery.

NEM BI Shredded roast pork and shredded pork skin mixed with roasted rice
powder, mint, coriander and lettuce and rolled in rice paper.

NEM CHUA Rice paper wrapped around sour sausage, lettuce, mint, coriander and
fragrant shiso leaves and dipped in nuoc cham.

PHO Meal-size portions of noodle soup with thick rich beef, pork or chicken
broth and noodles, along with any combination of chicken, beef, pork, shrimp and
fish balls accompanied by lime wedges, bean sprouts, coriander, hot chilies,
scallions and nuoc mam (fish sauce).

Fish With Nuts and Herbs

CHA CA, a popular fish dish in Vietnam, is cooked on a charcoal stove at the
table. In the absence of a brazier or gas grill that can be put on the table, it
can be cooked on the stove.

 Cha Ca
Total time: 20 minutes plus 2 hours to marinate

 3 pounds cleaned monkfish
 4 large shallots
 3 large cloves garlic
 1/2 of small onion
 1 tablespoon turmeric
 2 tablespoons plus 1/4 cup canola oil
 1/4 teaspoon white pepper
 1 bunch green onions, white part removed and green part sliced into tiny rings
 1 1/2 bunches dill, minced
 6cups cooked Vietnamese rice noodles
 1 small bunch mint, leaves removed from stems
 1 small bunch shiso leaves, if available
 1 small bunch basil, leaves removed from stems
 1/2 cup dry-roasted unsalted peanuts
 Nuoc cham (see recipe).

1. Wash the monkfish, and cut each piece into slices 1/2 inch thick.

2. With the food processor running, add the shallots, garlic and onion,
processing until the ingredients are finely chopped. Add the turmeric, 2
tablespoons oil and pepper, and continue processing until mixture is a fairly
smooth paste.

3. Mix the monkfish slices with the turmeric mixture and allow to marinate,
covered, in the refrigerator for at least two hours or overnight.

4. When ready to cook, either prepare a charcoal fire or use a top-of-stove
grill. Arrange fish on a greased two-piece wire grill to make them easy to flip.
Grill only long enough to brown a little on both sides.

5.  Meanwhile, heat the remaining 1/4 cup of oil in a pan that can be taken to
the table. Add 2/3 of the scallions and dill. When fish is ready, arrange it on
the scallions and dill and top with remaining scallions and dill. Cook the fish
in the oil at the table until done.

For each serving, put some rice noodles in a bowl and top them with the
monkfish, then sprinkle with torn mint, shiso, basil leaves, peanuts and nuoc
cham.

Yield: 6 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 615 calories, 25 grams fat, 55
milligrams cholesterol, 1,290 milligrams sodium, 45 grams protein, 60 grams
carbohydrate.

 Nuoc Cham
Total time: 10 minutes

 1 tablespoon shredded carrots
 1 tablespoon shredded daikon (Japanese radish)
 1/2 cup nuoc mam (fish sauce)
 1/3 cup water
 1/4 cup lime juice
 2 tablespoons sugar
 1/2 teaspoon minced hot red or green pepper
 1/2 teapoon finely minced garlic

1. Sprinkle salt on carrots and daikon to tenderize them.

2. Combine remaining ingredients. Rinse salt off carrots and daikon, then drain
on paper towel. Combine all ingredients. Serve with cha ca.

Yield: 6 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 40 calories, 0 grams fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 1,240 milligrams sodium, 1 gram protein, 9 grams
carbohydrate.


LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fox meat? Of course: Vietnam's markets, like this one in Ho Chi
Minh City, offer everything from papaya to snakes; The staple: Rice is harvested
by hand, mostly by women. (Photographs by Mary Silverman for The New York Times)
(pg. C1); Beep-beep: Ho Chi Minh City, already clogged with bicycles, food-laden
carts, motor scooters and motorcyles, is also filling up with the new cars of
business people. (Mary Silverman for The New York Times); No frills: The Mai Anh
Pho Ga restaurant in Hanoi; Efficiency: Kitchen of Viet Huong restaurant in
Hanoi; Nap time? Diners outside Mai Anh Pho Ga in Hanoi. (Lois Raimondo for The
New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 574 words



Markets

The United States teamed up with the central banks of 16 nations to buy dollars
in a global campaign intended to show investors that the Clinton Administration
is serious about maintaining the dollar's value. [Page A1.]

Stock prices were mixed as traders closely followed the turbulence in the bond
and currency markets. The Dow Jones industrial average fell 16.66 points, to
3,697.75. [D10.]

Treasury prices and yields bounced up and down as investors showed skepticism
over the Federal Reserve's defense of the dollar. The yield on the 30-year bond
slipped to 7.33 percent. [D17.]

Beef prices tumbled to their lowest levels since December 1991, as rich supplies
weighed on the market. [D20.]

Companies

The torrid growth of auto sales eased in April, climbing 4.9 percent. Auto
makers attributed the slowdown to factors including shortages of some
best-selling models, rising interest rates and bad weather. But industry
analysts were pleased with the results. [D1.]

LDDS Communications is offering $2 billion to acquire Wiltel Communications
Systems. [D1.]

National Health Laboratories agreed to buy Allied Clinical Laboratories in a
deal valued at about $220 million. [D4.]

Southwest Airlines started its own computer reservations system to combat moves
by rival carriers to curb travel agents' access to its schedules and fares.
[D4.]

Time Warner Cable has put into effect a hiring freeze and plans to cut capital
expenses by $100 million this year because of rate cuts imposed by Federal
regulators. [D4.]

Forty-six companies have responded to a challenge by Northeastern governors to
help reduce packaging waste. [D4.]

 The Economy

Farmers are pushing themselves and their equipment to the limits to get their
spring planting done as quickly as possible. [D1.]

A Congressional study will recommend that the S.E.C. be given broad new powers
to regulate dealers and corporate users of complex financial instruments known
as derivatives. [D1.]

The economy is growing solidly in most of the nation except California, the
Federal Reserve said, as the Government reported a surge in factory orders.
[D19.]

Representative John D. Dingell is investigating an F.C.C. decision to grant
radio licenses free to three companies. [D7.]

The F.D.A. is imposing stricter rules on food labels. [A20.]

 International

A Vietnamese delegation has come to the United States to seek foreign
investment, marking the first such visit since the American trade embargo was
lifted in February. [D1.] Moscow money managers have visited Wall Street in
their search for ways to revive the Russian economy. [D9.]

Spanish police arrested the former governor of the Bank of Spain and the former
chairman of Madrid's stock market on charges of tax fraud. [D2.]

State-run industries in China are diversifying in an effort to deal with
cash-flow problems. [A10.]

Today's Columns

Gaza and Jericho are likely to find their main chance for growth lies in
economic embrace with Israel, even though they are becoming autonomous areas.
Peter Passell: Economic Scene. [D2.]

Japanese investors have been placing their bets on Ford Motor by bidding up the
shares of Mazda, which is 25 percent owned by Ford. Market Place. [D10.]

Occasionally, an advertisement becomes part of the popular culture, succeeding
beyond an agency's wildest dreams. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D5.]

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Gun Debate, Gun Definitions Matter

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section B;   Page 10;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words


The Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms estimates that only one of
every 100 guns in this country is an assault-type weapon.

But in the bureau's criminal investigations, seven of every 100 guns its agents
trace for law-enforcement agencies across the nation turn out to be such
weapons.

This wide statistical disparity is at the heart of the gun-control argument now
raging in the House of Representatives.

"It's the one figure you keep coming back to," John C. Killorin, the bureau's
spokesman, said.

Questions of Purpose

Proponents of a bill to ban the manufacture and importation of 19 assault
weapons -- rifles, pistols and shotguns -- say the disparity proves their
argument that the semiautomatic versions of military assault weapons are
increasingly the weapons of choice for criminals.

They contend that such weapons, while not fully automatic like the genuine
military assault models, are nevertheless far more lethal than the average
hunting or target gun because they trace their lineage to the battlefield.

"These are guns that were fashioned for no other purpose than to kill," said
Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who is the chief
sponsor of the House bill. "They were designed not for hunting or plinking, but
so that the average draftee with no real gun expertise could spray a lot of lead
around in combat. The civilian versions are essentially the same as the military
versions."

The bill's opponents counter that so-called assault weapons, while they may look
more lethal, are in fact no more lethal than guns designed for hunting and
target shooting. They contend that many other guns among the 200 million in the
nation have the same capacity to kill and that in the end, the only way to stop
gun deaths is to control criminals.

Few Real Statistics

"You can take a duck gun or a deer gun or any pistol and fire a lot of shots in
rapid succession, or you can do the same with an assault-type weapon," said Tom
Wyld, a spokesman for the National Rifle Association, the leading gun-owner
group. "The real question is not about guns but whether or not you're a criminal
on the loose."

Which side is right?

There is no easy answer.

For one thing, while proponents of banning many assault weapons say the firearms
are increasingly favored by criminals -- as indicated by the firearms bureau's
investigations -- there are no reliable statistics on what percent of homicides
or holdups can be linked to them.

On the other hand, although opponents of the bill to control such weapons
contend that they are no more lethal than many other firearms, anecdotal
evidence often indicates otherwise. The guns involved in a number of mass
slayings in recent years were assault weapons. Further, police officers report
that more and more drug dealers are resorting to such weapons, though few
departments provide solid specifics.

Design Is Modified

In general, a genuine military assault gun is an automatic weapon, meaning that
so long as its trigger is depressed it will continue to fire until the rounds in
its magazine are exhausted. As such, owning one is limited to people who meet
exceptionally stringent Federal requirements. That means genuine assault weapons
are basically out of the reach of the average American.

But when the design of an assault weapon is modified so it can fire only one
shot at a time -- that is, each shot requires a separate pull of the trigger --
it is said to be semiautomatic andreclassified as an "assault-type" weapon that
can be sold legally.

Such modifications have become popular in the years since the Vietnam War, a war
fought mainly with genuine assault weapons after American combat units became
involved.  Now, just about every gun store stocks several kinds of weapons
modeled on military assault weapons.

Many of these legal assault guns have finely tuned breech mechanisms enabling
the user to fire them nearly as fast as a fully automatic assault weapon simply
by rapidly squeezing the trigger . There are also some other sporting guns that
have unusually fast firing rates.

Matter of Clip Size

Most genuine assault weapons and guns modeled after them are fitted with
magazines or clips holding 15 or more rounds -- a larger capacity than most,
though not all, guns designed strictly for hunting and target shooting. Many
assault weapons also have a handling and aiming grip known as a pistol grip that
is typically positioned behind the trigger.

Finally, most genuine assault guns, and even some imitations, can be fitted with
equipment like bayonets, flash suppressors, grenade launchers and silencers.

Manufacturers of assault weapons say they add these features mainly as
eye-catching selling points, noting that only bayonets are readily available to
the average gun fancier.

The Schumer bill essentially seeks to ban the manufacture and importation of
assault rifles and pistols having detachable magazines holding more than 10
rounds and two or more of these features: folding stock, pistol grip, bayonet
mount, threaded barrel for a flash suppressor or silencer, grenade launcher
mount or a barrel shroud.

Grandfather Clause

Currently, only 19 weapons are covered by that definition. The bill explicitly
exempts 650 other weapons because they are classified as semiautomatic sporting
models unable to use large-capacity magazines or have limited rapid-fire ability
because they are manually operated by bolt, pump or lever action.

The Schumer bill would not cover assault weapons and equipment already owned by
American citizens. Thus, such weapons would almost certainly continue to be a
factor in crime. But presumably if the bill is adopted, such weapons would
become more and more scarce -- and show up less and less frequently at the scene
of crimes.

"I'm not saying this is the be-all and end-all to our gun problem," Mr. Schumer
said. "But you have to start somewhere and this is the most visible place."

Mr. Wyld, the Rifle Association spokesman, disagreed.

"The place to start," he said, "is with the criminal. Put him in jail. Any gun
of any capacity in the hands of any criminal is a bad gun."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "CHECKLIST: Features That Would Be Banned"
In addition to listing 19 semiautomatic versions of military-style assault
weapons that would be banned outright by legislation now in Congress, the bill
sets out features of those weapons, like high-capacity magazines, pistol grips
or flash suppressors, that combined on other weapons would determine whether
they also should be banned.

Photos: TEC-9 assault pistol and AK-47 assault rifle showing features that would
be banned. (Source: Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, Senator Dianne
Feinstein)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Delegation Seeking American Capital

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section D;   Page 1;   Column 3;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


Like many Vietnamese of his generation, Pham Chanh Truc protested against the
American military presence in Vietnam. He was jailed once, escaped and worked
eight years in the Vietcong underground before he was caught and jailed again.
When Communist forces drove out the South Vietnamese Army in 1975, Saigon became
Ho Chi Minh City and Mr. Truc joined its new Government.

Now, nearly two decades later, as vice chairman of the People's Committee of Ho
Chi Minh City, Mr. Truc is leading the first Vietnamese delegation to the United
States since the American trade embargo was lifted in February. With an
ambitious two-week tour to drum up financial investment for the city, the
Vietnamese are, in effect, inviting Americans back to Vietnam.

Forgoing Pride for Technology

"I don't think I wasted my prime years," Mr. Truc said in an interview last week
as the delegation headed to the headquarters of Pepsico in Somers, N.Y. "I did
the thing I believed in, the right thing, fighting for the independence and
sovereignty of Vietnam. So I don't think this is an irony for me, but an
advantage. I was able to participate in the first phase of gaining back our
country, and I am still here, participating in its construction."

If the trip might strike some Americans as audacious, Mr. Truc viewed it through
a lens of pragmatism and economics. With so much of Vietnam's essential services
and facilities in need of repair, much of it because of "the American war," as
many Vietnamese call it, the delegates are turning to a country of proven
engineering and technological skills, not to mention wealth.

Ho Chi Minh City is the economic engine of Vietnam, with 60 percent of the
industrial output and 27 percent of the gross national product, according to the
city's latest economic reports. Its population last year was about four and a
half million, well above the three million-plus of Hanoi, the capital, in the
north.

Yet beyond the city's threshold attempts to seek American financing for new
ports, bridges, airfields, telecommunications, natural resource development and
roads, the trip to New York and Boston last week, California and Seattle this
week, was also planned to help Vietnam establish relationships with American
interests at a time when few exist.

The countries have no normal diplomatic relations, and only a handful of big
American companies, including Pepsi, Coca-Cola and Mobil, have substantial
operations in Vietnam.

Further, many American companies are not likely to invest heavily until Vietnam
gains most-favored-nation trading status, a designation that would enable it to
export its goods to the United States under the lowest tariff rates.

American experts in United States-Vietnam relations predict that gaining
preferential trade status could take two years or more, largely because of
lingering concern over American servicemen still listed as missing in action,
and the controversy raised in the 1992 campaign over President Clinton's draft
avoidance during the Vietnam War.

With an obvious need for funds, Mr. Truc said, Ho Chi Minh City is willing to be
patient. The cover article in last week's issue of The Saigon Times, a
Government-subsidized weekly magazine, included a headline that said the country
"urgently needs foreign investment" to develop adequate electricity supplies.
And that is only one area of major need.

Playing the America Card

But the reasons Ho Chi Minh City and the rest of Vietnam appear eager to have
Americans back might not be be altogether economic.

Rather, the experts say that an expanded American presence in Vietnam would
serve as a strategic buffer against other nations in the region, particularly
China, whose economic might provides great advantages over developing nations
like Vietnam.

Thomas J. Vallely, director of the Vietnam Program at the Harvard Institute for
International Development, cited as one hedge against China Hanoi's decision to
grant Mobil exploration rights to the Blue Dragon oilfield in the South China
Sea. "A wise decision," he said of the grant.

Two years ago, China signed a contract with another American company, the
Crestone Energy Corporation, for rights to explore waters nearby.

A recent analysis of Vietnam's economic situation by a team of Japanese and
American scholars said the country also worried about China's dumping of cheap
consumer goods in Vietnam and its building of airstrips on the Spratly Islands,
disputed by the Chinese and the Vietnamese.

"The Vietnam Government is not only anxious, it is almost desperate to have an
American presence in the country," said Irwin Jay Robinson, president of the
Vietnam-American Chamber of Commerce in New York. The organization sponsored a
business seminar for the visiting delegation last week.

While the lifting of the American embargo by President Clinton in February was a
watershed in the old adversaries' relationship, and the expected precursor to
normalized trading, this green light hardly unleashed a heavy flow of business
traffic into Ho Chi Minh City.

One reason is that the Communist Government lifted its clamps on private
enterprise in 1986, ushering in waves of investment from Hong Kong, Taiwan,
South Korea, Singapore, France and Malaysia. Companies from those areas all have
a huge step up on American businesses, especially those that would make products
for the domestic market.

Imagine a land in which Marlboro, made by the Philip Morris Companies, is not
among the leading foreign cigarettes. In Vietnam, the best-selling brand is 555,
from B.A.T. Industries of Britain.

Want More Than Wage Advantage

More than $3 billion in foreign capital is currently financing about 300
projects in the metropolitan area, Mr. Truc said.

The vast majority of that is from countries other than the United States. Until
American interests can identify specific advantages for investing in Vietnam,
there is little reason to expect change. While companies like Caterpillar and
Boeing are eager to sell bulldozers and aircraft to satisfy Vietnam's
development needs, far more American companies need more favorable trading
conditions to tap the obvious benefits of skilled but cheap labor.

"We're in a never-never land kind of relationship," said Virginia Foote,
president of the United States-Vietnam Trade Council in Washington. "American
companies are allowed to sell and invest in Vietnam, but they have no real
opportunity to buy. The support system to provide that is just not available."

For all the exchanges and contacts they expected to make on their trip, not even
a week had passed before Mr. Truc and other members of his delegation reflected
a degree of resignation over any sudden increase in American interest. They
acknowledged that they would wait at least two years for Congressional
consideration of favored trade status for Vietnam.

Sugar-Coating Defiance

Cao Van Quoi, chairman of the city's planning committee, said the visitors had
"a long way to go to accomplish" their mission, adding, "I am encouraged by the
spirit of cooperation, but I don't think we can have any tangible results right
away."

In the meantime, Mr. Truc said Ho Chi Minh City would seek other options. "We're
not looking for any specific country to fill the void," he said sharply. "We
seek cooperation and building good relations with all countries. If the United
States does not come to us fully, we can always go on with partnerships in other
countries."

But lest he sound too dismissive of the country he once said he "hated with all
my guts," Mr. Truc quickly added, "I would like to reiterate, however, that the
United States is a big partner, and we would welcome America to our country."

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A trade delegation from Vietnam is visiting the United States to
attract American investment. Pham Chanh Truc, left, chatted last night in San
Francisco with Mayor Frank Jordan and his wife, Wendy Paskin, right. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hue Beer on Way

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;   Page 7;   Column 6;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 29 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 4


The Hue Brewery has dispatched Vietnam's first container cargo of Hue beer to
New York, three months after the end of a 30-year United States trade embargo
against Hanoi.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Pioneering Bronx Plant To Recycle City's Paper

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words


In the first inner-city project of its type in the nation, one of the country's
leading environmental organizations, two paper companies and a community
development group are expected to announce a proposal today for a $100 million
plant in the South Bronx to produce recycled paper from New York City's trash.

Proponents say the project is intended to take advantage of what
environmentalists call the "urban forest" -- the vast amounts of paper discarded
by offices every day. But for residents of the South Bronx, the plant would also
be intended to create perhaps 300 new jobs and bring other economic benefits,
including housing, training, day care and health care services for the workers.

The planners, who have been quietly discussing the project for two years, say
they expect to raise $2 million from the paper companies and state and local
governments to pay for detailed engineering and economic studies, which they
hope to present to investors this fall to raise money for the plant.

The recycling operation, which would be run as a for-profit company called the
Bronx Community Paper Company, would be on a 19-acre site in the old Harlem Rail
Yard just north of Randalls Island and could be operating by fall 1996, planners
said.

John Adams, executive director of the environmental group behind the plan, the
Natural Resources Defense Council, said the project would also promote social
values.

"We get everything we want: jobs, recycling, a process we like and social
equity," he said. "We save lots of trees and end the waste of putting a valuable
resource into landfills."

Clay Lifflander, president of the New York City Economic Development
Corporation, which seeks to attract businesses to the city, said the Guiliani
administration supported the plan. "We will do what we can to help see this
vision brought to reality," Mr. Lifflander said.

The White House, which last year issued an executive order requiring Federal
agencies to increase their use of recycled paper, also praised the South Bronx
plan. "This initiative shows that economic development, job creation and
environmental protection can work together for the benefit of us all," Vice
President Al Gore said in a statement.

The real test of the project's viability will be whether a business payoff can
be seen by the paper companies and outside investors who will be asked to pay
for the plant.

"This is not a social project for us -- we need the pulp," said James D. Black,
a vice president of S. D. Warren, a Boston-based unit of the Scott Paper Company
that has contributed $250,000 to the effort. The other paper company involved is
the Modo Paper Company of Stockholm, which operates recycling plants in Europe
and has contributed $300,000 so far to the South Bronx project.

"We need high-quality pulp to make printing and writing papers," Mr. Black said.
"And our customers increasingly want recycled content."

Even for the business-minded, there may be pragmatic value in the perceived
social benefits. Because of the participation of a community group, the Banana
Kelly Community Improvement Association, project organizers expect the active
support of local residents, rather than the community opposition that can
severely delay development proposals.

Partnership With Residents

"The residents of the South Bronx appreciate being included as partners from the
outset, rather than being cornered into the role of adversaries," said Yolanda
Rivera, chairwoman of Banana Kelly, which is named for the curve of Kelly Street
in the South Bronx.

Of the approximately $100 million it will cost to build and equip the plant,
$6.2 million will be earmarked in advance for day care and health facilities,
housing and education. "These social services will help people move out of
unemployment to train for real jobs," Ms. Rivera said.

The plant is expected to employ 180 to 200 people, with approximately 100 more
jobs coming from the related social services. Most of the people hired are
expected to be from the South Bronx and would be trained by Banana Kelly.

If the money is in place, construction could begin in February, said Allen
Hershkowitz, a senior scientist with the Natural Resources Defense Council.

Although other companies in the city call themselves recyclers, their work
involves only the collection of trash, which they sort to remove the recyclable
materials, which are then bundled and sent outside New York City to be
processed. The Bronx mill would be the first in the city to render used paper
into clean pulp that paper companies could then make into high-grade printing
and writing papers.

In recent years the number of paper-recycling plants has increased throughout
the nation. But most have been in old paper mills in rural areas or in
industrial parks in the Midwest, where land and labor are cheaper than in urban
areas and where there tend to be fewer bureaucratic obstacles.

But with enough local support, the South Bronx could have certain advantages,
Mr. Hershkowitz said. "The economics of transportation work in our favor," he
said. "Most mills are hundreds of miles from cities, so we will have a $15-a-ton
cost advantage."

David Gatton, an environmental adviser to the United States Conference of
Mayors, said the project might set an important precedent by showing how
abandoned inner-city industrial sites, like the Harlem Rail Yard, can be
redeveloped.

Initial plans call for the installation of equipment to remove ink from used
paper so the resulting pulp can be used to make new paper elsewhere. But if the
venture is successful, a paper mill may be built on the site as well, which
would bring additional employment.

Private haulers who collect paper from office buildings are expected to be main
suppliers for the plant because they have access to large amounts of high-grade
used paper, like the paper used for computer printouts. Paper collected by the
city from residences is usually too contaminated by other materials to meet the
plant's quality requirements.

Environmental groups and paper companies have been antagonists in the past
because paper companies have been seen as damaging forests by cutting down large
numbers of trees and by operating mills that emit air and water pollutants. In
fact, the Natural Resources Defense Council has sued three paper companies in
the last decade because of water pollution. And the council has a petition
pending before the Environmental Protection Agency to ban discharges of dioxin,
a toxic byproduct of paper bleaching -- a prohibition that could close some
paper mills if enacted.

But environmentalists tend to like paper-recycling plants, because they use
existing paper as their raw material, saving trees. And the recycling process to
be used in the Bronx project, based on techniques developed in Japan, would
minimize pollution by using none of the chlorine normally associated with paper
bleaching. It would also use water recovered by a nearby city-operated
waste-water treatment plant and be powered by "clean" electricity produced by a
gas-fired generator to be built for the operation.

"This is the next stage of environmentalism," Mr. Hershkowitz said. "Instead of
suing to stop projects we do not like, we are going to promote the ones we do
like."

In addition to environmental and social goals, organizers are hoping to bring
high esthetic values to the project. The architect Maya Lin, best known for her
design of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, has been hired to design the plant and
its surroundings.

In a written proposal, she said she wanted to showcase the recycling process,
rather than hide it inside a featureless building, and to make ornamental,
landscaping use of the water used in the process.

In addition, Ms. Lin's design specifies the use of recycled materials wherever
possible.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two paper companies, an environmental group and a community
development organization are proposing a $100 million paper-recycling plant in
the South Bronx. Allen Hershkowitz, a scientist with the Natural Resources
Defense Council, and Yolanda Rivera, chairwoman of the Banana Kelly Community
Improvement Association, at the proposed site: a 19-acre section of the
abandoned Harlem Rail Yard. (Chester Higgins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Fed Goes Ghostbusting

BYLINE: By Lester C. Thurow;   Lester C. Thurow is professor of management and
economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


The Federal Reserve Board has been spooked by the ghost of inflation. In its
panic, the Fed has raised interest rates three times, taking everyone by
surprise. Long-term bondholders have lost billions and international currency
markets have been rattled. Yet the Fed's economists admit they can't point to
even a hint of inflation in the current numbers. They are missing the obvious:
the 90's are likely to be an inflation-free decade, and their interest rate
hikes will squash the current economic recovery.

The 70's and 80's were inflationary times. The failure to raise taxes to pay for
the Vietnam War led to slowly accelerating inflation that exploded with the oil
and food shocks of the 70's. Inflation stubbornly receded in the 80's. If the
effects of surging health care costs are subtracted from inflation figures, it
is clear that more prices have fallen than risen this spring.

Sophisticated investors including George Soros, Citicorp and Bankers Trust took
huge losses because of the Fed's action. They were betting on low interest rates
because they had no worries about inflation. The Fed's economists contend that
it takes 12 to 18 months for higher interest rates to stop inflation, so they
are acting now to prevent renewed inflation in 1995. In the Fed's view, the
economy is so prone to inflation that even this slow recovery from the 1991-1992
recession -- 3 percent growth in 1993 and 2.6 percent in the first quarter of
this year -- represents an overheated economy.

The 90's began with a deflationary crash in asset values: property prices in the
United States declined by up to 50 percent. This trend spread to England,
flattened Japan and is now rocking Germany. While the U.S. stock market has
risen (the money flowing into pension and mutual funds has had nowhere else to
go), the inflation-adjusted fall in the Japanese stock market in the 90's has
been bigger than the decline in the American stock market from 1929 through
1932. Worldwide, hundreds of billions of dollars in wealth have been wiped out.

One traditional cause of inflation is a shortage of labor, which drives up
wages. Yet global unemployment rates are reaching levels not seen since the
Depression. Spain reports 24 percent and Ireland and Finland not much less. In
the U.S., if one adds together the officially unemployed, discouraged workers
who have stopped actively searching for work and those with part-time jobs who
want full-time work, 15 percent of the labor force (19 million) is looking for
work.

The Fed is worried that an increasing number of U.S. companies are running close
to their production limits -- that they will be unable to keep up with the
demand for goods, thus driving up prices. But in today's global economy, what
counts is world capacity, not U.S. capacity. No American will have to wait for a
new car: since auto makers in Japan and Europe aren't producing at anywhere near
capacity, U.S. producers aren't going to raise prices and sit by and watch their
market share erode. While America's economic recovery is under way, the rest of
the industrial world shows no sign of coming back; until it does, inflation will
not quicken.

The demise of the Soviet Union and the effective collapse of the Organization of
Petroleum Exporting Countries in the aftermath of the Persian Gulf War means
there will be no repetition of the energy or food shocks of the 70's. What has
been happening in aluminum will be repeated in most raw materials: 1.3 million
metric tons were exported from the former Soviet Union in 1993, causing the
lowest real (adjusted for inflation) prices in history.

Oil prices are lower in real terms than before the first OPEC oil shock in the
early 70's, yet exports from the former Soviet Union have barely begun and Iraq
has yet to be brought back into world oil markets. When Ukraine comes back into
production (it was the world's largest exporter of grain in the 19th century),
food prices will plunge.

The decline in real wages that began in the U.S. and is spreading across the
industrial world further undermines the Fed's contentions. Among American men,
salaries are falling at every education level -- for those in the bottom 60
percent income bracket, real wages are 20 percent below 1973 levels. Women with
a high school education or less have seen their wages drop, and it looks like
the same will happen to college educated women soon. At the same time,
productivity is increasing at the highest rates seen since the 60's. Wages down,
productivity up -- that simply isn't the recipe for inflation.

Economists differ on the causes of falling wages. Immigration and technical
innovation are partly responsible, but some worldwide trends are also behind it.
The Communist bloc did not run very good economies but it ran excellent
education systems. One-third of humanity, much of it skilled, is joining the
capitalist world. If some of the world's best physicists can be hired in Russia
for $100 per month, why should anyone pay a third-rate American physicist
$50,000 a year?

In the 80's, only 60 million people in Singapore, South Korea, Hong Kong and
Taiwan were export-oriented. With the decline of state socialism in East Asia,
hundreds of millions of third-worlders (two billion Indians and Chinese) are
going to be joining them. Inflation is going to be impossible in any country
with open borders: lower-priced goods will flood in from low-wage countries.

In addition, the layoffs at big U.S. companies with high wages and good benefits
are unrelenting. More than 109,000 jobs were cut in January, a record. Getting
rehired after being laid off usually means a cut in pay, and the competition for
these lower-paying jobs drives overall wages -- thus inflation -- further down.

Since World War II, American companies have typically held prices constant, or
even raised them, while distributing the fruits of productivity in the form of
higher wages or profits. But under the pressure of international competition,
that system is rapidly eroding. In the 90's productivity gains will lead to
lower prices, not wage increases.

Large manufacturers are forging new arrangements with their suppliers. For
example, Chrysler used to have hundreds of suppliers, but it has given a few of
them exclusive rights to supply all of its parts, and Chrysler engineers will
give them design information. In exchange, the suppliers will lower their prices
every year. In such scenarios, the manufacturers will in turn pass their savings
on to customers in the form of lower prices.

At least one member of the Federal Reserve Board has extolled the virtues of
zero or negative inflation. This ignores a tenet of capitalism: it doesn't work
very well when prices are falling. When prices fall (and many prices must fall
to have zero inflation, since some prices will always be rising), the smartest
move is to postpone purchases. With prices lower tomorrow, only a fool buys
today. So investment falls as people forgo entrepreneurship to become inactive
rentiers. Money in the mattress becomes the only smart investment. Deflationary
times are tough times.

Yet the Fed is intent on killing a very weak recovery that has yet to include
most Americans. The 7 percent growth rate in the fourth quarter of 1993 was
heavily concentrated in housing, automobiles and business equipment. High
interest rates will hurt these sectors, and the Fed's large rate increases have
hit the economy at a time when growth has already slowed dramatically.

Since January, interest rates on 30-year Treasury bonds have risen 1.3 percent
and those on 30-year fixed rate mortgages have risen 1.5 percent. These rates
did not soar because of worries about inflation. Rather, they reflect the payoff
that investors must demand to protect themselves from a Fed that thinks
inflation is about to rise from the grave. The Fed's erratic behavior has also
led to a currency crisis that made necessary Wednesday's billion-dollar effort
to protect the dollar. While nobody has ever been hurt by ghosts, investors are
showing that they have real reason to fear a ghost-busting Fed.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Zippos in Vietnam

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 120 words


To the Editor:

The Zippo lighters on display in Hanoi (pictured in "Vietnam: Memorabilia of a
War Best Forgotten," The Week in Review, April 24) were not dropped by careless
G.I.'s as they scuttled home from Vietnam. In most cases, the obverse of each
lighter contains the engraved name of its owner. Most of those names are also
engraved on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington or are the names of
former prisoners of war.

The contention that Zippo lighters in Vietnam are best remembered for setting
fire to villages is absurd. Hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions, of Zippos
were carried by G.I.'s in Vietnam, and very few were used as weapons.

JOSEPH MCCUSKER
New York, April 25, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary: May 1-6

BYLINE: By Hubert B. Herring

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1418 words



THE ECONOMY

Would Bread Lines Make the Financial Markets Happier?
In the perverse financial world, no good news goes unpunished. The markets hate
job numbers that are too strong, because they're afraid the inflation bells will
go off -- though no one's actually seen any inflation -- and the Federal Reserve
will clamp down again. So on Friday's surprising report that unemployment fell
to 6.4 percent and 267,000 payroll jobs were added in April (to top it off,
without the truckers' strike that would have been 73,000 higher), the stock and
bond markets went into mourning. The Dow industrials, off more than 50 at one
point, lost 26, while 30-year Treasury bond yields hit 7.54 percent, an 18-month
high. . . . Even as the job numbers soar, though, there are dark spots: New York
State has lost 97,000 jobs in 12 months, a worse performance even than
California. And last week Digital Equipment said it would cut at least 20,000
more jobs.


The Noisy Month of May
A silent spring? Not a chance. As nature bursts blissfully forth, gardeners
brace for attack, their deafening arsenal -- lawn mowers, weed bashers, leaf
blowers, you name it -- gassed up and ready. But noise pollution is just the
beginning. While car emissions are scrutinized, garden tools spew far more
filth, creating fully 10 percent of air pollution, the E.P.A. says. Mowing for
an hour matches the pollution caused by driving 11 1/2 hours. So last week the
E.P.A. said it will regulate garden-tool emissions. But it didn't mention one
clean, silent, forgotten alternative: the reel mower. How does it run? You push
it.

'Healthy,' Redefined
For many, food-buying is a constant struggle between healthy foods and
high-salt, high-fat siren calls. And some food packagers seemingly offer the
best of both worlds by slapping words like "healthy" on all sorts of things. No
more. Last week the F.D.A. and the Agriculture Department said that from now on
"healthy" on a label must mean healthy inside. Products must be low in fat and
low in salt, and have certain redeeming vitamins. An industry lobbying group
says the rule is too restrictive because, say, green beans do not meet the
vitamin threshold. But wouldn't it be silly to put "healthy" labels on beans?

Shopping for Dollars
Governments and currency speculators have very different wish lists. Governments
want things nice and steady, otherwise trade gets distorted. A strong dollar
makes American goods too costly abroad, while a strong mark makes German goods
too costly here. But speculators like movement: then they can roll their dice
and -- with all their fancy strategies -- score big if they bet right.
Speculators have been betting heavily against the dollar lately -- perhaps
because they thought President Clinton wouldn't act to support it -- and their
bets have helped batter the dollar. But last week Washington and its allies
decided it was enough and, in the biggest intervention in the currency markets
in nearly two years, 16 nations went on a dollar shopping spree, propping it up
for the moment. The question is, Will speculators be scared into reverse -- or
will they simply take a breather?

Auto Sales Hit Cruising Speed
When sales surged 19.7 percent in March, auto makers worried that their recovery
was so dazzling it would burn out -- that no buyers would be left. They prefer
steady growth, a foundation for lasting good times. That's just what they got in
April, as the most recent figures showed a far more modest 4.9 percent rise.
What cooled things off? Higher interest rates, probably -- but also, many
dealers simply didn't have enough cars and trucks to sell. The buyers -- or, as
one analyst described them, "close to six million units of pent-up demand
waiting to be satisfied" -- are still out there, to keep this recovery purring.

COMPANIES

Drug Makers Face Reality
Even without health reform, drug makers are racing to adjust to new realities.
One new reality: the spread of "managed care" andhealth plans that buy vast
quantities of drugs at discount. Managed-care drug companies could control 80
percent of the market in five years. So to keep from being left behind, drug
giants are climbing aboard. Just last week SmithKline Beecham agreed to buy
Diversified Pharmaceutical Services, a discount-drug marketer, and Pfizer and
Value Health said they'd create a managed-care unit.

I.B.M., at Your Service
I.B.M. has set itself a reasonable goal: make a decent profit. But the way it's
always done so, making computers, provides only scant returns these days. So
last week it had a new idea: It will, in effect, try to turn its vast marketing
force into consultants, experts who can give clients just what they need,
including software and tailor-made plans, not just sell them machines. Marketers
will be divided by industry, not by which machine they sell.

A Low-Voltage Send-Off
It was a moment that could have marked the beginning of an era: a leading auto
maker saying it would mass-produce an electric vehicle. But when Chrysler
announced plans for its electric mini-vans last week, it did so as if it had
already given up on selling them. It said it would build the mini-van to comply
with a California law requiring such vehicles by 1998 but said its range was so
short, and its price would be so high, that few people would buy it. But now, at
least, electric vehicles have a foot -- well, a battery -- in the door.

A Death at Tenneco
Michael Walsh could handle simple matters like turning Tenneco around, but not
brain cancer. In February, after a long battle, he stepped aside. Last week he
died at 51.

At Kodak, Less Is Sharper
George M. C. Fisher knew he had to get hopping. He's Kodak's chairman now only
because his predecessor was ousted for not cutting costs fast enough. His plan:
pare Kodak to the basics. Last week he said he'd sell just about everything but
pictures: the drug unit Sterling Winthrop, plus household products and medical
testing businesses. It'll be a far smaller company, with revenues more like $13
billion than $20 billion.

Southwest: On Its Own
No matter how much pressure the industry's heavies put on Southwest Airlines, it
refuses to play by their rules -- and this upstart has become the nation's most
profitable airline. For one thing, it has refused to pay fees to be listed on
the big computer reservation systems, and last week rival carriers moved toward
deleting Southwest from those systems. Southwest's response was typical of its
I'll-take-you-all-on approach. It simply started its own computer system. Pretty
soon, American et al. may clamor to be listed there.

Jett Wants His Money
Joseph Jett wants his money. Kidder, Peabody dismissed him as its top government
bond trader, saying he'd created $350 million in fake profits to inflate his $9
million bonus, and froze nearly $5 million Mr. Jett had in a Kidder account. But
last week, "vehemently" denying wrongdoing, Mr. Jett went to court to try to
dislodge that money. So what about that $350 million? Mr. Jett may say
supervisors knew what he was doing. But if those profits were fiction, how could
his pay -- presumably a cut of those profits -- be treated as fact?

INTERNATIONAL

If Ribbons Count, Yes, It's Open
In a sense, the Channel Tunnel is here. Opening ceremonies were held last week,
complete with heads of state cutting ribbons. The huge project, intoned the
Queen, rejoins "what nature separated some 40 million years ago." It was fitting
that she took the long view, for the tunnel was supposed to open a year ago, and
its cost, at $15 billion, is nearly twice the original budget -- and counting.
And, ribbons aside, it's still not open: Shuttles for trucks? In a few days,
maybe. Passenger trains and car shuttles? This summer, maybe -- for special
guests. Regular service? With luck, this fall. And where do investors stand?
Don't ask.

Vietnam Comes Calling
Unlikely as it may sound, Vietnam wants Americans back. It badly needs
rebuilding and foreign investment, and it is wary of getting it only from Asian
neighbors. Last week, a delegation from Ho Chi Minh City was here in search of
investors, the first such expedition since the American trade embargo was lifted
in February. But if it gets any nibbles, all sides must be patient. The two
nations have no diplomatic relations yet, and Vietnam is not likely to get
most-favored-nation status, which brings low tariffs, for a couple of years.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: High-speed train entering the tunnel. (Mario
Fourmy/R.E.A.-Saba); Ho Chi Minh City, when it was Saigon. (Ernest Zaugg)

Graphs showing change in nonfarm business payrolls from Jan. 1993 to April 1994
(Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics) and the value of the dollar against a trade
weighted index of foreign currencies (Sources: Datastream, Federal Reserve)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
This Part's the Barrel, I Think

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 397 words


THE oratory that preceded the House of Representatives' by-a-whisker vote to ban
the production or importation of 19 assault weapons was nothing if not
portentous. Justice, freedom and the American way of death were all invoked
before the ban's proponents handed the National Rifle Association another
Congressional defeat by a vote of 216 to 214.

Both sides left nothing out of their lobbying on the bill, which was passed six
months after the House passed the Brady Bill, requiring a five-day wait before a
handgun can be bought. There were discussions of how criminals and law-abiding
citizens use or abuse these guns -- most of them semiautomatic copies of fully
automatic military weapons. There were testimonials for and against by hunters,
crime victims and law enforcement officers. There were photo opportunities.

And perhaps most tellingly, there was evidence of the lure of firearms. At
Capitol Hill press conferences, the proponents of the ban could not resist
fondling, however tentatively, examples of the hardware they had brought to
underscore their pitch.

Some may have sensed the incongruity of the scene. Senator Barbara Mikulski of
Maryland and Representative Leslie Byrne of Virginia looked downright bemused as
they hefted a shotgun known as a "Street Sweeper."

Others seemed less attuned to irony. There was a one-time-only photo op when
President Clinton gave his support to the ban while standing at port arms --
well, almost -- with an M16-type rifle, the very weapon he avoided picking up
during the Vietnam War.

Not to be outflanked in publicity, others who favored the ban paid a visit to a
local firing range so they could publicly squeeze off a few rounds -- just to
underscore the lethality of weapons, of course.

Representative Charles Schumer, the New York Democrat who wrote the legislation
and pushed its passage with dire warnings of armed anarchy in the streets,
grinned incongruously as he sprayed a burst from a Tec-9, a pistol favored by
urban drug dealers. And Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, one of the most
smartly dressed pols in Washington, managed to remain sartorially splendid and
dignified as he cut loose, a pair of Mickey Mouse muffs protecting his patrician
ears.

Opponents of the ban countered with a challenge, taunting the President and
other ban proponents to a shoot-off. There were no takers.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Representative Charles Schumer fired a Tec-9 in April to
demonstrate the semiautomatic weapon's power. (Reuters); Lloyd Bentsen with a
Streetsweeper. (Associated Press); Senator Barbara Mikulski shows a Street
Sweeper to Representative Leslie Byrne on Capitol Hill before the vote.
(Associated Press); President Clinton held a Colt AR-15, a gun included in the
ban. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 667 words



International   3-15

HAITI ASYLUM POLICY REVERSED
President Clinton reversed his Haiti policy, no longer requiring refugees to be
sent back and approving asylum hearings for those who try to reach the United
States.  1
VIETNAM FACING CRISIS
Vietnam is booming economically, but unless the Communist Government can control
its population and change demographic trends, experts believe, it will face a
catastrophe.  1
BATTLE OF WILLS IN BOSNIA
An agreement by the Bosnian Serbs to allow aid flights to land at the Bosnian
city of Tuzla has become the focal point for a battle of wills with the United
Nations.  9
RUSSIANS FACING UNEMPLOYMENT
For Russians working in thousands of debt-ridden and inefficient factories,
capitalism is beginning to mean shutdowns, leaving workers fearful and angry.  3

RWANDAN REFUGEES STRUGGLING
For the 250,000 Rwandan refugees camped over the border in Tanzania, life has
become a daily struggle to get enough food and to find shelter from the pouring
rain.  10
SOUTH AFRICA DEMOCRACY BEGINS
Although the Government has not been inaugurated, South Africa's provincial
legislatures met and at least one focused on points of order instead of broader
issues.  10

A Japanese official was dismissed for remarks on World War II.  12
As civil war continued, Yemen's leader demanded a surrender.  15
Italy will press Argentina for extradition in a war-crimes case.  11

National   16-28

U.S. SHIFTS ECONOMIC STANCE
After a year and a half of seeking faster economic growth, the Clinton
Administration has now reluctantly changed course, putting the stability of
financial markets ahead of rapid economic expansion.  1
LOOKING TO WAYS AND MEANS
Advocates of health care restructuring are desperate for a display of
legislative machismo to break the stalemate in other Congressional committees.
They are counting on the Ways and Means Committee to produce it.  1
SPECTER OF HEROIN GROWS
The latest drug in vogue is heroin, which, a generation ago, may have evoked the
specter of the ultimate dead end. But for young users, its allure has grown.  1
A HARASSING SWITCH
Some conservatives who had once called Anita Hill a liar for accusing Clarence
Thomas of sexual harassment were now supporting Paula Jones, the woman accusing
President Clinton of sexual harassment. Some women who put Ms. Hill on a
pedestal now find themselves wishing they could cut the ground out from
underneath Ms. Jones.  16
OUTSIDER LOSES ALLURE
Two years ago, Lynn Yeakel almost unseated Senator Arlen Spector of Pennsylvania
by focusing on his role in questioning Prof. Anita Hill. But now, she is just
one of a pack of Democrats seeking the nomination for Governor.  16
WHAT IS A 'MOTHER'?
Once, it was clear what a mother was supposed to be. But there is now, as seldom
before, intense confusion and anxiety about motherhood.  26

Washington Talk: A day in the House, night in the Senate.  24

Metro   29-40

A DRIVER WITHOUT A LICENSE
He was a man who loved cars and helped his neighbors, but Abraham Meyers,
charged with fatally running down three members of a family, was also a man who
drank and had no driver's license.  1
BIGGER STAGE FOR NEWARK MAYOR
As Sharpe James closes what seems likely to be his third successful bid for the
office of Mayor of Newark, his national stature is growing.  29
GANGS AND VIOLENCE IN JAILS
Jail officials in New York City are becoming worried about the organizing of
inmates into large gangs and an upsurge of violence.  29
CUOMO REJECTS BUDGET DEAL
Governor Cuomo has rejected a tentative budget proposal, saying it would spend
$200 million more than the state can afford this year.  29

The Schools Chancellor is postponing a special education shake-up.  31
A proposed contract with school custodians is not a revolution.  31
A fire captain dies.  31
Fresh Air Fund 30
Obituaries 38
Clement Greenberg, a prominent American art critic.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 54 words


Human rights involve national perspective. The United States may be troubled,
for example, by China's insistence on limiting families to two children. For
their part, the Chinese may regard widespread gun ownership in the United States
as a threat to human rights. -- LE MAI, Deputy Foreign Minister of Vietnam.
[12:6.]

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Overcrowded Vietnam Is Said to Face Catastrophe

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times;   The writer of
this article covered Vietnam during the war years, successively for The
Associated Press, ABC News and The New York Times. Now a senior science writer
for The Times, he was the paper's last bureau chief in Saigon when the city fell
in 1975. He spent April in Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2025 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Their streets are blocked by peddlers, beggars and parked motorbikes, their
houses are overflowing with young children and visiting relatives, and even
after death the urns containing their ashes must compete for space on the
crowded shelves of Buddhist pagodas.

Vietnam is bursting at the seams with people, and unless the nation can change
its demographic, social and economic trends, the Vietnamese will face a
catastrophe, many experts believe.

As the population booms, the Communist Government seems to be floundering in its
efforts to balance the demands of a free-market economy against the state
supervision and support needed to maintain national social and economic
cohesion.

Liberalized Government economic policy has attracted foreign investment and
allowed shopkeepers to fill their stores with imported television sets and
motorbikes. But predatory packs of thieves roam Ho Chi Minh City -- which is
still called Saigon, except in official usage -- unchecked by police forces that
are paid so little that the officers must extort bribes to feed their families.

Public health, education, road-building and other nation-building pursuits have
been starved of money and official support. The Government has moved at glacial
speed to meet a growing need for new laws on taxation, trade, banking, traffic
and countless other activities.

Many Vietnamese experts say that a lack of managerial skill is the country's
most serious shortcoming and that because of the decline in the country's
education system, new managers are scarcer than ever. Because improvement of the
education system depends partly on recruiting effective new managers, the
country is locked in a vicious cycle, some say.

Since 1975, when the "American War" came to an end, Vietnam's population has
increased by more than 60 percent. This impoverished land, which is only about
the size of New Mexico, now has more than 72 million people, making it the 12th
most populous country on earth. Demographers predict that by 2025 the population
will reach 168 million, a staggering number considering the limited space and
resources available.

Hanoi has mounted a campaign to reduce the birth rate, and most state and
recently privatized businesses now threaten to fire any worker who has more than
two children. Billboards that graphically depict the use of condoms,
intrauterine devices and vasectomies adorn intersections in cities and towns.

But in a country where two-thirds of the population is still agricultural, such
advertising has limited effect. "We city dwellers don't need to be told to have
only two children," a shopkeeper said. "Most of us already use birth control."

Throughout Asia, farmers traditionally have large families to share the labor of
growing and harvesting rice, and to make up for high infant mortality and short
life expectancy. Vietnamese farmers, by all accounts, have largely ignored the
official injunction against large families.

And many farmers have recently taken to moonlighting in the towns and cities to
earn money for Japanese motorbikes and electronic gadgets. Between crops, many
farmers migrate to towns to take temporary jobs as bicycle-taxi drivers or
manual laborers, further swelling city populations.

Teeming City Lacks Many Public Services

The population of Saigon in 1975 was about 2.5 million, but today this largest
city in Vietnam has 4.5 million permanent residents and another half million
temporary residents, most of them migrant farmers.

During nearly two decades of privation under Communism, many Vietnamese
accumulated savings they are now spending on imported motorbikes, televisions,
video recorders, boom boxes, refrigerators and other luxuries from the
industrial world. Few buy automobiles, for which the import duty is 170 percent,
but most Vietnamese families own at least one motorbike, costing around $2,100.

Although Vietnam's people have begun to acquire some of the products associated
with prosperity, the Government remains too poor to sustain public services.

Despite the policy of doi moi -- renewal -- introduced in 1986 and the rapid
recent transition from state socialism to a chaotic market economy, the Hanoi
Government has yet to learn how to collect the taxes it needs to pay for roads,
railways, clean water, health care, industrial research and an honest police
force.

Officials acknowledge that Government salaries are so low (a police officer is
paid about $16 a month and a teacher makes about $25) that graft and corruption
are far more widespread than they were under the notoriously corrupt Saigon
Government up to 1975.

Medical Care And Schools Scarce

Medical care in many parts of the country is virtually nonexistent, even though
some 300 doctors are currently unemployed.

Dr. Do Hong Ngoc, director of health information and education for Ho Chi Minh
City, said about 300 doctors graduate from medical schools in southern Vietnam
each year, but to work they must spend their first three years as Government
employees, paid $25 a month. If a young doctor can survive for three years on
such a salary, he or she is then permitted to go into private practice and make
a decent living.

"Starting doctors can make much more money as traders and business people, so
many of them abandon their medical careers," Dr. Ngoc said. "Young people look
upon our generation of doctors and scientists as poor people, not to be
emulated."

The same problems plague public education.

The Vietnam News Service, a Government agency, recently reported that in the
mountainous central province of Gia Lai, 203 hamlets are without schools.
Nationwide, a report by the Ministry of Education and Training estimated that
about two million Vietnamese between the ages of 15 and 35 were unable to read
or write, a marked decline in the literacy rate from what it was in 1975.

American visitors who knew Vietnam before the Communist victory in 1975 are
startled these days to see the shoulders of most of the roads in southern
Vietnam covered by golden kernels of rice drying in the sun. The new drying
system is a symbol of both the promise and the potential catastrophe facing the
desperately overcrowded country.

Rice Crop Booming; So Are Traffic Jams

The Communist Government abandoned collectivized farming in 1988;, since then,
land has been distributed by the state to small farmers under 20-year renewable
leases. Rice production has boomed as a result, and once again Vietnam is a
major exporter of rice, which helps to pay for the economic recovery.

But there is a debit side to this boom.

Before the 1975 "liberation," most privately owned farms were relatively large,
but today the average farmer owns only a backyard garden or at most a few acres
-- too little to waste on sun-drying rice. The rice, nevertheless, must be
dried, so farmers have taken to spreading out their grain along asphalt-paved
road shoulders. Foreign importers of Vietnamese rice increasingly complain that
it contains bits of asphalt, debris from the wheels of trucks and motorbikes,
and the droppings of birds, dogs and farm animals.

The population boom and the consequent crowding and elbowing touches every facet
of life.

Townspeople laugh ruefully at their monumental motorbike traffic jams, among the
worst in the world. But the casualty rate is no laughing matter.

During the first three months of this year there were 396 serious accidents in
Saigon alone, causing 133 deaths, injury to 434 people and heavy damage to 498
vehicles. Stoplights are few and far between, and even when they work, many
people simply ignore them. The hardy pedestrian bent on crossing a street
customarily half closes his eyes, smiles benignly and walks into the thick of
the beeping, yelling, roaring maelstrom.

The pedestrian usually survives, but drivers sometimes come to grief. There is
no law requiring motorbike users or bicyclists to wear helmets, and no seat-belt
law for car drivers. Owners of most motorbikes, those with engines rated at 50
cubic centimeters or less, do not need drivers' licenses, and many bikers are
downright reckless.

The police often stop them -- they stop even the most law-abiding drivers
several times a week -- but for a bribe of a dollar or two, a driver is sped on
his or her way without undue inconvenience.

Gap Between Rich And Poor Widening

The Government has given top priority to stimulating development by creating a
market economy and by attracting extensive foreign investment and technical
help. But this has created huge problems that are worsened by the population
explosion.

One problem cited by Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai is the widening gap between
rich and poor, a direct affront to the ideals of socialism.

There are painfully apparent differences between the standards of living of
relatively wealthy entrepreneurs and the street people who sell lottery tickets,
postcards and stolen watches.

Huge families that live in the tropical squalor of crumbling brick-and-stucco
buildings have almost nothing in common with the brokers and business people who
are making fortunes by arranging deals between newly privatized Vietnamese
enterprises and foreign companies.

There is also a large and potentially dangerous economic gulf between northern
and southern Vietnam, which in many ways remain separate countries despite the
postwar unification. Foreign investors still feel more comfortable dealing with
enterprises in the former South Vietnam than they do in the north, a fact
reflected by the substantially larger investments being made in and around
Saigon.

Many Saigonese believe that within sharply defined limits, Hanoi has decided to
leave southern Vietnam to its own devices, provided that the southern part of
the country continues to bring in the trade and investment essential to national
development. Many Vietnamese say they feel more free in the south than in the
north.

Foreign Criticism Not Appreciated

But despite its zeal to join the developed, industrialized world, Vietnam is
unwilling to accommodate pleas from the United States and other Western
countries for greater toleration of Government critics.

"Human rights involve national perspective," Mr. Mai said in an interview. "The
United States may be troubled, for example, by China's insistence on limiting
families to two children. For their part, the Chinese may regard widespread gun
ownership in the United States as a threat to human rights.

"As for Vietnam, we fully support human rights, but we oppose initiatives by
outside nations to interfere in our internal affairs."

In fact, many foreign businessmen argue that Vietnam needs tougher legal and
economic restraints, and that liberalization of human rights policies is not one
of the country's immediate priorities.

"This country is out of control and just growing like Topsy," said an American
trader, who spoke on condition that he not be identified. "There's no
comprehensive system of law covering investment, taxes, mortgages, bankruptcy,
insurance or the other cornerstones of a free-market economy. Most of all, this
country needs law. And it needs to create the means of enforcing laws."

The fines imposed for civil infractions are tiny. The B.G.I. Tien Giang Company,
a French-Vietnamese joint venture that makes beverages, was recently convicted
of adulterating one of its products with saccharine -- a sweetener that is
illegal in Vietnam. The company was fined the equivalent of about $100, a
penalty several American businessmen called woefully inadequate.

"You can get away with almost anything in Vietnam if you have a few dollars to
pay a tiny fine or pay someone off," an American said. "That's got to stop if
this country wants to make real progress."

Most of all, Vietnamese leaders agree, there are too many Vietnamese, and a
brake must be applied to the birth rate, which threatens to double the
population in 28 years.

"We'll never apply the draconian measures used in China to curb population
growth," said Nguyen Xuan Oanh, an economist and investment consultant. "But
we've got to do something before it's too late."

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vietnam may be heading for a social and an economic
catastrophe. Although motorbikes have joined the bicycle traffic on Ho Chi Minh
City's streets, the gap between rich and poor is widening. (Edward Keating/The
New York Times) (pg. 1); Vietnam is bursting at the seams. Markets like this one
in Ben Tre are crowded with people and goods, but the Government is unable to
provide adequate medical care, education and other public services. (Malcolm
Browne/The New York Times) (pg. 12)

Map of Vietnam highlighting Ho Chi Minh City (pg. 12)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike;
Deserved Honor

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


To the Editor:

Anna Quindlen's shameless character assassination of Richard M. Nixon in her
April 27 column (and on his day of mourning) is formidable revisionist history
itself.

She trivializes his vast body of foreign policy accomplishments while magnifying
the foibles the nation came to know only because they were recorded. Ms.
Quindlen ignores that far more damaging acts were committed by other Presidents.

She holds the former Commander in Chief responsible for death and destruction in
the Vietnam War, which she states he prolonged, rather than ended. This was a
war he inherited from and that was precipitated and escalated by the previous
two Democratic Administrations.

Lastly, is Ms. Quindlen naive enough to think that President Nixon monopolized
the dirty tricks and deceptive tactics employed during campaigns? These are the
tools of all who play the political game.

She speaks of Mr. Nixon's epitaph as revisionist, while the Kennedy years are
also remembered far differently from the actuality because of his senseless
assassination. Prominent figures in history, particularly in American history,
tend typically to be remembered in a flattering light.

Has the deserved dignity and honor bestowed on Richard Nixon so repelled her
that she must dredge up a 20-year-old wound the country has finally overcome?

JOHN BOSSO
Hoboken, N.J., April 27, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Even Now, Nixon Stirs Up Friend and Foe Alike

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


To the Editor:

"His efforts to end the war came to naught for years" (April 24): When I read
these words above the heading "Vietnam 1969" and the photo of a smiling
President Richard M. Nixon among United States soldiers in Saigon, I hit a wall
of shock and pain. It is one matter that Richard Nixon lied to this country for
decades about subjects from Helen Gahagan Douglas and Checkers through Vietnam
and Watergate; I believe we are still suffering from the harm he did to the
American Presidency, and to our images of political leaders. It is another that,
on his death, you lie about his efforts to end the war in Vietnam.

From the mid-1960's through the mid-70's, I was one of millions of people in the
United States who made efforts to oppose the involvement of my country in the
war in Indochina. In my view, United States participation in that war ended
because we the people became conscious of the wrongdoing, we rose up and
protested, and ultimately moved Congress and then, more haltingly, the executive
branch, to get out of Vietnam.

Some of us were college students; some were housewives and auto workers,
hairdressers and doctors; some were in groups like Vietnam Veterans Against the
War, and individual survivors of horrible wounding in that war, such as Lewis
Puller Jr. (see his "Fortunate Son"). Some of us were women for peace, mothers
for peace, the Vietnam Day Committee of Berkeley, Calif., and some were
followers of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who spoke ardently and
logically against the racism of this military engagement to obliterate certain
Asian peoples.

Richard Nixon was definitely not among us, making efforts to end the war. He was
in Washington, serving as President, and doing everything in his power --
including raising the military budget, covering up United States bombing of
Cambodia and bestowing constitutionally unheard-of powers on his Secretary of
State, Henry Kissinger (please see William Shawcross's "Sideshow" for a more
complete account) -- to continue United States military involvement in the
Vietnam War and Indochina.

Unlike many, I do not hate Richard Nixon, and I am not one bit interested in
using his death as a platform for vilifying him. But, as one more human being
who has sustained real losses from Mr. Nixon's misconduct in the United States
Presidency, I hate his misdeeds. You do not advance the cause of repair, or even
of dispassionate documentation, by trying to bury Richard Nixon's misdeeds with
him.

MARY C. DUNLAP
San Francisco, April 26, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: May 8, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 861 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3   I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Pocket, $6.50.)
           A television news reporter has mystifying experiences while
           covering a story.

 2     2   CRUEL & UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Avon, $6.50.)
           Dr. Kay Scarpetta probes mysteries of a man executed for
           murder.

 3    12   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Just
           before he kills himself, a lawyer reveals a deadly secret
           to an 11-year-old boy.

 4     3   "J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.)
           Kinsey Millhone on the case of a man who apparently
           committed suicide.

 5     2   WHERE THERE'S SMOKE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A
           physician moves to a Texas town and tries to live down her
           reputation.

 6     7   WHISPERS, by Belva Plain. (Dell, $6.99.) The realities that
           lie below the surface of an outwardly happy family.

 7     1   GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Dell, $6.99.) Cordial
           relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and
           foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.

 8*    2   AFTER ALL THESE YEARS, by Susan Isaacs. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $6.99.) A woman's estranged husband is found dead in her
           house.

 9    18   SCHINDLER'S LIST, by Thomas Keneally. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A German war profiteer rescues Jews in Nazi-occupied
           Poland.

 10*   1   THE FUNHOUSE, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) The sins of
           their mother haunt a boy and girl when a carnival comes to
           town.

 11    1   CHAINS OF COMMAND, by Dale Brown. (Berkley, $5.99.) An Air
           Force major restores his reputation in action on the
           Ukrainian border.

 12    3   DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $5.99.) Romantic
           adventures of a young woman raising unruly nephews in
           Regency England.

 13*   7   STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Pocket, $6.99.) A
           Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of
           a killer.

 14    2   PRIVATE SCANDALS, by Nora Roberts. (Jove, $5.99.) Romance,
           rivalry and revenge beset female hosts of television talk
           shows.

 15*   2   PRIMAL FEAR, by William Diehl. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A
           singular lawyer defends a young man charged with murdering
           an archbishop.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    17   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 2    548  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 3    17   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 4    64   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 5     6   SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Island/Dell, $5.99.)
           The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.

 6*    1   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade
           teacher.

 7*    3   RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Vintage, $9.) A Princeton
           professor assays issues affecting black Americans.

 8     2   BALKAN GHOSTS, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Vintage, $12.) A
           history since World War I of the peninsula where fighting
           is now going on in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

 9*    9   CRUEL SACRIFICE, by Aphrodite Jones. (Pinnacle, $4.99.) A
           night on the town for five teen-age girls leads to torture
           and murder.

 10*  27   THE TAO OF POOH, by Benjamin Hoff. (Penguin, $9.) Taoism as
           seen through the A.A. Milne character.

 11*  49   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           psychological and social significance of menopause for
           today's women.

 12*  134  A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A
           sojourn in the south of France.

 13*  148  YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine,
           $10.) The different languages men and women speak.

 14   147  LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper
           Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and
           emotions.

 15*  13   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE ... AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
           Joseph L. Galloway. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A three-day
           battle in Vietnam in 1965.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    164  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 2    171  THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's
           diet.

 3    29   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Counsel for parents-to-be.

 4     1   THE POCKET POWTER, by Susan Powter. (Fireside/S&S, $6.99.)
           Health and fitness advice for women.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 23, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically
weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk
indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book
above.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


THE HISTORIC EXPEDITION TO AMERICA (1909): Freud, Jung, and Hall the King-Maker
By Saul Rosenzweig. Rana House, Box 2997, St. Louis, Mo. 63103; $14.95.
Freud made only one trip to the United States, after he was invited by G.
Stanley Hall, the president of Clark University, to accept an honorary degree.
The 1909 visit was characterized by incidents highlighting Freud's power
struggle with his disciple, Carl Jung, and by a strange meeting with William
James, another scholar skeptical of Freudian theory. This account "is both sound
and ingenious," Perry Meisel said here last year.


COLLECTED STORIES
By Tennessee Williams. New Directions, $14.95.
The cast of "The Glass Menagerie" and Brick and Maggie of "Cat on a Hot Tin
Roof" make their first appearances in the pieces collected here, which include
several previously unpublished works. In 1985 our reviewer, Reynolds Price,
said: "Few artists' lives offer a memory more valiant than that of the Tennessee
Williams who sat down at dawn most mornings and, for hours, wrote -- wrote
literally to stay alive, sane and useful. That many of the dawns were miserable
makes it all the more a wonder that so much of the work is lucid, firmly built,
compassionate and always dynamically charged."
THE IDEA OF THE UNIVERSITY: A Reexamination
By Jaroslav Pelikan. Yale University, $10.
The author, himself a professor, analyzes John Henry Newman's 19th-century text
"Idea of a University" and finds its premises still valid today: that a
university should pursue knowledge for its own sake and that it must also
practice intellectual honesty. The book is "expounded with the grace that flows
from a cultivated as well as a learned mind," Noel Annan said here in 1992. Yale
has also reissued POLITICS BY OTHER MEANS: Higher Education and Group Thinking,
by David Bromwich ($10), another view from within academia. Mr. Bromwich
cautions against the tyranny of both right- and left-wing thinkers who would
reshape university curriculums. In 1992 our reviewer, David Lodge, called it "a
serious and intelligent book." Further arguments on the role of teaching are
examined in AN ARISTOCRACY OF EVERYONE: The Politics of Education and the Future
of America, by Benjamin R. Barber (Oxford University, $11.95). The author
asserts that democratic ideals and intellectual excellence are not opposing
goals and that both principles must inform the university experience. His is "a
temperate book," one critic said last year.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories
By Thom Jones. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $9.95.
Many of the author's characters are soldiers of one sort or another: some are
literal warriors, fighting in Vietnam; others are ordinary men and women
battling ill luck. Last year our reviewer, Thomas McGuane, said the "poetry of
his fictional world is irresistible."
THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica
By David G. Campbell. Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.
Antarctica may be a kind of desert, but it is far from barren. The author, a
biologist, celebrates the many species that developed especially to thrive
there. "All play center stage and are depicted with a Shakespearean
thoroughness," Edna O'Brien said here last year. The temperature is considerably
higher in the landscapes explored in DESERT TIME: A Journey Through the American
Southwest, by Diana Kappel-Smith (University of Arizona, $15.95). The author
spent a year and a half in the Great Basin, the Sonoran, the Mojave and the
Chihuhuan deserts, noting how these regions capture the immensity of geological
history. Last year our reviewer, Kathy Cone, said the book "leaves us with a
sense of the grand scale, both in space and time, of a living earth." The
University of Arizona has also reissued SONORAN DESERT SUMMER, by John Alcock
($15.95), the story of how a zoologist has made this particular place his
laboratory for both ecological and philosophical inquiry. The author "shows us
that scientific cognition isn't the only way to experience a glorious
ecosystem," David Quammen said here in 1990.
THE HAT OF MY MOTHER
By Max Steele. Algonquin/Workman, $9.95.
Women populate most of these 14 stories, using their strengths to survive in a
world where dreams of love and success often fail. In 1988 our reviewer, Carol
Hill, said, "These stories stay deep in our consciousness, and their sounds . .
. call forth clearly and hauntingly the deep, lost resonances of seemingly
ordinary lives."
A MOTHER'S LOVE
By Mary Morris. Delta, $9.95.
Ivy Slovak, a single woman whose mother took along Ivy's younger sister -- but
not Ivy -- when she left their father, has a baby herself. Her life "is not one
a reader will soon forget," Roxana Robinson said here last year. Maternal bonds
are also at the center of IN A COUNTRY OF MOTHERS, by A. M. Homes (Vintage,
$11), a novel chronicling the relationship between Jody, a 24-year-old adoptee,
and her therapist, who gave up her own infant daughter for adoption 24 years
earlier. Last year our reviewer, Maggie Paley, said, "The reader is hooked."
NOBODY'S FOOL
By Richard Russo. Vintage Contemporaries, $13.
The title character, Sully, is a 60-year-old man of odd jobs and only occasional
attachments who is forced into self-examination when plans for a theme park
threaten his small town. Its residents are "funny, quick and inventive,"
Francine Prose said here last year.
GAI-JIN: A Novel of Japan
By James Clavell. Dell, $6.99.
Japanese history once again gives this author his canvas, as he turns to
Yokohama in the early 1860's. For readers who like lots of samurai, shishi,
shoguns and sex, this is "a well-told story," our reviewer, F. G. Notehelfer,
said last year. LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS/ARTIFACTS;
For Sumatra's Warriors, Defenses Were Divine

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 36;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 875 words


LIVING AMONG volcanoes on the high plateaus of Indonesia, the Batak warriors of
Northern Sumatra resisted invaders until the 19th century. Turbulence and
isolation in a rugged island landscape helped these people shape powerful
expressions of the supernatural in architectural sculpture, everyday artifacts
and ritual objects.

Images of magic, death and deities are pervasive in the exhibition "Divine
Protection: Batak Art of North Sumatra," at the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
through Dec. 31, the first show in New York to focus exclusively on the art of
these Southeast Asian people.

While the 19th- and 20th-century items -- 70 carved doors, roof ornaments,
storage chests, potion jars, weapons and jewelry -- have practical functions,
their forms and surface decorations reveal otherworldly concerns. In the Batak
view, objects enhanced by mythical symbols invoked the assistance of the gods,
adding prestige and power to those who used them.

The exotic artifacts on view range in size from a finger ring of coiled brass
wire to a coffinlike wooden storage chest seven feet long. A repository for
household valuables, the large box is embellished with a pair of bulging-eyed
singas, creatures combining aspects of the horse, the water buffalo and the
serpent-dragon. It is a recurrent image in this show.

Puppets have universal appeal, even in this culture where they are not toys or
theater props but wooden funerary images. Intended to dispel the curse on those
who died childless, these life-size and half-smiling si gale-gale figures
(pronounced see GAH-leh GAH-leh) were carved as likenesses of the deceased. They
shed realistic tears when the right strings were pulled, squeezing the wet
sponges hidden behind the eyes. Mounted on wheeled platforms and colorfully
dressed, they were made to dance at funerals to calm the spirits of the dead and
ward off evil to the living.

The show's prize puppet is an exquisitely chiseled head with a bird-beak nose,
sad eyes, a vulnerable mouth and ears scrolled like question marks. Although
missing its platform and body, which would reveal whether it is a man or a
woman, the carving is one of the finest examples surviving of these relics.

Batak deities are also seen in a variety of animal sculptures on buildings and
as stoppers of ritual bottles. A vigorously sculpted lizard, symbolizing
fertility and regeneration, emblazons a granary door. Figures of men riding
singas were whittled of wood to serve as stoppers of potion vessels containing
pupuk, potent mixtures of organic substances and body fluids thought to be
magical. The jars themselves added to the mystique of these ritual objects,
because all were vintage ceramics imported from China, Vietnam or Japan and were
rare in the Batak area.

The show's weapons, stone sculpture, divination books and potion jars may
predate the Dutch takeover of the Batak regions in Sumatra in 1838. Some may
even be from the 18th century, when the Batak fought their fiercest battles
against their Islamic neighbors to the north and south.

The majority of the artifacts in the exhibition reflect European influences and
were probably produced after the arrival of German missionaries in 1864. With
their coming, the local population was gradually converted to Christianity, a
process that continued into the 1920's.

Although diminished by then, ancient animistic beliefs lingered on in Batak art.
The show's largest singa images, a pair of heads nearly five feet tall, were
carved probably in the 1920's as beam ends to guard the entrance to a nobleman's
house. In Indonesia, the house represented the cosmos -- the attic was heaven,
the living quarters were the earth, and the darkened space beneath the floor was
the underworld. And the singa's association with both the upper and lower worlds
reflects the ambivalence of supernatural power, which may help or hurt the
living caught in between.

In a different vein, the male and female figures crowning priests' staffs are a
curious bunch, ranging from crouching thinkers to skilled acrobats, all
characters in a mythological drama of incestuous twins. The relationship between
a twin brother and sister, some say, is a metaphor for lightning (male) and rain
(female). These elaborately carved sticks, some with finials of hair and fiber,
were used in ceremonies asking for protection of the village, for warriors going
to battle and for crops when there was danger of flooding or drought.

"We see some parallels in our own culture," says Florina H. Capistrano-Baker, a
research assistant in the museum's department of arts of Africa, Oceania and the
Americas, who organized this show. "The quest for divine protection in earthly
activities is certainly universal. What is less universal is the concept that
the supernatural is capable of both good and evil."

The exhibition, the first in the enlarged special exhibition gallery of the
Michael C. Rockefeller Wing, includes works from several collections, with more
than half from the Southeast Asian art holdings of Fred and Rita Richman, a gift
to the museum in 1988. The rest were donated to the museum by others or were
lent by the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago and the Barbier-Muller
Museum in Geneva.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Batak puppet cried when a string attached to sponges was
pulled. A lizard sculpted on a granary door, right, is part of a show at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. (Metropolitan Museum of Art)(pg. 36)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Picking Up The Legos And The Pieces

BYLINE: By DINITIA SMITH;   Dinitia Smith writes frequently about the arts and
culture.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2734 words


Mia Farrow is sitting in her large, dark, paneled apartment on Central Park
West. The light shines through her blond curly hair -- hair she says she cuts
herself. She is nearly 50 years old, with 12 children, 3 cats, 4 birds, a
hamster, a guinea pig. She has been up last night with her new adopted daughter,
3-month-old Keili-Shea.

Yet she seems eerily younger than her age. Her skin is luminous, seemingly
without makeup -- or makeup applied so expertly it is undetectable. The
impression of youth is enhanced by her clothes -- jeans, worn white cotton
T-shirt, Doc Martens.

Her family has occupied this apartment since she was 18, when her mother, the
actress Maureen O'Sullivan, first rented it. Almost every wall is covered with
family photographs: Ms. O'Sullivan as Jane in "Tarzan"; her father, John Farrow,
who directed "The Big Clock," John Wayne westerns and won an Oscar for his
script for "Around the World in 80 Days." The apartment is so dark that Andre
Previn, Ms. Farrow's second husband, is said to have once joked: "You have to be
careful where you step in Mia's apartment. There might be a baby."

Behind Ms. Farrow is the window from which she can see the apartment of her
former lover Woody Allen across Central Park. Today, she prefers not to talk
about Mr. Allen directly. "I have tried to take the high road," she says.

But she has a new movie coming out on Friday, "Widows' Peak." She is being
interviewed again, and inevitably questions turn to Mr. Allen.

For the past two years, the drama of Woody and Mia's breakup has been played out
in newspapers. The destruction of their relationship was like an end to
innocence itself. Woody and Mia were generational icons, a quintessential urban
couple, endlessly self-absorbed, in endless psychotherapy, simultaneously
knowing and childlike, seemingly able to take what they wanted from life, when
they wanted, how they wanted it.

Then Woody began having an affair with Mia's 19-year-old daughter, Soon-Yi
Previn. Woody Allen had reached too far, into his mistress's family, to pluck
her very child out. The innocence had come to an end. Then Mia accused Woody of
molesting their adopted daughter, Dylan, now 8 1/2.

Ms. Farrow appears fragile, waiflike, but "the fragility is a disguise," says
her friend Stephen Sondheim.

"She's a survivor, very strong and very smart. People think she's fragile
because of her voice. She sounds like a breathless, little girl."

Her roots are Irish, and she has an Irish person's love of language. In fact she
is quite literary and can discuss the relative merits of Henri Troyat's
biography of Tolstoy versus that of Flaubert.

Clearly referring to Mr. Allen, she says: "There is a way in which I have come
to see evil. A person relinquishes parts of himself, retains one fragment of his
total humanity. The cleverest can represent that fragment as the whole person.
The people around him don't realize he is not accountable in the same way others
are, that he doesn't experience himself in the same way. There is an emptiness
that can give place to anything, that permits behavior unacceptable and
unthinkable to others."

Ms. Farrow's new film, "Widows' Peak," is her first in 13 years without Mr.
Allen. (Another film, "Miami," written and directed by David Frankel, has not
yet been released.) Set in Ireland in the 1920's, "Widows' Peak" is about a
woman who, like Ms. Farrow, appears helpless and fragile -- but who has a
secret. Joan Plowright plays Mrs. Doyle-Counihan, a wealthy widow who rules the
fictional village of Kilshannon with her gossip. Ms. Farrow plays Miss O'Hare, a
mysterious, impoverished spinster. One day, a glamorous, young widow (Natasha
Richardson) arrives in the village. Miss O'Hare takes a dislike to her. And
nothing is ever the same.

For Mia Farrow, the film is a return to her Irish roots. Her mother was born in
Roscommon, in northwest Ireland, and her aunts still live in Dublin. Ms.
Farrow's great-grandfather, Daniel O'Sullivan, was Lord Mayor of Cork. "
'Widows' Peak' was a journey home," says John Irvin, the director. "But the film
was also a break from her past as an artist. Woody Allen has seen her as some
kind of icon. I saw her perhaps as more independent, more assertive."

1992
When Life Turns Tabloid

It has been two years since Ms. Farrow found photographs of a naked Soon-Yi,
taken by Mr. Allen, and nearly a year since Elliot Wilk, Acting Justice of the
New York State Supreme Court, denied Mr. Allen custody of his natural son,
Satchel (whose name has been changed to Sheamus), 6; his adopted son, Moses, now
16; and Dylan, 8 1/2 (whose name has been changed to Eliza).

A team of experts from the Yale-New Haven Hospital said they did not believe Mr.
Allen had molested Dylan. But Justice Wilk faulted the report and called Mr.
Allen's behavior with Dylan "grossly inappropriate." Some New Yorkers know the
words that follow almost by heart; they have the rhythms of a biblical
pronouncement. "He did not bathe his children," Justice Wilk wrote. "He does not
know the names of the children's dentist. He does not know the names of his
children's friends. He does not know the names of their many pets." Justice Wilk
said that Mr. Allen was "self-absorbed, untrustworthy and insensitive."

When Ms. Farrow is asked to list the names, ages and preoccupations of her
children, she readily complies, but Soon-Yi's name is conspicuously absent.
(Even Ms. Farrow's mother seems unsure how many children Ms. Farrow has. "I
don't know," she says, when asked. "I think it is 12.")

Ms. Farrow's children come from many backgrounds. The new baby is
African-American. Isaiah Justus Farrow, 2, is also African-American. There are
Eliza (Dylan) Farrow and Sheamus (Satchel) Farrow. Tam Farrow, a girl, either 12
or 13 -- her adoption papers are not clear -- is blind and adopted from Vietnam.
Moses Farrow was born with cerebral palsy and adopted from Korea. Daisy Previn,
19, and Lark Previn, 21, were adopted from Vietnam. Ms. Farrow's biological sons
with Mr. Previn are Fletcher, 20, a college student in Hamburg, Germany, and
24-year-old twins, Matthew, who is at Georgetown University Law School, and
Sascha, who works in electronics in Colorado.

Then there is the child Ms. Farrow had to give up. In October 1991, she had
adopted Sanjay, a Vietnamese child who appeared to be about 6. Ms. Farrow
thought he had polio but discovered he was profoundly retarded. "It was a very,
very difficult thing to do. But given the ages of the other children, how many
there are and all the professional advice, we let him go to another family with
two parents who were enthusiastic and waiting for such a child."

When Ms. Farrow is asked about Soon-Yi Previn, she says: "I still love her. You
always love your child."

Solutions
A Way Out Through Work

By the time of Mr. Allen's suit for custody of his children was over, Ms. Farrow
was understandably distraught. She had been dropped from Mr. Allen's new film,
"Manhattan Murder Mystery," having been replaced by Diane Keaton. Then came the
opportunity to film "Widows' Peak." "There was a sense of putting it all
together and going forward," she says today. "Making a film in Ireland was so
far removed from the courthouse. After all that had gone on, it seemed a
monumental leap, almost surreal. But I have children to support. To my real
delight, it was a pleasure. I was surrounded by people who were caring and
funny."

In many ways, all the principal actresses on the shoot last summer were nursing
wounds. A biography had been published saying that Ms.Plowright's late husband,
Laurence Olivier, had had an affair with Danny Kaye. Ms. Richardson's father had
died of AIDS. She had recently left her husband, Robert Fox, to be with the
actor Liam Neeson.

Then last August, Mr. Allen arrived in Ireland for his court-authorized visit
with Satchel. There were headlines in the Irish press: "Woody: Why My Suffering
Goes On" and "Woody's Anguish." "He spoke to the press, as I had anticipated and
feared," says Ms. Farrow. "We'd had such a peaceful time. Now again, there were
the sounds of gunfire and grenades. My stomach knew to turn over."

Hugh Leonard, the Irish playwright who won a Tony Award for "Da" and who
originally wrote "Widows' Peak" for Ms. Farrow's mother, says: "Woody Allen came
to Ireland and began to give speeches knocking Mia. Woody pretended to be very
hurt and innocent. He put up a facade about being reasonable and wanting to kiss
and make up. Everyone on the set closed ranks around her."

Mr. Allen refuses to talk to journalists about his children. "Two years later,"
says his spokeswoman Leslee Dart, "Mia Farrow is still saying she won't discuss
her legal problems. However, she continues to use her friends and family in her
attempt to vilify Woody Allen. For the sake of the children, Mr. Allen will not
speak to the press."

People close to Mr. Allen say Ms. Farrow is trying to manipulate the press,
presenting herself as shy, helpless, in need of a mother's love herself. "She's
very charming, very manipulative," says a member of the extended family who
sides with Mr. Allen and refuses to be identified. "Anyone who adopts this many
children for her own needs has real stability problems."

Growing Up
As the Twig Is Bent

Her father, John Farrow, was Australian, "a legendary womanizer," according to
Ms. Farrow, who also wrote treatises on Catholicism, a biography of St. Thomas
More and a history of the papacy. Mr. Farrow was what the Irish called "a
spoiled priest" and was forever torn between religious obligation and the life
of the senses. Mia's best friend as a child was Maria Roach Watkins, the
daughter of the producer Hal Roach. Ms. Watkins remembers the Farrow household
as "bizarre, almost like two houses."

"There was an adult part we were never allowed to go in. Mr. Farrow read all
night long. One of our jobs was to put his ice out in the bar for when he got
up. He had his own bedroom with its own entrance. Mrs. Farrow's bedroom was dark
green. It was like a sanctuary. If you went there, you had to say your prayers.
They were a beautiful family cosmetically, not as perfect inside."

Mia was one of seven children. She had a strict Roman Catholic education. "She
was very bossy," says Ms. Watkins. "She was the oldest girl. We put on plays;
Mia was always the producer, director and star. The children ran pretty wild. As
the oldest girl, she was the mother, the responsible organizer. It doesn't
surprise me she had all these kids. Her own mother was there physically, but she
wasn't. There were cooks and nannies. Mrs. Farrow would lock herself up in her
room. She was not really involved."

When Mia Farrow was 9, she contracted polio. Her parents could see her only from
behind a glass barrier at the hospital. When she recovered, the family dog had
to be given away for fear it was contaminated, the swimming pool drained, the
lawn reseeded.

Ms. Farrow's mother believes that the hospital stay contributed to Mia's later
desire to adopt children. "The children around her -- some died, some were in
iron lungs," Ms. O'Sullivan says. "Maybe that's what started her. She was very
brave to be 9 and shunted off in that dark hospital." In fact, after giving
Sanjay up, Ms. Farrow would still like to adopt a child who has had polio. "I
would love to parent such a child," she says.

Ms. Farrow's polio was followed by a series of other blows. The family moved
often, to Spain, England, California, New York. Then when Ms. Farrow was 13 her
brother Michael Damien Farrow died in a plane crash. When she was 17, her father
died. There was no money, and she had to go to work, performing in "The
Importance of Being Earnest" on Broadway in 1963.

At 20, Ms. Farrow married her first boyfriend, Frank Sinatra, who was nearly 50.
By then, she was known to millions as Allison MacKenzie in Peyton Place. "The
day she got married, it was really sad," remembers Ms. Watkins. "We all imagined
being married in the church we had gone to. Frank didn't want anyone to find
out, the press. She was going to Las Vegas and getting married. The problem with
Frank was that he had his life with Mia, and his other life with his cronies. I
think they were really in love, but his cronies never respected her, and she
never respected them. He reminded me of Mr. Farrow -- the flashes of temper.
Then he could be so charming and wonderful, and turn around and be somebody
else."

The marriage was brief. To this day, she and Mr. Sinatra remain on good terms.
"I love him very much," she says. While married to Mr. Sinatra, she appeared in
the film "Rosemary's Baby" and became a star.

With Mr. Previn, whom she married after leaving Mr. Sinatra, Ms. Farrow seemed
eager to forge the perfect childhood she had never had. There was a house in
Surrey with a thatched roof and twin babies. But Mr. Previn, who was a
successful conductor and composer in his 40's, traveled frequently. Ms. Farrow
wanted to work. Eventually, pregnant with Fletcher, she played Daisy in the film
"The Great Gatsby." She and Mr. Previn were divorced in 1978.

Growth
With Woody And After

In 1980, when in her mid-30's, she began seeing Mr. Allen, who was 45. "She was
interested in his intellectual craziness," says Ms. Watkins. "Mia is always
looking for a project, and he was a project. His neuroses challenged her -- to
give him a lovely home, even though he had his own apartment. Mia likes to
please men. She likes difficult men -- it's really sick," Ms. Watkins says with
a laugh.

With Mr. Allen came the period of her greatest artistic growth. Ms. Farrow could
play anything, it seemed: a bespectacled therapist in "Zelig," a Mafia moll in
"Broadway Danny Rose," a girl from the Bronx with an adenoidal whine in "Radio
Days," the sad, deceived woman in "Husbands and Wives," which prefigured the
unraveling of her own relationship with Mr. Allen.

All the while, she and Mr. Allen maintained separate residences and spent
weekends together at her country house, Frog Hollow, in Connecticut. "He never
wanted to be married to me," Ms. Farrow says now. "He said he didn't believe in
it -- it's just a piece of paper. He said we were married in every respect."

Even after she and Mr. Allen separated, Ms. Farrow continued adopting children.
"The last time she adopted, I was distressed," says her mother. "I said, 'Oh,
Mia, it detracts from your personal life and your physical life. What man would
want to be so involved with so many children?' "

But to Ms. Farrow, raising 12 children and working as an actress has not been as
difficult as it might seem. On movie sets, she says, "I just turned my camper
into a nursery. Right after having Sheamus, I was so exhausted, sometimes I
would just cry. Sometimes I felt like I had spent the night with vampires."

BUT NOW, SAYS MS. Farrow, "I just have six at home. The others are very
independent. Even Tam" -- her blind daughter -- "can babysit, though I wouldn't
leave her alone with them. She's very responsible. She's the one who finds
things. When we lost the baby chinchilla a couple of years ago, she came into my
room at 5 in the morning and said, 'Mom, I found it!' She had heard it.

"I have a good time," says Ms. Farrow, "unless I'm sick." There is a tincture of
dry humor in Ms. Farrow these days. "I've been picking up Legos for 23 years,"
she says. "By now I think I'm immune to everything." She has a housekeeper and a
babysitter who work from 9 to 5. She has a cleaning woman twice a week.

Would she ever marry again? Recently, there have been reports in some newspapers
that she is dating the actor Daniel Day-Lewis. "I'm not going to say anything
about Daniel Day-Lewis," says Ms. Farrow. "On principle."

For now, the Farrow family seems one almost singed by sorrow. "My oldest son" --
Matthew Previn -- "said, 'We have defined ourselves to ourselves, and to each
other, in a way that is not usually afforded to people other than through
tragedy, and that's a privilege."

In June, Ms. Farrow will give up the huge apartment -- with all its mementos and
photographs, the bookshelves with John Farrow's books -- and move her family to
Connecticut. Ms. Farrow glances around the huge room. "Recently, my mother said
to me, 'This used to be a joyous place, but I think it's depressing now. It's a
shrine to the past.' I think she's right."

NAME: Mia Farrow

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ms. Farrow with Jim Broadbent in "Widows' Peak," which opens on
Friday -- For the actress, the film is a return to her Irish roots. (Jonathan
Hassion/Fine Line Features)(pg. 22); Ms. Farrow in Mr. Allen's 1984 film
"Broadway Danny Rose" -- This time, a Mafia moll. (Brian
Hamill/Photoreporters)(pg. 23); Mia Farrow in the Central Park West apartment
she has lived in since she was 18. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Washington Trolley Links Major Sights

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


Gold Line/Gray Line Sightseeing has introduced the "Lil Red Trolley" in
Washington, a two-hour sightseeing circuit around the city.

Passengers may remain aboard for the entire two-hour narrated tour, or spend the
day, getting off and on at any of the 16 stops made by the motorized trolley.

Stops are made at several hotels, the Gray Line Terminal at Union Station,
Capitol Hill, the United States Navy Memorial, Ford's Theater, the National Zoo,
the Kennedy Center, the Lincoln and Vietnam memorials, the Holocaust Memorial
Museum, the National Air and Space Museum and Hogate's Restaurant on the
southwest waterfront.

The trolley operates daily from 8:30 A.M. to 6:30 P.M. and appears at each stop
every hour. The fare is $16, half price for children ages 3 to 11. For more
information, call (800) 862-1400.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENCOUNTERS;
Writer Confronts the Legacy Of Whitman and 'Raintree'

BYLINE: By ERIKA DUNCAN

SECTION: Section 14LI;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2598 words


WE stood at the top of Jaynes Hill, the highest point in Long Island, looking
out at the sea Walt Whitman looked upon. Larry Lockridge was holding his
father's annotated copy of Whitman, in which his father's favorite lines were
marked.

Oh, despairer, here is my neck,

By God, you shall not go down! hang your whole weight upon me.

I dilate you with tremendous breath, I buoy you up...

It was one of the first temperate days of the season, in which the weather
refuses to make a sign, and all that is outward seems to be held in abeyance, as
if waiting for a signal from inside the heart. So too had the suicide of Ross
Lockridge, Larry's father, refused an explanation by the outward signs when his
"Raintree County" came out back in 1948.

Many had tried to write the great American novel.  Few had been told during
their own lifetimes, and especially so young, that they had succeeded. At the
time of Ross Lockridge's suicide, "Raintree County" was being hailed as that
great long-awaited product by its publisher, Houghton Mifflin. The winner of an
M-G-M contest, even as the final editorial decisions had yet to be made, and
before its entity, its reality, could sit quietly with either its author or
publisher, it was put on the drawing board to be made into a multi-million
dollar movie. Pressures from publishers and publicity mongers were interwoven
with the sense of a complete emptying-out when suddenly the years of frantic
working and reworking were stopped, all leading to a spiraling downward, from
which there was no return.

In this age when writers' suicides hold a particular -- and I often think not
quite right -- fascination, Larry and I had often asked each other the age-old
questions about vulnerability and the risk of grandeur, what risk-taking lay
behind the daring to make art. We had asked ourselves many, many questions about
"election," disappointment in dreaming of grandeur, and the need for the world
to protect the making of art.

Finally, Father's Biography

It was in the sadness of "growing up with a novel instead of a father," and of
his wanting, first as a boy and then later as a man, to feel that his father's
book was as great as his sacrifice of his life for it, that Larry embarked
finally, at the age of 46, on the writing of his father's biography.

Back in Walt Whitman's house of birth, lying on a table in the Whitman kitchen,
where visitors were not supposed to go, but where they kindly would allow us to
sit retracing the memories, was Larry's book, newly published by Viking, "Shade
of the Raintree: The Life and Death of Ross Lockridge, Jr.," with a photograph
of himself with his family at the age of 4 on the cover, 16 months before he
lost his father.

We would return there soon, but for now Larry walked over to a small
commemorative boulder, where now, instead of the Whitman poem, on the bronze
plaque there was only pale graffiti. He stood there for a moment in his
raincoat, as I walked away to look through the gap in the trees not yet bearing
their green towards the sea, asking myself once again, as Larry and I had asked
each other the night before over dinner: Is what is given in the way of
art-making energy expendable? Does the gift of the muse come in a finite amount?
And what does it mean to make too much too fast, to try to be too big too soon?

Comparison to Whitman

For Ross Lockridge as a young man worked with a drivenness, day and night,
trying always to be bigger than big, including not only all of the mythology of
America in its pastoral singing, but all of the mythology of all time. He was,
indeed, only 33 when the 1,060-page "Raintree County" came out, that "buoying
up" and "tremendous breath" novel that the publisher said Walt Whitman would
have written, had Walt Whitman chosen to write a novel.

I was thinking of how Whitman had barely begun to find his own largeness and
particular poetic uniqueness at the age Ross Lockridge killed himself.

The annotated copy of "Leaves of Grass" that Larry held in his hand was meant to
be the subject of a doctoral dissertation, given up so that Ross might become
"the great bard" instead of merely writing about him.

His life, to all external eyes, was successful. He was happily married.  Vernice
Lockridge, his wife, worked closely with him, typing his manuscripts and
supporting the sacrifices of his writer's life. He had four little children, who
were underfoot happily while he worked, and he enjoyed their presence. It was,
as Larry would later say, "as if he had violated a taboo, creating in his own
life the 'possible impossibility.' No one stopped him, so he almost had to stop
himself." And yet had his own intensity, his own need for speed, stopped him?

Had he who had driven himself to a greatness, putting everything in, used
himself up? Or had he only momentarily emptied himself?

Talking in Whitman House

Later on we would return to the house where Walt Whitman was born, and sitting
talking in the low ceilinged kitchen, where the light dimmed through the
casement window surrounded by gray-green and the old doors were covered with
cast-iron hinges and latches, we would muse about what would have happened had
Ross's publisher not also gotten caught up in the need to bring out the great
American novel all at once and right away -- agreeing to every cut that M-G-M
demanded, every cut that the Book of the Month Club demanded -- but instead had
slowed Ross Lockridge down. We would try to make the publisher into a good
mother of sorts.

In the late afternoon light Larry's eyes narrowed. In the sunlight, often they
would close, and his face softened as he spoke of his need to bring up his
father again whole, or if not whole at least as close to whole as now possible.
"I've searched for my father in faded envelopes, dusty manuscripts, and
memories," Larry had written. "We can search for lost fathers and mothers, over
hard roads and wide, and they won't be there.  But I've found enough for now."

There had been a time when Larry would have been unable to write the book or to
reveal anything personal.  And then suddenly, about four years ago, came the
time when he felt he had no choice but to write it, and to do it from the son's
personal point of view.

Back in Print

Perhaps most moving in the book is the son's wish for his father's greatness,
that the book for which his father died be truly great. Now as Penguin Books
brings "Raintree County" back into print, Larry speaks of his wish that others
should love it and see in it all that his father once hoped that it was, and all
that in the time of Ross's last despair he repudiated, the hoping having proved
much too painful.

I looked at Larry, who had talked, even when I first met him 12 years ago, of
not wanting to be Icarus, nor to attempt to reach too high. And then I
remembered the days in which he was "only" a shy professor of Romanticism, who
hid himself well and surely would not have wanted to tell his own story, or the
secrets of his father's life. In fact, in those days at New York University he
had rarely told anyone that Ross Lockridge was his father. Although the notion
"that you burn up your allotment so that you die young" would often come up as
he discussed Romantic literature, moving from Keats to Shelley, and we would
often talk about the downward suicidal stain that was the dark face of the
passionate, impassioned flight, except to a few close friends he rarely spoke
about his father's "famous" literary suicide or his father's trying to fly too
high.

We could feel such an aura in the way that the old-fashioned wooden and iron
utensils, set on low tables, shelves and stools, caught the late afternoon
light, even though we knew well that they weren't the real ones, but only the
resurrected reproductions -- the Whitman Birthplace having passed into numerous
other hands between 1824, when the Whitmans moved out, and 1952 when it became a
State Historic Site.

And this while we talked of the generations of Lockridges who grew up with the
notion of resurrection, reconstruction of history, of the boy Ross who was taken
by his father, a populist historian, to historical sites, old Indian burial
grounds and sites of bloodshed and battles where his father gave speeches and
pageants, "silhouetted against a bonfire, gesticulating grandly," reconstructing
the dead.

And I thought of the boy Larry, who grew up not only with a novel instead of a
father, but so deeply immersed in the legend of Raintree County, where wherever
the family went in his father's Henry County, Indiana, everything had been
renamed for his father's novel.

"You will look hard and wide for the Shawmucky River, Paradise Lake, and the
Great Swamp, and they won't be there in this unarresting farmland some 25 miles
east of Indianapolis," Larry had written.

"You will find human testimonials, though: 'Raintree Auto Sales,' 'Raintree Bait
and Tackle,' 'Raintree County Dairy,' 'Raintree Barber and Styling Shop,'
'Raintree Muffler Shop'. . . an uncanny nostalgia for a locale that never really
existed."

Long before Larry was old enough to know the novel and its themes, or to read
its 1,060 pages, he seems to have taken it into his blood. So freely, even now
as Larry writes this book that is part literary biography and part a son's quest
for his father's meaning, does he move from the hero, John Shawnessy of the
novel to the tales of his own father's life.

"In the Great Swamp, John Shawnessy sees the astonishing beauty of plants and
insects as he searches for an Asian tree said to have been planted by Johnny
Appleseed," he writes as he searches for the lost adolescence, first of his
father and then of himself.

"Though I never warmed to bugs, I felt a similar biological imperative and a
sense of the land's pagan antiquity whenever the southern Indiana spring
arrived. A few times as a young adolescent I set out on solitary journeys
through river goo and poison ivy, reenacting the feverish pastoralism of the
novel."

A Moment in Church

Indeed it was in the moment of the destruction of the pastoral that Larry for
the first time felt close to his father's imperative, to raise up his own voice
and to act. It was during the Vietnam war, when Larry was a student at Harvard,
and there was a moment during a church ceremony in Boston, when they were
repudiating the war, when he seemed to hear his father's voice telling him that
he must raise up his own voice against sending young men to participate in the
bombing.

"I thought of my father's America as described in 'Raintree Country,' he said to
me, "of the populism, the great erotic promise of the land, Jeffersonian
democracy and the pastoral Eden. How could that land be bombing the brains out
of these peasants, I thought." In the rush of the feeling "that literature
shouldn't be anything other than renovative and revolutionary," he wrote his
entire doctoral dissertation on the mind of the moralist in Coleridge in seven
weeks' time.

"Coleridge also died at an early age inasmuch as the opium took over and
crippled him immensely for most of his life," Larry added somewhat sadly. "In my
treatise on ethics I was asking myself: How can an opium addict be treated
sympathetically, as I was asking how a father who forsook his family at the
height of good fortune could be treated sympathetically. When I decided to write
about my father I made the decision not to censor anything, no matter what I
found."

It is with a youthful exuberance that Larry tries to recapture his father's
young mania to put everything in, but even as we are talking what comes up is
the "mystery" of a nostalgia and sadness omnipresent in the book. It is a
sadness that seems to come more from a cosmic anticipation than an actual
knowledge, or perhaps from a deep spiritual knowledge, rooted in his family
history and his bones.

There are stories of an eldest brother lost to drowning when the boy Ross is 5,
a foreshadowing of Larry's own loss of his father at 5, and an uncle's loss,
also in adolescence, a generation earlier, which in its turn becomes an echo.

"But this isn't enough," Larry said, as he talked of the metaphysical aspect of
his father's very perception of time, and of human culture itself in a time of
decline, which made for the tremendous sense of loss in the novel. The whole
question of the sort of knowing that allows one to anticipate loss even before
it is given troubled him, as the question of election troubled him, especially
in the face of his Whitmanesque striving for democracy.

"He wrote with a demon in him," Larry said. "He would do all this historical
research, but when he sat down to write it would be in the hope that he would be
visited by the modern muse. He would chain himself to the typewriter, waiting
for visitation."

Place of Religion

Larry thought for a moment before he added, "Any poetics based on visitation is
very precarious, because the muse can desert you." In the end, and this was very
sad, he couldn't see the generosity of Raintree Country, but only its egoism. It
became a kind of hair shirt, a kind of sacrificial self-indulgence.

In fact, once the muse deserted him and he gave up his idealism anchored in the
body and paganism and sex, turning to his mother's Christian Science, which went
against everything he had written, it got so he couldn't write the personal
pronoun anymore.  He couldn't write the word I."

The story of how he gradually lost sight of what he really wanted and who he
really was is harrowing. Mary Jane Ward, who was his cousin and wrote "The Snake
Pit," the best selling novel that caused Americans to look in a new way at
mental illness, incarceration and shock treatments, comes into the story in a
dramatic way, both over-identifying with Ross's depression and denying it,
afraid that if the true extent of his depression would be known he would be
given the treatment that she had received, but not knowing of any other.

It is the story of a strange megalomania that lasted through the period of the
book's revision, during which he gradually gave up portions of the text for the
sake of the various predators who wanted to make the book a popular success, but
simultaneously fought over money, acknowledgement -- making himself all at once
very big and very small. The way that the demands of the publishing
establishment fed into this is a terrible commentary on the way artists --
usually in a less exaggerated way -- are bent and broken, but beyond that it
raised in us both, as we sat there together, the need to affirm what his father
had done, the fact that Larry would not have wanted his father to have written a
less ambitious book, nor to have given up the great egoism, which was also a
great generosity, to have striven less high.

"The link between creativity and depression is still a mysterious one," Larry
said to me softly. And then, returning to the theme of publisher and world as a
"bad mother" to the necessary vulnerable and porous creative artist, perhaps
flying too high, we spoke of the fact that we somehow must make permission to do
this, to take this sort of leap -- part of the artist's inalienable right -- and
to learn how to make safe shelters for this.

"I think that we all enjoy these downfalls because it makes us feel better about
ourselves for not having tried so hard," he said, shocking himself and me with
the baldness, the bareness of his own statement.

Then we both sat in silence for a while, thinking.

Erika Duncan is an essayist and novelist who lives in Sag Harbor.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Larry Lockridge outside the birthplace of Walt Whitman in
Huntington. (Pg. 1); In Walt Whitman's birthplace in Huntington, Larry
Lockridge, author of "Shade of the Raintree: The Life and Death of Ross
Lockridge Jr.," retraced memories of his father. (Pg. 8) (Maxine Hicks for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Accentuating the Positive

BYLINE: By John B. Judis;   John B. Judis, a contributing editor of The New
Republic, is the author, most recently, of "Grand Illusion: Critics and
Champions of the American Century."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1577 words



NIXON
A Life.
By Jonathan Aitken.
Illustrated. 633 pp. Washington:
Regnery Publishing. $28.

IN Richard Nixon's heyday we argued about whether there was really a new Nixon
or merely the old. Now, in the wake of his death, we will be debating whether
the good Nixon outweighed the bad. Jonathan Aitken, a Tory member of Parliament
who played a personal role in Nixon's rehabilitation after Watergate, has
written a biography of the late President that places him in the most positive
light. If Nixon's biographies are arranged on a favorability scale of 1 to 10,
with Nixon's own memoirs at a 10 and the post-Watergate psychohistories at a 1,
then Mr. Aitken's book ranks as a 9.

Mr. Aitken makes a case that Nixon was the "most innovative and successful
foreign-policy President of the 20th century" and that he is either blameless or
deserving of praise for many of the actions he has been condemned for, from his
conduct in the 1946 Congressional campaign to his 1972 Christmas bombing of
North Vietnam. Mr. Aitken contends that the Watergate burglary and its cover-up
were peccadilloes for which Nixon should not have been driven from office. "The
forcing of Nixon's resignation was a political overreaction, a human injustice
and a strategic mistake," he writes.

"Nixon: A Life" brings considerable new material to bear on this thesis. While
Nixon refused to see respectable but potentially critical biographers like
Stephen E. Ambrose and Roger Morris, he granted Mr. Aitken, who arranged a
triumphal post-Watergate visit to Britain for him in 1978, extensive access to
his person and papers and encouraged his family and close friends to talk to
him. None of Mr. Aitken's material is earthshaking, but it allows us to see the
man better -- particularly his relationship with his mother and his feelings of
estrangement from the Eastern upper classes. Because of this material and
because of Mr. Aitken's lively style, anyone interested in Nixon will profit
from this biography, regardless of whether, like me, they disagree with many of
the author's analyses.

Mr. Aitken is on the firmest ground in his assessment of Nixon as a foreign
policy maker. I might take the two Roosevelts over Nixon in this regard, but
certainly no one else. During Nixon's "Wilderness Years," from 1963, when he
moved to New York to practice law, to 1968, when he was elected the 37th
President, he developed the ability to form judgments about world history
without the taint of passing partisan prejudices or preconceptions. He was able
to see through the cold war to a new "structure of peace" based on the balance
of power rather than on a quasi-religious conflict between good and evil.

The book doesn't discuss it, but Nixon also displayed surprising skill in
international economic policy. In the mid-60's, Nixon was the first major
American leader to anticipate Japan's emergence as an economic power; and he was
the first President to come to terms with the end of America's economic
supremacy. In a noteworthy July 1971 speech in Kansas City -- later the basis of
his book "1999," published six years ago -- he predicted that the bipolar
rivalry of the cold war would eventually be replaced by a pentagonal rivalry,
rooted in economics, among the United States, Western Europe, China, Japan and
the Soviet Union. And he did his part to bring these trends to fruition, laying
the basis in 1971-72 for a new international economic order based on negotiated
currency values and managed trade. Nixon -- under attack in his own party --
later abandoned both his policies of detente and managed trade, but they
represented a high-water mark of American diplomacy and self-understanding.

But Nixon had one major foreign policy weakness, which Mr. Aitken doesn't
recognize: a naive faith that American military intervention could solve
international problems. On military matters, he was not a "granite realist," as
Mr. Aitken describes him, but an adventurist. Mr. Aitken doesn't mention Nixon's
plan to win the Korean War by bombing China or his support in 1954 of American
intervention in Vietnam on the side of the French. Mr. Aitken relates without
comment that, in 1961, Nixon advised John F. Kennedy to invade Cuba, and that
during the mid-60's, he goaded Lyndon B. Johnson to escalate the Vietnam War.
And even though Nixon campaigned for the Presidency on a promise to secure
peace, he came to believe that he could achieve a quick, favorable settlement in
Vietnam through military force. All these positions were wrong, but the last was
disastrous and led to the destruction of his Presidency.

Nixon's illusion about the military persisted to the Vietnam War's end. While
his national security adviser, Henry Kissinger, believed that the January 1973
Paris agreement ending the war merely allowed the United States a safe
withdrawal before the South Vietnamese Government collapsed, Nixon believed that
through his continuing threat to re-enter the war, he could maintain the South
Vietnamese Government in power indefinitely. Mr. Aitken endorses this view,
writing, "Peace in perpetuity had been given a chance." Nixon would later argue
that Watergate alone permitted Saigon to fall -- a position his biographer
shares.

Mr. Aitken is probably at his least persuasive when explaining Nixon's political
past. He acknowledges that Nixon's dark side -- his brooding resentment, his
eagerness to destroy and discredit his opponents -- shaped his conduct and led
ultimately to Watergate, but he believes it only asserted itself very late in
Nixon's political life. He rejects the view of Nixon's critics -- and there are
many still, despite his rehabilitation -- that from 1946 on, Nixon played a
nefarious role in American domestic politics.

In telling the story of Nixon's life, Mr. Aitken argues that his dark side,
represented by his argumentative, resentful father, Frank, only emerged as the
result of the death of his saintly mother, Hannah, in September 1967. "As long
as Hannah was alive, the dark side of Nixon was rarely in the ascendant," Mr.
Aitken writes. "She was the sheet anchor of his morality and the visionary
spirit behind his highest political ideals." Mr. Aitken also quotes with
approval former Secretary of State William Pierce Rogers's opinion that during
the 60's Nixon was influenced negatively by the example of political
ruthlessness that the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations set. In short, the bad
Nixon was a creation of the Democrats.

But there is good ground for believing that Nixon's dark side was present from
his first election. In a letter to a Whittier, Calif., banker, in which he
agreed to run against the incumbent Democrat, Jerry Voorhis, in 1946, Nixon
promised to "tear Voorhis to pieces." He centered his campaign on attacking
Voorhis as a pawn of Communists, even though Voorhis had sponsored legislation
in 1940 requiring Communists to register as agents of a foreign power. Mr.
Aitken contends that Nixon was simply conducting a normal race, insisting that
in 1946 -- in Southern California! -- calling someone a Communist was an
innocuous charge. "The equivalent label today might be 'left winger' or 'hard
leftist,' " he writes.

In fact, Nixon was one of the first politicians to run negative campaigns
against opponents based on the imagined charge of their being tied to Communism,
for which he has to share some of the blame for the outbreak of McCarthyism in
the early 50's. Mr. Aitken makes much of Nixon's running a clean Presidential
campaign against John F. Kennedy in 1960, but this was because Nixon was
operating under Dwight D. Eisenhower's implicit command. It was not the death of
Nixon's mother but Nixon's removal from Eisenhower's shadow that caused his dark
side to re-emerge in the 1968 campaign and during his first term. It manifested
itself in the pursuit of a political strategy (the "Southern strategy") that
ended up polarizing the parties along racial lines and in a political style,
reinforced by Vice President Spiro T. Agnew, that encouraged negative
campaigning and spurious personal attacks.

Mr. Aitken's portrayal of Watergate, highly influenced by Len Colodny and Robert
Gettlin's "Silent Coup," places the primary blame for the scandal on John Dean,
whom he charges with authorizing the original break-in and then attempting to
implicate everyone else in the cover-up. I can't judge whether Mr. Aitken is
right, but I agree with him that, in retrospect, neither the Watergate break-in
nor the cover-up should have merited Nixon's resignation. In Mr. Aitken's view,
Nixon was finally forced to resign not because of what he did, but because of
the violent antagonism between Nixon and the national press and between Nixon
and Congress.

Is Nixon in the end more good than bad? If I had to judge, I'd put him closer to
the guarded evaluation of Stephen Ambrose and Roger Morris than to that of Mr.
Aitken. But a biography of someone so deeply controversial as Nixon does not
rise or fall on whether a reviewer or reader agrees with its interpretation. Mr.
Aitken's book should join the pantheon of Nixon books -- including Mr. Ambrose's
three-volume biography, "Nixon"; Mr. Morris's "Richard Milhous Nixon"; William
Safire's "Before the Fall"; Henry Kissinger's "White House Years" and "Years of
Upheaval," and Walter Isaacson's biography "Kissinger" -- that one must read to
form an evaluation of, perhaps, the most important politician of our time.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard M. Nixon campaigning for President in 1968. (DIRCK
HALSTEAD/GAMMA LIAISON/FROM "NIXON")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By CHRIS PATSILELIS

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 270 words



MILITARY BIOGRAPHY
PARATROOPER
The Life of Gen. James M. Gavin.
By T. Michael Booth
and Duncan Spencer.
Simon & Schuster, $27.50.

Considered a pioneer exponent of the deployment of airborne troops, Gen. James
M. Gavin (1907-90) commanded the 82d Airborne Division as it battled its way
through Europe in World War II. Gavin was also an early proponent of such
technological innovations as the bazooka, combat helicopters, the use of tanks
as a separate branch of ground forces, and tactical nuclear weapons. T. Michael
Booth, the author of a novel, "Retribution," and Duncan Spencer, a columnist for
Roll Call, a newspaper that covers Congress, use Gavin's unpublished
recollections as the basis for their vivid biography, "Paratrooper." After his
wartime success, the authors write, Gavin found himself increasingly out of sync
with military thinking; for instance, he opposed the concept of massive nuclear
retaliation against the Soviet Union. Following a contentious and unhappy stint
as Army Deputy Chief of Staff, Gavin retired in 1958 and joined the consulting
firm of Arthur D. Little, eventually becoming its president; he also served as
President John F. Kennedy's Ambassador to France. In one of his last public
appearances, in 1967, he urged to a Congressional committee that "we bring
hostilities in Vietnam to an end . . . that we make a massive attack on the
problems of education, housing, economic opportunities, lawlessness and
environmental pollution." Mr. Booth and Mr. Spencer have written a clear
portrait of an innovative and unconventional warrior.
   CHRIS PATSILELIS

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Talk of Life And Death Of Firefighter From Widow

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words


On a somber day of leaden skies and bittersweet remembrance, the widow of Capt.
John J. Drennan stood in the portals of her husband's firehouse in SoHo
yesterday and spoke quietly of the life and death of a firefighter, of courage
and the limits of endurance in his 40-day ordeal with overwhelming burns.

"It's a good ending to a good life," Vina Drennan said of her husband's intense
struggle for survival, which began March 28 with burns over 65 percent of his
body in a blaze that killed two other firefighters and ended with his death on
Saturday at the burn unit of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.

Meantime, the surgeon who attended the 49-year-old Captain Drennan told in an
interview of his patient's valiant fight for life through 10 skin graft
operations, repeated infections, liver and kidney failures and other crises that
he came close to outlasting, despite heavy odds against him.

And a fire captain who had been at the family's side virtually around the clock
for nearly six weeks recounted an "emotional war" comparable to his own tour of
military duty in Vietnam years ago: the honor of service, the daggers of
frustration and the ultimate tragedy of defeat.

'He Loved Going to Work'

Solemn but tearless, her children beside her outside the firehouse at West
Houston and the Avenue of the Americas, Mrs. Drennan's face was etched with the
strain of the weeks at a hospital bedside as her husband endured his final days
in interminable but dulled pain, motionless on his back and unable to speak.

"John Drennan had a wonderful life," said the widow, 48, a school teacher on
Staten Island, where the family lives and where Captain Drennan had been a
teacher and coach before joining the Fire Department. "He loved going to work
every day -- 25 years he's enjoyed serving the people of the City of New York."

A funeral Mass for Captain Drennan, scheduled for St. Patrick's Cathedral at 10
A.M. on Wednesday, was expected to be attended by many of the city's 11,000
firefighters and top public officials, as well as thousands of firefighters from
across the nation. The captain was the 756th New York City firefighter to die in
the line of duty in the department's 129-year history.

Amid fire engines and ladders, floral bouquets left by neighborhood people and a
yellow ribbon someone had tied to a tree, Mrs. Drennan and her children --
Jessica, 25, Adrian, 24, Justine, 19, and John, 14 -- also paid tribute to the
firefighters who had helped care for and comfort the captain and his family
through the weeks of agonizing pain and emotional hardship.

"Many people have wondered how the Drennan family could be so strong," Mrs.
Drennan said, "and this is the reason: these wonderful people have enveloped us
with a lot of love and care and it's helped my children and myself get through a
very big tragedy."

In the firehouse, the headquarters of Engine 24 and Ladder 5, the pictures of
Captain Drennan and Firefighters James Young, 31, of Queens, and Christopher
Siedenburg, 25, of Staten Island, who also were killed in the explosive fire at
62 Watts Street in SoHo, had been posted in a window, and the mood was down.

A visibly shaken firefighter, Bob Callahan, said many young colleagues had
looked upon Captain Drennan as a father figure. "A piece of each of us died with
him," he said. "I'll never forget him."

Capt. Pat Brown, 41, who had known Captain Drennan for 15 years and had been
assigned on the night of the fatal fire to aid Mrs. Drennan and her family
during his hospitalization, told in another interview of a long vigil in
hospital waiting rooms, in the patient's room and with family members at nearby
accommodations supplied by the Fire Department.

"It was like an emotional war every day," said Captain Brown, who recalled a
patient who breathed through a tube, was fed through a tube, could not talk,
would lapse in and out of consciousness and, occasionally shed a tear as he
endured crisis after crisis. "We planned his funeral three times," he added.
"His heart couldn't take it any more. It's a miracle he survived this long."

Captain Brown said that, to spare him further agonies, Captain Drennan had never
been told that two of his colleagues had also died as a result of burns in the
Watts Street fire. "I just said to him, don't worry. Your wife and kids are
doing fine and all the guys at the fire station are O.K.  too."

Shaking his head at the memories, the captain added: "It was the hardest thing
I've ever done. I was in Vietnam. I've spent 18 years as a firefighter. I've
been in scores of tragedies. But this is by far the worst."

Dr. Michael Madden, clinical director of the burn unit at New York
Hospital-Cornell Medical Center since 1981 and the surgeon who attended Captain
Drennan, said yesterday that his patient had been up against terrible odds with
third- and fourth-degree burns over 65 percent of his body, many of them not
just through the skin but down into the muscle tissue and the bone.

Despite 10 operations ranging from 3 to 12 hours each to apply grafts of skin
from Captain Drennan's chest, abdomen and scalp to the burned areas of his body
-- his back and both sides from head to toe and his upper extremities as well --
the grafts were unable to establish much healthy new tissue, he said.

Captain Drennan endured many episodes of infection, the doctor said, in addition
to liver and kidney failures.

"The amazing thing about it was that he began to recover, which is extremely
unusual in burn patients who have multiple organ failure," Dr. Madden said.
"Most people die. But his liver and kidneys were recovering. We were making
progress covering his wounds and controlling the infections."

But around 4 A.M. on Saturday, there were signs of a new series of infections in
his pancreas and in small areas throughout Captain Drennan's body, Dr. Madden
said. The delicate balance between the invasion of bacteria and his body's
defense mechanisms began to tip in favor of the bacteria, and he died at 4:47
P.M.

"His body had been running at full tilt for 40 days and 40 nights," he said
referring to a metabolic rate of twice the normal levels. "At a certain point,
you just can't keep it up. The infection outruns the defense mechanism, and
that's what happened. The fact that he lasted for 40 days is a testament to his
will to live and the fact that he was, without question, a fighter."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Capt. Pat Brown escorting members of the family of Capt. John
J. Drennan outside his firehouse in SoHo yesterday after Captain Drennan died
Saturday of burns sustained at the end of March. From left were Captain
Drennan's daughter Justine, son John Jr. and his widow, Vina. (Monica
Almeida/The New York Times); Capt. John J. Drennan

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Maya Lin's World Of Architecture, Or Is It Art?

BYLINE: By CAROL VOGEL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1364 words


Say Maya Lin's name to architects, and they will tell you she's really an
artist. Mention her to artists, and they'll start reeling off the architectural
projects she has completed. Spending one's life walking a delicate tightrope
isn't easy. Ms. Lin knows she doesn't really belong to any one camp.

"It's been exceedingly difficult and at times downright discouraging," she said,
perched on the edge of a chair designed by Charles Eames, the 1950's architect,
that occupies the front corner of her Manhattan office.  "There's an incredible
suspicion that if you're interested in two different disciplines, then you treat
them lightly. I love architecture and I love sculpture, but I could never
choose. Sculpture to me is like poetry, and architecture is like prose."

Ms. Lin works in one plain room in a dilapidated building in the Bowery.  Her
telephone number is unlisted. As an architecture student at Yale, when she was
the subject of international attention for her design of the Vietnam Veteran's
Memorial in Washington, she said she "just wanted to disappear."

Public Work by a Private Artist

That was 12 years ago. Now, at 34, with six public commissions to her credit and
two more in the works, the thought of another spate of publicity still makes her
want to hide. "I'm like a turtle," she said. "I live in my own world. Just
because my work is public, I am not."

Yet she is resigned to the fact that more publicity is inevitable. In the next
few weeks, when her latest public commission, a sleek, 38-foot-long elliptical
clock, is installed across from the ticket booth at the newly renovated 34th
Street entrance to Pennsylvania Station, Ms. Lin's work will once again be very
much in the public eye. Five years in the making, the clock is a significant
departure from her other projects, which range from a large grass earthwork of
repetitive waves in front of an aerospace company in Michigan to a
4,000-square-foot house in Santa Monica.

When she was at the Yale School of Architecture in the late 1970's and early
1980's, Ms. Lin said she was told by her professors she could either be an
artist or an architect, but not both.  She remembers sneaking over to the art
school to take sculpture classes. "I quickly got tired of paper architecture,"
she said, "of designing things that never got built."

'A Greedy Profession'

Her commissions, for the most part, come by word of mouth. "Someone has to know
someone who knows me to get my phone number," Ms. Lin said. Her most recent
architectural project involved renovating two floors of a loft building in SoHo
for the Museum for African Art, where she used different colors to articulate
the different galleries.

"The problem with architecture is that it's a greedy profession," she said. "It
starts sucking up all your time. I'm nervous because I want to remain low key. I
don't want to be overwhelmed by running a big firm and having to delegate
authority. I like designing in the middle of the night. Being hands-on is
important."

Several weeks before the museum in SoHo opened a little over a year ago, Ms. Lin
spent every day on the site supervising and often hand-fitting the finishing
touches herself. The steel and maple reception desk was made by an opera singer
turned cabinetmaker from Pennsylvania. The curved staircases were laid out by
Ms. Lin on site. "The design came from a freehand sketch," she said."There's
often a point when the architect in me stops and I want to do something that has
the touch of a human hand." She made and installed the copper pipes, or
sculptured "trees" as she calls them, and the copper mesh screens at the
museum's entrance.

Last fall she spent several weeks in Columbus, Ohio, planning "Groundswell," a
three-level garden of sea-green crushed glass, which is the first permanent
installation at the four-year-old Wexner Center for the Arts at Ohio State
University. Dressed in blue jeans, high boots and a mask, Ms. Lin directed a
crew of six as 40 tons of recycled glass from the Ford Motor Company were
hoisted by crane in a conical-shaped sifter and poured in soft mounds that fell
in just the right size and sequence in three levels of outdoor spaces that are
part of the New York architect Peter Eisenman's stark building. Ms. Lin calls
the project her version of a Japanese Zen garden.

Expecting Criticism

In describing her work, Ms. Lin exhibits a quality rare among artists and
architects, being articulate without taking herself too seriously. With her
black-rimmed glasses, shoulder-length hair, intense black eyes and no makeup,
she resembles a prettier version of the brainy kid you hated to sit next to in
math class because she never made a mistake. At first this can be disarming. Her
ideas seem far beyond her years.

"I've learned to expect criticism when you do anything in public," she said.
"But it still hurts." When she designed the Vietnam Memorial, a black granite
V-shaped wall carved with the names of more than 58,000 war dead, it was called,
among other things, a "degrading ditch" and a "wall of shame." Over time, the
public response has been positive. Ms. Lin expected the same harsh reaction in
1989, when she designed the Civil Rights Memorial at the Southern Poverty Law
Center in Montgomery, Ala. But the work was surprisingly well received.

Not so for "Groundswell." Someone who didn't like the work poured red pigment on
a large portion of it, forcing her to replace 14 tons of glass.  "I took it
personally," she said. "Maybe I shouldn't have. At first I felt pain, but it
quickly turned to anger. I expected this in Washington or Alabama but not in
Ohio."

Not in her home state. While her mother is from Shanghai and her father from
Beijing, Ms. Lin grew up in Athens, Ohio, where her father (who died five years
ago) was a ceramicist and dean of the art school at Ohio University. Her mother
is a professor of literature there.

Her sculptures, which she makes both in her Bowery studio and a house she owns
in Vermont, are simple abstract pieces using classic modern materials like
combinations of iron, wood and beeswax. By contrast, many of her public
commissions reflect a concern with the environment. "Ever since I was a kid I
felt we had no right to overrun the planet as we have," she said. Earth, water
and stone are recurring elements.

Diverse Projects

Ms. Lin was asked to design a sculpture to commemorate women at Yale, to go in
front of the Sterling Memorial Library. She created a 36-inch high elliptical
table made of green granite with a bluestone base.  Water seeps from a
funnel-shaped hole drilled through the table like a wellspring. Carved into the
top is a spiral of numbers starting with zeros and mounting into the thousands
to chart the number of women at Yale.

In front of the new Federal Court House just south of Worth Street in lower
Manhattan, Ms. Lin is designing her version of "plop art," a series of four
human-size, highly polished stones from a quarry in Norway. For the Rockefeller
Foundation at 420 Fifth Avenue, at 38th Street, she is creating an environment
of sugar cane and bamboo surrounding a stone table and benches fashioned from
chunks of recycled wood.

But right now most of her energy is spent finishing the clock for Pennsylvania
Station. A crew of 16 have been working full time at Treitel-Gratz, a foundry in
Long Island City, cutting the steel frame, and polishing, sandblasting, tinting
and lacquering the aluminum. The project is part of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority's Arts For Transit project, and Ms. Lin was chosen from
a competition of artists who were invited to submit their work. She says the
work is reminiscent of "a solar eclipse." Rather than traditional hands, soft
white light emanating from behind a moving disk will illuminate the numbers.

Once it's in place Ms. Lin hopes it will become the kind of landmark the famous
clock at the Biltmore Hotel became after the hotel was built in 1913. "I know
this is an old-fashioned notion," she said with a deliberate pause. "But all I
really want is to hear people say, 'Meet me under the clock,' and then I'll be
happy to disappear again."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maya Lin with her sculpture "Groundswell," reflected in the
window of the Wexner Center for the Arts at Ohio State University in Columbus.
(J. Kevin Fitzsimons for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 826 words



International A2-10

MANDELA VICTORY AFFIRMED
A Parliament as diverse as any in the world took office in South Africa and
proclaimed Nelson Mandela the country's President. A1



In South Africa, celebrations of many stripes. A8

BATTLE OVER YEMEN CITY
Rival armies in Yemen battled for the southern city of Aden. In five days of
civil war, hundreds of people have been killed or wounded. A1

QUANDARY FOR VIETNAM
While Vietnamese officials want American investment, the bitterness over the war
has not disappeared, creating a quandary for the leaders as they shape policy.
A6

ITALY: NEW FACES, OLD ISSUES
Italians are beginning to suspect that the new Government will face the same
issues of conflict of interest and corruption as the old. A10

BUYING TIME ON HAITI
American officials said the new Haitian refugee policy may allow time for
pressures on the country's rulers to work, but that they still have no firm plan
if that fails.  A3

From Haitians in New York, guarded skepticism. A3

AT&T GETS BIG SAUDI DEAL
Saudi Arabia selected AT&T to modernize its entire telecommunications system in
a deal worth $4 billion over the next six years. D1

A United States warning on Mexico's election. A2

Economic analysis: Rethinking trade strategy with Japan. D1

Japan will share military technology with Washington. A6

Impatient for change, Gazans fought Israeli soldiers. A9

Moscow Journal: Wrestling, and nestling, with the mob. A4

National A12-21

NEW HEALTH PLAN OFFERED
Senator Edward M. Kennedy proposed a revised health care plan to broaden
individuals' choice of insurance and to reduce the burden on very small
businesses.  A1

FINANCIAL BLOW TO ABORTION FOES
A jury ordered two anti-abortion groups to pay $1.01 million in punitive damages
to a Planned Parenthood clinic disrupted by their protests in1992.  A1

THE GREASE OF POLITICS
Pleading, often shamelessly, for money is the underside of the American
politics, as Ken Harper has discovered in his campaign to be elected senator
from Mississippi.  A1

A RUSH TO FIGHT CRIME
Citing alarm among the citizenry, state legislatures are rushing to pass
measures to fight crime, and toughness is the watchword.  A1

SNITCH ON DRIVERS, PLEASE
The Florida Highway Patrol hopes private cellular-phone users will help it crack
down on drunken driving: it is urging them to call the nearest station, free,
when they see wrongdoing on the highway.  A12

KING DEFENDANT DISMISSED
A Federal judge dismissed Daryl Gates, the former Los Angeles police chief, as a
defendant in Rodney G. King's suit for financial damages for being beaten in
1991.  A19

CHANGING MEDICAID FORMULA
President Clinton said the formula for distributing Federal Medicaid money
should be altered to provide larger amounts to states with many poor people.
A20

A hearing began on a college's altering the Gettysburg battlefield.  A12

An eclipse occurs today.  A18

Metro Digest B1

STATEN ISLAND MAN SUFFOCATED
The Medical Examiner's office said that a Staten Island man who died in the
custody of police officers suffocated because of pressure on his chest and neck.
A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C15-20

An appreciation of Clement Greenberg.  C15

Several forthcoming films touch on a new subject: obesity.  C15

Theater: "Passion." C15

Film: "Murder Magic." C19

Music: Exploring Stravinsky.  C16

Eldar Nebolsin, pianist.  C16

Orpheus Chamber Orchestra.  C16

Shonen Knife.  C19

Unsane at Wetlands.  C19

Celtic fiddling.  C19

Books: "Split Skirt," by Agnes Rossi.  C20

Television: "Perry Mason Mystery" and "Getting Gotti." C20

ABC's fall lineup.  C20

Science C1-13

Species-rich marine sanctuaries in U.S. are expanding.  C1

The familiar box turtle is under assault.  C1

The brain's unusual system for locating sounds.  C1

Fashion B7

Sports B9-17

Baseball: Yanks win and move into first. B11

Mets defeat Expos. B11

Basketball: Riley avoids controversy.  B9

Columns: Berkow on Pippen.  B9

Hockey: Rangers beat Capitals to gain semifinals. B9

Devils take lead over Bruins. B9

Obituaries B8

George Peppard, a Hollywood actor, known for "Breakfast at Tiffany's."

Jim Finks, player, coach and executive in professional football.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

More rats, fewer dollars.

Pursue gay-baiting commanders.

Politicizing privatization.

Communists as reformers.

Letters

Russell Baker: The national pastime.

A. M. Rosenthal: The Haitian mirror.

Christopher Buckley: Silver screen, black lungs.

Jordan Moss: Nice drive to the ballot box.

Chronicle B6

Chess C8

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.;
Where Monuments Speak of a U.S. Defeat, the Talk Is of 'Peaceful Contacts'

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1901 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


In Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City there are Vietnamese who wash down pizza with
Coke, pay for things with American dollars, wear American flag patches on
jackets and yell "hello!" at any "big nose" foreigner they see.

But the country still raises patriotic banners gloating over what the Communists
regard as America's defeat in the Vietnam War. Beneath an outwardly friendly
curiosity many Vietnamese display toward Americans, a predatory undertone tinged
with bitter resentment is often detectable. There are many reminders for
Americans visiting Vietnam of the lacerations left by a war that ended nearly
two decades ago but that still colors Vietnamese attitudes.

Vietnam's political leaders face something of a quandary as they reshape
national policy toward the United States.

On one hand, the 1975 victory over the South Vietnamese Government and its
American ally, still fresh in the minds of many, is commemorated as a historic
triumph comparable to America's victory over the British at Yorktown. America,
to some, is still an enemy -- a fighting enemy to Communist military veterans,
and a perfidious former friend to those Vietnamese who regard America's
withdrawal from the war as a betrayal.

Much Is Needed And U.S. Can Help

Moreover, there are some who resent the 19 years it took Washington to lift its
trade embargo, and the attitude of American conservatives who continue to block
diplomatic recognition of the Hanoi Government.

But eclipsing these irritants, Vietnamese leaders have come to believe that
there is a pressing need for American investment, technical aid, tourist visits
and many other kinds of contact with the United States. Hanoi is even trying to
persuade thousands of overseas Vietnamese (known as Viet Kieu), including
Vietnamese-American refugees, to return to their native land and help rebuild
it. Many have come back for temporary visits, and a few, disillusioned with life
in the United States, expect to remain.

The Government is celebrating a double anniversary -- the 19th of the fall of
Saigon, renamed Ho Chi Minh City after the war, on April 30, 1975, and the 40th
of the fall of the French bastion at Dien Bien Phu on May 7, 1954.

Anti-American sentiments adorned some of the red-and-gold celebratory banners
flown over streets for the occasion, but as a sign of the times, Vietnamese
authorities did not include English or French translations that might have
offended foreign visitors. Aside from the Communist slogans, visiting Americans
-- tourists, business executives, journalists and officials of the United States
Missing in Action Mission -- are treated by officials in Vietnam with studied
courtesy and conciliation.

On the anniversary of Saigon's surrender to the Communists, for example, this
correspondent was received at the home of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap for a brief chat.
The 83-year-old general, who commanded the Vietnamese Communist forces against
both the French and the Americans, has been rated by Western military analysts
as one of the greatest generals of the 20th century. But "the victor of Dien
Bien Phu," as he is often called, does not gloat.

Old Warrior Muses On Today's World

One subject of the conversation was the fall of Saigon in 1975, which this
correspondent covered for The New York Times.

Imposing in his olive-green uniform and general's shoulder tabs, General Giap
was avuncular and cordial, and clearly reluctant to say anything he thought an
American might find objectionable. Speaking in French, he deferred benignly to
frequent interjections and corrections from his wife, Dang Bich Ha, who was once
a soldier in the Communist forces herself.

At his comfortable villa a few hundred yards from the Lenin-style mausoleum of
Ho Chi Minh, General Giap, the supreme commander of Hanoi's legions from 1952
until 1977, mused on the changing state of the world.

"In the traditional sense, the threat of colonialism and imperialism has
disappeared," he said, "and we shall probably not need to confront such threats
again. We Vietnamese are optimists. But even though we face no shooting war in
Vietnam, the world is in a very uncertain state, and Vietnam must always be
willing to sacrifice to protect its freedom."

He praised the "fairness" of American journalists, and said that after retiring
from active command he had turned his attention increasingly to the war against
pollution and the preservation of the environment -- causes he knew to be
popular with the American press.

General Giap's masterly command of logistics and maneuver, and his deployment of
artillery at the isolated Dien Bien Phu fortress in 1954, caught the French
defenders by surprise and stunned world leaders; a peasant army had brought a
well-armed European army to its knees.

General Giap's 1962 book "People's War, People's Army," which outlines the
mixture of political warfare and military strategy that was his hallmark, became
a textbook for guerrilla insurgents in many parts of the world, and was highly
regarded even by such longtime battlefield foes as the late Gen. William E.
DePuy of the United States Army.

Although General Giap spent much of the anniversary of the fall of Saigon
receiving Vietnamese military well-wishers and admirers, he took care in the
interview to avoid any suggestion of belligerency.

"We certainly have no fight with the American people," he said, "and we welcome
peaceful contacts with your country."

But despite the diplomatic language Vietnamese leaders use with Americans, there
remain many reminders of the war that most Americans would find galling.

On Hai Ba Trung Street in Ho Chi Minh City stands a tall, unkempt-looking
building that was formerly the Brink Hotel -- a military billet erected for
United States Army officers. On Christmas Eve 1964, Vietcong terrorists drove a
jeep containing a huge bomb into the building's courtyard and set it off,
killing two Americans and wounding 58.

Today a monument stands at the corner entrance of the building, adorned with a
concrete relief sculpture depicting American dead and wounded scattered through
the debris. In front of the marker is a single strip of barbed wire, symbolizing
the huge thicket of barbed wire that surrounded the building in the war years.

A Forbidding Prison, Full of Memories

There is no marker at the floating My Canh Restaurant in Ho Chi Minh City, but
many Americans remember it as the place where Vietcong bombs set off in June
1965 killed 44 diners, including 12 Americans. One, Sgt. Al Combs of the Special
Forces, was killed along with his Vietnamese wife and their children.

Hanoi is also filled with disagreeable reminders of the war. At the Army Museum
on Dien Bien Phu Street, a large bin containing dozens of flight helmets taken
from American fliers shot down over North Vietnam is displayed. Outside, a
freshly painted MIG-21 has been mounted; a sign says the aircraft shot down a
dozen American planes.

The looming yellow walls and electrified wire surrounding Hoa Lo Prison in Hanoi
-- known to Americans as the "Hanoi Hilton" -- remind visitors of a time when
many American servicemen were imprisoned there, undergoing privation and
mistreatment.

In Ho Chi Minh City, the former Doc Lap Presidential Palace has been restored as
a museum intended to show the wasteful extravagance of the old regime, as
abetted by the United States. Guides at the palace, English-speaking girls who
had not even been born at the time Saigon fell, shepherd visitors through
"shamefully opulent" reception chambers, a ballroom, dining halls and private
quarters where South Vietnam's last President, Gen. Nguyen Van Thieu, spent his
last days before fleeing to the United States.

Adorning the walls of District People's Committee headquarters and other
official offices in many parts of Vietnam are photographs of Nguyen Van Troi
bound to a stake and facing a firing squad in Saigon on Oct. 15, 1964. Troi, now
a national hero for whom one of Ho Chi Minh City's main streets has been
renamed, was caught and shot after trying to kill Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara by planting a bomb under a bridge Mr. McNamara's limousine was
scheduled to cross.

The War Is Over; English Classes Call

At West Lake in Hanoi is a monument honoring city residents who helped to find
and capture downed American airmen. At a small lake in the suburban Ngoc Ha
("Flower Village") district of Hanoi is a monument honoring the antiaircraft
missile crews that shot down American bombers in the 1960's and 1970's. In the
middle of the lake stand a large fuselage section and wheels from a B-52 that
was shot down at the spot in 1972, and was left where it fell.

Although the relic could offend some Americans, Vietnamese passers-by seldom
spare it a glance. Many are hurrying to attend evening English classes offered
at a school facing the lake, and the few Americans who visit the lake are
usually hailed by children eager to practice their English. "We all must learn
English if we hope to become traders and make money," one said.

A recent American visitor to Hanoi was John Denver, the folk singer, who
happened to arrive on the anniversary of the fall of Saigon to begin a series of
concerts.

"We had a phone call from an American back home who was under the mistaken
impression that our first concert would coincide with the anniversary, and the
caller didn't like what that seemed to imply," Mr. Denver said, "but we
reassured him our arrival on that day was just coincidence."

Mr. Denver, who said he was exempt from the draft in the Vietnam War years
because of a medical disability, said his concerts here -- the first by any
American folk singer since the end of the Vietnam War -- had no political
significance.

The Nation's Poverty Is Breeding Crime

The crime bred by Vietnam's poverty is not helping to heal Vietnamese-American
relations. Gangs of street children envelop foreigners as they step out of their
hotels, and theft is a constant threat. Believing that a recent American visitor
could not understand Vietnamese, one gang leader was overheard instructing his
scruffy lieutenants to obstruct her way in the next block so that confederates
could grab her watch.

It seems to some American businessmen that many Vietnamese are determined to
attract as much American investment as possible while giving as little as
possible in return. "In their eyes, Americans lost the war and although we are
rich, we are weak," a businessman said. "The idea seems to be to take us for all
they can get."

A Vietnamese former employee of an American company that had an office in Saigon
before the Communist victory expressed a common view of Vietnamese who remained
after their American colleagues fled.

"We have had very difficult lives," he said. "Some of us spent years in prisons,
re-education camps and 'new economic zones' -- Vietnam's Siberias -- because we
worked for Americans. But despite all, we love our country. I am glad I stayed,
and so is my family. Some Vietnamese who opposed the Communists still resent
America's leaders for abandoning Vietnam, but I say, forgive and forget."

A Government official offered a more diplomatic view. "The war brought us
victory and we are proud of that," he said, "but the hatred is past and we are
getting on with the future. Part of that future means learning English and
making American friends."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The walls of Hoa Lo Prison, the "Hanoi Hilton" where many
American servicemen were imprisoned, still loom grimly in the Vietnamese
capital. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Hanoi.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

George Peppard Dies; Stage and Screen Actor, 65

BYLINE: By GLENN COLLINS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


George Peppard, the actor who played a would-be writer smitten with Audrey
Hepburn in the 1961 film "Breakfast at Tiffany's" and was better known to
younger generations as the cigar-chomping, tough-guy commander of "The A-Team"
on television, died on Sunday at the U.C.L.A. Medical Center. He was 65 and
lived in Los Angeles.

The cause was pneumonia, said his press representative, Cheryl J. Kagan. He was
admitted to the hospital on Thursday because he had trouble breathing, Ms. Kagan
said. In 1992, a cancerous tumor was removed from Mr. Peppard's right lung, she
said.

In the 1970's, Mr. Peppard (pronounced pep-PARD) starred as a shrewd
Polish-American detective in "Banacek," which ran from 1972 to 1974 on NBC, and
as Jake Goodwin, a neurosurgeon, on "Doctors' Hospital," an NBC medical drama in
the 1975-76 season.

Leader of 'The A-Team'

But he is perhaps best known for his role on "The A-Team" on NBC as John
(Hannibal) Smith, a former Army colonel leading a team of renegade Vietnam
veterans who became soldiers of fortune. The show, which ran from 1983-87 on
NBC, was a ratings blockbuster but drew fire from some critics, who described it
as a violent demolition derby.

"The character is probably the best part I've had in my career," Mr. Peppard
once told an interviewer. "It was a good script, and a good script is hard to
find."

An Engineering Student

Mr. Peppard was born in Detroit, the only child of George Peppard Sr., a
building contractor, and Vernelle Rohrer Peppard, a light-opera singer and voice
teacher.

Although he majored in civil engineering at Purdue University, he was an early
participant in the Purdue Playmakers. He continued acting after he transferred
to the Carnegie Institute of Technology in Pittsburgh, where he received his
bachelor's degree in 1955.

After moving to New York, he was accepted into the Actors Studio, where he
studied the Method with Lee Strasberg. In 1956 he made his Broadway debut at the
Longacre Theater in "Girls of Summer," by N. Richard Nash, in a production with
Pat Hingle, Arthur Storch and Shelley Winters.

After his film debut in "The Strange One" (1957), adapted from a Calder
Willingham novel about brutality in a Southern military academy, Mr. Peppard
returned to Broadway in "The Pleasure of His Company" (1958).

'Tiffany's' and After

After supporting roles in "Pork Chop Hill" (1959) and "Home From the Hill"
(1960), Mr. Peppard won his first starring role, opposite Leslie Caron in a film
adaptation of Jack Kerouac's novel "The Subterraneans." But it was not until he
played a writer being kept by a wealthy matron in "Breakfast at Tiffany's" that
he received recognition as a box-office draw.

His role as a Howard Hughes-like playboy in "The Carbetbaggers" (1964) was
admired by some critics, who praised his ability to play a forceful, caddish
character. Others faulted his performance as overly enigmatic and colorless.

Mr. Peppard's more than 25 films included "How the West Was Won" (1962), "The
Victors" (1963), "Operation Crossbow" (1965), "The Blue Max" (1965), "House of
Cards" (1969) and "The Executioner" (1970).

In recent years he toured the country in "Papa," a solo show about Ernest
Hemingway, and in "The Lion in Winter," by James Goldman. Most recently, he was
a co-star on the March 3 episode of the television series "Matlock," which was a
pilot for a series in which Mr. Peppard hoped to play a private investigator.

He was twice married to Elizabeth Ashley, his co-star in "The Carpetbaggers."
Both marriages ended in divorce. His other wives were Helen Davies, Sherry
Boucher, Alexis Adams and Laura Taylor.

In addition to Laura Taylor Peppard, he is survived by a daughter, Julie; two
sons, Brad and Christian, and three granddaughters, all of Los Angeles.

NAME: George Peppard

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: George Peppard, above (Camera Press), in 1990, and with Audrey
Hepburn in the 1961 film "Breakfast at Tiffany's." (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 12, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Lewis Puller Jr., Vietnam Hero And Biographer, Is Dead at 48

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 14;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 552 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, May 11


Lewis B. Puller Jr., who won the Pulitzer Prize for chronicling his fight
against despair and alcoholism after he lost both legs while serving in Vietnam,
died this afternoon. He was 48 years old.

A spokesman for the police in Fairfax County, Va., said Mr. Puller died of a
self-inflicted gunshot wound at his home in Mount Vernon, Va., just outside
Washington.

His wife, Linda T. Puller, a member of the Virginia House of Delegates, was in
Richmond today for a one-day session of the Legislature. Friends said the couple
had recently separated.

Mr. Puller's book, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet" (Grove
Weidenfeld, 1991), was written as a tribute to his father, the late Gen. Lewis
B. (Chesty) Puller, the most decorated marine in the history of the corps. The
book won the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1992.

Journey From Alienation

On winning the award, Mr. Puller told interviewers that he planned to write a
second book about the life of Senator Bob Kerrey, Democrat of Nebraska, who met
Mr. Puller while both men recuperated from their war wounds at the Philadelphia
Naval Hospital in 1968.

Mr. Kerrey said tonight: "He was cut in half. He should have died in the
hospital. He had to will himself back to life. Tragically, in the end he was not
able to give himself the lift he gave to all those who read his book."

William Styron, who reviewed the book for The New York Times, called it "a dark
and corrosive autobiography." Mr. Puller described it as an account of his
journey from alienation to reconciliation with a nation that had sent him to
war.

In the book, he told of stepping on an enemy land mine while he was a Marine
combat platoon leader in Vietnam. "I felt as if I had been airborne forever," he
wrote. "I had no idea that the pink mist that engulfed me had been caused by the
vaporization of most of my right and left legs."

Wounds That Never Healed

In public speeches and in conversations with friends, he said the physical and
emotional wounds never healed. Still, he called his book "an affirmation of life
-- there are second chances."

Tonight Mrs. Puller said in a statement: "To the list of names of victims of the
Vietnam War, add the name of Lewis Puller. He suffered terrible wounds that
never really healed.

"In his struggle to recovery, we faced many troubled and painful times together.
But today, I hope his friends and the family he loved so much will remember the
wonderful moments he brought to our lives."

Mr. Puller was awarded the Silver Star and two Purple Hearts, the Navy
Commendation Medal and the Vietnam Cross of Gallantry.

Lewis B. Puller Jr. was born in Camp Lejeune, N.C., in 1945. He graduated in
1967 from the College of William and Mary, where he also earned a law degree. In
1978, he ran unsuccessfully for Congress as a Democrat in Virginia.

Since 1979 Mr. Puller worked as a senior lawyer in the Defense Department. At
his death, he was on a leave of absence and working as a writer in residence at
George Mason University in Fairfax, Va.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Puller is survived by a son, Lewis 3d, of Arizona;
a daughter, Margaret, of Alaska;two sisters, Martha Downs of Alexandria, Va.,
and Virginia Dabney of Lexington, Va. A family friend said tonight that funeral
plans had not been made.


NAME: Lewis B. Puller Jr.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Jerry Bauer,1991)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 12, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE SET WITH: Dennis Franz;
A Man for All Precincts

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, May 11


It's lunch-time, and Dennis Franz is sitting lazily in his small trailer on the
20th Century Fox lot. He sips at a bottle of Snapple. Slowly, he picks at a dish
of rice, chicken and vegetables.

At first glance, he seems only a distant relative of Detective Andy Sipowicz,
the volcanic cop on ABC's acclaimed "N.Y.P.D. Blue." The jeans are perfectly
cut, the knitted shirt is fashionably loose, the suede and leather loafers are
expensive. Even the haircut -- of what's left up there -- looks like the work of
a high-priced Beverly Hills barber.

More important, Mr. Franz is quiet and relaxed, hardly the surly, complex and
wrecked man he plays in the weekly hourlong series, which was created by Stephen
Bochco and David Milch. Although filmed almost entirely in Los Angeles, the
series takes place in New York and is a hard-edged, believable and (for
television) profane exploration of the police in Manhattan. The two stars are
Mr. Franz and David Caruso, whose lithe good looks, red hair and cool style have
put him on the cover of the current issue of GQ, magazine, given him fat movie
offers and made him a star.

In fact, Mr. Franz, who is 50, on the heavy side and looks, well, like an
average guy, is in many ways the unheralded centerpiece of the show: a man
teetering on the emotional edge, a cop falling off the wagon now and then, an
isolated figure estranged from his son and struggling to adapt to a romance with
a sensitive prosecutor after he tangled with her bitterly in the opening
episode.

As gritty as the show is, "N.Y.P.D. Blue" is not especially violent, but it is
crammed with street language and has some nudity and sex that seem unusual, if
not unique, for network television, even in its 10 P.M. time slot. Mr. Caruso
has shed most of his clothes already, but Mr. Franz has not had his moment.

Women all over America are probably not losing sleep, he said with a laugh,
although he has received hundreds of letters indicating that many in the
audience think he's as much a sex symbol as his buddy, Mr. Caruso.

"I'm waiting," Mr. Franz said. "I've already signed a piece of paper saying I
have no objection to taking off my clothes. So far, so good. I've just gotten
down to my shorts and T-shirt."

He shrugged and smiled. Mr. Franz is 5 feet 11 inches tall and weighs 210 to 220
pounds. Is there an indulgence that he cannot forgo? "It's a four letter word,"
he replied. "F-O-O-D."

Of the perhaps-inevitable nude scene, Mr. Franz said: "I don't worry about it. I
don't have any qualms about it. But I asked them to give me enough notice --
like a month -- so I can try to get myself in shape.

"To be honest, with my lack of self-discipline, they could give me a year's
notice and I don't know if anything would change," he said. "Besides, we all
don't look like David Caruso. It wouldn't do the show a disservice to show
everyday people. We all have rear ends. We all weren't born with clothes on. I
would represent Everyguy."

Maybe he'll have his chance next season. The series, which is broadcast Tuesday
nights, is the highest-rated new drama on network television. It ranks among the
top 20 shows, and is viewed each week by nearly 20 million people, said
officials of Twentieth Television, the division of Fox Inc. that distributes the
show. No one was surprised when it was renewed on Monday.

Mr. Franz may not have always represented Everyguy in his 20-year career, but he
has certainly played just about every cop. His first professional acting job in
his hometown, Chicago, was in a play called "Cops," with Joe Mantegna and
Meshach Taylor. He has played policemen 28 times, in television series like
"Hill Street Blues," "Bay City Blues" and "Beverly Hills Buntz," and films like
"Dressed to Kill" and "Die Hard 2."

Mr. Franz recently bought a house in fancy Bel Air, but he seems ambivalent
about his success. "I'm very, very fortunate to be able to find some sort of
niche," he said. "But I'm looking at scripts now, and the only prerequisite I
have is no cop roles."

Despite his success, he says he is simply not offered roles other than
policemen. "An actor can be anybody," he said. "But once you find a niche for
yourself it becomes difficult to break out, difficult to convince people that
I'm also capable of playing a husband or a lawyer or a postman or a priest or a
family man or a nice guy without a cop attitude."

He has just completed an NBC movie of the week, based on a true story, in which
he plays a South Carolina journalist. He is also trying to initiate a film or
television production of Paddy Chayefsky's 1955 comedy-drama "Marty," about a
lonely Bronx butcher.

Mr. Franz grew up in the suburbs of Chicago, the son of German-born postal
workers. He started acting in high school, when he accompanied a girlfriend to
an audition for "The Crucible."

"I got caught up in the whole spirit," he recalled. "The guys trying out were
sort of meek. I used to sing when I was a kid, and my father's words to me were,
'Be loud.' So I got up and was loud. And I got one of the leads."

Acting enthralled him. "I loved being part of the theater," he said. "I lived
for the rehearsals. I found it very comforting to know what I was going to say
and what other people were going to say back to me."

After attending Southern Illinois University, Mr. Franz was called into the Army
and sent to Vietnam in the late 1960's. "I have a hard time remembering some of
my experiences," he said tightly. "I chose to let a lot of it go. You spent
every day trying to survive."

Because the creators of "N.Y.P.D. Blue" were aware of Mr. Franz's Vietnam
experience, they wrote an episode about a disabled veteran who is humiliated by
thugs who steal his wheelchair. At the end, Sipowicz, who is a Vietnam veteran,
struggles to help the crippled man. Sipowicz says sadly that he has a hard time
remembering the war. The veteran replies, "I would like to forget, also."

Mr. Franz said that in many ways acting helped him cope with Vietnam.  When he
was discharged from the Army, in 1970, he immersed himself in Chicago repertory
companies and spent five years in the Organic Theater Company. The police roles
began almost immediately and never stopped.

In his trailer, the few photos on the wall are those of his companion, Joanie
Zeck, who runs an executive recruiting company, and of her two grown daughters.
Mr. Franz and Ms. Zeck have lived together for 11 years, and the actor helped
raise the girls.

Mr. Franz was reluctant to marry early on because of the financial uncertainty
of an actor's life. Now that his life seems financially certain, the actor says
he's almost there. Almost. "I have a thing about responsibility," he said
uneasily.

Mr. Franz has many friends in the police and receives letters almost daily from
law-enforcement officers who praise his multidimensional portrayal of Detective
Sipowicz.

"I wouldn't want to do that job for anything in the world," he said. "Sipowicz
is a certain kind of policeman, a man who is not able to step away from all the
stresses and negative elements of his work."

Mr. Franz said that when the show periodically moves to New York for exterior
shots, the police are especially enthusiastic. "They jump out of their cars and
want to take pictures with me or they yell, 'Hey, Sipowicz.' "

And in both New York and Los Angeles, the police accord Mr. Franz special
treatment. After all, he seems very much one of them. Asked if he had ever been
given a speeding ticket in New York or Los Angeles, Mr. Franz was
uncharacteristically cautious. He drained his Snapple.

"Let's just say I have a better chance of not getting a ticket than somebody
who's not on this show," he said.

NAME: Dennis Franz

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dennis Franz, a star of the gritty "N.Y.P.D. Blue." (Mojgan B.
Azimi for The New York Times) (pg. C1); David Caruso, left, and Dennis Franz as
police detectives in the show "N.Y.P.D. Blue." (Bonnie Colodzin/ABC) (pg. C12)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Battlefields of Khe Sanh: Still One Casualty a Day

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: KHE SANH, Vietnam


A quarter century has passed since one of the most costly battles of the Vietnam
War raged across the desolate Khe Sanh plateau, but this old battlefield near
the former border between North and South Vietnam is still filling hospital beds
with fresh victims.

The bare brown earth for miles around remains seeded with unexploded shells and
bombs -- a legacy of the 77-day siege in 1968, when some 40,000 North Vietnamese
troops tried in vain to overrun the 5,000 United States marines holding the Khe
Sanh bastion.

In the battle American forces rained 100,000 tons of bombs (equivalent in
destructive force to five Hiroshima-size atomic bombs) and 158,000 large-caliber
shells on the hills surrounding the base, killing an estimated 15,000 Communist
soldiers.

Some of these projectiles, along with a considerable number of Vietnamese
shells, were duds. But they remained alive and they are still killing unwary
farmers bringing new land under cultivation. Dr. Pham Sy Dan, director of the
Quang Tri Province Hospital at Dong Ha, said that people newly wounded at Khe
Sanh and other battlefields in the province are admitted at the rate of one a
day. Victims killed outright are not counted in this total.

The land around Khe Sanh is poor and ill suited to most crops, but it has
nevertheless become valuable as a result of population pressure. Since the end
of the war, Vietnam's population has grown by more than 60 percent -- it now
exceeds 72 million -- and crowding has become particularly acute for farmers in
the Red River Delta of northern Vietnam. Growing numbers of them leave home to
seek land in the south, and many have settled in previously underpopulated
regions.

The plow has come even to the dangerous fields of Khe Sanh. Men, women and
children are dying here whenever their draft buffaloes plow up old bombs and
shells. But an even greater hazard to life and limb is the thriving scrap metal
business.

Residents of the region, including Van Kieu tribesmen as well as ethnic
Vietnamese, are attracted by the easy money that can be made by finding and
selling scrap metal to the steel plant at Thai Nguyen in northern Vietnam.

Dealers pay about seven cents a pound for military scrap, and with the help of
$50 metal detectors imported from Thailand, scavengers can easily find enough
metal around Khe Sanh to make a living. Common scrap includes big chunks of
steel shrapnel, spent artillery cartridges, rockets, and intact shells and
bombs.

Paying With Their Lives

For miles around, the ground of Khe Sanh is pitted and furrowed by the shovels
of these scrap diggers -- men, women and children who can earn up to $2 a day, a
relatively good income. But some of them pay dearly for their booty, or their
crops.

During a visit to the Quang Tri Province hospital, an ambulance delivered Tran
Van Nam, a 22-year-old scrap metal hunter whose face and arms were horribly
injured by an explosion that also killed his 30-year-old brother. The two men
had been plowing a field.

Artificial Limbs Scarce

On one of the nearby wooden pallets that serve as beds in Vietnamese hospitals
lay Ho Dung, a 13-year-old girl who was wounded five days earlier by a bomb
explosion that blew out both her eyes and amputated a leg and an arm. In agony,
she rolled blindly from one side to another on her wretched pallet.

Another victim, Nguyen Van Bon, was digging up sweet potatoes near his home in
Vinh Linh village when a shell exploded and crippled him. Mr. Bon has five
children.

Artificial limbs are scarce and expensive in Vietnam, and many victims of
munition explosions take to the streets of nearby towns to beg. The
Belgian-based relief organization Handicap International is building a simple
workshop at the Quang Tri hospital with a lathe and a curing oven for
manufacturing prosthetic arms and legs.

"But it would be far better if these terrible injuries could be stopped in the
first place," said Mulpas Thy, a Belgian expert supervising the workshop.

Le Xuan Thong, chairman of the Huong Hoa District People's Committee, says that
army experts occasionally survey old battle areas for unexploded munitions, but
that so much territory is affected that it would be impossible to clear all of
it.

No Warning Signs

Metal detectors can only locate munitions buried less than one foot deep, he
said, and many dangerous projectiles escape detection even when search teams
sweep battlefields. The best the experts can do is erect signs warning against
dangerous areas, officials say.

In any case, no warning signs are visible at Khe Sanh.

Very few of the scrap collectors who scavenge here had even been born at the
time of the battle of Khe Sanh, which lasted from Jan. 21 to April 7, 1968. Many
of these boys and girls are illiterate, there being no schools in many rural
hamlets, and none show interest in the fading inscription on a small stone
monument that proclaims Khe Sanh as "America's Dien Bien Phu" -- an allusion to
the French bastion in northwestern Vietnam that fell to the Communists 40 years
ago.

In fact, Khe Sanh was not an American defeat; though the American forces
suffered 205 killed and 852 wounded in the siege, they held on.

Abandoned by Marines

But two months after the siege was broken, American commanders decided that Khe
Sanh was not needed for the war effort after all. They ordered the Marines to
abandon the base and destroy everything that had stood upon it --
fortifications, bunkers, buildings, supply depots, an airport. Only the metal
scrap and the dud projectiles remained.

Some American servicemen wondered later why so many had had to give their lives
for territory deemed expendable so soon after the battle.

Ghosts of the past haunt Khe Sanh. At a bridge across the Ben Hai River near
here stands a Communist monument marking the official northern terminus of the
Ho Chi Minh Trail, and not far away is a national cemetery containing the graves
of 10,360 North Vietnamese and Vietcong soldiers who died along the trail in the
war. The cemetery is one of 72 graveyards for Communist troops dotting Quang Tri
Province alone.

An official of a local People's Committee looked out across a vast field of
white grave markers, shook his head, and said, "We paid dearly for this land."


LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Vietnam Revisited -- A periodic report

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ho Dung, 13, who lost her sight and her right forearm in the
explosion of one of the old bombs still scattered around Vietnam. (pg. A1);
Scavengers in Vietnam risk their lives digging up wartime munitions for scrap
metal. One scavenger showed off the live artillery shell she had brought to a
weighing station on the old Khe Sanh battlefield. (Malcolm W. Browne/The New
York Times) (pg. A6)

Maps show the location of Khe Sanh, Vietnam. (A6)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 890 words



International A3-11

LATINS REJECT FORCE IN HAITI
Several Latin American nations rejected the use of force in Haiti, dimming
prospects for approving of any United State-led intervention to settle the
standoff there.  A1

U.S. BOMBS STILL KILL IN VIETNAM
In the battle for Khe Sanh in 1968, United States forces dropped 100,000 tons of
bombs, some of which are still killing Vietnamese.  A1


BOSNIAN GOVERNMENT IS BUOYED
With its army less stretched and somewhat better armed, the Muslim-led Bosnian
Government feels confident in fighting the Serbs.  A10

The Senate backed efforts to lift the Bosnian arms embargo.  A10

SETBACK FOR BRITAIN'S LABORITES
The leader of Britain's Labor Party died suddenly, just as it appears to have
gained the upper hand on the Conservative Party.  A11

POSTMORTEM ON RAID IN SOMALIA
In a hearing on the failed Army raid in Somalia last year, commanders said the
American military was divided about trying to capture a faction leader and about
the amount of firepower needed for the effort.  A8

Athens Journal: Digging for a subway yields a rich trove.  A4

Nuclear inspectors plan to press their mission in North Korea.  A7

A lull in the attack on Rwanda's capital enabled food to arrive.  A5

National A12-22, B8

ABORTION CLINICS PROTECTED
The Senate approved legislation making it a Federal crime to attack or blockade
abortion clinics.  A1

SIGNS OF AN ECONOMIC LULL
New Government reports suggested a lull in economic expansion, which could ease
some concerns about future inflation. Retail sales fell in April while
first-time claims for unemployment benefits climbed unexpectedly. in the first
week of May.  And inflation at the producer level was nonexistent in April.  A1

ICE CURTAIN ON BERING STRAIT
With post-cold war business ventures floundering and some cultural exchanges
turning sour, Alaskans and Russians wonder if it was easier to like each other
when their governments hated each other.  A12

FIRST CASE UNDER OZONE LAW
The owner of a car-repair shop in St. Louis became the first person prosecuted
under a law regulating Freon to protect the ozone layer.  A12

SKIPPER OF VALDEZ TESTIFIES
In his first public testimony, the former captain of the oil tanker said that
Exxon had known of, and ignored, his drinking problem.  A14

HARVARD'S FUND-RAISING EFFORT
The university that already has the largest endowment of any private university
will try to raise $2.1 billion over five years.  B8

SUPERIORITY AS CURRICULUM
A Florida school board said schools should teach that American culture is
superior to all others.  A16

OVERHAULING THE NANNY TAX
The House voted to simplify Social Security laws that turned household employers
into tax cheats and embarrassed Clinton nominees.  A17

TOBACCO RESEARCH DOCUMENTS
Documents show tobacco companies knew of smoking hazards in the 1960's and
discovered a crucial step for making a safer cigarette.  A20

WARNING ON BLUE CROSS PLANS
The General Accounting Office said that 11 Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans were
financially weak.  A22

IMPEACHMENT OF JUSTICE BEGINS
Pennsylvania legislators started impeachment proceedings against a State Supreme
Court Justice.  B8

TEXAS GANG BUYOUT PLAN
Fort Worth is offering gang leaders $10,608 a year to dissuade fellow gang
members from crime.  B8

Law Page B18

An embezzlement scandal ravages a career at a leading law firm.

At the Bar: When payment for writing violates the law.

How much need a prospective juror disclose of herself?

Metro Digest B1

LEGISLATION ON VIOLENT CRIME
The New Jersey Senate approved legislation that would require mandatory life
imprisonment for a person convicted of violent crimes on three or more
occasions.  A1

SCHOOL CUSTODIAN CONTRACT
The Giuliani administration set the stage for a showdown with the school
custodians' union over contracting out work to private companies.  A1

MIDLIFE CAREER CHANGES
Mid-level, mid-career executives are finding new niches for themselves, as
owners of sandwich shops, printing centers and other small businesses.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-30

New wing at the American Museum of Natural History.  C1
For Children C29
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
Film: Cannes Festival preview.  C1
Spike Lee in a tender mood.C5
"Trading Mom." C10
"The Conviction." C10
Dance: Choreography without release.  C5
Margaret Illman stars.  C10
Restaurants C20-21
Art: Two schools of painting.  C1
Old Masters at the Armory.  C23
Cartier-Bresson events.  C24
Books: "Judge Learned Hand." C28
Television: TV Weekend D17
Home Video D17

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Yankees beat Indians in 10th.  B11

Obituaries B8-9

Erik H. Erikson, psychoanalyst.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

Stay calm on Haiti.
Mr. Bratton's wise policing.
Racial injustice in the Senate.
Save health care for N.Y. children.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton's honor saved!
Anthony Lewis: Wreckers at work.
David L. Boren: Why I am leaving the Senate.
Franklyn G. Jenifer: Hate speech is still free speech.

Chronicle B8

Crossword C28

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Officers Were Divided on Somali Raid

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


In their first public account of the failed Army raid in Somalia, the top
commanders painted a picture today of a mission in which the American military
was divided about the wisdom of trying to capture a Somali warlord and the
amount of firepower needed to carry it out.

For seven months, Maj. Gen. William Garrison, who commanded the American
commando force in Somalia, has maintained a stony silence.

But today General Garrison disclosed to the Senate Armed Services Committee that
he had asked for the deployment of AC-130 gunships to help protect the commandos
sent to Somalia to capture Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid, only to be turned down.

Differences Over Mission

And Maj. Gen. Thomas Montgomery, the former deputy commander of the United
Nations peacekeeping force in the East African country, defended the effort to
capture General Aidid, while acknowledging that military superiors in the United
States were dubious about the mission.

Their testimony during the first hearing by Congress on the raid came in an
emotional session in which the families of soldiers slain in the mission also
demanded that the White House be held accountable. That complaint led President
Clinton to summon them to an impromptu meeting at the White House, at which he
said he was mystified that the raid had been tried, believing it should have
been called off because Washington was shifting to a diplomatic course.

The Congressional testimony today, and interviews with Government officials,
revises the picture that emerged immediately after the raid, in which 18
Americans were killed and 75 wounded.

Were Tanks Denied?

Initial reports portrayed the military as engaging in a fruitless man-hunt for
General Aidid, the Somalia clan leader, against its better judgment. The early
reports also blamed Defense Secretary Les Aspin for denying the military tanks
and armored personnel carriers that might have been used to rescue the Rangers
after they were pinned down.

But today a more complex picture emerged of a policy that was plagued by
divisions in the American military as well as between the military and their
civilian bosses.

In defending the effort to capture General Aidid, General Montgomery said that
the United States had good intelligence on the Somali warlord and that the
military assessment was that the capture of the Somali strongman was necessary
to break the back of the Somali resistance thwarting the United Nations. In so
doing, General Montgomery acknowledged, he differed with Gen. Joseph P. Hoar,
the head of the United States Central Command, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, then
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Garrison's assertion that he had sought AC-130 gunships also disclosed
another rift within the ranks of the military. Officials said Gen. Wayne A.
Downing, the head of the Special Operations Command, had supported the request
for the gunships, whose advanced targeting systems and firepower might have
helped the Rangers repel their Somali attackers during the Oct. 3 raid.

Use of Gunships Opposed

But General Hoar, the head of the Central Command, recommended against sending
the gunships. General Hoar believed that the Army helicopters in Somalia
provided adequate firepower and that the dispatch of the gunships would enlarge
the American military presence in the region at a time when Washington was
looking to transfer the mission entirely to the United Nations, officials said.
Frank G. Wisner, the Undersecretary of Defense for Policy, also recommended
against sending the gunships, an official said.

One Defense official, who asked not to be identified, also asserted that the
Joint Chiefs of Staff opposed sending the gunships and additional Ranger forces.
A spokesman for General Powell said the General did not recall the request that
the gunships be sent.

In disclosing his request for the AC-130's, General Garrison said the use of the
gunships might have had an important psychological effect on the Somalis.

Fear of Gunships

"The Somalis were petrified of the AC-130," General Garrison told the Senate
committee. But General Garrison also argued that the failure to send them did
not deprive his force of the firepower it needed since it had helicopters.

But Larry Joyce, who stunned the voluble panel into silence with a moving eulogy
for his son, a Ranger who was slain in the battle, rejected that argument.

Mr. Joyce, who served two combat tours in Vietnam, told the panel the gunships
would have been a potent weapon. Without them, Mr. Joyce said, Army helicopters
were forced to hover at 75 feet to direct their fire, making them vulnerable
targets.

In another contentious statement, General Garrison asserted that just a few
lives would have been saved had Mr. Aspin sent the tanks and armored personnel
carriers requested by the field commanders.

Armor for Rescue Effort

General Garrsion said he might not have used the tanks in launching his raid. He
acknowledged, however, that the effort to rescue the Rangers after the raid went
awry would have been less dangerous and more speedy had the armor been
available. Two Americans were killed and 14 wounded in the effort to rescue the
Army Rangers, who stayed to guard a downed helicopter.

But James H. Smith, a disabled Vietnam veteran whose Ranger son bled to death
while awaiting rescue, said the armor was needed. "It would have made a
significant difference," Mr. Smith said. "Information has to come from the White
House as to how certain decisions were made."

President Clinton, who had failed to respond until last night to the request by
relatives of soldiers killed in the raid for a meeting, did not put the
families' concerns to rest.

Mr. Joyce said Mr. Clinton appeared to be moved in the 45-minute session. But
Mr. Clinton appeared to have more questions than answers.

"He was dismayed on Oct. 3 that the raid had been launched after he had decided
that there should be a diplomatic solution," Mr. Joyce said. "His immediate
reaction was, 'Why did they launch the raid?' "


LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Capt. James H. Smith, retired, right, and his wife, Joyce, of
Long Valley, N.J., listening yesterday at a hearing in Congress about a United
States Army raid that tried to capture a Somali warlord. Their son died in the
raid. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Wreckers at Work

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Conducting the regular business of the Federal Government has become a far more
draining task for the President and his people than it used to be. If you want
to know why, here is a small example.

Last November President Clinton nominated Sam W. Brown Jr. to be an ambassador
as head of the U.S. delegation to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe. The C.S.C.E., which has played a leading role in promoting human rights,
now mediates conflicts in the former Soviet republics and is to supervise some
arms control efforts.

Sam Brown was a leading activist against the Vietnam War in the 1960's. He was
elected State Treasurer of Colorado in 1975. For four years during the Carter
Administration he was the director of Action, the Federal agency that runs
volunteer programs. Since then he has been in a real estate development
business.

On Nov. 18 the Senate Foreign Relations Committee held a hearing on the
nomination. Mr. Brown appeared as a witness. No Republican senator asked him a
question.

The committee met to consider the nomination on Feb. 9, after the Christmas
recess. Republicans objected.

On Feb. 14 Senator Hank Brown, Republican of Colorado, submitted several dozen
questions for the nominee to answer. They asked such things as what his
experience was in Armenia and Azerbaijan and what course he would recommend to
end their conflict. (Mr. Brown replied that he had not been there but had been
to many other places with disputes, and that he would follow the existing
mediation plans.)

On March 1 Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, submitted 45 more
questions. The first was why Mr. Brown, as Action director in 1978, had
recommended dropping from the Peace Corps' legislation a requirement that it
instruct volunteers on "the philosophy, strategy, tactics and menace of
Communism." (As best he could remember, Mr. Brown replied, The provision had not
been followed and no one objected to dropping it.)

On March 22 the Foreign Relations Committee met and approved the nomination on a
party-line vote, 11 to 9. But when it came to the floor, Republicans raised a
point of order about the committee meeting.

On April 20, Senator Helms submitted more questions, bringing the total to 108.
Among other things he asked whether Mr. Brown had engaged in protests at the
1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago and had thrown "any objects,
including human feces." (Mr. Brown replied that he was on the staff of Senator
Eugene McCarthy's campaign there and had not demonstrated or thrown anything.)

Last week the committee again approved the nomination on a party-line vote. It
is now ready for the Senate floor, but Republicans are threatening a filibuster.
In order to get a vote, the Senate leadership will have to round up 60 votes for
cloture.

What is the real basis of the Republican opposition to Sam Brown? It could be an
effort to re-fight the battle over whether America should have been in the
Vietnam War. A number of Senator Helms's questions dealt with a reception held
in New York in 1977 for the arrival of Vietnam's delegation to the United
Nations. He asked whether Mr. Brown had been there and approved remarks critical
of the United States. (Mr. Brown replied that he had noticed a sign for the
event as he walked up Broadway and dropped in for five minutes.)

Senator Brown argued at length in the committee that Sam Brown had had no
military experience. Neither have Max Kampelman or Warren Zimmermann, two of his
distinguished predecessors, both of whom have endorsed his nomination.

When I asked Senator Brown about his position, he said he thought Sam Brown was
"bright and able." He was not moved by partisanship, the Senator said, but
C.S.C.E. was going into security matters, and he was "convinced that Sam Brown
doesn't have the needed diplomatic or military experience."

Perhaps Senator Brown is really moved by nonpartisan concerns. But for six
months now Republicans have blocked a nomination that is not exactly at the
level of the Supreme Court. One would have to be exceptionally naive not to
suspect that some are simply determined to make the Administration's life
difficult -- unless President Clinton sends up nominees pleasing to Jesse Helms.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 14, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Suicide of a Veteran, Amid Pain and Fame

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


Tens of thousands of obituaries have been written for the men who fought and
died in Vietnam. More will follow as veterans age and die. But some deaths seem
larger than others, as if they could serve as obituaries for the war itself.

Lewis B. Puller Jr.'s was one such death. It happened on Wednesday night, when
Mr. Puller, who was 48, shot himself in the head at his home in suburban
Virginia. A veterans' advocate and Pulitzer Prize winner whose hands were
disfigured and whose legs were torn from his body by a booby trap in Vietnam, he
had finally surrendered in his 26-year battle against depression, drug and
alcohol addiction, despair and perhaps, at the end, sheer fatigue.

His suicide came at a time of physical and emotional pain but professional
success, a conundrum that his colleagues and friends confronted with deep
sadness and, for some, profound confusion. The lessons of the suicide of Mr.
Puller must be as much about his successes as his final failure to hang on, his
friends said.

"Lewis Puller never stopped fighting the war of healing," said Kieu Chinh, a
Vietnamese actress who worked with him on his last project, an effort to build a
school in what once was the no man's land of Quang Tri. He fought, she said, "to
heal not only his own wounds but the common wounds of the two nations."

A Will to Live

His legacy, friends said, was not the image of his shrunken body perched on a
wheelchair in front of the Vietnam War Memorial, but his book, a difficult and
graphic description of his trauma and pain-filled struggles against addiction;
his fight for veterans to win fair representation in the Clinton Administration;
his son and daughter; his friends, and his will to live. It was typical of him,
they said, that his last great passion would be the construction of a school in
a battered area that was once the demilitarized zone.

"We were going to build a monument in Vietnam," said Terry Anderson, the former
hostage in Lebanon who worked with Mr. Puller on the Vietnam Memorial
Association. "But he was quite strong about his feeling that we should build
something more than a pile of stone."

For not quite three months in 1968, Mr. Puller, the marine son of the most
decorated marine in American history, the late Gen. Lewis B. (Chesty) Puller,
fought an enemy he rarely saw on the shores of the South China Sea. His injury
came suddenly. His recovery never ended.

Decades of Rehabilitation

For the next two decades, he worked not only on what physical rehabilitation he
could muster but also within the ranks of the veterans movement to push for the
construction of the Vietnam memorial here, the eventual lifting of the embargo
on trade with Hanoi and the school project. His account of his war experiences
and efforts to heal, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet" (Grove
Weidenfeld, 1991), won the Pulitzer Prize for biography in 1992.

Early last year, he was approached by the Clinton Administration with several
offers of work. Instead, he used his computer to trace how many veterans the
Administration had placed in important positions and concluded that the numbers
were too low. Rather than join the Government, he chose to work as a writer in
residence at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., and on veterans projects.

But in the midst of those public achievements he carried on a private battle. He
was still in combat when he died, friends said, battling to save a marriage
traumatized by his addictions and trying to help the country with a healing
process after a war that in one way or another shadows a generation.

"He was fighting 'stump pain' at his two amputations," said his friend John
Wheeler. He was also fighting to rebound from addictions to pain-killing drugs
and alcohol. Last winter, after a fall in which he broke his hip, he entered
Bethesda Naval Hospital. "We closed ranks and continued to get the work done,"
Mr. Wheeler said.

His friends thought his political work would be his salvation. And after he
suddenly ended his life, Mr. Wheeler said, "I felt like I let my guard down in
helping him heal and keeping a watch over him."

Though he stopped taking pain killers and had stayed away from alcohol since
acknowledging his many battles with addiction, Mr. Puller could not shake a
sense of bleakness, said Mame Reiley, a friend of the family's.

His wife, Linda T. Puller, a Virginia legislator, finally despaired, Ms. Reiley
said. "They were going through a very rough time," she said.

Addictions' Toll

Other friends said Mr. Puller had spoken with sadness of his marital troubles
and said the couple were planning a divorce. His book, a brutally honest account
of his struggles and their toll upon his friends and family, touches on the cost
of the addictions to the people he loved.

"Lewis, in his book, described how abusive and difficult he became during those
times," said Senator Bob Kerrey, a fellow veteran who became a close friend
while the two were recovering from wounds at the Philadelphia Naval Hospital in
1969.

Mr. Kerrey said bitterly that laxness on the part of doctors in one of Mr.
Puller's more recent hospitalizations may have aggravated his problems just as
his life had come to seem more whole. "They put him on narcotics without asking
him if he was an alcoholic," Mr. Kerrey said. "Here is a man who won a Pulitzer
Prize writing about his addiction in these areas and the hospital didn't even
pay attention. I just don't get it."

The physical pain that followed when he stopped taking the drugs mixed with his
anguish over the war, over his family's troubles and over his own future, said
Mr. Kerrey. "He inspired so many people," he said. "The tragedy in the end is
that he was not able to inspire himself."

Those whom he did inspire, though, stretched well beyond the broad population of
war veterans. Marcia Landau, who worked with him on the school project, said his
honesty and courage changed her own life. "I am so shaken," she said. "I woke up
this morning thinking of a phrase from my childhood. I hadn't thought of it in
years: The stronger the light you stand in when you tell the truth, the larger
the shadow of the devil becomes."

That quality of spirituality both lifted and haunted him, she said. "If you are
willing to go to the light, you have to be willing to face the darkness," Ms.
Landau added.

The two, perhaps, finally came together for him in a return trip to Vietnam last
fall. Several friends said the trip seemed to both exalt and depress him. When
he returned, his friend and colleague, Ms. Chinh, asked if he had taken
photographs. He said he had not. "Everything," he told her, "is here in my
heart."

Ms. Chinh had planned to go back to Vietnam with him in November. Instead, the
last time she saw him was at a recent gathering at the National Press Club here,
before a speech about the school project.

'He Was Alone'

She arrived early, after a flight east from California. He was already there. As
the elevator doors opened, her eyes were drawn across the room, to a bank of
windows. "Here was this man sitting on his wheelchair, looking at the sky," she
said. "He was looking at the sky and he was alone."

She stole up behind him and placed her hand softly on his shoulder. He did not
turn, but put the gnarled remains of his own hand gently across hers. They stood
silently together for a moment, then went to face the public, to talk of
Vietnam's sinking literacy rate and the importance of the school.

He was, she said, the kindest soldier that she ever knew.

NAME: Lewis B. Puller Jr.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lewis B. Puller Jr., who killed himself this week, was
recognized by President Clinton last Memorial Day. (Reuters)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Profile;
West Pointer Commands Tenneco

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1779 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


BEFORE he ever marches into battle, Dana G. Mead, the chief executive of Tenneco
Inc. since February, has always been one to plot grand strategy. As a West Point
professor on leave, he wrote four volumes of the Pentagon Papers report. Then he
went to Vietnam.

Now as a corporate general, Mr. Mead runs one of the nation's 35 largest
industrial companies. "Plan deliberately; execute violently" is the motto,
adapted from General Patton, that he has impressed on his Tenneco troops. They
meekly protest by trying to get him to change "violently" to "aggressively" or
something else that's a bit less bellicose.

When Mr. Mead, who is 58, joined Tenneco as chief operating officer two years
ago, he hardly expected to become the commander. The chief executive who hired
him, Michael H. Walsh, was seven years younger and had been in his job less than
seven months. But Mr. Walsh was diagnosed with brain cancer in January last
year. He turned the command over to Mr. Mead three months ago and died on May 6.

Mr. Mead is not one to hesitate. At the J. I. Case division, a maker of
agricultural and construction equipment, he has already named a new chief and
framed a plan to sell 35 percent of Case to the public in an initial public
offering of stock. He is plotting Tenneco's push into more foreign markets and
higher-profit businesses.

Whether Mr. Mead can succeed as well as he and Mr. Walsh did in turning Tenneco
around is an open question. They inherited a bloated company that lost a total
of more than $2 billion in 1991 and 1992, including write-offs for cutbacks and
layoffs. But by last year, they had improved efficiencies to yield earnings of
$426 milllion.

To go further, however, Mr. Mead will have to increase sales by developing new
products, making prudent acquisitions and grabbing market share. "The failures
we have taken out were just internal. We were competing with ourselves," Mr.
Mead said in an interview at his office last week. "Now we've got market
behavior and competitive behavior we've got to deal with as we grow."

Even behind his desk, he sits erect, arms folded across his chest, his deep-set
eyes commanding the attention of those across from him, as if he was reviewing
troops who didn't quite measure up.

With Tenneco, he has charge of an ungainly conglomerate in an age of corporate
focus. Only one of its six divisions is based in Houston, Tenneco's
headquarters. The largest division markets and transports natural gas, but
Tenneco also makes products ranging from Case tractors to Monroe shock
absorbers, from double-hulled oil tankers to cardboard egg cartons.

When Mr. Walsh announced his illness, Tenneco stock fell $2 on the New York
Stock Exchange, or 5 percent, to $40 a share, and analysts cut their ratings.
Since then, investors have come to respect Mr. Mead enough so that Mr. Walsh's
resignation in February produced no apparent tremors.

"He earned that respect by continuing the program of cost cutting at Tenneco in
general and Case in particular," said Paul J. Milbauer, a stock analyst at C. J.
Lawrence/Deutsche Bank Securities in New York.

Tenneco has, however, been among the hardest-hit victims of a market retreat
that has been especially cruel to heavy industry. Its Friday close on the Big
Board at $47, unchanged, represents a 20 percent drop from its 365-day high of
$58.75 -- and about as much as a company with several slowly growing businesses
is currently worth, Mr. Milbauer said. Some other analysts, however, are more
optimistic.

Now that Tenneco's rescue is nearly complete, Mr. Mead just might be at least as
well equipped as Mr. Walsh would have been to guide it from here. Mr. Walsh was
a turnaround specialist, blunt and impatient. At his very first get-together
with Tenneco's division managers, weeks before he officially joined the company,
he loudly demanded to know what was going wrong and why.

AT first glance, Mr. Mead might seem like a Walsh clone. Both showed enough
early promise to become White House Fellows, and both entered corporate
management in midcareer. Both played football in school and became lifelong
jocks. Mr. Mead skis, sails, fishes for salmon and plays tennis but not golf (a
"wimp sport" he has called it).

But Mr. Mead is more the intellectual. He was a tenured professor in West
Point's social sciences department, a bastion of broad-gauge military thinking
that, he notes, has produced several of the Army's highest commanders. His
doctoral dissertation (M.I.T., political science and economics) had to do with
making battle plans in uncertain times. He urged that, even during peacetime,
the military use quantitative, scientific means of planning to fight the next
war, not the last one.

From his current command post, he can spin around in his chair to the credenza
behind him and call up on a computer the targets he has set for his division
presidents -- everything from return on capital investments to workplace safety.
If they already know how to reach their goals, he tells them, he has set them
too low to call forth their true creativity.

And what if the goals aren't met? Mr. Mead spins back around as if drawing a
gun, and, with finger pointed and thumb cocked, provides rapid-fire sound
effects.

His executives, worried about a punishment still worse, have succeeded in
getting him to remove a noose from his office. "The first division president
that walks in here and hasn't made his numbers is going to try it on for size,"
he used to say.

With analysts, politicians and the press, however, he can be much more politic.
He likes to remind people that by the time he was in his mid-30's, he was
briefing the Cabinet, having stayed around after his White House fellowship to
become associate and then deputy director of the Domestic Council in the Nixon
Administration.

He remains a Republican, a Bush voter with an "I Like Ike" button pinned inside
one of his briefcases. Needing the support of a Democratic President and
Congress if his shipbuilding division hopes to build another aircraft carrier,
he is decidedly low-key in his politics.

Leading a Tenneco annual meeting for the first time last Tuesday, he made such a
point of raising his arms and motioning toward the emergency exits that he
seemed to be preparing his stockholders for takeoff. All a part of Tenneco's
safety efforts, he said.

His courtliness toward two dissident stockholders extended to meeting with one
beforehand to see what questions would confront him.

His voice places him in the Midwest. He was born in Iowa and grew up in
small-town Illinois in a family that owned some small newspapers. A football
player at West Point, he rose to the rank of colonel. By that time, in 1970, he
was banging out his White House Fellow application in a bunker at or near the
demilitarized zone in Vietnam.

HE returned from the White House to West Point in 1974. He was an acting
department chairman when, in 1978, Paul O'Neill, now the Alcoa chief executive
but then with International Paper, called. Mr. O'Neill, a former deputy director
of the Office of Management and Budget, had met Mr. Mead at the White House.
"From what I knew of his leadership skills in the battlefield, I was confident
Dana would be successful any place," Mr. O'Neill said.  Mr. Mead, restless with
academia's stately pace, was ready to jump.

His record at International Paper suggests that he knows how to expand a
business, hunt for acquisitions and penetrate foreign markets, as he has pledged
to do at Tenneco. When he began there, International Paper was trying to slim
down and economize. Then came a burst of acquisitions and expansions that raised
sales from about $4.5 billion in 1984 to $14 billion in 1992.

Mr. Mead led the negotiations to buy major French and German paper companies as
well as the Hammermill Paper Company in the United States, together adding $3.1
billion in sales. Analysts said he helped lower the company's energy and fiber
costs while raising output for each employee by at least 3 percent a year.

He also gained a reputation for sometimes carrying competitiveness too far. Paul
T. Stecko, now the president of Tenneco's packaging division but then an
International Paper executive under Mr. Mead, recalls the time he brought two of
his very best customers to join them in doubles tennis. Mr. Mead, incapable of
holding back and playing what salesmen call client tennis, blasted an overhead
shot at point-blank range into a customer's chest.

"I about died," Mr. Stecko said.

Mr. Mead had battled his way up to executive vice president and board member
when Mr. Walsh asked him to become second-in-command at Tenneco, soon naming him
chief executive of the Case farm and construction equipment unit as well. "Case
was holding Tenneco hostage," Mr. Mead said. "Our cash, our management effort,
the way the street viewed us was all being dominated by Case."

Production was too high, the inventory ruinously expensive, the losses unending.
When Mr. Mead and Mr. Walsh presented their billion-dollar-plus restructuring
plan to the board, they had to promise they wouldn't come back for more. After
nearly $1 billion in losses in 1991 and 1992, Case showed an $82 million
operating profit in 1993, and, with a strengthening economy, an $81 million
operating profit in the first quarter of this year.

Mr. Mead plans to seize the moment by selling 35 percent of Case to the public
by early July, investing the proceeds in less cyclical businesses with higher
returns. Analysts expect the sale to realize about $500 million, but wonder
whether market conditions will allow Mr. Mead to reach his goal of having a
majority of Case's shares in the public's hands by the end of the year.

Mr. Mead, meanwhile, hired a French citizen away from Honeywell to succeed him
as Case chief executive, and appointed a West Point graduate, Steven Lamb, to
build the Case empire in Europe. A situation that, for Mr. Mead, recalls the
exploits of another European military leader.

"He's mentioned a couple of times that Napoleon gave the marshals of France
special batons," Mr. Lamb said. "I never met Napoleon, but I suspect his
marshals had some of the same experiences as us."

Dana G. Mead

 Born: Feb. 22, 1936; Cresco, Iowa.

 Education: B.S., West Point; Ph.D., M.I.T.

 Car: Cadillac Seville, Jeep Grand Cherokee, Case Model 1130 tractor.

 Family: He and his wife, Nancy, have two sons, ages 35 and 33, and three
grandsons.

 Recent reading: "The Fifties," by David Halberstam; "Theodore Roosevelt: A
Life," by Nathan Miller; "Selling at Mach 1," by Steven D. Sullivan.

 Favorite leader: Winston Churchill.

NAME: Dana G. Mead

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Plan deliberately; execute violently" is Mr. Mead's motto.
Dana G. Mead became head of Tenneco three months ago. (Photographs by F. Carter
Smith for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Asia's Having One Huge Nicotine Fit

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1819 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


THE Marlboro Man has found greener pastures.

The cigarette-hawking cowboy may be under siege back home in the United States
from lawmakers and health advocates determined to put him out of business, but
half a world away in Asia he is prospering, his craggy all-American mug slapped
up on billboards and flickering across television screens. And Marlboro
cigarettes have never been more popular on the continent that is home to 60
percent of the world's population.

For the world's cigarette-makers, Asia is the future. And it is probably their
savior.

Industry critics who hope that the multinational tobacco companies are headed
for extinction owe themselves a stroll down the tobacco-scented streets of
almost any city in Asia. Almost everywhere here the air is thick with the
swirling gray haze of cigarette smoke, the evidence of a booming Asian growth
market that promises vast profits for the tobacco industry and a death toll
measured in the tens of millions.

At lunchtime in Seoul, throngs of fashionably dressed young Korean women gather
in a fast-food restaurant to enjoy a last cigarette before returning to work, a
scene that draws distressed stares from older Koreans who remember a time when
it would have been scandalous for women from respectable homes to smoke.

In Hong Kong, shoppers flock into the Salem Attitudes boutique, picking from
among the racks of trendy sports clothes stamped with the logo of Salem
cigarettes. In Phnom Penh, the war-shattered capital of Cambodia, visitors
leaving an audience with King Sihanouk are greeted with a giant billboard
planted across the street from his ornate gold-roofed palace. It advertises
Lucky Strikes.

According to tobacco industry projections cited by the World Health
Organization, the Asian cigarette market should grow by more than a third during
the 1990's, with much of the bounty going to multinational tobacco giants eager
for an alternative to the shrinking market in the United States.

American cigarette sales are expected to decline by about 15 percent by the end
of the decade, a reflection of the move to ban smoking in most public places in
the United States. And sales in Western Europe and other industrialized
countries are also expected to drop.

But no matter how bad the news is in the West, the tobacco companies can find
comfort in Asia and throughout the third world, markets so huge and so promising
that they make the once all-important American market seem insignificant. Beyond
Asia, cigarette consumption is also expected to grow in Africa, Latin America,
Eastern Europe and in the nations of the former Soviet Union.

Status

Smoking is not only tolerated in most of Asia, it is still fashionable. And for
millions of smokers here, nothing confers greater status than a pack of American
or European-brand cigarettes. No gift is more appreciated in Vietnam than
British-made "555" cigarettes. In China, the choice is Marlboro. Among the
gentry of Thailand, it is Dunhill.

Status appears to matter far more than taste. "There is not a great deal of
evidence to suggest that smokers can taste any difference between the more
expensive foreign brands and the indigenous cigarettes," said Simon Chapman, a
specialist in community medicine at the University of Sydney, in Australia. "The
difference appears to be in the packaging, the advertising."

He said that researchers had been unable to determine whether the foreign
tobacco companies had adjusted the levels of tar, nicotine and other chemicals
for cigarettes sold in the Asian market. "The tobacco industry fights tooth and
nail to keep consumers away from that kind of information," he said.

Most governments in Asia have launched anti-smoking campaigns, but their efforts
tend to be overwhelmed by the Madison Avenue glitz unleashed by the cigarette
giants. Several Asian nations have banned cigarette advertising on television
and radio in recent years, but the tobacco companies often find ways around the
bans through indirect promotions that skirt the law -- sports events, glossy
advertisements for clothing brands or travel agencies that bear that name and
logo of a cigarette brand.

With 1.2 billion people and the world's fastest-growing economy, China is the
most coveted target of the multinational tobacco companies. Cigarette
consumption, calculated as the number of cigarettes smoked per adult, has
increased by 7 percent each year over the last decade in China. There are 300
million smokers in China, more people than the entire population of the United
States, and they buy 1.6 trillion cigarettes a year.

Competing in many cases with domestically produced brands, the multinational
tobacco companies are moving quickly to get their cigarettes into China and
emerging markets in the rest of the developing world. Their campaign has been
bolstered by the efforts of American Government trade negotiators to force open
tobacco markets overseas. Since the mid-1980's, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and
Thailand have all succumbed to pressure from Washington and allowed the sale of
foreign-brand cigarettes. Foreign cigarettes, shut out of Japan in 1980, now
make up nearly 20 percent of the market.

Anti-smoking groups in Asia, often critical of the Bush Administration for its
aggressive pursuit of the tobacco industry's agenda abroad, say it is too early
to judge the Clinton Administration on the issue.

R. J. Reynolds Tobacco has manufactured its Camel and Winston cigarettes in
Chinese factories since the late 1980's. Last year the American company also
opened plants in Poland and Turkey and took stakes in two state-owned tobacco
companies in Ukraine. "Worldwide, hundreds of millions of smokers prefer
American-blend cigarettes," James W. Johnston, chairman of Reynolds Tobacco
Worldwide, wrote in his company's 1993 annual report. "Today, Reynolds has
access to 90 percent of the world's markets; a decade ago, only 40 percent.
Opportunities have never been better."

Last year, Philip Morris, the company behind the Marlboro Man, signed an
agreement with the government-controlled China National Tobacco Corporation to
make Marlboros and other Philip Morris brands in China. The company's foreign
markets grew last year by more than 16 percent, with foreign operating profits
up nearly 17 percent. Operating profits in the domestic American market fell by
nearly half.

Physicians say the health implications of the tobacco boom in Asia are nothing
less than terrifying, and there are frequent comparisons here to the Opium War
of the mid-19th Century, when the British went to war to force the Chinese to
accept imports of a dangerous, addictive drug -- opium, an important cash crop
for British merchants.

Richard Peto, an Oxford University epidemiologist, has estimated that because of
increasing tobacco consumption in Asia, the annual worldwide death toll from
tobacco-related illnesses will more than triple over the next two or three
decades, from about 3 million a year to 10 million a year, a fifth of them in
China. His calculations suggest that 50 million Chinese children alive today
will eventually die from diseases linked to cigarette smoking.

"If you look at the number of deaths, the tobacco problem in Asia is going to
dwarf tuberculosis, it's going to dwarf malaria and it's going to dwarf AIDS,
yet it's being totally ignored," said Judith Mackay, a British physician who is
a consultant to the Chinese Government in developing an anti-smoking program.

The explosion of the Asian tobacco market is a result both of the increasing
prosperity of large Asian nations -- suddenly, tens of millions of Asians can
afford cigarettes, once a craved luxury -- and a shift in social customs. In
many Asian countries, smoking was once taboo for women. Now, it is seen as a
sign of their emancipation.

In explaining the boom in tobacco sales here, physicians and researchers also
point to the cigarette companies' multimillion-dollar marketing campaigns.

"Just four or five years ago, there wasn't a tobacco advertisement to be seen
anywhere in Shanghai," said Dr. Mackay during a recent visit to China's most
populous city. "Now, just as soon as you land at the airport, it's a
bombardment, an absolute visual disgrace, with signs everywhere for Marlboro,
Kent, all of them. On the streets, they've got a huge series of neon signs and
billboards. Almost every telephone kiosk has a cigarette advertisement."

Targeting Women

Much of the advertising is aimed at women, who smoke in far smaller numbers than
Asian men, and at the young, and the ads often depict young, striking, stylishly
dressed Asian models set in scenes of Western-style elegance. Some tobacco
companies play up their American roots. Winston is advertised in the
Philippines, a former American colony in which American culture still dominates,
as "the Taste of the U.S.A."

Rosmarie Erben, Asian regional adviser for health promotion for the World Health
Organization, said that "the tobacco industry is addressing women in a very
aggressive way. There are still many cultures that do not accept the concept of
women smoking, but that is changing."

Dr. Erben said that domestic tobacco companies in Asia have had to step up their
own advertising targeted at women to meet the threat from foreign competitors.
She said she was startled when she learned earlier this year that a Philippine
cigarette maker was distributing free wall calendars decorated with a portrait
of the Virgin Mary, an image of conspicuous power in a nation that is devoutly
Roman Catholic, set above the logos of the company's cigarette brands. "I had
never seen anything like it before," said Dr. Erben, who is based in Manila.
"They were trying to link the icon motif to tobacco, to make Philippine women
comfortable with the idea of smoking."

The global tobacco companies insist that they are not attempting to recruit new
smokers in Asia. They say they are only trying to encourage smokers to switch to
foreign brands. "The same number of cigarettes are consumed whether American
cigarettes are present or not," said Elizabeth Cho, a spokeswoman for Philip
Morris. "Whatever one may feel about the smoking and health controversy, the
presence or absence of American cigarettes is not a cigarette consumption
factor."

But some of the industry's advertising in Asia would suggest otherwise. Only
about 2 percent of women in Hong Kong under the age of 40 smoke, so logic would
suggest that a tobacco company interested only in encouraging smokers to switch
brands would not introduce a cigarette there marketed specifically for women --
it is just too small a market. Yet that is precisely what Philip Morris did in
Hong Kong several years ago by introducing Virginia Slims. As in the United
States, the cigarettes were sold in Hong Kong with an advertising slogan that
linked smoking to the liberation of women: "You've come a long way, baby."

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American tobacco companies might be on shaky ground at home, but
they are on very firm soil abroad. In Japan, where people are shown smoking,
above, 37 percent of the population smokes, and American cigarettes are sold in
vending machines like the one here, left. (Kaku Kurita for The New York
Times)(Sigma)(pg.16)

Graphs: "Got a Light? Got a Trillion of Them?" China's Growing Taste for Smoke.
Cigarette smoked per Adult. (Source: World Health Organization); Shipping
Americn Tobacco. Total exports per year. (Source: Census Bureau, foreign trade
division); Markets for 'Made in the U.S.A.' Shares of total American cigarette
exports in 1993. (Source: U.S. Commerce Department); The Cigarette's Open
Frontier. Percentage of each county's adult population that smokes. (Source:
World Health Organization)(pg.16)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MAY 8-14;
Going to Vietnam as a Champ

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


More than a quarter century after he faced prison for refusing to fight in the
battlefields of Vietnam, Muhammad Ali traveled to the former war zone last week
to try to find comfort for the families of the Americans who disappeared there.

Mr. Ali, the 52-year-old former world heavyweight champion, was a sight as
wrenching as some of the scenes of war he visited in Vietnam. He suffers from
Parkinson's Disease, which has left him barely able to speak or walk, but his
aides said he wanted to make the trip to Vietnam to demonstrate his support for
the families of the more than 2,000 Americans still missing in action from the
war. (As searching continued there last week, several sets of human remains were
found, including some believed to be American.)

Mr. Ali was welcomed warmly by the Vietnamese -- both Government leaders and
people on the street. Many remembered how Mr. Ali was stripped of his boxing
title after his conviction for draft evasion in 1967, in the midst of the
Vietnam War. He had refused to serve citing his conscientious objection as a
devout Black Muslim, and returned to the ring after the conviction was
overturned in 1970.

He traveled with two M.I.A. families who had invited Mr. Ali along on their own
pilgrimage to Indochina.

"He is a man of peace and good will," said Arnold Beizer, a Connecticut lawyer,
who helped organize the trip.

"He came here to build a bridge of friendship between our peoples."   PHILIP
SHENSON

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

2 Killed in Somalia Are to Get Medal of Honor

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 29;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: INDIANAPOLIS, May 14


President Clinton announced today that he would award the Medal of Honor to two
Army sergeants killed in Somalia last fall as they tried to help wounded
comrades.

Mr. Clinton said the awards would go to Master Sgt. Gary I. Gordon and Sgt. 1st
Class Randall D. Shughart. The men were members of the Army Special Operations
Command at Fort Bragg, N.C. Sergeant Shughart was from Newville, Pa., and
Sergeant Gordon was from Lincoln, Me.

The White House said the two medals, to be bestowed in a ceremony on May 23, are
the first to be awarded for valor in any American conflict since the Vietnam
War.

The sergeants came under attack in Mogadishu, Somalia, on Oct. 3, 1993, when the
crews of two downed American helicopters were attacked during a raid on a local
factional leader. The Americans remained under fire for several hours until
reinforcements could reach them.

The failed raid left 18 Americans dead and was the subject of a Congressional
hearing last week where relatives of those killed were critical of Clinton
Administration's policy in Somalia.

In the furor that followed, it was disclosed that the Defense Secretary at the
time, Les Aspin, had denied a request from commanders in Somalia for additional
armored equipment that might have saved lives by reducing the time that the
lightly armed and outnumbered helicopter crews had to be on their own.

Mr. Clinton arranged a meeting in the Oval Office with some of the relatives on
Thursday. The relatives said the President had told them he was surprised and
angry that subordinates had ordered the raid. The relatives said they believed
that the statements showed that Mr. Clinton was out of touch with his own
military chain of command.

According to the citation for the awards, the two sergeants were providing rifle
fire from a lead helicopter that was trying to protect other American soldiers
under attack by automatic weapons and rocket-propelled grenades.

"The two sergeants unhesitatingly volunteered to go to the aid of four wounded
comrades at a second crash site despite being well aware of the growing number
of enemy personnel closing in," the citation said.

Covering Fire

The citation said Sergeants Gordon and Shughart fought their way through a maze
of shacks and shanties and provided covering fire for an injured pilot until
they ran out of ammunition.

"After Sergeant Shughart was fatally wounded, Master Sergeant Gordon recovered
another rifle from the crash site and gave it and the last five rounds of rifle
ammunition to the injured pilot with the words, 'Good luck,' the citation said.
"Then armed only with his pistol, Gordon continued to fight until he was fatally
wounded. By their extraordinary heroism, Sgts. Gordon and Shughart saved the
pilot's life."

The White House announced the awards while Mr. Clinton was traveling in Indiana.

The Medal of Honor, authorized by act of Congress during the Civil War, is
awarded for "conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life above and
beyond the call of duty in action with the enemy." The medal is awarded to
survivors of combat as well as those killed in heroic circumstances.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Evening Hours;
A Museum Celebrates 10 Years

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 10 words


A party for the Museum for African Art, SoHo, May 4.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: 8:20 P.M. The Museum for African Art in SoHo celebrated its 10th
anniversary by giving a preview party for its exhibition "Western
Artists/African Art." At the gathering, TERRY ADKINS, left, an artist in the
show, speaks with MERELE ADKINS, center, and DANIEL SHAPIRO, who was the guest
curator; 8:25 P.M. MAYA LIN, left, the architect who designed the Vietnam
Memorial in Washington, speaking with the architect PHILIP JOHNSON, right. At
center is GARY JACOBSEN, an artist; 7:45 P.M. SALLY GANZ, left, an art
collector, with the artists ELLSWORTH KELLY, center, and RICHARD SERRA, whose
works are in the show; 8:10 P.M. SHERRY BRONFMAN, left; CARMEN DELAVALLADE,
center, and KORBY BRITTON. (Photographs by BILL CUNNINGHAM/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 15, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1432 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  11   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2   3   REMEMBER ME, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $23.50.)
                After an estranged couple reconcile, they find themselves
                haunted by a mysterious force.

 3      3   4   "K" IS FOR KILLER, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $22.95.) Kinsey
                Millhone investigates the strange death of a waitress's
                daughter.

 4      5  92   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 5          1   INCA GOLD, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Dirk Pitt
                contends with a ring of thieves for possession of ancient
                artifacts in the Peruvian Andes.

 6      4   4   THE DAY AFTER TOMORROW, by Allan Folsom. (Little, Brown,
                $24.95.) A young doctor, haunted by his father's murder,
                stumbles into a tangle of international conspiracies.

 7      6   5   THE ALIENIST, by Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A journalist
                and a psychologist track down a murderer in turn-of-the-century
                Manhattan.

 8      7   5   LOVERS, by Judith Krantz. (Crown, $23.) Romance, rivalry and
                fun among half a dozen couples.

 9      8  17   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $24.) A
                computer-industry executive rejects the advances of his boss
                and is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 10    13  57   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman on a Mexican ranch.

 11     9  13   ACCIDENT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A car
                collision involving four teen-agers tragically alters the lives
                of five families.

 12    11  28   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) From Iowa to India: the romance of a professor and a
                colleague's wife.

 13    10   3   CHARADE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $21.95.) Following a heart
                transplant operation, a television host finds her life enriched
                -- and threatened.

 14    15   2   THE FIST OF GOD, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $23.95.) Spies,
                traitors and brave warriors at work during the Persian Gulf
                war.

 15    14   6   ON DANGEROUS GROUND, by Jack Higgins. (Putnam, $22.95.)
                Powerful interests conspire to prevent the transfer of Hong
                Kong to China in 1997.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  53   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
                (Gold Leaf Press, $16.95.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2      2   2   REBA: My Story, by Reba McEntire with Tom Carter. (Bantam,
                $22.95.) The autobiography of the country singer.

 3      3  21   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $27.50.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 4      4  10   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 5      6   5   OLD SONGS IN A NEW CAFE, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) Nineteen essays dealing with his memories by a
                novelist-photographer-musician.

 6      5  11   HOW WE DIE, by Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf, $24.) A physician and
                surgeon reflects on "life's final chapter."

 7      8   4   DIPLOMACY, by Henry Kissinger. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) Ways in
                which the art of diplomacy and the balance of power have shaped
                the world we live in.

 8      7   9   ZLATA'S DIARY, by Zlata Filipovic. (Viking, $16.95.) The diary
                kept by a girl living in war-torn Sarajevo, from 1991 (when she
                was 11 years old) to 1993.

 9     12  24   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy Hill
                Hearth. (Kodansha, $20.) Two black sisters, both of them over
                100, reflect on their lives.

 10    10  18   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $25.) A
                psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 11     9   9   MAKES ME WANNA HOLLER, by Nathan McCall. (Random House, $23.)
                The life of a young black man in America: the memoirs of a
                Washington Post reporter.

 12    14  91   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to
                understand their psyches.

 13*   11   4   SAVED BY THE LIGHT, by Dannion Brinkley with Paul Perry.
                (Villard, $16.) An account of two near-death experiences by a
                South Carolina businessman.

 14    13  32   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
                (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and
                evil.

 15    15  38   THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas.
                (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine
                behavior.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   3   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      3   3   MAGIC EYE II, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) A second collection of duplicitous designs in color.

 3      2  17   MAGIC EYE, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.

 4      4  51   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending April 30, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AFRICAN AMERICANS AT MARS BLUFF, SOUTH CAROLINA, by Amelia Wallace Vernon.
(Louisiana State University, $29.95.) What was a community of black rice growers
doing 60 miles from the sea in the heart of cotton country? This important and
surprising book transcends the domain of local history.

THE COLLECTED STORIES, by Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) Three
previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright
unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of
Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.

KAY BOYLE: Author of Herself, by Joan Mellen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A
fervent telling of the turbulent, unexamined life of a modernist author whose
popularity peaked in the 1940's.

LEADING WITH MY HEART, by Virginia Kelley with James Morgan. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.50.) This intimate, posthumously published memoir throbs with the vitality
of its gregarious, gambling, hard-drinking author, who was also the President's
mother.

LEARNED HAND: The Man and the Judge, by Gerald Gunther. (Knopf, $35.)
Penetrating and delicate, this study of a judiciary eminence known for his
self-restraint and fortitude explores the inner tensions and doubts that shaped
Hand's character.

NIXON: A Life, by Jonathan Aitken. (Regnery, $28.) A Tory Member of Parliament
argues that Nixon was not only the 20th century's most innovative foreign-policy
President, but also wrongly condemned for Watergate and the 1972 Christmas
bombing of North Vietnam.

ONE ART: Letters, by Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so
small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.


ROALD DAHL: A Biography, by Jeremy Treglown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
This deft, revealing unauthorized biography of the bullying author of children's
books serves as an antidote to Dahl's own sparky but none-too-truthful image of
himself.

THE TRACK OF REAL DESIRES, by Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $21.) At the center of this
comic, spirited novel are a terrific dinner party and a story of loss, malice,
ruin, envy and, finally, trust.

THE TROUBLESOME OFFSPRING OF CARDINAL GUZMAN, by Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow,
$25.) Mr. de Bernieres's third novel set in the imaginary Latin American city of
Cochadebajo de los Gatos concerns good and evil and a clergyman who has his
inner demons removed, surgically.

WITHOUT A HERO: Stories, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Boyle's
unaverted gaze, caustic sensibility and attraction to everything queasy are all
evident in his fourth collection of short stories.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CENTRAL BROOKLYN;
To Grill or Not to Grill: Learning to Share a Park

BYLINE: By GARY PIERRE-PIERRE

SECTION: Section 14;  Page 10;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


To some residents, the stretch of Prospect Park near the band shell along Ninth
Street in Park Slope is a great place to barbecue. But to others, the barbecuing
means only the nuisance of litter and smells.

Now, the issue, which has increasingly pitted residents of the neighborhoods
surrounding the 526-acre park against one other, is being addressed by park
officials, who have mapped out a compromise.

"My own personal feeling is that there is a law on the books that there should
not be open fire in the park," said Jasmine Melzer, a Park Slope resident and a
member of the 11th Street Playground Committee. "Every park user should be
allowed to have a clean park."

Rachel Ortiz, who lives blocks from the park, uses it most Sundays to barbecue
with friends and family. To her, the issue is overblown.

"I don't have a backyard like some people, and the park is for everybody," said
Ms. Ortiz, who has two children. "When we come here we don't bother anyone. I
don't understand what the fuss is all about."

Vanessa Hartman, the co-chairwoman of the Ninth Street Playground Committee,
said that while the issue may seem trivial, it is an example of the
quality-of-life issues that have been dividing New Yorkers of all kinds during
the last decade.

"I grew up in an era when we debated the Vietnam War and impeaching Nixon," Mrs.
Hartman said. "Now I am at a meeting deciding whether we should allow people to
barbecue in the park."

At that sometimes heated meeting on May 5, organized by area playground
committees, park officials reached a compromise that restricts barbecuing to a
designated area away from the playground, the band shell and trees.

To encourage picnickers to confine their cooking to the approved area, 20
barbecue grills will be installed and "No barbecuing" signs will be posted
elsewhere. Anyone who violates the new guidelines could be issued a ticket and
face a fine of up to $50.

"I believe we must provide space for people to barbecue," said Tupper Thomas,
the administrator of the park, adding: "We bend the rules for a lot of groups.
You have to allow people to have fun. That's what the parks are about."

Ms. Thomas said the problem of litter was more a result of severe budget cuts in
the Parks Department than of the barbecuing. Many who are complaining, she
added, are dog walkers who use the park early in the morning, before workers can
pick up the trash.

The trash problem is unlikely to be improved by Mayor Giuliani's proposed
budget, released last week, which calls for a reduction of about 600 park
maintenance workers.<?  G. P.-P.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Prospect Park showing locations of barbecue zones.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MEMENTOS AND MEMORIES;
In Covenant With The Sacred

BYLINE: By Robert Stone;   Robert Stone is the author of "Outerbridge Reach"
(Harper Perennial).

SECTION: Section 6;  Part 2;  Page 22;  Column 6;  Sophisticated Traveler
Magazine

LENGTH: 265 words


Some people take to cameras, some don't. Whether out of laziness, snobbery, or
superstition, I've never carried one on my travels. But since travel is in part
about memory, everyone needs some way of capturing and possessing what can never
really be brought back.

Once, staying at a small inexpensive hotel in Saigon, I was provided by the
management with a thermos bottle decorated with a picture of a rampant bat. The
bat, I was informed, was a lucky totem in Vietnam. Luck was never to be despised
-- certainly not by me -- and it made a conversation piece. I have to admit that
when I left the country, the bat thermos left with me. Appropriately enough, I
later lost it at a Buddhist monastery.

Years after that, I walked up a camel trail to the top of Mount Sinai. Morning
had broken, like the first morning, as in the old hymn. The ancient mountains
were ablaze with roseate light, and the turquoise glitter of the Gulf of Aqaba
was visible eastward and that of the Gulf of Suez to the west. I bent down under
the limitless sky and picked up a handful of stones from the mountaintop. I had
in mind some kind of tiny covenant.

Another time, back in the Holy Land, I was standing by the shores of the Sea of
Galilee near Capernaum. All at once I seemed to require its water. So I climbed
over a kibbutz fence and filled an empty nip bottle of Carmel cabernet sauvignon
with a few inches' worth of that most favored deep.

I deserved to lose the bat thermos, but I still have the stones and the water on
a bookshelf. They remind me of promises, and about above and below.

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 934 words



International A2-9

BANKS FAIL IN VENEZUELA

In Latin America's worst banking crisis of the free-market 1990's, a string of
bank failures has left half of Venezuela's banking sector in the hands of the
state. A1


SOUTH IS FOCUS IN YEMEN'S WAR

The civil war in Yemen is concentrating on the city of Aden, with southern
forces falling back as northern Government troops have made a three-pronged
attack. A1

THE BATTLE OVER KASHMIR

India's effort to put down secessionist rebels in the province of Jammu and
Kashmir is causing concern among countries that view it as a possible flashpoint
for a nuclear war between India and Pakistan. A6

NEW FIGHTING IN RWANDA

Heavy fighting resumed in the capital of Rwanda, Kigali, as Government troops
tried unsuccessfully to dislodge rebels from around the city and near the
airport. A3

SIGNS OF CHANGE IN JERICHO

As Palestinians have begun to take control of Jericho, changes are visible --
whether in the easier time Palestinians have at police checkpoints or in the
fence that is coming down in the city.  A9

Secretary of State Warren Christopher will visit Jericho. A8

NEW DIVISIONS IN BRITAIN

News analysis: with the death of the head of the Labor Party, members are trying
to overcome internal divisions and come up with a new leader, just when the
party had been starting to take advantage of divisions among the Conservatives.
A3

U.S. WAITING ON NORTH KOREA

The U.S. expressed concern over North Korea's announcement that it had begun
extracting nuclear fuel from its largest reactor before international inspectors
arrived, but Washington delayed any decision on seeking economic sanctions until
the inspectors report their findings.  A3

BOSNIA PEACE EFFORT SHAKY

Bosnian Government troops have pushed Serbian forces out of a strategic plateau
above a Muslim-controlled town, but the continued fighting could hurt chances at
new efforts for a negotiated peace.  A2

My Thanh An Journal: Back in Vietnam -- this time to stay.  A4

National A10-15

NEW METHODS FOR NEXT CENSUS

The Census Bureau is planning several changes in how it will collect survey data
in the year 2000 to overcome soaring costs and criticism of the 1990 count as
inaccurate.  A1

NOT JUST A GAME

A robbery-turned-fatal-shooting at a bank machine by a 14-year-old boy and his
10-year-old accomplice is but another episode in the growing crisis of youth
violence.  A1

TOBACCO INDUSTRY FIGHTS BACK

In California, one of the nation's largest tobacco companies has begun an
all-out counterattack against anti-smoking laws, including a pro-smoking ballot
proposal.  A1

NO FIGHT FORESEEN OVER BREYER

Both Democratic and Republican Senate leaders praised Clinton's Supreme Court
nominee and said that he would be confirmed without difficulty. But one Senator,
Howard Metzenbaum of Ohio, voiced reservations.  A10

A SLOW APPROACH TO HEALTH CARE

The pivotal committee headed by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan may be the
furthest one away from taking a position on a health care reform bill.  A11

HANDGUN CRIME INCREASES

Violent crime involving handguns increased 21 percent between 1991 and 1992 even
as violent crime over all decreased.  A10

NEW DOUBTS ABOUT MARGARINE

The fatty acids in margarine may do more to promote heart disease than the
saturated fat found in butter and meat, a researcher says.  A10

FINDINGS IN POLICE RAID DEATH

Investigations into the death of an elderly minister after being handcuffed by
Boston police have found many mistakes but no criminal misconduct.  A12

Metro Digest B1

BRIBES AND BUILDING MANAGERS

Investigators say at least 50 cases involving managers of Manhattan condominium
and cooperative buildings, accused of taking payoffs from contractors and
suppliers, are to go to a grand jury soon.  A1

GAPS IN GERIATRIC MEDICINE

While the number of very old Americans is rising quickly, particularly those
over 85 and in the frailest health, experts say that doctors trained to meet
their needs are in dangerously short supply.  A1

Business Digest D1

Sports C1-10

Baseball: Yanks earn perfect 10. C1

Braves handle Mets. C7

Basketball: Bulls even score with Knicks. C1

Rockets beat Suns. C5

Columns: Anderson on winning C2

Vecsey on N.B.A. C4

On Baseball C7

Golf: Laura Davies wins L.P.G.A. Championship. C8

Hockey: Devils notebook C3

Horse Racing: Notebook C9

Soccer: Reyna is an American star in waiting. C9

Tennis: Sampras routs Becker. C8

Arts/Entertainment C12-16

BBC documentary on Watergate.  C13

Andy Warhol Museum opens.  C13

Cannes Film Festival.  C13

The Prado's director resigns.  C16

Tribute to Avery Fisher.  C16

Theater: "Moe's Lucky Seven." C14

Dance: Ballet Theater in "Manon." C15

Compagnie Christine Bastin.  C15

Books: "Colored People," by Henry Louis Gates Jr.  C16

Obituaries B8

Erwin A. Glikes, a leading publisher of nonfiction books.

John B. Swainson, the former Governor of Michigan and state judge.

Sir Alfred Beit, a philanthropist and art collector.

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Self-limiting terms in Congress.

Revamping foreign aid.

A city budget checklist.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Brown v. Board.

William Safire: Clinton at his best.

John Kerry: Make Haiti's thugs tremble.

Chronicle B2

Bridge C12

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

My Thanh An Journal;
G.I. Settles in Vietnam, at Peace With Old Foes

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: MY THANH AN, Vietnam


Sgt. 1st Class John Foggin of the United States Army spent five hard years
fighting the Vietcong, but he has buried the past and found a home among his
former enemies in this remote hamlet in the Mekong Delta.

Hidden in a rural palm grove across a river south of the market town of Ben Tre
is an oasis of modest luxury where Mr. Foggin and his Vietnamese wife, Lan, plan
to spend the rest of their days earning a living as cafe owners.

Trees shade a spacious cafe patio shared by the Foggins with their Vietnamese
neighbors and customers, and amenities in the Foggins' home include
air-conditioners, television, two telephones and a fax machine from which they
can directly dial friends in Vietnam or back in the States. Water diverted from
a nearby canal fills an ornamental pool in a pleasant garden.

To his neighbors, Mr. Foggin, a tall, blond 54-year-old American, seems as
exotic as an immigrant from Mars. But he is more than a mere curiosity. He is
regarded by residents like Tim Tan Duc, a Ben Tre hardware dealer, as a symbol
of the healing process that is slowly closing the gulf that has lingered between
Vietnam and the United States since the Communist victory in 1975.

"He lives like one of us -- it's very unusual," said Mr. Duc's wife, Manh.

"As far as I know," Mr. Foggin said, "I'm the first G.I. to come back to Vietnam
to live. But I know I won't be the last. There's something about this country
that draws you back."

The Foggins have no car. But like most of their neighbors, they get around on
the family motorbike. Electric power outages have become less frequent, and
there no longer are compulsory blackouts on weekends.

Last year the Hanoi Government dropped the requirement that all Vietnamese and
foreign residents obtain permits for traveling from one province to another, so
the Foggins can move around the country freely.

"Every day things get better here," Mrs. Foggin said, "although we sometimes
miss McDonald's hamburgers."

Mr. Foggin has built a dirt road and a wooden bridge to make his Ngoc Lan Cafe
more accessible to visitors, and the refreshments, dancing and foreign ambience
attract crowds of young people from Ben Tre on weekends. Mr. Foggin says many of
his other customers are former Vietcong guerrillas who come to swap war stories
with him and show off their wound scars.

He says a few people in Ben Tre still resent his presence. "But on the whole we
couldn't hope to have friendlier neighbors," he said. "Everyone is trying to
learn English these days, and a lot of the local kids come to our cafe just to
practice and improve pronunciation. They all want jobs with the American
companies started up in Vietnam, and for that you have to speak English."

Mr. Foggin's command of the Vietnamese language is shaky, and his wife
translates and handles details of the family business.

Mr. Foggin, who was born in Columbus, Ohio, spent most of his adult life in the
Army. Between 1967 and 1972 he served with the 11th Armored Cavalry and as an
adviser to regional South Vietnamese forces at Xuan Loc, among other assignments
in Vietnam. Having served 22 years in the Army, Mr. Foggin now has a military
pension, supplemented by money he saved as a civilian construction expert in
Saudi Arabia and Turkey.

The Foggins were living in San Diego in 1989 when they decided to take advantage
of newly relaxed restrictions on visits by American citizens and see what life
in Vietnam would be like. They say they were drawn to Vietnam not only because
rural life in the Mekong Delta was cheap and relatively easy, but also because
robberies and criminal violence had tainted their lives in the United States.

Mrs. Foggin came to visit her relatives near this hamlet in 1989, and her
husband joined her during another extended visit in 1991. Last July they settled
here "for good," bought some land, and built their cafe and house.

For the time being, the Foggins are living here on temporary visas that require
them to leave the country every three months, but they expect to be issued
resident visas eventually. Meanwhile, they say they have no problems with the
local People's Committee or the other Communist authorities.

Mr. Foggin looks back on the war with mixed feelings.

"We could have won the war if we'd had a consistent policy," he said, "but as it
was, I think the war was wrong. Now, I think we ought to be helping Vietnam.
Japanese and Thai businesses are exploiting Vietnam's need for machinery and
technology, often selling the Vietnamese secondhand or defective products at
high prices. Americans can provide honest value."

Despite the couple's relative isolation from such things as medical care, "it's
a pretty nice life here, and we mean to stay," Mr. Foggin said, adding: "My
wife's sister is buried out in the little cemetery back there, and there are
places for us, too, when our times come."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Foggin, who as an American Army sergeant fought the
Vietcong for five years, has returned to Vietnam to build a home among his
former enemies. He is seen with his wife, Lan, at their home and cafe. (Malcolm
E. Browne/ The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location of My Thanh An.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Rebels in Kashmir And Indian Army Ready for Long Fight

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2221 words

DATELINE: SRINAGAR, Kashmir


In the Himalayan foothills of Kashmir, the commander of a Pakistani-backed
guerrilla force fighting to wrench the Muslim-majority state of Jammu and
Kashmir out of Hindu-dominated India dismounted from his horse and gestured
across the landscape of snow-capped mountains, blossoming orchards and plunging
rivers.

"This is our land -- we enjoy 100 percent support of the people," Syeed
Salahuddin, commander of a force known as the Hizbul Mujahedeen, or Fighters for
the Party of God, said as he greeted reporters who hiked into the Kashmir
hinterland to meet him.

Placing his arm on the shoulder of one of his bodyguard of young fighters, he
added, "The gun will remain in our hands until India comes to its knees."

A day later, 50 miles away across the mountains in Srinagar, the summer capital
of Jammu and Kashmir, the state's Governor, K. V. Krishna Rao, reacted
incredulously when asked if India might suffer the fate of the United States in
Vietnam -- deploying a huge military force, only to withdraw, humiliated, after
failing to defeat an insurgent force operating from rugged rural terrain.

"This is not Vietnam -- it's not a case of an outside power interfering," said
Mr. Rao, whose Government controls most of the region and accuses Pakistan,
which controls a smaller portion, of providing the financing, weaponry and
training that sustain the guerrillas.

Mr. Rao, a 72-year-old former chief of staff of the Indian Army, is backed in
his efforts to pacify Kashmir by the largest force India has ever assembled to
crush a secessionist rebellion -- about 400,000 soldiers, border troops and
paramilitary police officers. By Western estimates, there are no more than
15,000 active rebel fighters, divided into several rival groups.

Over 10,000 Dead In 4-Year Revolt

Since Muslim resentment of Indian rule boiled over into open rebellion four
years ago, the death toll has risen steadily every year. According to Indian
commanders and guerrilla leaders, 10,000 to 20,000 fighters and civilians have
been killed, most of them in the Kashmir Valley area around Srinagar. The vast
majority of those killed have been Muslims, who account for about 4 million of
the 6 million people in Kashmir.

At least half the casualties have been civilians, many of whom have been killed
in incidents that international human rights groups have described as
atrocities. India has said dozens of such incidents happened when rebel fighters
opened fire on Indian troops in crowded places, and the Indian troops fired
back. It has also denied charges by human rights groups that its troops and
police have killed Muslim political leaders and human rights campaigners,
explaining many of the deaths as suicides in custody.

But while Indian diplomats at the United Nations and elsewhere have been
strained in their efforts to defend the country's Kashmir policies, the conflict
has only recently begun to stir major international concern.

It is to be on the agenda for talks at the White House on May 19 between India's
Prime Minister, P. V. Narasimha Rao, and President Clinton, whose Administration
considers Kashmir one of the world's most dangerous flashpoints because of fears
that the conflict could trigger a nuclear war between India and Pakistan.

[Mr. Rao, who stopped in New York Sunday on his way to Washington, was met by
about 100 Muslim and Sikh protesters, who picketed a reception for the Indian
leader at the Waldorf-Astoria. Sikh separatists are fighting for the
independence of India's Punjab state.]

The nuclear weapons programs of India and Pakistan, along with that of North
Korea, have become the primary focus of the Clinton Administration's drive to
curb the spread of nuclear arms around the world. Since the late 1980's, Western
intelligence experts have concluded that New Delhi and Islamabad have secretly
assembled small stockpiles of nuclear warheads, perhaps 10 to 20 on either side
-- estimates that senior officials in both countries have said privately are not
far wide of the mark -- and that a race is on to deploy missiles capable of
delivering the warheads.

While officials in New Delhi and Islamabad say that United States concerns about
a nuclear exchange are overdrawn, none deny that a new war, if it began, would
almost certainly center on Kashmir. In two of the three wars the two countries
have fought since Britain's departing colonial rulers partitioned the Indian
subcontinent in 1947, creating Hindu-dominated India and Muslim-ruled Pakistan,
Kashmir has been the battleground. No issue between them so focuses the passions
-- of religion, of nationalism, and of pride -- that have made each, for the
other, an object of enduring dislike and mistrust.

Fear That India Could Disintegrate

Governor Rao, who is no relation to the Prime Minister, expressed India's
position bluntly in an interview at his colonnaded mansion on a magnolia-scented
hillside above Srinagar. Like many Indian military officers, he has spent much
of his career fighting secessionist rebellions elsewhere in India, and his
assignment here has hinged on a central principle: that if Kashmir were allowed
to break away from India, other restless parts of the country would follow,
until India itself would disintegrate.

Mr. Rao, starchily formal in a crisply-pressed blue suit, leaned forward over
mid-morning refreshments of Darjeeling tea and tasty Kashmir snacks to make the
central point of a two-hour discussion. Indian troops, he said, were firmly in
control of the territory. It is a point not seriously challenged by the rebels,
who have operated mainly in small, hit-and-run groups in cities like Srinagar,
or from remote bases in Kashmir's hinterland, in the lush valleys and hillsides
where grazing goats grow the fine wool that takes its name from Kashmir.

"Jammu and Kashmir is part and parcel of India, and the question of allowing it
to go to Pakistan, or becoming independent, will not be entertained by India no
matter what," Mr. Rao said.

In Pakistan, determination to support the rebel cause in Kashmir appears no less
strong. Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and her arch-rival, Nawaz Sharif, who
leads the parliamentary opposition, have made support for a "free Kashmir" --
meaning not only Pakistan's part but also India's -- a touchstone of politics in
their country. Any hint of weakening support for the Muslims of Kashmir draws
mass protests in Pakistan.

Can U.S. Influence Stop the Fighting?

Although United States diplomats say there is little of a practical nature that
Washington can do to promote a settlement, the heightened United States interest
has encouraged both sides in the war to think that the weight of the United
States could play in their favor.

"The solution is very simple," said Mahmud Ur-Rahman, who is a top security aide
to Governor Rao and who like several top Indian officials in Kashmir is a
Muslim. "Bill Clinton should telephone Benazir and say 'Call it a day!' and that
very day this thing will be all over."

Over a picnic of roast chicken prepared by villagers in the Pir Panjal
mountains, Mr. Salahuddin, the guerrilla commander, seemed eager to foster the
fears of a nuclear exchange between India and Pakistan, evidently in the hope of
drawing the United States more deeply into the region.

"If we involve India and Pakistan in a war, we will not care in the least," said
Mr. Salahuddin, whose real name is Syeed Mohammed Yusuf Shah. He added, "We will
continue our struggle to the end, even at the cost of a nuclear war."

Mr. Salahuddin's group is one of several guerrilla factions, and differs in its
commitment to making Kashmir part of Pakistan with other, more popular groups,
like the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, which say that they are fighting to
make Kashmir independent of India and Pakistan.

But interviews with leaders of a new umbrella group founded by the guerrillas
last year, the All-Party Hurriyat Conference, suggested that all the guerrilla
factions have agreed on a central issue, that a clean break with India is the
least they will accept.

Rebels Agree India Must Leave Kashmir

"There is a very deep feeling among Kashmiris that we have reached the point
where we must carry our struggle through to the end," said Maulvi Omar Farooq,
who holds the hereditary position of Mir Waiz of Kashmir, religious leader of
the region's Muslims. Mr. Farooq, who at 21 is chairman of the Hurriyat group,
said that all 32 rebel organizations agree that matters have gone too far to
turn back.

"We have very clearly in our minds that 20,000 people have laid down their lives
for the right of self-determination of the Kashmiri people," he said.

The view is little different in the winding streets of Srinagar.

"If you read Kashmir politics you will see that all invaders -- the Pathans, the
Sikhs, the Dogras -- ran away, and one day the Indians will too," said Ahmed
Fayaz, a 36-year-old pharmacist.

In other conversations with ordinary Kashmiris, they turned quickly to an issue
that has dogged India rule here from the start: India's refusal to carry out a
pledge it gave in 1947 to hold a plebiscite among Kashmiris to determine whether
the territory should be part of India or Pakistan.  For the last 40 years,
Indian Governments have been saying that United Nations resolutions on a vote no
longer apply.

Moreover, few Indian politicians seem ready to consider any concessions. Two
months ago, the Indian Parliament, led by Prime Minister Rao, passed a
resolution declaring that "Jammu and Kashmir has been, is and shall be an
integral part of India," and any hint of weakening central Government control
causes an uproar among the Hindus who dominate among the legislators in New
Delhi.

Mr. Rao's Government has also promised to insure the eventual return of 400,000
Kashmiri "pandits" -- Hindus from the Kashmir Valley -- who have fled their
homes since the outbreak of the rebellion, many of them for refugee camps around
Jammu, the state's winter capital.

With the two sides in the conflict apparently at a political stalemate, India's
presence has taken on the appearance of an occupation. Senior Indian officials,
and the few Muslim politicians who still proclaim loyalty to India, travel in
bomb-proof cars, or in helicopters. Even with precautions, assassinations are
common, especially of Muslim politicians who lower their guard. At Srinagar's
airport, passengers are required to undergo 10 searches between the check-in
desk and the plane.

Capital Resembles A Ghost Town

Srinagar, with 800,000 residents, becomes a ghost town after dark, the only
visible movement coming from nervous Indian soldiers peering out of sandbagged
bunkers that guard every major building, bridge and intersection.

Tourism, previously the state's biggest money earner, has collapsed. Where
100,000 foreigners used to come each year, there are now deserted houseboats,
overgrown golf courses and luxury hotels turned into Indian interrogation
centers.

In New Delhi, Prime Minister Rao and his associates have been saying for months
that they recognize the need for new policies that will quiet international
criticism of India and address the alienation of Kashmiris. But little has been
done.

Under pressure from human rights groups in India and abroad, New Delhi has
relaxed its ban on visits by outside groups to assess the situation in Kashmir.
Representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross and groups of
New Delhi-based ambassadors have been allowed to travel here in recent weeks for
meetings with guerrilla groups, but no change has been made in the shoot-to-kill
orders that have been carried out in incidents in which 2,000 civilians, by an
official Indian count, have been killed.

Prime Minister Rao has also promised to begin a "political process" in Jammu and
Kashmir, meaning steps toward an election for a Kashmir government that could
take over some authority in the state, which has been ruled directly by the
government in New Delhi since 1989. But few Kashmiris seem in the mood for an
election. The last time a vote was held, in 1987, Indian officials were accused
of extensive vote-rigging to produce a government pliant to New Delhi.

In the meantime, Governor Rao appears to have persuaded the New Delhi Government
to step up military pressure on the guerrillas in the hope that growing losses
will persuade them to abandon the insurgency.

Indian Governor Is Optimistic

"I have been able to turn around 75 percent or 80 percent of the population,"
Mr. Rao said. "They are not cooperating with the militants now. I feel in the
next four to six months I should be able to bring about a much better security
atmosphere, and we should be able to set about trying to start the electoral
process."

The Governor's optimism was widely shared among Indian officials in Srinagar,
but almost nowhere else.

In the mountains, Mr. Salahuddin, the guerrilla commander, laughed when asked
him if the prospect of India's holding elections worried him.

"It is their dictum, and it is baseless," he said. "There is no possibility of
any political process. None of their candidates will dare to come to Kashmir. By
engaging in this political process, they will become enemies of the Kashmiri
people, and targets for the Hizbul Mujahedeen."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Kashmir, these Party of God guerrillas are braced for a long
fight. They were with their leader, Salahuddin, mounted, in the field this
month. (John F. Burns/The New York Times)

Map of Kasmir showing location of Srinagar.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

COMMENCEMENTS;
Stony Brook Chief Tells of Road Ahead

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 566 words


Calling the turmoil of the Vietnam era superficial compared with the world of
today, the departing president of the State University of New York at Stony
Brook told the 2,600 undergraduates and 1,700 graduates in the 1994 graduating
class that the road ahead for them would be more difficult than the one he had
followed.

"The continuity of education and career that many of my classmates and I
experienced is rare today," said the president, John Marburger. The future
today, he said, is a field "for which no curriculum seems adequate."

After 14 years of commencements, this graduating class is Dr. Marburger's last
as head of the university. He will remain on campus as a professor.

He said the most interesting challenge in his career at Stony Brook occurred
when rules came into conflict. "How much, for example, should we tolerate what
would seem to be unjust behavior to correct other injustices?" he asked.

An example, he said, was times that he had been asked to open the campus to
racist speakers and to close it to military recruiters. "While I had a choice, I
chose to open it to all, despite my belief that the military's position on
sexual orientation is as wrong as racism," he said to a loud, standing ovation.

In a separate graduating ceremony for 183 students of the School of Social
Welfare, the United States Surgeon General, Dr. Joycelyn Elders, was awarded an
honorary degree of doctor of humane letters.

In an impassioned speech, she told the audience that it was midnight in society
in America, citing statistics on handguns, abused women and children, teen-age
pregnancy and children living in poverty. Despite a health care budget of nearly
$14 trillion, larger than that of all other countries, Dr. Elders said, the
United States does not come close to being No. 1 in providing health care.
"We've not been paying for health," she said.  "We've been paying for very
expensive dying."

She also accused society of "sitting on the beach drinking cocktails of 'just
say no,' while our young people are in the middle of an ocean surrounded by
sharks."

She said that when asked by a group of lawyers why she believed that every
citizen had the right to health care, she responded by saying that as long as
lawyers believed every criminal had the right to a lawyer, every sick person
should have the right to a doctor.

Adelphi University

GARDEN CITY, L.I. -- The president of Adelphi University, Peter Diamandopoulos,
warned graduates yesterday that they were entering a world of confusion,
disputed values and "politics by talk show consensus." But he urged them to
conquer doubt with self-knowledge and moral courage.

About 2,500 students were awarded graduate and undergraduate degrees at the
school's 98th commencement yesterday.

The college awarded six honorary degrees to individuals whose accomplishments,
officials said, promise to shape the 21st century.

They were Ruth Nita Barrows, the Governor General of Barbados, honored for her
work in international health care; Robert Conquest, a historian of the Soviet
Union and a poet; John Gross, a literary critic; C. John Herington, a professor
of classical literature at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill;
George N. Hatsopoulos, an engineer whose work in thermodynamics inspired
important environmental technology, and Stavros Xarhakos, a composer and
cultural critic.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Make Haiti's Thugs Tremble

BYLINE: By John Kerry;   John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, is a member of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Haiti's military rulers continue to thumb their noses at the United States and
the rest of the world. Since the ouster of President Jean-Bertrande Aristide in
September 1991, the international community has consistently tried to pressure
the junta to step aside, but nothing has worked -- not diplomacy, not tighter
sanctions, not a partial naval embargo. By tolerating their defiance and
unrelenting brutality, we have empowered Haiti's military thugs.

As a result, our credibility as a world leader is at stake. Haiti's military
leaders must now be put on notice that we're prepared to take all steps
necessary to restore democracy and prove to all renegade elements that we mean
what we say. We need to pursue an aggressive diplomatic course, to escalate
sanctions and to impose a total naval blockade if necessary. But if those don't
work, we must be willing to seek international approval to use military force.

My clear first choice is to pursue an aggressive diplomatic course of
multilateral negotiations aimed at forcing the military leaders out within a
short time. But precisely because there was no believable threat of force, our
efforts have failed.

Opponents of force argue that President Aristide is so flawed that he does not
deserve our help, that an invasion would be bloody and costly and could involve
us in a long-term military quagmire. But the issue is not simply the return of
an individual. It is the restoration of the democratic process in Haiti. Father
Aristide may not be perfect (what elected leader is?), but we have never
discarded whole democracies because of an individual leader. Moreover, he has
already demonstrated his willingness to compromise, agreeing to share power with
a broad-based coalition with safeguards for everyone's rights. Those assurances
could be bolstered by international peacekeepers.

There is every reason to think an international invasion would succeed. Haiti's
7,000-man military is hardly a formidable opponent. It is an undisciplined
collection of gun-wielding bullies with little training or experience other than
terrorizing poor, unarmed civilians. In Iraq, we decimated the world's
fifth-largest army in a couple of months. In Grenada and Panama, outlaw regimes
were ousted in a matter of days. A show of determined resolve from a U.S.-led
international force of professional soldiers, backed up with sufficient air
power, could quickly subdue the Haitian military.

Haitian history is filled with coups and civil wars. There are deep-seated
hatreds between the small, wealthy, ruling mulatto elite, which is in league
with the military, and the poor, largely uneducated masses, which make up 90
percent of the population. That enmity is born of decades of repressive rule and
irresponsible social policy.

The division is complicated by the presence of "attaches," the plainclothes
military thugs who have replaced the hated Tonton Macoutes of the Duvalier
regime. These attaches come from the masses but do the bidding of the elite. In
a culture where revenge and retribution have played such prominent roles,
healing the hatreds will not come easily.

But the prospect of a Vietnam-like quagmire can be avoided by guaranteeing at
the outset that military action will under no circumstances lead to a U.S.
occupation of Haiti. Any intervention should be followed with the immediate
insertion of a large international peacekeeping force. The presence of a
neutral, civilized power will allow Haiti to rebuild its political institutions,
its schools and its health system, and provide some cooling-off time. This could
be accomplished along the lines contemplated in the July 1993 accord at
Governor's Island, which was supposed to have led to the return of Father
Aristide.

Some will argue that the last time we went into Haiti, we stayed 19 years. But
that invasion was in 1915 -- an age of colonialism that has long since been
repudiated. In 1994, we would be going to wrest the nation from the grip of a
tiny elite and return it to the vast majority of Haitians. The difference
between occupation and liberation is dramatic.

Some argue that intervening in Haiti is not worth the loss of an American life.
We should remember that American soldiers were at risk when we intervened in
Grenada, Panama and Iraq. Those who supported Presidents Bush and Reagan ought
to ask themselves why the Haitian situation is different. Is it simply that the
President is of a different political party? What other facts are different?

Every individual reason given for those previous interventions is present in the
plural in Haiti -- to protect innocent lives, to end chaos, to restore order, to
root out drug traffickers. Most important, in Haiti, we would be restoring a
stolen democracy, human dignity and hope to a country's brutalized masses.

In the absence of clear and present danger, the United States should not use
force unilaterally. If ultimately needed, the force should be similar to the
international one used in the Persian Gulf. It should consist of troops from the
"four friends" -- the United States, France, Canada and Venezuela -- and from
other nations in the region. The military power should be massive, to minimize
casualties, and the intervention should be short. Granted, it will take
leadership and persuasive power to build the coalition. But the United States
succeeded in both regards in Grenada, Panama and Iraq, and there's no reason it
can't accomplish the same for Haiti.

Some of those governments have expressed reluctance to commit to a military
solution before the current diplomatic strategy has time to mature. They miss
the point. Failure to threaten to use force now would significantly increase the
probability that diplomacy will fail. In the end, we'd wind up where we are
today: unprepared and with a weak hand.

If ultimately needed, any intervention should use vast military power to
minimize casualties and the time commitment. Once the coup leaders were ousted
and the allied forces replaced by peacekeepers under the United Nations, the
technical assistance and financial aid promised in the Governor's Island accord
should be expanded and undertaken to insure the restoration of democracy.

No one should ever casually entertain the use of military power. Certainly I do
not; it is a most serious proposition. But it is imperative that we and other
nations in the hemisphere put the option on the table now. It is the best means
to avoid a unilateral response under emergency conditions later on. It's also
the best means of putting teeth in our diplomacy now.

The people of Haiti cannot restore democracy -- cannot overthrow a drug-running,
gun-wielding military regime -- by themselves. They need our help. If our stated
goal of restoring democracy is real, if our concern for the Haitian people is
genuine, if our credibility as a world leader is important, then we must
confront the crisis in Haiti with the will to act.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 17, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Youthful, Impressionable And Accused of Murder

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 7940 words


The most shocking thing about them is their ordinariness. Like so many young
teen-agers, they are insecure, materialistic, impressionable, not always in
command of their anger and aggressiveness.

They often come from broken homes, and in many cases their mothers are
hard-working women trying to build safe and comfortable futures for their
children. They get in arguments that seem the petty stuff of coming of age -- a
taunting bully, an insulting boyfriend, a stolen puppy. They want the things
that will make them popular: Nikes, mountain bikes, presents for girls.

But what sets these few apart from other young teen-agers is that the state has
called them killers. In New York City, 28 youths 13 to 15 years old were
indicted last year in adult courts for murders committed in 1993. The cases were
handled under a juvenile offender law intended specifically to move them out of
family court and allow for tougher sentences. Thirteen of the youths have been
found guilty of murder or manslaughter. Two were acquitted of murder but found
guilty of lesser charges. The rest await trial.

Rodney Reid, who was 13 years old when he murdered an 18-year-old over a drug
deal, says he sold marijuana to buy himself what he otherwise could not afford.
"I made money so I could get myself things I needed, like sneakers," he said. Of
the youth he shot, he said, regretfully, "He was all right."

Crime in general, and crime by the youngest in particular, has become a national
obsession. The arrest rate for juveniles for murder has climbed 60 percent in a
decade, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

But who are these youngsters? And why do they kill?

They often come from single-parent homes, seeking older friends in place of the
father they barely know. But they are not all the children of a
welfare-dependent, drug-abusing underclass. Half have parents or guardians who
work.

In fact, the vast majority of cases are not directly related to drugs. Most of
the killings were the result of robberies and disputes. The connection is often
more subtle than a scrap over drug turf.

Rather, it is that the youth was high when the police say he pulled the trigger,
or that his mother was an addict so he had to go live with a relative.

Most of these youths were not habitual lawbreakers. Six of them, however, had
serious criminal records that provided some clue to the violence to come,
according to a study by The New York Times of the 26 cases in which the
teenagers have been convicted or still await trial.

More commonly, they were truants who passed their days on the streets. Ten of
the youths had never been arrested. Another 10 had been arrested for lesser
offenses like joy riding, fighting, or playing bit parts in the drug trade --
cases that prosecutors say were often dropped because witnesses did not show up
or undercover narcotics officers were unwilling to blow their identities to put
someone away for a few months.

And in a juvenile justice system struggling to handle growing numbers of serious
felons, prosecutors and social workers have had fewer resources to deal with
teen-agers charged with small-time offenses -- before they graduate to big-time
trouble.

One factor does tie together 20 of the 26 cases: the availability of a handgun.
The youths bought and borrowed guns easily. Some said they went to the black
market on a street corner or in someone's house, where arsenals of were for
sale.

A Fascination With Weapons

Guyce Hayes said he bought a .32-caliber handgun from a neighborhood crack
addict for $40 when he was 14 years old. "I just bought it to be buying it
because I had the money at the time," Guyce said in a recent interview from
prison.

Others borrowed weapons. Tippy Jones, 15, got his TEC-9 from a friend he knew as
"J.B. And Chauncey Forden, 15, told police that he found a .38-caliber revolver
in his brother's room.

In a neighborhood equivalent of the arms race, some of the youths said they got
a gun because everyone else seemed to have one. Shaul Linyear bought his first
gun at age 15 for $100 on a corner two blocks from home after he was robbed
twice at gunpoint.

Only four of the youths had been arrested on gun charges, though far more
carried or had access to guns. A 1992 survey of New York City public high school
students, conducted by city agencies and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, found that 7 percent said they had carried a handgun.

The number of juveniles New York City prosecuted for possession of a loaded
firearm rocketed from 103 in 1986 to 750 in 1992, said Peter Reinharz, chief
prosecutor in the city's Family Court. There were so many gun cases in
Manhattan's Family Court last year that prosecutors needed a second evidence
safe to store the weapons.

Most Victims Were Young

The teen-agers' victims fell into two categories: A majority were young and
usually died as the result of a dispute, either as a participant or a bystander.
Eight were teen-agers. Usually, the victims were the same race as the person
accused in the killing.

In contrast, all 10 robbery victims were adults. Usually they were a different
race than the youths charged with killing them. All 10 suspects were black,
while five of the victims were Hispanic, two were Asian, two were black and one
was white. The victims were shopkeepers, cabdrivers, deliverymen or people just
out for a stroll.

The weakened bonds of family and community -- bonds that have traditionally kept
teen-agers in line -- also appear to have contributed to the violence,
especially in urban black communities hit hardest by social and economic decay.
Of the 26 teen-agers, 21 lived with a single parent, an aunt or a grandmother.
Twenty-one of the 26 were black teen-age boys. All but two of the 26 were male.

A Lack of Alternatives

It makes sense, say sociologists, that the youth crime rates took off in the
mid-1980's, as the growing number of children born to unmarried mothers in the
1970's entered adolescence at the same time that crack began eating away at the
already weakened structure of many poor families.

Often, the youths in these cases confronted their crimes with bravado or
naivete. Richard Siracusa, a criminal defense lawyer, said many youths involved
in violent incidents, including his client Gerald Bunche, do not even hide out
after a crime.

"These 15-year-old kids, they don't know where to go. So they go home," said Mr.
Siracusa. "It amazes me sometimes, the police ask some kid to come down to the
station, and they go, on their own carfare. Their own token. You or me, we'd be
on the next flight to Miami. But these kids just go right in, like they're
told."

ANTHONY KNOWLES, 13
Awaiting trial

Anthony was involved in a gun battle on Aug. 26 between rival groups of youths
at the Louis H. Pink Houses in East New York, the police say. Toyatwenda
Gillard, 17, was caught in the crossfire as she ran to the playground there to
scoop up her son Donovan, 2, who had been climbing on a jungle gym. Ms. Gillard
was struck by a bullet in the head and died draped over the playground fence.

The police said that Anthony, a slight, sweet-faced boy, was chasing Shaimond
Johnson, 16, when he fired a .380-caliber handgun several times. Ms. Gillard's
sister, Valena, said the bad blood between the two groups began with a fight
during a basketball game in 1992.

Yvonne Knowles, Anthony's mother, said her her son is innocent and is being
blamed for the crime by neighborhood toughs who bullied him. Anthony hung out
with the wrong crowd because he was looking for older guys to substitute for the
father he did not have, she said. She worried about Anthony's truancy, but was
unable to get him to attend school, she said.

"I hate the projects," said Ms. Knowles, who moved after her son was charged in
the killing. "They are not a place to raise any kids."

At the time of the shooting, Anthony was on probation for being a passenger in a
stolen car.

GUYCE HAYES, 15
Convicted of murder; sentenced to 12 and one-third years to life

The blue Alfa Romeo throbbed with the beat of rapper Heavy D as it cruised
Jamaica, Queens, on Jan. 31, Super Bowl Sunday. Guyce, a slim, reserved
15-year-old in the back seat, pulled out a .32-caliber handgun and fired a shot
into the brain of 22-year-old Kevin Edwards, the driver. Then he swung the gun
to the passenger side and put a bullet in 29-year-old William Cox's head.

No one, least of all his victims, had believed Guyce capable of such a bloody
act. He was a shy, sickly youth who had to be taught at home by a public school
teacher because he was asthmatic. His passions were rap music and cars. He
hadn't even started shaving the fuzz on his upper lip.

"He was the little guy from the neighborhood," said Mr. Cox, who survived the
shooting.

Guyce's father, Donald Chapman, an elevator operator, never knew he had a son
until Guyce was indicted for murder and the child's mother broke the news to
him. By the time they met, Mr. Chapman said, "It was too late for Guyce."

Guyce lived with his grandmother and his mother in Jamaica. They got by on
welfare. When Guyce was a seventh and eighth grader, Steve Williams, a teacher
of homebound students, came to their dilapidated house most weekdays.
"Personality-wise, Guyce was the best," Mr. Williams said. "He was pleasant. He
had a sense of humor. If I gave him an assignment, it was always done."

Guyce's friends and family say that when he was 14, he got mixed up with Mr.
Edwards and Mr. Cox, known as Junior. Guyce says they pressured him to accept an
old, broken-down Ford Escort that just sat unused on the street, gathering
stacks of parking tickets. Guyce claims Mr. Edwards threatened to hurt him and
his mother unless he sold drugs to pay off the tickets -- a contention Mr.
Edwards' family called a lie.

"They forced the car on me," Guyce said in an interview. "It was a setup. They
had customers on my block, and being that they knew I was always over, they,
they tried to get me to sell to their customers."

Guyce worked for Mr. Edwards and Mr. Cox, he and his relatives said. Along the
way, he bought a gun for $40. "He did whatever they told him to do," said
Michael Reavis, Guyce's best friend's uncle. "As he got older, he wanted out,
but they wouldn't let him out."

In his confession, taped the morning after the crime, Guyce told the police in a
dull, exhausted monotone that the men were pressuring him to sell crack to pay
off a $1,200 debt. Guyce said that, when he refused, the men said they were
going to "strip me, beat me with a bat and throw me in the lake" at Baisley Pond
Park.

Mr. Cox testified that Guyce shot them for no reason. Mr. Cox acknowledged that
he had had a crack problem and had served time in prison for it, but said he was
off drugs at the time of the shooting and was not a drug dealer. Prosecutors
noted that Mr. Edwards, who died, had no criminal record.

After the gunfire, Mr. Cox said he called out to Guyce to duck, but Guyce was
gone.

"Guyce, I trusted him," Mr. Cox said. "I went to his house. I went to his
bedroom. I knew his mother. I keep thinking, 'Not Guyce. I see you every day.' "


RODNEY REID, 13
Convicted of manslaughter; sentenced to three years

Rodney shot Rafael Nunez, 18, on a street corner in Jamaica, Queens, on March 3.
Rodney later went around the neighborhood boasting about the killing and trying
to sell the .45-caliber handgun, the police said.

Rodney said in an interview that he met Mr. Nunez that night to buy a pound of
marijuana and to return a gun Mr. Nunez had lent him. Rodney said Mr. Nunez
wanted $1,250 for the drugs, but he had only $950.

"I told him to try to do better for me," Rodney said.

During an argument over the price, Rodney told the police, Mr. Nunez grabbed the
gun from his waistband, the two struggled and the gun went off.

But investigators believe Rodney intentionally shot Mr. Nunez in the stomach,
then chased him into a nearby bodega, where, the police said, Rodney asked if
the dying victim wanted "some more."

Rodney moved to New York City from Florida with his mother and four brothers
when he was a toddler. They settled in Crown Heights, then moved to Queens at
age 9 to get away from crime. But violence followed.

At 12, Rodney said, he was robbed on the subway by six youths, three of them
with guns. They took his designer sneakers and jacket, then ran. Rodney said he
made his way home, shoeless and angry.

"They played me like I was a punk or a sucker," he said. "That was the first and
last time, I make sure of that."

Rodney would not say whether he began carrying a gun after that. Rodney himself
became a menace in his neighborhood and school, investigators and a school
official said. He had an explosive temper and a frame as large as a man's. He
routinely shouted insults at neighbors, frequently skipped classes and once even
threatened to kill a teacher who reprimanded him for incomplete homework.

Neighbors and others say his mother, Jaqualine Thompson, who Rodney said was a
meter maid who is now unemployed, was upset by her inability to control him. She
told investigators the day of his arrest that she would consider a plea bargain
on her son's behalf if it included mandatory schooling.

ROBERT BROWN, 14 GREGORY MORRIS, 14
Cases Pending

Robert testified that he, Gregory and two older youths had three bikes and
wanted a fourth. Instead of going to school on June 1, they headed to Prospect
Park to steal one.

During a trial last month that resulted in the conviction of the shooter, Jerome
Nisbett, 17, for murder, Robert testified that they first went after a woman
practicing karate, but she saw them and fled. Then, they saw a male cyclist, but
he was going too fast. Finally, they found Allyn Winslow, on Quaker Hill, one of
the most peaceful places in the park.  Robert testified that Gregory said,
"Let's get him." They circled Mr. Winslow, 42, a drama teacher, on their bikes,
Robert said.

When Mr. Winslow tried to ride away, prosecutors say, Mr. Nisbett shot him in
the back twice. Mr. Winslow stayed on his bike, steering down a hill, over a
small bridge and out of the woods. But he collapsed in a meadow, fatally
wounded.

Mr. Nisbett told the police that he fired the .22-caliber revolver, which he
called "the burner." "All you could see was the smoke coming from the gun,"
Robert testified.

Robert and Gregory were indicted as juvenile offenders because they were 14. The
two other suspects, both 16, were charged as adults. Robert agreed to testify in
exchange for being allowed to plead guilty to manslaughter, a lesser charge, and
to receive a sentence of one and one-third to four years.

Robert said he also has a case pending in Family Court, where he is charged with
showing a gun on May 6, 1993, while another person took someone's wallet. Two
years ago, he pleaded guilty in Family Court to fourth-degree grand larceny for
joy riding and was given two years' probation.

Robert lived with his mother, Sarah, and several siblings on St. Marks Avenue in
Crown Heights. Gregory also lived with his mother, Winsome, and nine other
siblings in a cramped basement apartment nearby on Rogers Avenue. They knew each
other from the neighborhood.

Gregory was a troublesome student at I.S. 390, prone to angry outbursts and rude
behavior, school officials said. On one occasion, he threatened to cut a dean
with a razor when the dean asked him to leave a hallway where he was causing
trouble, said the dean, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Eventually, the dean said, school officials recommended Gregory's transfer to a
resource room in the school where he could receive individual attention.

Alicia Benton-Owens, who teaches health at the school, said Gregory "wasn't a
pleasure. He'd come in with a Walkman, eating candy, and put his feet on his
desk."

Gregory's lawyer, Howard Kirsch, declined to comment on the case, although his
client has pleaded not guilty. Robert's lawyer, Howard Weiswasser, said his
client is not guilty.

"I really don't think he's a bad kid," he said. "I think he got swept up in a
series of circumstances."

LUKE DAWKINS, 14
Pleaded guilty to manslaughter; sentenced to three and one-third to ten years

It all started over a single cigarette, the police said. Nahl Finch and Luke
Dawkins both wanted to smoke it. The 14-year-olds argued, and the next
afternoon, July 6, they returned to Liberty Park in Jamaica, Queens.

Nahl started picking on Luke right away, witnesses said. Nahl was a neighborhood
bully who had set cats on fire, and even threatened his own grandmother, family
members said. Luke was afraid of him, and so that day, Luke said, he had put a
steak knife in his pocket just to scare Nahl away.

When Nahl grabbed at Luke, Luke said he pulled his knife. But the knife didn't
make Nahl back off. In a split second, Luke decided to use the knife. He plunged
it into Nahl's neck, hitting a major artery. Luke ran home, crying, to wash the
blood from his hands.

"That knife was in his pocket," said his lawyer, Bryan Levinson. "He stabbed.
That's how it is out on the street. People in these areas are afraid for their
lives. The whole world is a fight."

Luke lived with his mother, Pamela Dawkins, in Jamaica. Ms. Dawkins worked in
the nursing department at St. Albans Veterans Administration Hospital, the
police said. Luke was the youngest of six children, and he had fallen under the
influence of his older brother, Alvin, now 22.

Seven months earlier, Luke and Alvin had been arrested for ambushing a Chinese
food delivery man and robbing him of $67 and $19 worth of food, and Alvin was
later found guilty in that case. The victim told the police that Luke had hit
him on the head with a bat.

After stabbing Nahl, Luke pleaded guilty to the robbery and to killing Nahl,
although the murder charge was reduced to manslaughter because Luke had not
meant to kill him. Luke was terrified of prison and asked his lawyer, Mr.
Levinson, "Will they beat me up?"

HEDLEY SEWELL, 14
Pleaded guilty to manslaughter; sentenced to three and one-third to ten years

Hedley says he and four friends decided to rob someone, anyone, for money. He
later told the police that Jorge de Leon was the first vulnerable-looking person
they saw as they walked down Ryer Avenue 187th Street in the Bronx on the night
of Aug. 12.

Mr. de Leon, 43, an unemployed Vietnam veteran, was headed home after visiting
his wife, Rosa, at a nearby hospital. The teen-agers chased him across the
street, threw him down and went through his pockets. They found 50 cents, his
wife said.

They then punched and stomped Mr. de Leon, leaving him on the street, dazed and
bleeding. The boys retreated down the block, hooting with excitement, a witness
said.

Mr. de Leon was helped inside a nearby building, then taken home, where he died
three days later from a brain hemorrhage.

Hedley, who was small for his age at 4 feet 8 inches, lived alone in his
mother's apartment. She worked as a live-in helper in Westchester County,
neighbors say, coming home on Saturday evening and staying only 24 hours. An
older brother sometimes came by.

Unsupervised, Hedley rarely attended school, went out at all hours, played loud
music and invited friends over, some of whom brought girls to stay the night,
neighbors say.

"I can't tell you how many people I saw coming and going," said Margie Vega, who
lives next door. "He must have given keys to all his friends."

When he was taken into custody for killing Mr. DeLeon, the police said Hedley
quickly admitted his guilt. Court records show he had never been charged with a
crime. Tracy Almazan, the prosecutor, said she was startled to face such a tiny
defendant.

"In court, he was very matter-of-fact," she said. "Most pleadings are very
emotional affairs. Some people cry, some are angry. He was stone cold."

Ms. Almazan said she was also struck by the way that the boy was eager to plead
guilty, ignoring the urging of his lawyer and his mother that he contest the
charge. He seemed proud, she said, and seemed to want everyone to see that he
could take whatever he was dished.

TIPPY JONES, 15
Awaiting trial

From the window of his ground-floor apartment in a housing project on West 19th
Street in Manhattan, the police said that Tippy Jones watched as a neighborhood
crack addict and small-time drug dealer, Audrey Walker, 35, approached his
building in the early hours of Oct. 18. Tippy took the Tec-9 semiautomatic
handgun he kept under a mattress, stepped out his front door into a small lobby,
and shot Ms. Walker four times.

Tippy had been arrested for selling cocaine in 1992 and spent a year in jail in
that case, but the detective who arrested Tippy for murder said he thought the
youth was too small a player in the drug trade to be the gunman in a planned
execution. Tippy probably acted on his own to impress friends, neighbors and
drug dealers, said the detective, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Tippy was living with his aunt and her seven children. He was not in school. His
mother was a crack addict, a law-enforcement official said. His father had died
of a heart attack when he was 8. Tippy and two sisters grew up in Jamaica,
Queens, where they were raised by a grandmother. She died while Tippy was
serving a year in a juvenile detention center for the cocaine charge.

Tippy's aunt, Felicia Lindsey, said he lacked a moral anchor in his life. "Kids
are looking for something to hold on to," she said. "If you teach them some
morals, then when they do something wrong, you can pull them back. If you don't
care what they do, they'll be out there, looking for self."

With slightly droopy eyes that seem to tinge his face with sadness, Tippy seemed
to some friends to be mentally frail, frequently collapsing into tears when he
was teased by other kids in the project.

"Tippy listened to other people too much," said Kareem Jones, a friend who also
lives at 420 West 19th Street. "He couldn't think clearly for himself. He would
always do what you want, chill when you want to chill, go to the store when you
want to go to the store."

The detective who arrested Tippy said he bragged about the shooting, telling
several people in the building that they should thank him for doing away with a
public menace. Ms. Walker had been widely disliked. Neighbors said she regularly
robbed elderly neighbors to support her habit.

Tippy acted unafraid, cocky even, when the police asked him and his aunt to come
to the station to answer some questions, the detective said. But confronted with
information that implicated him in the shooting, Tippy wavered, asking his aunt
to go back home and let him talk to the detective alone.

"I told him, no, you act like a man and talk about this while she's here," said
the detective. "Those were the words that got to him, 'act like a man.' He
crumbled."

Tippy confessed to the shooting, the detective said, and said he had asked a
friend to throw the gun into the Hudson River. Later, Tippy pleaded not guilty.
His lawyer, Edwin Gonzalez, declined to comment.

JAMES BUTLER, 14
Pleaded guilty to manslaughter; sentenced to two to six years

This killing grew out of a fight over dice game winnings, said Shannon
Alexander, James's 17-year-old co-defendant.

On Aug. 18, a few days after the game, Mr. Alexander said he, James and a third
young man, were in Aberdeen Park in Bushwick, when they spotted "Prince" from
the dice game fight, adding that it was the third man who fired an AK-47 assault
rifle at Prince. The police say those bullets missed the intended victim and
struck a bystander, Derrick Johnson, 23 years old. James had the AK-47 when the
police arrested him at his home. Mr. Alexander later pleaded guilty to
manslaughter in the killing.

James lived with his aunt, Sylvia Graves, from the time he was 2. His mother,
Paulette, lives in Manhattan and has not seen her son in years, Ms. Graves said.
He was known in the neighborhood as "Little James" because of his diminutive
stature. His passion was basketball, his friends said.

Though James was quiet and polite, friends say he began hanging out with older,
tougher youths in his neighborhood sometime in 1993. Danny Esquilin, a community
activist who helped organize basketball teams in the neighborhood, said James
was looking for a male role model. "He was looking for somebody who wasn't
there," Mr. Esquilin said.

"I guess he wanted to feel like he was part of something. But this kid was no
hood."

MICHAEL HARRIS, 15
Awaiting trial

According to the police account in court records, on Sept. 5, Michael's
co-defendant, Russell Gaither, 16, cornered Frantz Germain on a street in
Flatbush and swung a bat at him. Then Michael stabbed Mr. Germain, 19, in the
chest with a knife.

Darla Harris, Michael's mother, an immigrant from Belize, did not want to
discuss the case. His lawyer, Salvatore Canonico, said Michael was not the one
who carried out the killing. Mr. Gaither is still awaiting trial.

WILLIAM BAILEY, 15
Awaiting trial

The police said that William shot Jerome Clark, 63, a Pepsi-Cola deliveryman,
during an attempted robbery on Oct. 18 in a South Bronx supermarket.

William was not attending school or working at the time of the incident, said a
spokesman for the Bronx District Attorney's office. He was living with his
grandmother, Joyce Kanu, in the High Bridge section of the Bronx. A lawyer for
William, Anthony Ventura, said a videotape monitoring the store's entrance did
not give a clear picture recorded entering and leaving the store at the time of
the killing.

CHAUNCEY FORDEN, 15
Awaiting trial

On Friday, Nov. 5, Chauncey was playing hooky in his basement with a couple of
buddies. They were smoking joints, munching on sandwiches, and watching a video
of "Menace II Society," a movie about guns and violence in the ghetto, he told
the police.

They had already smoked "two blunts" when Chauncey started toying with his
brother Shawn's black .38-caliber revolver, Chauncey told the police, adding
that he picked up the gun and pulled the trigger. Nothing happened. He pulled
the trigger again. This time, Chauncey told the police in a deadpan voice, the
bullet tore into his friend Kevin Scott's head as Kevin got up from the couch.

Kevin died the next day at Jacobi Hospital.

Chauncey grew up in the same neatly kept brick row house where he shot Kevin, in
Williamsbridge, the Bronx. His parents, who declined to discuss the case or say
what they do for a living, were working that day.

Chauncey admits he knew the revolver was loaded, court records show. That
morning, he had taken it from his brother's room, emptied it of three bullets,
then put them back in. He even wandered to the back door and fired it in the
air, the record said.

Chauncey's lawyer, Lewis Alperin, said he will argue that Chauncey never meant
to kill his friend and should be found guilty of a lesser charge, manslaughter
in the second degree, which is prosecuted in Family Court. Mr. Alperin, who has
seen Chauncey's videotaped statement, said he was taken aback by the demeanor of
the youth and of his mother, Catherine Forden, who sat at his side.

"He talks about this horrible crime, and his mother just sits there," Mr.
Alperin said. "There was no emotional reaction. If it was my kid, I would turn
around and say, 'How could you do this?' "

Chauncey had been arrested seven months earlier on a robbery charge. And that
July, he was arrested twice within two days on charges of selling drugs. The
drug cases were never prosecuted, but he pleaded guilty in September to larceny
and was given two years probation, court officials said.

SHAKEEM HODGE, 15
Awaiting trial

Ann Yeo, the co-owner of a Chinese takeout restaurant on Burke Avenue in the
Bronx, knew Shakeem as a regular customer. On Nov. 24, the night before
Thanksgiving, the police say Shakeem walked into Lee's Kitchen, pointed a
9-millimeter handgun at Ms. Yeo and asked her for the cash in her register. Two
of his 14-year-old friends watched.

Ms. Yeo apparently took $19 out of the register, stuffed it into her apron
pocket and then tried to push the gun away. In the struggle that followed, the
gun fired and struck Ms. Yeo, 30. She died the following day. A co-worker later
suggested that Ms. Yeo had been unable to take seriously a demand from a chubby
kid who spent most of his afternoons in front of the video games in the pizza
parlor next door.

Shakeem later told the police that he and his friends wanted money to go roller
skating, a detective said. They did not intend to shoot Ms. Yeo, Shakeem said,
and when the gun fired they ran out of the store without taking any money.
Shakeem's mother, Linda Hodge, who says she is self-employed, insists that her
son was not capable of the crime, and the teen-ager has pleaded not guilty in
the killing.

Shopkeepers in the area said a gun can turn a young prankster into a killer.
Maria Rodriguez, the proprietor of a bodega next door to Lee's Kitchen, knew
Shakeem for his awkward attempts to shoplift Cheetos. Donald Marajh, who works
at Step Two Haircutters three doors down, said Shakeem was a harmless-looking
kid who dropped quarter after quarter into video game machines.

"These kids are not used to having a gun," said Mr. Marajh. "When they get one
in their hands, they want to flash it around."

Like most other teenagers in Williamsbridge, a quiet section of the Bronx near
the border with Yonkers, Shakeem was from a middle-class family and had never
been arrested. A reliable if uninspired student at Harry S. Truman High School,
Shakeem liked gym class best, his mother said, because he excelled at basketball
and swimming.

Ms. Hodge and her eight children moved to New York from the Virgin Islands in
1988 when Shakeem was 10. His father, a plumber and carpenter, stayed behind.

RAYMOND JOHNSON, 14
Awaiting trail

The police say that Raymond and an unidentified man went to an unoccupied
apartment in a public housing project in the Boerum Hill section of Brooklyn on
Dec. 3 to scare away some people who were using it as a place to party. The
police believe the man with Raymond was a drug dealer who wanted to use the
apartment for business.

Jerome Reeves, 21 years old, was shot as he answered a knock at the door, the
people in the apartment told the police.

Housing police officers heard the shots and saw two men run from the building.
One of them, whom police identified as Raymond, dropped a gun and was
apprehended. The police do not believe Raymond pulled the trigger.

Raymond's lawyer, Mark Zuckerman, said Raymond was not even at the scene of the
killing.

GERALD BUNCHE, 15
Convicted of murder; sentenced to nine years to life

On a cold night in February, Gerald Bunche helped two friends rob a bodega on
Frederick Douglass Boulevard in Harlem. While Gerald stood lookout, his friend,
Dion Davis, 18, pointed a Mach 11 semiautomatic at the cashier, Jose de Leon,
39, and pulled the trigger twice, killing him.

Gerald's family had been torn apart by divorce, and Gerald had spent time living
with each parent. His three siblings adapted and did well in school. But Gerald
fell in with older youths and began committing crimes, his father said.

When he was 13, Gerald was arrested three times in one month: for possession of
crack, assaulting a passenger on a No. 1 subway train in Manhattan, and
attempted rape, Family Court records show. At 14, he served a year for car
theft. He had been out only a week when he was arrested for murder.

JOE SANCHEZ, 15
Awaiting trial

Firing from a rooftop in the Bronx, the police said, Joe fatally shot Andy Vega,
16, on Jan. 25 as the victim stood outside a bodega in the Mount Hope
neighborhood.

But investigators say it is not clear why he fired the deadly shot, or whether
he wanted to kill anyone. He was identified as the shooter nine months after the
killing and arrested.

Joe moved to the Bronx from San Juan, P.R., with his family when he was nearly a
year old. His parents separated about seven years ago, leaving his mother,
Carmen Olmedo, who receives public assistance, to raise Joe and seven other
children. But his father, Alejandro Sanchez, who lives nearby, says he has kept
close ties to the family.

Joe was a slow learner who showed little interest in his studies, his mother
said. But while he sometimes played hookey, she said he was never a habitual
truant.

His family said he has no criminal record and was not a troublesome child, and
he has pleaded not guilty to the killing. The family maintains he had never
given them reason to believe he was capable of such violence.

"My heart tells me that he didn't do it," said Mrs. Olmedo.

TAHIR TOOMBS, 13
Pleaded guilty to murder; sentenced to 9 years to life

Tahir killed for the first time in Ozone Park, Queens. He shot Clyde Scott, 35,
in the back with a .380-caliber semiautomatic handgun on Feb. 7 after Mr. Scott
confronted him for snatching a gold necklace earlier that day.

Nine days later, Tahir killed again, with the same gun. He shot a livery cab
driver, Fernando Lopez, 26, in the head while robbing him of cab fare to send
two friends home that night.

Tahir had been driving his mother, Deboroah Toombs, to distraction since he was
10, straying far from the modest, working-class life she had provided. Earning
$29,000 a year as a telephone operator, Ms. Toombs had raised Tahir and his
younger brother in a tidy apartment in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.

She provided her boys with trips to the zoo, picnics, video games, stereos,
fancy jeans and sneakers. "I used to have to tell him, 'It's not that you have
it good; it's that your mother works hard,' " Ms. Toombs said.

Tahir was a quiet boy most of his life, the kind of child who did average work
in school and never caused trouble. But by age 10, he began to show a keen
interest in the wild life of the streets during stays at his grandmother's house
in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, where, his mother said, she left him most
evenings while she worked the late shift.

There, Tahir came to admire young men who wore flashy gold jewelry, drove fancy
cars and made quick profits on drugs sales. "I got him what he needed, but I
couldn't compete with that," Ms. Toombs said. She became so alarmed by her son's
friends that, she said, she wandered the streets, begging them to stay away from
him.

Tahir started cutting class, selling drugs and even struck his mother. Seeking
help, she said she phoned her police precinct and the city's Child Welfare
Administration. She even considered sending him to a military academy until she
found out the cost.

"I tried everything because I was afraid of losing him," she said.

In desperation, she convinced a neighbor to press charges against Tahir in 1991,
and he served several months for assault in a juvenile detention center. But the
brief incarceration did not stop his slide into crime.

A year and a half after his release, he went on the killing spree. By then, his
mother had sent him to live with some relatives in Queens with the hope that
they could bring him under control.

SHAUL LINYEAR, 15
Pleaded guilty to murder; sentenced to seven years to life

Shaul shot and killed a candy delivery man, Ricardo Nunez, in Brooklyn during a
robbery on Feb. 19. Shaul said he had planned to spend the money from the
robbery on a new pair of sneakers.

Shaul lived in Crown Heights with his mother, who had a job as an office worker
and went to college at night. Shaul had been found guilty of possession of a
loaded weapon two months before the murder. He was sentenced to 18 months in a
residential center on the gun charge, but spent only two weeks there.

ANTHONY SMITH, 15
Convicted of weapons charges. Hung jury on murder charge. Will be retried.

Prosecutors say that on Feb. 27, Anthony shot and killed Michael McNeil, 26, the
backseat passenger in a moving car, during a dispute over money.  Anthony denies
it.

Anthony lived with his mother, who is on welfare, in Brownsville, Brooklyn. His
father had recently been murdered in what Anthony's family described as a
drive-by shooting. Anthony was devastated, said his brother, Frederick Smith.
"He didn't care about things anymore," Mr. Smith said.

Anthony has a history of arrests, dating back to age 12, for robbery and weapons
possession. Family Court records show he failed to show up in court on the
weapons case. A warrant was issued, but he was never picked up and the case was
dismissed because it was not prosecuted quickly enough.

ELIZABETH HOS, 15
Pleaded guilty to murder; sentenced to six years to life

Elizabeth admitted in court that she and her boyfriend, Anton Rogers, 18, walked
into Kim Wei Kitchen, a Chinese restaurant in Sunset Park, to pull a robbery on
April 1. Mr. Rogers drew his .25-caliber revolver and demanded money from the
cashier, Kam Ping Kwok, 30, who told them she recognized them and would report
them to the police, Elizabeth and Mr. Rogers said later.

Mr. Rogers, who also pleaded guilty to murder, told the police that Elizabeth
pressured him to fire. "Beth said, 'Shoot the bitch,' " Mr. Rogers said. "So I
shot her."

Elizabeth said she went behind the counter to get the money from the register.
They fled to a friend's house, where they counted about $200, Mr. Rogers said.

Elizabeth -- Beth to her family -- was a truant and a runaway, her mother, Sadet
Hos, told the police when she filed missing persons reports on her in the month
before the murder. In March, Beth called home and told her brother she would see
them when she was 18. Mr. Rogers told the police that he and Beth had done other
robberies together.

Family members said Elizabeth wanted to be like any other American teen-ager,
but Ms. Hos, a Turkish immigrant and a devout Muslim, thought her daughter
should stay home, study and do household chores. Ms. Hos was struggling to raise
Elizabeth and a younger son by herself, since the father lived in New Jersey.
She worked nights cleaning offices at the Met Life building in Manhattan,
leaving her children with a friend. The mother and daughter often fought, said
Elizabeth's lawyer, Daniel Williams.

Elizabeth's family and classmates say she was led astray by a possessive and
manipulative boyfriend. "She's not a bad person," said her brother, Gokhan, 14.
"She was just hanging with the wrong people."

CATHY MAJARAJ, 14
Awaiting trial

Cathy says she was simply rushing home from school on April 5 to get ready for
work when a mob of more than 25 teen-agers erupted into violence in Ridgewood,
Queens. "It was a riot," she said. "I was on the floor getting all scratched up
myself." But investigators say Cathy stabbed Kultos Sayaves, 21, with a kitchen
knife during the melee in front of the victim's home.

Cathy was raised by her mother, Slavia Martinez, after her parents separated
when she was 7 years old. Ms. Martinez struggled to make ends meet, sometimes
holding down two jobs and working late into the evenings while a neighbor
watched her children in Bushwick, Brooklyn, Cathy said. Cathy maintained a close
relationship with her father, Pooran Maharaj, spending many weekends with him.
Cathy said she kept busy with homework, chores and a part-time job selling
cookies. She had no prior arrest record.

DAMON HOOKS, 15
Convicted of manslaughter; sentenced to three and one-third to 10 years

Deshawn Mayberry and his girlfriend were arguing on June 26 about who was going
to look after their baby while she went to the beach. Damon, a friend of the
girl's, got into the middle of the fight. "It was a little bit of chivalry,"
said Detective George Readding of the 40th Precinct. "Damon was trying to
protect the girlfriend."

In the hallway outside Damon's aunt's apartment in Mott Haven, the Bronx, the
yelling between Mr. Mayberry and his girlfriend escalated into a shoving match,
said Damon's lawyer, Pat Bruno. Damon fetched a a kitchen knife. When he pulled
it, Mr. Mayberry, 19, asked, "What are you going to do, stab me?"

There may have been a struggle before Damon put the knife in Mr. Mayberry's
heart. "Damon was trying to do what a man has to do in the Bronx," said Mr.
Bruno. "This was kind of like senseless stupidity," said Detective Readding.

Damon lived with his mother, who is on welfare, in Mott Haven, a desolate,
violent neighborhood. Damon had never been in trouble with the law before.

PARIS PERKINS, 15
Awaiting trial

Paris went to a party in Bedford-Stuyvesant and ended up spending the night in
the apartment of Noel Cooper, 36, because it was too late to walk home to
Bushwick, said Paris and his lawyer, Alan Stutman. Mr. Stutman said that Mr.
Cooper was about to sexually molest Paris and, after a struggle, Paris took Mr.
Cooper's .380-caliber revolver and shot him. The lawyer said Paris was acting in
self defense.

Paris fled with the gun he used to kill Mr. Cooper on July 18, and also took
another gun that belonged to his victim, he told the police. "I sold the guns,"
he said.

Paris was raised by a single mother on welfare, Theresa Perkins. He was the
oldest of six children. Ms. Perkins said that her son was never the same after
he was hit in the head with a baseball bat during a fight when he was about 11.
Afterward, he became unruly and would often disrupt his classes.

When Paris was 14, he was sentenced to 12 months' probation for assaulting a
student at Public School 369. He spent a few months at a non-secure detention
center and was released in July 1992, and the school board provided him with a
tutor who came to his home, Ms. Perkins said. Shortly before Mr. Perkins shot
Mr. Cooper, Ms. Perkins said that she had asked a Family Court judge to send
Paris to a school upstate to keep him out of trouble.

After his arrest for murder, Paris's teacher at the Spofford Juvenile Detention
Center wrote: "He's a pleasant and bright person who has the potential to do
anything he puts his mind to. Paris could get away with a lot because he's so
likable."

GILBERTO UBIERA, 15
Pleaded guilty to murder; sentenced to five years to life

DAVID TEALDO, 15
Pleaded guilty to manslaughter; sentenced to three to nine years

Gilberto was furious when his family's Rottweiler puppy was stolen from the
backyard, but he said it was his buddy David who pushed him to kill the youth
they believed was the thief.

On the hot summer morning of July 20, Gilberto was showering when David came by
his house. David kept nagging him, saying, "This is your chance to do "Rev,"
their nickname for Henry Vargas, 15. Gilberto told the police he stalled,
playing records and taking his time dressing.

But when David handed Gilberto a .25-caliber handgun, Gilberto said he told his
friend, "Yo, I'm about to murder someone." He said David replied: "So what? He
robbed something from your house."

They tracked Henry down that day to a street in Corona, Queens. David waved the
youth over to them, Gilberto said.

"David whispered to me, 'Do it now or else I'll do it,' " Gilberto told the
police the next day. "I gave in, pulled the gun out of my right jacket pocket
and shot once at Rev."

The murder was a bloody exclamation point to two violent, wayward lives.
Gilberto and David grew up on the same block in Corona. David lived with his
mother and father, a handyman; Gilberto's mother and stepfather, Yani and
Goupaul Ramtahal, owned a video store in the neighborhood.

Both youths began getting into trouble in high school. David's problems quickly
intensified from chronic truancy in his freshman year at Bayside High School to
three arrests for robbery and attempted robbery in early 1993. (After the
murder, he was convicted of robbing a convenience store and sentenced to two to
six years.)

His parents said they tried everything to keep him out of trouble. "I didn't
want him to become another statistic," said his father, Luis Tealdo. They
escorted him to school each morning, attended counseling, and gave him a new
computer and a 1991 Suzuki.

Nothing worked, not even the threat of punishment. "I tried the nice way; I
tried the hard way," his father said. "What else could I do?"

Gilberto was also a troublemaker. He skipped 55 classes at Flushing High School
from September 1992 to November 1992, according to a school official who spoke
on condition of anonymity. When he was in class, he was disruptive and
argumentative.

In February 1993, he was arrested on robbery charges after he waved a box cutter
at another student and tried to steal the student's book bag, the police and
others familiar with the case said. Gilberto said the book bag had been stolen
from him and that he was just trying to get it back.

JEFFREY WASHINGTON, 15
Pleaded guilty to murder; sentenced to 5 to 15 years

On Aug. 8, Sixto Marte, 43, and his niece came down the stairs of a footbridge
that crosses the exit ramp from the Third Avenue Bridge in East Harlem. Jeffrey
approached them and asked for the girl's black mountain bike. When Mr. Marte
refused, Jeffrey shot him and took it anyway.

"I asked him for the bike. He said no," Jeffrey said in a Manhattan courtroom in
early March, when he pleaded guilty. He offered no more explanation for his
action.

The shooting at East 129th Street and Lexington Avenue, across from where
Jeffrey lived with his mother, Debra Washington, and his twin sister, Debrina.

Jeffrey and his sister grew up in Yonkers, where their father was a postal
worker. But the father was killed when Jeffrey was 9, shot as he tried to rescue
someone being robbed. His mother moved the family to Harlem.

Jeffrey dropped out of Richard Green Teachers High School in the ninth grade and
spent the second half of the school year at home, his mother says, passing the
day playing Nintendo and listening to rap. She says he planned to move to
another school to study computers. He had no prior arrest record.

PARIS PERKINS, 15
Awaiting trial

Paris went to a party in Bedford-Stuyvesant and ended up spending the night in
the apartment of Noel Cooper, 36, because it was too late to walk home to
Bushwick, said Paris and his lawyer, Alan Stutman. Mr. Stutman said that Mr.
Cooper was about to sexually molest Paris and, after a struggle, Paris took Mr.
Cooper's .380-caliber revolver and shot him. The lawyer said Paris was acting in
self defense.

Paris fled with the gun he used to kill Mr. Cooper on July 18, and also took
another gun that belonged to his victim, he told the police. "I sold the guns,"
he said.

Paris was raised by a single mother on welfare, Theresa Perkins. He was the
oldest of six children. Ms. Perkins said that her son was never the same after
he was hit in the head with a baseball bat during a fight when he was about 11.
Afterward, he became unruly and would often disrupt his classes.

When Paris was 14, he was sentenced to 12 months' probation for assaulting a
student at Public School 369. He spent a few months at a non-secure detention
center and was released in July 1992, and the school board provided him with a
tutor who came to his home, Ms. Perkins said. Shortly before Mr. Perkins shot
Mr. Cooper, Ms. Perkins said that she had asked a Family Court judge to send
Paris to a school upstate to keep him out of trouble.

After his arrest for murder, Paris's teacher at the Spofford Juvenile Detention
Center wrote: "He's a pleasant and bright person who has the potential to do
anything he puts his mind to. Paris could get away with a lot because he's so
likable."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: When Trouble Starts Young -- A periodic report.

CORRECTION-DATE: May 18, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about murder cases against teen-agers in New York City last
year misstated the sentence received by one defendant, Jeffrey Washington. It
was 5 years to life in prison, not 5 to 15 years.


GRAPHIC: Photos: A 13-year-old murder suspect at the 75th Precinct in Brooklyn.
(Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times) (pg. A1); Gail Gillard, whose daughter
died in a gun battle in an East New York housing project, is comforted by a
neighbor, Renee Hillary. (The New York Times) (pg. B6); Friends and relatives at
the wake service for Ann Yeo, who was shot and killed in a robbery at her
takeout restaurant in the Bronx. (The New York Times) (pg. B7)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Steven Keats, 48, Film and TV Actor

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


Steven Keats, a screen, television and stage actor, who played Carol Kane's
husband in the film "Hester Street," was found dead on May 8 in his Manhattan
apartment. He was 48.

He had committed suicide, said his son Thatcher, of Manhattan.

Mr. Keats, the son of Jewish emigrants from Denmark, was born in the Bronx and
grew up in Canarsie, Brooklyn. He graduated from the High School for Performing
Arts in Manhattan. After serving in Vietnam with the Air Force in 1965 and 1966,
he attended the Yale School of Drama and Montclair State College.

He made his Broadway debut in 1970, in the second cast of "Oh! Calcutta." He
played a spaced-out punk in the movie "The Friends of Eddie Coyle" (1973),
Charles Bronson's son-in-law in "Death Wish" (1974), and Robert Shaw's Israeli
sidekick in "Black Sunday" (1977). His most recent film appearance was in Woody
Allen's "Shadows and Fog."

His many television roles included ones in "The Awakening Land" and "The
Executioner's Song."

In addition to his son Thatcher, Mr. Keats is survived by a son Shane, of
Manhattan, and a sister, Roberta Allen of Miller Place, L.I. His three marriages
ended in divorce.

NAME: Steven Keats

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven Keats (1977)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SOUTHEAST ASIANS HIGHLY DEPENDENT ON WELFARE IN U.S.

BYLINE: By ASHLEY DUNN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1254 words


Nearly 20 years after the end of the war in Southeast Asia brought thousands of
Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese refugees to this country, many still
languish in poverty, giving Southeast Asians the highest rate of welfare
dependency of any racial or ethnic group.

More than 30 percent of all Southeast Asian households in the nation now depend
on welfare for survival, according to a report on the economic diversity of
Asian-Americans released Wednesday in Washington. Among some groups, like
Cambodians and Laotians in California, the percentage of those on welfare
reaches 77 percent. Nationwide, only 8 percent of households received public
assistance in 1991.

Still, Southeast Asians account for a small fraction of the welfare budget. Of
the one million here, about 300,000 receive public aid, making up about 2
percent of the total welfare population.

In addition to highlighting the poverty of Southeast Asians here, the report
seeks to add depth to the nation's often two-dimensional picture of
Asian-Americans, who are the fastest-growing segment of the population. Their
numbers have risen from 1.4 million in 1960 to more than 7 million in 1990, or 3
percent of nation's total.

The report, based on variety of sources like the Census Bureau, the Immigration
and Naturalization Service and state governments, was prepared by the Asian
Pacific American Public Policy Institute, based in Los Angeles, and the Asian
American Studies Center at the University of California in Los Angeles.

The success of Asian-American entrepreneurs and professionals has fostered an
image of a "model minority" -- ostensibly more affluent, stable and highly
educated.

Indeed, the report showed, the stereotype is true in many respects.
Asian-Americans have the lowest divorce rate of any racial group (3 percent),
the lowest rate of teen-age pregnancy (6 percent), the highest median family
income ($35,900) and the lowest rate of unemployment (3.5 percent). The number
of Asian-owned businesses skyrocketed by nearly 1,000 percent from 1972 to 1987.

But, the authors argued, those figures mask the group's economic problems. For
example, many of the Asian-owned businesses suffer high turnover and low
profits, and the per capita income of Asian-Americans, $10,500 in 1990, is lower
than that of non-Hispanic whites, $12,000.

Paul M. Ong, a professor of architecture and urban planning at U.C.L.A. and
co-author of the study, said the stereotype of the "model minority" and public
ignorance of the diversity of Asian-Americans had prevented the group from being
adequately considered in national policy debates on issues like poverty,
economic development and health care.

'Complex Population'

"It's been a problem in that people say, 'Asian-Americans, they don't have any
problems,' " Dr. Ong said. "What we're trying to do is educate people so they
know there is more to it than just median income. This is a very complex
population."

The public policy institute that cosponsored the study is affiliated with
Leadership Education for Asian Pacifics, a nonprofit organization created to
expand the leadership roles of Asian-Americans.

Asian-America has become a world of striking contrasts, the report said.  For
every Asian-American family with an annual income of $75,000 or more, there was
roughly another making less than $10,000 a year. While more than a third of all
Asian-Americans have at least a college degree, another 23 percent of those
older than 25 had less than a high school diploma. For every Asian-American
scientist or engineer, there was another making minimum wage.

The bustling atmosphere of neighborhoods like Chinatown in Manhattan belie the
harsh reality that many businesses in these areas pay low wages and provide no
health care benefits. The unemployment rate in Chinatown was 6 percent in 1990,
but a quarter of all families were nevertheless living below the poverty level.

Asian-American professionals have become significant members of fields like
medicine and engineering. Yet they have also been frustrated by a "glass
ceiling," an inability to advance into management positions because of
discrimination or language and cultural barriers, the report said.

Few in Management

A study of three major public hospitals in Los Angeles revealed that while
Asian-Americans made up 34 percent of all doctors and nurses, they filled only
12 percent of management positions.

The institute says the "model minority" image also obscures the economic
diversity within Asian-America. For example, 47 percent of Asian Indians hold
professional or managerial jobs, while 22 percent of Korean-Americans do. (This
compares with 24 percent for whites.)

The report found the severest economic difficulties among Southeast Asians, a
finding that will not surprise social workers or advocacy groups.

Dr. Ong said the Southeast Asians' prolonged and pervasive reliance on
government assistance provides a grim lesson in the failure of current welfare
programs that stress cash over long-term job training.

"The country has not dealt very well with those on the margins," he said. "It's
a tragedy and it affects us all."

The flow of refugees from Southeast Asia began in 1975 after the end of the
Vietnam War. The influx was originally seen as temporary, but the flow continues
today as new political upheavals and natural disasters draw more refugees to
this country.

Trauma of War

The first large group of refugees that came between 1975 and 1978 was almost
entirely Vietnamese. Many had advanced educations and job skills and assimilated
with relative ease.

But many of the refugees in later migrations came from rural areas with few
skills to survive in the United States. In general, the study says, this group,
which included Cambodians, ethnic Chinese from Vietnam and Laotians, spent
longer periods detained in refugee camps in Thailand and elsewhere, further
burdening their adjustment to America.

Their transition has been made all the more difficult by their war experiences,
by the traumatic journey to America and by welfare programs that do not account
for their special needs, the study said.

Today, three-quarters of all Southeast Asian adults on welfare in California
have less than a high school education and limited proficiency in English. Forty
percent of the nation's Southeast Asians live in California, and the welfare
rate is substantially higher there than in other states, partly because of
California's less restrictive treatment of two-parent households.

The lack of skills, low pay and lack of health benefits in the jobs available to
them have kept the Southeast Asians trapped on welfare, the study says. Possibly
more than a quarter of Southeast Asians will remain on public assistance after
more than a decade in this country, Dr. Ong said.

He also noted that many welfare programs have been designed for people with
different needs. For example, nearly 90 percent of Southeast Asian families on
welfare have both parents present, making them ineligible for some programs that
are meant to help the more traditional welfare population of single-parent
families and families headed by teen-agers.

Changing welfare programs to place greater emphasis on job training would help
Southeast Asians free themselves from public assistance, Dr. Ong said.

"This population is now so enmeshed within the public assistance system that
their well-being is and will be determined by this system and future reform,"
the report says.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "DEMOGRAPHICS: Southeast Asians and Welfare" shows percentages
of welfare recipients. (Sources: Dr. Paul M. Ong, U.C.L.A., Cenusus Bureau) (pg.
A23)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Heigh-Ho! It's Off to Reassess We Go!

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, May 18


Not much is predictable in the movie business, but the closest thing to a sure
bet is that Disney's new animated musical, "The Lion King," which is to open on
June 15 in New York and Los Angeles, will emerge as one of the summer's biggest
hits. That's the good news for the Walt Disney Company.

The not-so-good news is that its feature-film division -- in contrast with the
animation unit -- has been rolling out movies in assembly-line fashion, and too
many of them are Edsels.

Despite the surprising success of "When a Man Loves a Woman," a drama about
alcoholism starring Meg Ryan and Andy Garcia (No. 2 at the box office last
week), Disney has produced so many tepid movies over the last year that Jeffrey
Katzenberg, its chairman, is re-examining the studio's agenda of making mostly
inexpensive, high-concept movies aimed at family audiences and teen-agers.

Cast of Dozens

The films -- among them, "The Air Up There," "My Father the Hero," "Blank
Check," "Blame it on the Bellboy," "Another Stakeout," "The Program," "Hocus
Pocus," "Money for Nothing," "Cabin Boy," "Father Hood," "Aspen Extreme," "The
Cemetery Club," "My Boyfriend's Back," "Holy Matrimony," "Born Yesterday" and
"Swing Kids" -- have been duds. And some of the recent bigger-budget
productions, including "Angie," and "The Three Musketeers," produced by Joe
Roth's Caravan Pictures, a division of Disney, did not live up to the hopes that
the studio had for them. Neither did "Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit."

As Mr. Katzenberg surveys this list, the Disney company is struggling to cope
with the leadership vacuum left by Frank Wells, who was killed on April 3 in a
helicopter crash. The president and No. 2 to the Disney chairman, Michael D.
Eisner, Mr. Wells was among the most formidable executives in Hollywood. He has
not been replaced.

Other than to insist that they will improve in the next few months, Mr.
Katzenberg has refused to publicly comment on the studio's fortunes. But Disney
officials insist that many of the studio's movies, even the dismal ones, earn a
profit after video and television sales. They also point to the handful of
commercial successes, including "Tim Burton's the Nightmare Before Christmas,"
"What's Love Got to Do With It," "The Joy Luck Club," "Cool Runnings" and
"Tombstone," as well as the animated features -- "The Little Mermaid," "Beauty
and the Beast" and "Aladdin" -- that have been enormously profitable. And its
new animated sequel to "Aladdin," "The Return of Jaffar," is being released
tomorrow, for video sales only.

And they point to several coming films that have generated strong
preview-audience interest, especially "I Love Trouble," a Julia Roberts-Nick
Nolte comedy; "Quiz Show," a drama directed by Robert Redford about the 1950's
quiz-show scandal, and "Miami," a comedy about marriage and relationships, with
a cast that includes Sarah Jessica Parker, Mia Farrow and Antonio Banderas.

"The product will speak for itself," said a senior Disney official who spoke on
condition of anonymity. The official added that Disney was in a more formidable
position than any other studio. Not only was "When a Man Loves a Woman" the
second most popular film last week; the Brandon Lee thriller "The Crow,"
released by Disney-owned Miramax, was No. 1. Beyond this, the executive said
with some heat, it is unfair to characterize the studio as churning out one
failure after another when Warner Brothers, which is just a mile away in
Burbank, has produced just as many flops.

Yet some at Disney acknowledge what rival studio executives and top agents say:
that this company's relentless output, without top directors or stars or
creative vision, has been salvaged only by the success of its animated
blockbusters. And unlike Warner Brothers, whose action-adventures often perform
strongly overseas, Disney comedies have scant European or Asian interest. (The
overseas box office for a hit movie can account for 50 percent or more of its
gross.)

The Disney strategy is unique among Hollywood studios. It produces an avalanche
of movies in the hope that two or three of them will turn into hits like "Pretty
Woman," or the original "Sister Act," both Disney studio films. Disney is known
for paying those who work for it as little as possible, even while its top
executive, Mr. Eisner, made $203.1 million last year, the highest annual
paycheck in history for any chief executive of a public corporation, according
to Business Week. This, despite the fact that Disney's profits fell sharply last
year, mostly because of the financial troubles of Euro Disney, its theme park
outside Paris.

A Risky Business

"When you get down to it, Disney is in the theme park and merchandising and
animated business," said a top executive at a rival studio who spoke on
condition of anonymity. The executive said the Disney philosophy was to avoid
using big stars who demand huge salaries and a percentage of the gross. "They
don't give away profits; they take few risks," the executive said. "And that's
the upside and the downside for them. In the end, it's a creative business. It's
not the cereal business. You've got to take risks."

Despite this, Disney in the Eisner-Katzenberg era is among the movie industry's
more fascinating stories.  When Mr. Eisner, who is now 52, took over in 1984,
after serving as a top executive at Paramount, the Disney company was somnolent
and its movie studio virtually irrelevant. Since then, the company's operating
income has climbed to $1.7 billion last year from $242 million in 1984. Under
Mr. Katzenberg, who moved over from Paramount with Mr. Eisner, the film division
moved into high gear by 1986 with a strategy of hiring such stars as Bette
Midler, Richard Dreyfuss and Nick Nolte, whose careers were in the doldrums, and
producing such successes as "Down and Out in Beverly Hills," "Ruthless People"
and "Outrageous Fortune," as well as "Who Framed Roger Rabbit" "Good Morning,
Vietnam," "Three Men and a Baby" and "Dead Poets Society."

But Mr. Katzenberg's subsequent move into the big-budget arena, with such movies
as "Dick Tracy" and "Billy Bathgate," proved a mistake. He acknowledged this in
a widely publicized internal memo to Disney staff members several years ago that
said, essentially, that such films were just too consuming and unprofitable. On
the other hand, Mr. Katzenberg displayed a golden touch by rejuvenating and
expanding Disney's animated division.

A New Job

Last month Mr. Katzenberg, who is 44, appointed a top associate, David Hoberman,
41, the president of Touchstone Pictures, a Disney studio, to the newly created
job of president of motion pictures at Disney, putting him in charge of all
three arms of the company's principal movie-making operation: Walt Disney
Pictures, Hollywood Pictures and Touchstone. The degree of his autonomy under
Mr. Katzenberg remains unclear, but Mr. Hoberman said in an interview after his
appointment that he wanted to make big-budget action films with big stars and
top directors. Mr. Eisner was known to be unhappy about the comments.

To top Hollywood agents and producers, the appointment of Mr. Hoberman, together
with the resignation of another executive, Ricardo Mestres, was an indication
that the studio was facing strains caused by what one prominent agent called "a
staggering bad number of movies."

But senior Disney officials insist that the studio's fortunes are turning.
Having acquired Miramax last year -- a company that released such acclaimed
films as "The Crying Game" and "The Piano" -- Disney clearly hopes to tap into
the world of prestigious, risky movies that win Academy Awards. Disney also
signed a deal with the producing and directing team of Ismail Merchant and James
Ivory ("Remains of the Day," "Howards End"), whose films are hardly traditional
Disney fare.

Is a Plot Afoot?

Mr. Katzenberg is plainly aware that changes are necessary. The death of Mr.
Wells has left Mr. Katzenberg with company responsibilities beyond movies,
including Disney's Broadway venture with "Beauty and the Beast."

Mr. Katzenberg, who strongly defends his films, has implied that top talent
agents are out to get him because his studio is the only one not to buckle to
the big-money demands they make for their clients. But he is clearly shifting
his strategy. He has given more responsibility to Mr. Hoberman and autonomy to
Mr. Roth, the former chairman of 20th Century Fox studios. Meanwhile, the word
is out that Disney is now in the market for serious and high-profile scripts.
Many agents, as well as Mr. Katzenberg's studio-executive rivals, say they will
believe it when they see it.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Disney's feature-film division is hoping the coming "Quiz Show,"
a drama directed by Robert Redford about the 1950's quiz-show scandal, will lead
an upswing from its recent fortunes. In a scene, from the movie, Christopher
McDonald reads a question to a contestant, Ralph Fiennes, left. (Hollywood
Pictures)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Peggy Noonan Recounts Her Century-End Jitters

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness
By Peggy Noonan
255 pages. Random House. $23.

"When last we met," Peggy Noonan writes at the opening of her outspoken new
book, "Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness," "George Bush had just been
inaugurated President, Ronald Reagan was waving goodbye to Washington in a
helicopter flyby, and I had just come back to New York, where I finished a book
about being a speechwriter for both."

That book was "What I Saw at the Revolution," which not only held an incendiary
magnifying glass up to the Reagan White House, but also told Ms. Noonan's own
story, a turning point of which was her revolted reaction to her leftish college
busmates while traveling to an anti-Vietnam War demonstration in Washington and
her resulting conversion to Republican conservatism.

Now, at the opening of her new book, you find her sitting at a "good and
overpriced" East Side beauty salon, which might not sound promising for an
overview of our culture, but this is not to reckon with Ms. Noonan's striking
ability to behold great vistas through a pinhole. So from watching Oscar -- "his
black shirt is buttoned at the neck, his black pants gathered at the waist and
feet" -- she goes for a shampoo and daydreams about cars and how Henry Ford has
changed our lives more than the women's movement has. "Kids have no one home
now," she muses. Many of them are going through life with "a parent-sized hole
inside."


Soon she is pondering her "end-of-century jits." She writes: "It's a big thing
when a century ends, a time of fate and foreshadowing . . . The 1890's were a
pleasant time, a beautiful epoque, and a prelude to the most killing century in
the history of man.  Start out on a bicycle built for two, wind up at Verdun.

"Start out at Sarajevo, wind up at Sarajevo."

Following her train of thought is like watching a spark move along an endless
serpentine fuse that leads from impassioned cultural commentary to shrewd
political analysis to quotidian autobiography. She's a New Yorker again now,
with hopes for the city's future thanks to the vitality of its immigrants. As a
single parent, she works at home: "I look like Grace Metalious in the author's
picture on the back of 'Peyton Place.' "

Before very long the firecrackers of her conservative political outlook have
begun to explode. "I think of New York's street criminals as, simply, fascists,"
she writes. The threat of pollution to the environment has been overrated, she
believes. "We are the inheritors of a coarsened country," she says, and adds
that Hollywood is partly to blame, having lost the strictures of the Legion of
Decency that once forced the film industry to be artful.

Yet whatever you think of her opinions, you read on in thrall to the fascination
of her anecdotes. In Part 2, titled "Liberty," she attends a dinner at the White
House and sits next to a weepy President Bush, who asks her to rejoin his
speech-writing team.  In the hourlong delay to respond to his order for a car to
take her to the airport, she detects a fatal slackness in his staff that will be
confirmed when she tries to help rescue him from defeat.

Yet the alternatives do not inspire her. President Clinton may be the third
"great natural politician" she has seen in her life, after John F. Kennedy and
Ronald Reagan, but she considers the Clinton Administration already doomed to a
single term. "If the Republicans pick a young Republican as their nominee for
President in '96" -- she means philosophically young -- "they will not only win,
but win with meaning." But her incisive survey of the talent on the horizon
fails to turn up much beyond Bob Dole.

Again, as she did in her first book, Ms. Noonan shows her Republican soulmates
to have amusing senses of humor, particularly in an exchange she reports she had
with Marlin Fitzwater, President Bush's balding Press Secretary, during which
she punched his arm and said: "This is nice, ya know? Kinda like Tracy and
Hepburn, if you had hair."

"Aaaaaaahhh!," said Mr. Fitzwater.

"I think I'm finished now."

"I have to go lay down."

Some reviewers of Ms. Noonan's first book had a hard time accepting that the
author's savvy could have been committed to the robotic Reagan Administration,
so they tried to disentangle the writer from her politics. In this book, Ms.
Noonan eventually commits herself to a deeper form of conservatism than a
political administration's. In her final section, "The Pursuit of Happiness,"
she traces how a certain uneasiness of spirit despite her success led her to
take up Bible study and return to the Roman Catholic faith of her upbringing.
The prose gets heavier here, but her wit doesn't entirely desert her.  She
reasons that if man is fallen, as the Old and New Testaments hold, then we are
better off empowering free-market forces than welfare-state administrators.

At the same time, she concludes that what she considers the American culture's
"war against religion" is "not so bad."

"Christianity, after all," she writes, "is at its purest, its most vital, when
it knows it is what it has always been: countercultural."

Throughout her book Ms. Noonan reveals her talent for connecting the seemingly
trivial to the potentially murky, in language that is always concrete and vital.
In the opening section, during a discussion of career prospects, a friend asks
her why she works. "I told her, to support myself and my son and because of
compulsion: I want to be immersed in life and name what I see."

Some might find these two activities contradictory, but in Ms. Noonan's unusual
case the experience of immersion leads her to straight-shooting speech.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Peggy Noonan (Kelly Campbell/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Also Extending The Search for Their M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1573 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


"For 2,000 years, wars have seeded our land with the bones of the missing in
action," the general told a visitor, "and the American war produced a
particularly rich crop. We'll never find most of our own dead soldiers, but they
remain in our hearts."

The speaker, Maj. Gen. Nguyen Trong Vinh, spent most of his 68 years fighting
the French and the Americans, and he now publishes a monthly magazine for North
Vietnamese and Vietcong veterans listing grave sites and missing soldiers and
guerrillas.

Sometimes families who see the photographs, eyewitness reports and maps that the
magazine publishes have been able to identify the resting places of missing
husbands, fathers and sons.

The quest by the United States for its war dead and missing in Vietnam seems to
have brought increased efforts by Hanoi to account for Communist troops who
remain missing.

Besides offering information that might help identify Communist dead, ordinary
Vietnamese also sometimes respond to an American advertisement in the yellow
pages of Hanoi's telephone book that asks for information that could lead to the
recovery of American bones. The Veterans of Foreign Wars, which has given Hanoi
a few tips on where to look for Vietcong remains, has thanked the Vietnamese who
have helped in the search for American servicemen.

Most Vietnamese families gave up hope many years ago of learning the fates of
their missing, most of whom were buried where they fell. During the war, this
correspondent saw the unidentified corpses of hundreds of Communist soldiers
shoveled into unmarked mass graves all over South Vietnam, where relatives will
probably never find them.

With no graves or urn niches to visit, bereaved families remember their dead by
burning joss sticks and by offering symbolic food and drink to framed
photographs of the dead in improvised household shrines. For Buddhists, who make
up most of the population, the lack of a final resting place where an ancestor
can be visited is a sad end to life.

Vietnam has no systematic reckoning of the Communist combatants who fell in
battle, but most authorities agree the total was close to a million, the
overwhelming majority listed as missing in action. On the allied side, 254,257
South Vietnamese soldiers were killed (many of them never recovered for burial),
and the United States lost more than 47,000.

Search Intensifies

In the 19 years since the war ended, the search for American dead has never been
more intense. The impetus from Washington has created joint Vietnamese-American
search teams that are combing the country for human remains or clues to the
fates of airmen. Pending diplomatic recognition of Hanoi, the only official
American presence in Vietnam is the United States Joint Task Force Full
Accounting Detachment 2.

On the Vietnamese side, hundreds of new military cemeteries have been set up
throughout the northern part of the country as more remains are found and
identified. Tall white monuments emblazoned with the gold star of Vietnam
proclaim the cemeteries as the resting places of heroes among the victorious
Communists.

The families of Vietnamese dead on the losing side are less fortunate. Many dead
southerners have been removed from their graves and belatedly cremated. Mac Dinh
Chi Cemetery in Saigon, which held the graves of many of South Vietnam's army
officers and prominent political leaders, was closed by the Communists and
turned into a park. Relatives were ordered to retrieve the bones of their dead.

A Constant Search

Although Vietnamese and American authorities are finding fewer bodies than they
did when surveys began in the 1980's, the search continues. The campaign to
account for every American has intensified since September 1988, when Hanoi
first allowed American teams to look for the missing.

In April the 29th American Task Force, made up of 91 forensic anthropologists,
medical technicians, graves-registration experts and others, arrived to work
with Vietnamese on a new round of investigations.

Three teams of investigators and five teams specializing in excavation and
recovery planned to spend 34 days investigating 62 cases at 17 sites where there
were crashes or ground battles, using earth-moving equipment, jack hammers,
aircraft and any other tools needed.

The highest priority goes to "live sightings" -- statements by people who claim
to have seen Americans. Despite the special efforts made in these cases, no
sighting has ever been authenticated, and American team leaders say no credible
evidence supports the theory that Americans were held prisoner by the Vietnamese
after 1973.

Deserters, Not M.I.A.'s

This view was corroborated by a former United States Army sergeant, John Foggin,
who retired after 22 years of military service and now lives in the Mekong River
delta.

Mr. Foggin, who served five years in Vietnam, said in a recent interview that in
the final years before the Communist victory in 1975, there were "lots and lots
of American military deserters, hundreds of them in the Bien Hoa area near
Saigon alone." Many remained in Vietnam for months, he said, eventually making
their way out through Cambodia to Thailand.

Some were almost certainly mistaken for prisoners, he said, but "I've never
believed there were any American M.I.A.'s held prisoner in Vietnam after the
war."

The current surveys will not be the last; in fact, American officials say they
will search indefinitely.

Down to the Hard Cases

But with the passage of time, fewer cases are solved. "By now, we're working on
the hardest cases, and results come more slowly than they did when we first
gained the cooperation of the Vietnamese," said K. Gary Flanagan, a 44-year-old
specialist. Mr. Flanagan is one of seven American staff members at the search
teams' spartan compound on the outskirts of Hanoi, known by its residents as the
Ranch.

Mr. Flanagan, who learned Vietnamese before retiring from the Air Force, works
for the Defense Department under the commander of the M.I.A. office, Lieut. Col.
John Cray, the senior United States official in Vietnam.

Of the total of 2,234 Americans once listed by the Pentagon as missing in
Southeast Asia, 1,643 disappeared in Vietnam.

Joint search teams have whittled down the tally, and on April 12, nine more sets
of human remains suspected to be those of Americans were shipped to Hawaii,
where experts will try to identify them.

Seeking Bodies of Prisoners

Since 1973, when the last American prisoners of war were released from Hoa Lo
Prison (known as the Hanoi Hilton), 606 cases of Americans missing in action
have been resolved. In the last two years alone, the remains of 124 people were
shipped to Hawaii; some were later identified. About 1,000 M.I.A. cases in
Vietnam remain unresolved.

United States officials say Hanoi is cooperating fully, after refusing for 15
years to let Americans search. But the disposition of the remains of 98
Americans who died during the war as prisoners of the Vietnamese remains a sore
point. "We feel the Vietnamese should account for all of them and return the
remains," Mr. Flanagan said.

Vu Chi Cong, director of the Foreign Ministry's missing persons office, heads
the team that works with the Americans. Mr. Cong says that he does not believe
any more remains of Americans are likely to be found, but that intensive efforts
will continue. Vietnam has already turned over more than 300 sets of American
remains.

The search for dead is often dangerous. Of more than 1,000 investigations since
1988, many were in jungles and mountains where disease hazards include malaria,
typhoid and rabies.

Relying on Tips

Maj. Kenneth H. Smith of the Air Force, operations officer for the detachment
here, makes radio contact with each field team twice a day "to make sure
everything is all right, and to ask about any progress that may have been made."

The search teams rely heavily on witnesses for tips on where to look, and these
tips sometimes rouse investigators from their beds and send them scurrying. The
searchers evaluate information immediately, and if a report seems credible, a
joint team can reach a suspected casualty site in hours.

Although witnesses are encouraged by the Vietnamese and American governments to
come forward, the United States offers no compensation or favors. A Vietnamese
bringing information cannot hope to be rewarded with a job or a visa to go to
the United States, for example.

"Still, people do come in, sometimes with very important leads," Mr. Flanagan
said. "One guy had been out looking for scrap with a metal detector when he
stumbled upon a buried crash site. We investigated and excavated the site, and
recovered some remains."

Using All the Clues

Even when bodies are not found, crash sites sometimes disclose the fates of
airmen. Remnants of ejection seats that failed to operate sometimes provide
proof that the occupants must have perished. Serial numbers on aircraft or their
engines can be compared with lists of missions and their crews.

The Defense Department sometimes puts the families of missing Americans in touch
with the detachment here or with one of the other M.I.A. offices in Laos or
Cambodia.

"We welcome contacts with relatives who can sometimes give us information that
helps in identification," Mr. Flanagan said. "It sometimes helps the families to
know just what we're doing to look for their people."


LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Vietnam Revisited -- A periodic report.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vernon Valenzuela, of Bakersfield, Calif., arriving in Hanoi
Wednesday with other members of a delegation from the Vietnam Veterans of
America. They came to turn over personal effects taken from battlefields that
may provide information on some of the Vietnamese soldiers missing in action.
(Associated Press) (pg. A8)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words



International A2-10

FORCE IN HAITI? CLINTON EXPLAINS
Seeking to explain why he is considering using force in Haiti, President Clinton
said at a news conference, "It's in our backyard." But aides said no action was
imminent to oust Haiti's military leaders.  A1

VOTERS OUST MALAWI'S DICTATOR
President Hastings Kamuzu Banda, now in his 90's, conceded that he had lost
Malawi's first multiparty vote. He was the last prominent ruler in a generation
of African strongmen who displaced European colonialists. President-elect Bakili
Muluzi, 51, is a businessman.  A1


HUNT FOR M.I.A.'S IS GAINING SPEED
In the 19 years since the Vietnam War ended, the search for bodies of American
dead and missing has never been more intense. At the same time, Hanoi seems to
be trying harder to account for Communist troops who are missing. Families of
Vietnamese who were on the losing side have been less fortunate.  A1

ARAFAT'S 'WAR' TALK ANGERS RABIN
Prime Minister Rabin of Israel said that Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. leader, had
harmed Middle East peace talks with a speech in which he seemed to call for a
"holy war" to liberate Jerusalem for Muslims.  A3

CHALLENGES SWAMPING TURKEY
A financial crisis, a Kurdish rebellion and a surge in Muslim militancy have
plunged Turkey into uncertainty. Diplomats say public trust in the Government
has plummeted, though no one seems to covet Prime Minister Ciller's job.  A3

BRITAIN SOFTLY PRESSES I.R.A.
The British Government gave some carefully couched replies to questions from the
I.R.A.'s political wing about proposed talks on Northern Ireland's future. While
Britain is trying to keep peace efforts alive, it made clear it is losing
patience.  A6

RIVAL VIEWS OF CHINA'S INTENTIONS
As President Clinton nears a decision on whether to renew China's trade
benefits, human rights groups have begun trying to persuade him to revoke them.
And key lawmakers have begun to come out strongly in favor of keeping them.  A9

NORTH KOREA MOVES NUCLEAR FUEL
North Korea has begun to remove fuel from a nuclear reactor, inspectors
reported. The confirmation heightens concern that it is moving to build up its
supply of bomb-grade plutonium.  A9

ENVOYS' MISSIONS FAIL IN RWANDA
Though diplomatic missions to end Rwanda's civil war are multiplying, the
fighting continues unabated. Heavy shelling battered the capital, killing at
least 30 in a hospital.  A10

An inquiry assigns blame for heavy U.N. casualties in Somalia.  A10

Sarajevo Journal: Defying death with perfume and mascara.  A4

National A12-20, B9

CASE OF THE MISSING PLUTONIUM
Discrepancies in figures on plutonium production are fueling suspicion that the
Government is lax about guarding nuclear bomb fuel.  A1

EASING TAP WATER PURITY
Saying it had overreached eight years ago, the Senate voted to loosen strict
water standards.  A12

HOLOCAUST SURVEY WAS FLAWED
A poll that claimed one in five Americans doubted the Holocaust happened was
misleading because of the question's phrasing.  A12

WOMEN IN MILITARY DISCUSSED
Military leaders assured six female Senators of their commitment to insure
equality for women and to oppose sexual harassment.  A16

PUZZLE FROM SPACE TELESCOPE
New pictures taken from the Hubble have confronted astronomers with two
mysterious gaseous rings.  A19

LIGHTS! CAMERA! CIGARETTES!
Internal memorandums show that one tobacco company spent a million dollars in
four years to get its products into movies.  A16

SMALL STEP FOR HEALTH CARE
In a show of bipartisanship, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee
agreed on a plan to keep costs of benefits low.  A18

NEW VALDEZ LAW INVOKED
The operators of a cruise ship have agreed to plead guilty to dumping oil in the
Atlantic intentionally and to pay a $500,00 fine.  A18

CITADEL WILL SEEK ALTERNATIVE
Lawyers for the all-male military college said there was little demand for
military-style education for women in their state.  A20

Law Page B20

FAVORING IMMUNITY FOR CLINTON
The Justice Department is preparing to argue that the sexual harassment suit
against President Clinton should be dismissed because Presidents have broad
immunity from lawsuits while in office.  A1

At the Bar: Devil-made-me-do-it excuses become I'm-a-victim defenses.

California's Supreme Court expands the definition of "fetal personhood."

Metro Digest B1

18 CHARGED IN SCHOOLS CORUPTION
Federal prosecutors charged yesterday that the Board of Education division that
maintains schools and leases space has been rife with corruption, five years
after it lost its power to build new schools because of earlier scandals.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-27, D18

New director for Prado.  C22
Electric car race.  C26
For Children C17
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Milk and Honey." C8
"The Hyacinth Macaw." C13
Film: "Maverick." C1
"Even Cowgirls Get the Blues." C10
Music: Infectious Grooves.C21
Dance: City Ballet's Diamond Project.  C1
Restaurants C18
Art: Inside Art C20
Tracing Buddhism by sculpture.  C21
Art in Review C16
Books: Critic's Notebook C1
Television: TV Weekend D18
Home Video D18

Sports B11-19

Baseball: Paul O'Neill isn't ready to talk .400.  B17
Mets' Green happier sees change.  B17
Columns: Berkow on Bulls.  B11
TV Sports B13
Robert Lipsyte B14
Basketball: Knicks seek clincher in Chicago.  B11
Hockey: Rangers win in overtime.  B11
Racing: Go for Gin gets No. 2 Post for Preakness.  B14
Sports People B12
Tennis: Capriati enters rehabilitation center.  B11

Obituaries B7

JACQUELINE KENNEDY ONASSIS DIES
The widow of President John F. Kennedy and the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle
Onassis died of cancer of the lymphatic system at her apartment in Manhattan.
A1

Close friends and family members surround Mrs. Onassis.  B10

Treatment of Mrs. Onassis was guided by her living will.  B10

Henry Morgan, radio/TV bad boy.  B7

Michael Schwartz, dancer.  B7

Hanna Grunwald, psychotherapist.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Mr. Balaguer's dubious victory.
Diet roulette.
Breast-feeding: a civil right.
Reforming school boards.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: License for torture.
Anthony Lewis: The logic of peace.
Jill Nelson: Blue plague.
Stefan Kanfer: La Stazione.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C21

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Moving Ahead Diplomatically

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Hanoi and Washington have agreed in principle to exchange diplomats within three
months, a senior Vietnamese official said today.

The official, Le Van Bang, Vietnam's representative to the United Nations, made
the remarks at a business conference that involved the first major Vietnamese
delegation to visit the United States since President Clinton lifted a trade
embargo on Feb. 3.

The two sides began negotiating the exchange soon after Mr. Clinton ended the
trade ban. But Washington has linked full diplomatic ties to continued
cooperation by Hanoi in tracing missing servicemen.


LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;
An adventure trip for agency and client executives that turned fatal becomes a
morality play on HBO.

BYLINE: By Stuart Elliott

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


A FILM that recalls perhaps the deadliest day in advertising is renewing the
debate over the blurring of the line between fact and fiction when actual events
are dramatized for entertainment purposes.

The dispute centers on "White Mile," a movie about a rafting trip that claimed
the lives of five marketing and agency executives. It was made for the HBO cable
television network and will have its initial showing at 8 P.M., Eastern and
Pacific times, tomorrow, then be repeated six times through June 11.

A preview of the wilderness adventure cum courtroom drama, a sort of
"Deliverance" meets "The Verdict," showed it to be a morality play that
explores, earnestly though melodramatically, issues like personal responsibility
versus personal ambition and whether executives pay a price for seeking to win
at any cost.

Advertisements for "White Mile" hyperbolically describe it as "based on the true
story of how the pressure to succeed turned a company trip into tragedy."
Headlines over a photograph of the cast, which includes Alan Alda, Peter
Gallagher and Robert Loggia, ask: "Will not taking this trip cost them their
jobs? Will taking it cost them their lives?"


 Those who recall the actual accident on which the film is based are wincing at
those words. On Aug. 1, 1987, 5 of 11 men on a white-water rafting trip
organized by the Chicago office of DDB Needham Worldwide died. The title comes
from the site of the mishap, a rugged, rock-strewn stretch of the Chilko River
in the British Columbia wilderness.

The dead were Robert Goldstein, vice president of advertising for the Procter &
Gamble Company; Richard T. O'Reilly, national director of the Partnership for a
Drug-Free America; two senior vice presidents of DDB Needham Chicago, and a
retired executive of that agency. The survivors included Michael Miles, then the
president and chief executive of Kraft Inc. and now the chairman and chief
executive of Kraft's parent, the Philip Morris Companies.

Barry Holt, a spokesman for Philip Morris in New York, said that Mr. Miles "is
not willing to comment" on the film. But two other survivors were more
forthcoming.

The characters "were not the people I was on the trip with," said Joseph F.
Morrison, who was then an executive vice president with Mattel Inc. and is now
president of the Morrison Entertainment Group in Manhattan Beach, Calif.

Mr. Morrison, in a telephone interview, took particular exception to suggestions
in "White Mile" that the participants, tossed into the rapids when their
inflatable raft hit a rock, were pressured into the excursion.

"There was absolutely no coercion whatsoever," he said.


 Mr. Morrison also challenged the character of the agency president, portrayed
by Mr. Alda in a star turn that combines elements of Richard Nixon, Michael
Douglas as Gordon Gekko in "Wall Street" and David Clennon, the scheming adman
Miles Drentell in the series "Thirtysomething." Mr. Alda's character, named Dan
Cutler, is a paradigm of macho posturing who slyly orchestrates a dangerous
male-bonding ritual intended, in part, to keep a client from placing his
account, with billings of $20 million, in review.

In real life, the agency president was named Al Wolfe, then president of the
United States division of DDB Needham Worldwide and a member of the agency board
and executive committee. He retired a year after the accident.

"None of the motives they attributed to Al Wolfe were those of the Al Wolfe I
know," Mr. Morrison said, "and I've known him for years."

Mr. Wolfe, in a separate interview, said: "The movie is an absolute farce. No
one was manipulated. No one was misled."

"It puts me in a totally false light," he added. "It's a fabrication of
character with everyone who was involved."

Mr. Morrison also scorned the elements of "White Mile" that excoriated the
1980's.

"It was not about the 80's," he said. "It was not about morality."

"Maybe," he added, "it was about wearing safety helmets."


 That, however, is a lesson more likely to be imparted by a 30-second public
service announcement, not a 97-minute film with a budget of almost $7 million.

"There's a 'cautionary tale' aspect to this movie that excites me," said Dick
Berg, an executive producer of "White Mile" who has also produced fact-based
films about Raoul Wallenberg and the Vietnam War.

"It has become a cliche that men and women will kill to advance themselves
careerwise," he added. "This says that under conditions of excessive pressure,
people will even kill themselves."

While the film "does have its genesis in a real event," Mr. Berg said, " 'White
Mile' is a work of fiction." For instance, the character played by Mr.
Gallagher, an executive who survives the accident, "is a protagonist contrived
out of whole cloth."

"What excited us was not the specificity of the individuals involved," he added,
"but the rare opportunity to do a movie that is as visual as this that has
something on its mind."


 Bob Cooper, senior vice president with HBO Pictures in Los Angeles, which
produced "White Mile," said, "You make choices and you live with those choices."

Rather than "make a number of sanitized movies that don't touch on anything," he
added, "we've decided to look at stories that have a real, true basis, but are
not like Amy Fisher or rape stories." By their nature, such dramas, like
"Barbarians at the Gate," "And the Band Played On" "Citizen Cohn" and "White
Mile," raise problems.

"You try to be accurate," Mr. Cooper said, but "you always have to take some
license."

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Many U.S. Friends Helped Free South Africa

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


To the Editor:

It was gratifying to read the May 6 Anthony Lewis column, "Help From Outside,"
on the importance of efforts around the world, and especially in the United
States, in the demise of apartheid in South Africa. Those of us active in those
efforts, some for more than 40 years, felt a special exhilaration as the old
South African flag came down and the new one was put afloat at midnight the day
the voting ended. Many of us saw the new South Africa as a victory for us too.

Mr. Lewis refers to the role of the American Committee on Africa. I was its
executive director from the early 1950's until the early 80's and lived through
the years of struggle to end apartheid. As Mr. Lewis points out, American
interest in South Africa (and Africa in general) was at a low ebb in the 50's
and 60's. Activists were focused on the civil rights struggle and ending the war
in Vietnam.

Nevertheless activity generated in that period laid the foundation for adoption
of sanctions as a national policy by vote of Congress in 1986. Campaigns began
then to end United States bank loans to South Africa, to keep South African
Airways out of United States airports, to support cultural and sports boycotts,
and to press American companies to disinvest from South Africa.

Mr. Lewis mentions Robert F. Kennedy as one leading American political figure
who showed real concern for the struggle in South Africa. Among others with whom
we worked closely I think of Eleanor Roosevelt, who served as the international
chairwoman of the 1957 Declaration of Conscience against apartheid, calling for
a "worldwide protest against the racist policies of South Africa." The Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. served as vice chairman. This effort was backed by 100
outstanding world figures such as Bertrand Russell, Martin Niemoller and Trygve
Lie.

Among United States supporters were Senators Hubert H. Humphrey, Wayne Morse and
Irving Ives. The South African Government was so disturbed by this campaign that
the Minister of External Affairs, Eric Louw, went on the radio in a national
broadcast condemning it as backing Communist goals and calling Mrs. Roosevelt
one who was "not a stranger in American left-wing circles."

Dr. King was involved in other ways too. He was co-chairman with Chief Albert
Luthuli (then president of the African National Congress and a recipient of the
Nobel Peace Prize) of the Appeal for Action Against Apartheid. This campaign,
begun in 1962, advocated boycotts and other sanctions against South Africa. In
1965, Dr. King made his first and most eloquent speech on the South African
struggle in New York at Hunter College on Human Rights Day (Dec. 10),
emphasizing the need for sanctions as a nonviolent protest against apartheid. He
was shortly after turned down for a visa to visit South Africa and make
speeches.

Jackie Robinson was another national figure who took a prominent role in
protesting South Africa's racism. He chaired a conference called by the American
Committee on Africa and sponsored by 30 national organizations to form a South
Africa Emergency Committee after the Sharpeville massacre of 1960. Further,
Robinson was a leading figure in the campaign to keep South Africa out of the
Olympics in 1968.

We worked with Dennis Brutus of South Africa (mentioned by Mr. Lewis) on a
successful campaign calling on American sports notables to back South Africa's
ouster from international competition. Well-known athletes, such as Wilt
Chamberlain, Arthur Ashe, Calvin Hill, Oscar Robertson and Maury Wills joined
in.

A. Philip Randolph, the labor and civil rights leader, was prominent in actions
in support of sanctions. He chaired the Committee of Conscience Against
Apartheid in 1966, which inaugurated the effort to end bank loans to South
Africa beginning with Chase Manhattan and Citibank.

Although the final struggle was inside South Africa itself, an amazing
solidarity was built up among organizations around the world that supported the
struggle. This also led to a special relationship with the African National
Congress inside. That is why many of us feel that the establishment of a new
South Africa is our victory too.

GEORGE M. HOUSER
 Pomona, N.Y., May 8, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION VIEW;
Seducified by a Minstrel Show

BYLINE: By Margo Jefferson

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2819 words


WHO WAS YOUR FAVORITE character on "Amos 'n' Andy"? Mine was Lightning, the
ineffably witless house painter. "Which way did he go, Lightning?" a policeman,
hot on the track of some malefactor would shout, and Lightning would point to
the right with his left forefinger and to the left with his right forefinger,
expel some raspy syllables ("Ah . . . " "Well . . . " "Dat is . . . "), then
cross his eyes and expire in puzzlement. One day Lightning got stuck in a
garbage can. He banged about the room futilely for some moments, trying to get
out. Then, realizing that this was not to be, he sank gently down, placed his
chin mournfully in his hand and murmured, "Oh, me."

Oh, me, indeed. I'm not surprised that I liked the show: seeing episodes
recently at the Museum of American Broadcasting, I saw how funny it had been.
But why was I so attached to Lightning (the producers spelled it Lightnin'), the
figure who most embodied what an aunt of mine called, in sorrow and disdain,
"the type of the ignorant Negro"?

Comedy is such a mixture of empathy and superiority, identification and
alienation. Belonging to the type of the educated Negro, I found Lightning
provocatively unlike me (which let me laugh at him) and yet oddly like me (which
let me laugh with him). For one thing, we were both cross-eyed. For another
thing, which had precious little to do with race, I was a child, and his was the
comedy of regression: broad, slow gestures; grimaces and double takes; sounds
that broke language into vowels, syllables and tones. Besides, what child
undergoing socialization doesn't know exactly what it feels like to get caught,
literally or metaphorically, in a garbage can and to try desperately to get out
before the adults find you?

Oh, me.

One day at school I was chatting with a classmate, and we started recounting the
last episode of "Amos 'n' Andy." Nothing seemed more natural than that he would
slip into a rendition of one of Kingfish's famous exclamations. It may have been
"I'se regusted!" or "Holy mackerel!" (basso voice quavering, eyes turned
heavenward); perhaps he stroked his chin and intoned, "Well, now, Sapphire. . .
. " In any case, as soon as the words came out of his mouth, I stopped enjoying
myself. I smiled weakly and hurried the conversation on. But because he was
white and I was black, all sorts of other things had suddenly attached
themselves to Amos, Andy, Lightning and Kingfish: charged talk about "equality"
and "prejudice," about what holds "us" back and how "they" like to think we
behave.

I tell the story because it told me something about comedy in a nation that is
not a melting pot or a mosaic but one big ethnic variety show stuffed full of
mixed dialects, mixed manners and mixed motives.

In her book "American Humor," published in 1931, the critic Constance Rourke
said that our comedy sprang from a new nation's effort to devise an identity for
itself in the face of a powerful, often patronizing Old World. The British saw
the newly freed American as a coarse buffoon. Americans winced and admitted as
much but retaliated by giving that buffoon a con man's wit and a prankster's
bravado.

Comedy is about our needs, our place in the world, and how we cooperate or
collide with people just as obsessed with their needs and place.

What began as comedies about rustic Anglo-Saxon buffoons in the 18th century
became comic fantasies about Negroes in the 19th century, and by the 20th had
spread to include nearly every immigrant group. And the comedy of ethnicity is
always tied to that of social class: of new settlers who start in the barnyard,
on the street corner or in the poolroom, then make their way to the office, the
living room and the cocktail lounge. Which means it is always tied to the
question of who is laughing at whom and why.

The ethnic and social masks kept on rotating. Northern Irish-American actors
impersonated Southern African-American slaves, followed by Northern
African-American actors impersonating Southern African-American slaves.
Irish-Americans played Jewish-and Asian-Americans; Jewish-Americans played
African-and Irish-Americans. In an essay called "Change the Joke and Slip the
Yoke," Ralph Ellison said that for a nation of former colonials and immigrants,
"the declaration of an American identity meant the taking on of a mask," one
that "imposed not only the discipline of national self-consciousness, it gave
Americans an ironic awareness of the joke that always lies between appearance
and reality."

Which doesn't mean that the jokes were of grade-A quality. Here's a sample from
"Desdemonum," a 19th-century minstrel burlesque of "Othello."

OTEL: Wake Desdemonum, see de risin' moon,

Everybody's snorin', nightingale's in tune. . . .

DES: 'Tel, my duck, I hear you: Daddy's gone to bed.

Fotch along your ladderum, I'm de gal to wed!

BOTH: De hour am propitious -- come my darlin' flame!

De say dat in de dark all cullrs am de same.

Plenty of jokes and comic types entered vaudeville largely stripped of ethnicity
though still tied to sex and status: the harridan mother-in-law, the loutish
politician, the girlfriend with the face of a saint -- a St. Bernard! But a lot
of them kept both the thrill and the stench of ethnic difference: the way your
voice, gestures and manners get interpreted out of motives that include
pleasure, admiration, envy, disapproval and contempt.

Feckless, Shiftless, Shameless, White

If a group's status in America is fairly secure, ethnicity becomes a matter of
style, artfully or awkwardly deployed. But if the group's status is perpetually
up for grabs or periodically up for grabs or temporarily in question, every
guffaw gets attached to a social or political judgment.

That's why "All in the Family," the long-running CBS series that was the first
post-modern whiteface minstrel show, came to television in the 1970's. Against
the backdrop of the Vietnam War, the civil rights and black power movements and
feminism, it was the "counterculture" versus the "silent majority." And Archie
Bunker was in the center of the fray: an oaf and yokel because he was a white
hard hat and bigot.

Middle-class black viewers could feel comfortably superior on social and racial
grounds. Middle-class white viewers were protected from all-out racial
embarrassment because of their social distance. Women could take some
satisfaction in an Edith Bunker who might be ditsy and ingratiating but had a
kind heart and sometimes managed to get the last word. Jean Stapleton pulled
this off well. And Carroll O'Connor played Archie so skillfully that you
couldn't help enjoying his follies, his colorful (albeit primitive) way of
expressing himself. Besides, plenty of fans identified with Archie and didn't
look down on him at all: minstrelsy has always managed to service an amazing
variety of needs.

My favorite white minstrel show today is MTV's chronicle of two young,
mean-mouthed cartoon-strip white boys, "Beavis and Butt-head." Before I watched
them I thought that only "special interest" groups like the N.A.A.C.P., NOW and
the Anti-Defamation League protested the way mass culture portrayed their
people. Now I rather enjoy watching mainstream editorial writers and politicians
who could be the fathers or older brothers of Beavis and Butt-head denounce them
as dangerous and degenerate.

It must have something to do with the fact that in their own way they are very
like the pair of old-time black comic stereotypes, the pair of clowns who at
various times have been called Tambo and Bones, Zip Coon and Jim Dandy, and Andy
and Kingfish. They boasted and postured, insulted each other and told silly
jokes in loud voices accompanied by snorts and chortles.

Like them, Beavis and Butt-head are feckless, shiftless and shameless. Their
language, though white suburban in rhythm and tone (curt, short phrases instead
of loopy, meandering ones; deadpan delivery instead of lavish theatrics), relies
on the same puns and shrewdly butchered words that were the mainstay of
minstrelsy. In old "Amos 'n' Andy" radio scripts, "repercussions" became
"reconcussions," and "premeditated murder" became "prefabricated murder." In
their book (the title of which cannot be reprinted here), Beavis and Butt-head
turn cast of characters into "cast of caricatchers" and their acknowledgments
into "uh-knowledge-mints."

But I don't think that the young classmate who unwittingly shamed me with his
Kingfish imitation would have been ashamed to see me burst forth as Beavis or
Butt-head. Because even if you loathe them (and I don't), they always get the
last word and the last insult. This is something the blacks who peopled "Amos
'n' Andy" were never permitted, except by indirection.

Audiences were encouraged to see the "Amos 'n' Andy" cast more as real-life
racial types than skilled performers. They always ended up implying, directly or
indirectly, that the cosmic joke was on them. They -- and by extension their
people -- were absurd in a way they didn't get and couldn't help.  Beavis and
Butt-head, on the other hand, know exactly who thinks they're absurd and they
couldn't care less. They make the rules, and they break them.

Richard Pryor and Dick Gregory led those who made the black comic over, from
naive prankster to hip prophet: the one who remade the rules of his comic world
while breaking the rules of yours. Eddie Murphy was their most popular 1980's
descendant. The 90's brought Martin Lawrence.

Mr. Lawrence rules his world as firmly as Beavis and Butt-head rule theirs.
(Since blacks spent so many years playing flesh-and-blood cartoons, it seems
only fair that their comic emancipation would include rights of
self-determination on a par with those of storyboard cartoons.) All three
characters talk about sex, bodily fluids and bodily functions the way
hyperactive kids trying to peek into a bedroom or under a bathroom stall would.
They all use sturdy one-syllable Anglo-Saxonisms but in an oddly innocent way --
more like rhythm markers than expletives.

On "Martin," his Fox series, Mr. Lawrence plays a disk jockey engaged to a
career girl and offers a story line that joins gentrification to folksiness. But
when he does stand-up monologues as in the new film "You So Crazy," he dispenses
with the sitcom niceties and goes for polymorphous-perverse broke.

If I have been talking only about men, that is because I have had to be faithful
to American comic history. The female roles in the minstrel show were fixed
versions of the vamp, the termagant and the bonehead, and until late in the 19th
century they were played exclusively by men. The type was carried into
vaudeville and onto television (Amos and Andy's fussy wives and bossy
mothers-in-law; Archie Bunker's fond, foolish wife and earnest, dizzy daughter).
So was the tradition of female impersonation: witness Martin Lawrence's bossy
country mother and raucous homegirl neighbor Sheneneh.

A good, red-blooded, authoritative American female comic is still hard to find.
That's because it is still a hard persona to create: the only two who seem to
have pulled it off with steady mass-media success but with some fresh twists are
Roseanne Arnold and Whoopi Goldberg. They have done it by combining old,
seemingly unrelated styles with new tones and attitudes. When I watch Ms.
Arnold, I see the product of a comic mating between Hattie McDaniel and Thelma
Ritter: the type of the aggressive, no-nonsense black maid and mammy from 1930's
and 40's movies, and the type of the laconic, no-nonsense white maid and
housekeeper from 50's and 60's movies. Neither was permitted a life outside her
day job, and the camera and script were always reminding audiences to snicker
because McDaniel was fat and dark and Ritter was bony and sallow.

But Ms. Arnold throws her weight wherever she wants to on her series: her loud,
flat voice sets the pace and grounds the plot. We can't condescend to Roseanne's
working-class life because she makes better jokes about her family, food and
home furnishings than we could, and she fires off better one-liners about sex,
death and rock-and-roll too.

Whoopi Goldberg seems to have learned her craft from Richard Pryor (the quick
changes of mood and character, the physical comedy) and from Pearl Bailey (the
maternal folksiness that can turn scathing in a flash), among others. But she is
clearly meant for screwball comedy: the combination of slapstick and dotty wit
that Lucille Ball perfected in "I Love Lucy." Ms. Goldberg started out as a solo
performer, playing characters of different ages, sexes and races without
changing costume or pigmentation. Things began to falter when she went into the
movies in the 1980's and got stuck in a series of lame vehicles like "Jumpin'
Jack Flash" and "Burglar." Scriptwriters and directors veered nervously between
asexual slapstick and pseudo-sexual pseudo-funk.

But her recent and very popular movies have managed to put her talent to better
use. Playing a psychic in that sentimental fantasy-drama "Ghost," she bridged
the usually segregrated worlds of the dead and the living with a vigor that gave
the movie both comic relief and common sense. The silly and funny "Sister Act,"
in which she played a nightclub singer hiding out in a nunnery, had her walk the
line between comic sleaze and comic celibacy. And in the 1993 "Made in America,"
she and Ted Danson tucked a romantic comedy into a screwball race tale.

I hope posterity will remember them for that, not for the Friars Club roast
where Mr. Danson appeared in blackface to recite gags scripted by Ms. Goldberg.
Ted Danson is a good comedian, but I'm reminded of what the critic Zora Neale
Hurston said about performers who used burnt cork and dialect in the 1920's:
"Good comedians but darn poor niggers."

I have high hopes for Queen Latifah too. On her records and videos as well as on
her more gentrified sitcom, "Living Single," she claims a boy's traditional
right to be a signifying braggart as well as social critic and a girl's right to
be a comic charmer. She reminds me of Mae West, actually, and of vaudeville
blues performers West admired, like Ida Cox and the young Ethel Waters. She
blends satire and sex with a touch of the gangster.

A Time for More Comic Daring

Black or African-American comedy is an expanding set of performance traditions
and styles, not a fixed set of sociological or cultural rules. When critics or
comics speak of what constitutes "real" black comedy, they are speaking of its
folk or populist traditions rather than its elite or bourgeois traditions. When
folk traditions enter mass culture, they can keep their power and their edge,
but they never stay "pure"; they start to call and respond to other influences.
They can be flattened out, even degraded; brilliantly maintained and revised or,
as with "Amos 'n' Andy," an unsettling combination.

This is all part of the history of American culture. Paying close attention to
it does amount to what Ralph Ellison called "the discipline of national
self-consciousness." That's why I would no longer mind seeing "Amos 'n' Andy"
reruns on television now, playing alongside "Lucy," "The Jack Benny Show" and
"The Honeymooners."

Comedy is always a jostling for rights of representation: having your job
laughed at, your place in the world vindicated. And now, at a moment when
representations of all groups are under fire and up for grabs, more comic daring
is called for.

I'm often surprised at how safely segregated or tamely integrated mainstream
comedy remains. Take "P.C.U.," the new movie send-up of political correctness on
college campuses. Its merry band of politically incorrect students includes one
black and several women, but no good comic use is made of that fact.

Asked about the autobiographical roots of the film recently, one of its
scriptwriters reminisced about his days as a straight white man at Wesleyan
University. "Early on, I was told that I should walk in a nonthreatening way,"
he said. "Every night I walked home from the library, I asked myself, 'Is my
walk nonthreatening? How do I do this goofy, nonthreatening walk and not appear
to be coming on to a girl? I mean, woman.' "

But instead of sounding a bit whiny, why not put that scene in the movie and
develop it? He might have had his leading man go to an African-American cohort
and request lessons on how to walk in a nonthreatening way: surely a young black
male who had gotten to Wesleyan must have spent a good chunk of his adolescence
mastering the art of walking down the street in a way that assured pedestrians
of his good intentions. Together the two youths could then submit their walks to
a panel, a girl group, of judges. Everyone would get a chance to play the fool;
everyone would have a chance to get the last laugh.

And the best performer would be declared the winner. That's my idea of a divine
American comedy.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sapphire (Ernestine Wade) and Kingfish (Tim Moore) in "Amos 'n'
Andy," first shown on CBS in 1951. (Personality Photos/Howard Frank Collection);
Left, Martin Lawrence in his Fox sitcom, "Martin." (Joseph Viles/Fox); Queen
Latifah, second from right, on the Fox series "Living Single." (Fox); MTV's
Beavis and Butt-head, above. (MTV); ABC's "Roseanne," below. (ABC)(pg. 40);
Horace Stewart as Lightning, crouching, in cap, with the "Amos 'n' Andy" cast --
His was the comedy of regression:slow gestures, grimaces and double-takes.
(Personality Photos/Howard Frank Collection)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DANCE VIEW;
Are Choreographers Indifferent to War?

BYLINE: By Anna Kisselgoff

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 30;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1197 words


IT HAS BEEN MORE THAN TWO years since the war in Bosnia began, and yet barely a
handful of American choreographers have been moved to create works about this
continuous cataclysm.

By contrast, the Spanish Civil War from 1936 to 1939 galvanized virtually the
entire dance community in the United States; rarely has any era seen so many
works choreographed on a single political theme.

The lack of comparable creative response to Bosnia from contemporary
choreographers may stem from the differences between the two events, although
each war divided populations that had lived side by side. But there may be other
reasons, from the self-absorption common to the "me generation" to a more
pressing preoccupation with the AIDS epidemic, a disaster closer to home. Or
perhaps times are simply different, the issues more complex, and the general
feeling is that artistic expressions of solidarity with those who suffer are
futile when nothing is done to stop that suffering.

It was Ignazio Silone, a writer both anti-fascist and anti-Communist, who once
warned of the dangers of "spiritual tourism." Empathy with the poor in Sicily,
he said, would not improve their condition. Silone's scorn, comparable to that
of Bosnians for Western intellectuals who make fleeting visits to Sarajevo, was
obviously also a call to action. It was not a plea for silence.

At the least, then, there is something morally troubling about an artistic
community (which includes critics) that does not protest a killing field that
has been ceaselessly brought to our attention.

The dance world is hardly the chief offender. How many plays or operas have been
written about Bosnia? But with a few recent exceptions -- notably Mark Morris
and a young newcomer, Shannon Hobbs -- choreographers have not had Bosnia on
their mind.

The urgent reaction to the civil war between the anti-fascist Loyalists of
Spain's elected government and Franco's rebel forces was very different. There
was no need to be a flaming radical to sympathize with the suffering of the
Spanish people. In 1937, Lincoln Kirstein wrote, "The battle of Spain is the
immediate tragedy of our lives, far more so than the Great War." "Immediate
Tragedy" was also the title of one of Martha Graham's major antiwar solos about
Spain. Other dances on the subject ran the full stylistic gamut, from "Guns and
Castanets," Ruth Page's ballet about Bizet's Carmen in Loyalist Spain, to more
typical modern dances by Jane Dudley and Sophie Maslow.

If Bosnia does not stir up similar emotions, this does not surprise Alfred
Kazin, the writer and critic who has long studied American culture. Mr. Kazin
once marveled in a memoir, "New York Jew," that in 1943 Merce Cunningham and
John Cage lived only for art, "as if they had never heard of the great war
against Hitler."

But at present, he said in a recent interview, choreographers should be seen as
part of a generation that feels powerless. "There has been a collapse of
political faith," he said.

Asked why he thought that so many choreographers, like writers, today create
work that is confessional and centered on personal experience, Mr. Kazin
replied: "Life has become narcissistic. At the root of all this is Freud and the
extraordinary success of psychoanalysis in America. This meant that everything
you dreamed became significant and that everything personal, everything you feel
is important."

Like many choreographers in the 30's, Sophie Maslow felt part of a larger
population intent on improving the world. Today's dancers are isolated, she
said. "With wars breaking out in places as diverse as Rwanda and the republics
of the former Soviet Union, the issues are harder to understand."

Nonetheless, Bosnia is ostensibly the subject of "The Office," a piece recently
created by the popular experimental choreographer Mark Morris. "The Office,"
however, is only about Bosnia within a specific context. Mr. Morris presented it
last month in Columbus, Ohio, with Zivili, a local folk-dance troupe. The steps
and patterns were abstractions of the kind of Yugoslav dances in which Zivili
has specialized for 20 years.

The structure told the story. After each segment, a woman wearing a business
suit and carrying a clipboard escorted a dancer off stage. Eventually, only one
remained, the haunting survivor of the symbolic elimination of a people.

Nonetheless, this meaning may be lost when Mr. Morris's troupe performs the
piece, no longer framed by Yugoslav dances. The fact that the dancers leave one
by one was actually a formal device, suggested by the music, Dvorak's "Five
Bagatelles." Revealingly, the 38-year-old choreographer added: "I didn't say,
'I'll make a dance in tribute to the people of Bosnia.' I have strong personal
feelings about the repulsive, primitive, horrifying situation there, but I don't
feel I have to comment upon it specifically."

This line between private sentiment and esthetic concerns may explain the
paucity of dances about Bosnia. Mr. Morris may, for example, often focus on
experiments in form. Yet these dances also come from his subconcious, he said.
Certainly, that is one reason "The Office," an experiment in reducing the number
of dancers onstage, could be interpreted as being about people dying one by one
-- or, in Mr. Morris's words, as "a dance about people who disappeared."

LIKE MR. MORRIS, SHANNON HOBBS, a 26-year-old newcomer, is from Seattle and
danced with a Balkan folk group there. Unlike Mr. Morris, she set out to distill
her feelings about Bosnia -- in "Sarajevo Requiem," a solo (danced by Jennifer
Pollack) presented at Dance Space in New York last November.

The springboard was a photograph published in The New York Times about Vedran
Smailovic, a musician in the Sarajevo Opera. Mr. Smailovic played his cello for
22 days in front of a bakery where 22 people had been killed while waiting to
buy bread in May 1992. Sitting in the line of sniper fire in formal dress, he
played Albinoni's "Adagio" (which Zivili used to introduce "The Office").

"That one photo really affected me," Ms. Hobbs said. It crystallized the horrors
of a war she had found hard to grasp, and while her dance was about an image
rather than an experience, it provided the emotional impetus to universalize
what she wanted to choreograph. The solo, for which Ms. Hobbs used a
commissioned score by Kevin Lawson, rather than the Albinoni music, was a highly
dramatic study in deterioration.

"Someone asked me how I could do this when I know nothing about Sarajevo," Ms.
Hobbs said. "It was my emotional response to that image, of a man risking his
life, his anger and passion. Any artist can respond at an emotional level to
what he or she sees."

Bosnia, of course, will not be saved by one solo. But art has a strange power.
Maya Lin's design for the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, initially criticized
because it was abstract, has become a national shrine. What if dancers all over
the world danced every day about Bosnia? They might be accused of simplifying
issues of life and death. But as Picasso showed in "Guernica," the most
celebrated mural about the Spanish Civil War, art also has the power to indict.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephanie Kemper, far left, with Richard Graber, left, and Fred
Todt in Mark Morris's recent work "The Office" -- It is, says the choreographer,
"about people who disappeared." (Jeff Gotschall)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DANCE;
'Echoing of Trumpets' Can Still Be Heard

BYLINE: By JACK ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 30;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 657 words


THE CHANGE OF ONE WORD IN A title can make a subtle but significant difference.

When Antony Tudor created a new work for the Royal Swedish Ballet in 1963, it
was called "Ekon av Trumpeter," which was translated into English as "Echoes of
Trumpets." But Tudor soon came to prefer "Echoing of Trumpets," and it is under
this title that the piece will be revived at the Metropolitan Opera House by
American Ballet Theater, beginning on Tuesday. The British-born choreographer
was associated with Ballet Theater from the troupe's inception in 1940 to his
death in 1987.

"Echoing of Trumpets" is a searing denunciation of war. The ballet's inspiration
was the wanton slaughter of the residents of Lidice, a Czechoslovak village that
the Nazis destroyed in 1942 as an act of revenge following the murder of a
German official. At the time, the bloodbath made international headlines and
became a symbol of Hitlerian brutality.

In 1966, after Tudor had staged the American premiere of "Echoing of Trumpets"
for a special performance by the Metropolitan Opera Ballet, I asked him during
an interview why he preferred "echoing" to "echoes." He answered, "The word has
a more resonant quality about it, suggesting an on-going, rather than a
finished, action."

Violence, of course, refuses to go away. The Stockholm premiere of "Echoing of
Trumpets" came during the cold war, when the world worried over nuclear
annihilation. At the time of the Metropolitan Opera production and at the work's
first performance by Ballet Theater in 1967, the Vietnam War was raging. This
spring, when "Echoing of Trumpets" returns to Ballet Theater's repertory for the
first time since then, audiences may well think of Bosnia.

The work shows village women brutalized by soldiers and is as relevant today as
it ever was. That is one reason Kevin McKenzie, Ballet Theater's artistic
director, is presenting it, in a revival staged by Viveka Ljung, a member of the
original Swedish cast. "It's timely," Mr. McKenzie said recently. "Ballet
doesn't have to be pure entertainment. Ballet can help us question ourselves and
make us aware of man's inhumanity to man."

"Echoing of Trumpets" may involve more than politics. When I discussed it with
Tudor, he insisted that his ballet depicted not only specifically military
cruelty but also the way "people always seem to want to dominate other people."

"Everyone knows that's a stupid thing to do," he said. "Yet they keep on doing
it. They never stop torturing each other with a kind of mild viciousness."

Asked if there can be such a thing as mild viciousness, the irascible
choreographer replied: "Oh, yes. It exists. I've known some specialists in it --
even in ballet studios."

"Echoing of Trumpets," which is set to Bohuslav Martinu's "Fantaisies
Symphoniques (Symphony No. 6)," evolved when Tudor became fascinated by a
recording of the score. "One passage sounded like gunshots," he recalled.
"Another reminded me of a plague of locusts. Now what can one do with a plague
of locusts in a ballet?"

The first thing he thought of doing was an allegory about the biblical Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Though he soon abandoned that concept, he pointed
out that "once you begin to consider the Four Horsemen as subjects for a ballet,
you can be sure whatever ballet results will deal with unpleasant things --
hunger, war, things like that."

Allegory gave way to a realistic plot about a war-torn village. Curiously,
Martinu composed a "Memorial to Lidice," but Tudor never learned of it until
after he had started using the "Fantaisies Symphoniques."

The choreographic result was his first real success after several years of near
misses. In addition to its New York and Swedish productions, "Echoing of
Trumpets" has been presented by such companies as London Festival Ballet, the
Louisville Ballet and the Ballet of the Deutsche Oper Berlin. Wherever it is
danced, it disturbs people.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elizabeth Lee, aloft, Richard Gain, left, and Terry Orr of
Ballet Theater in a 1967 production of "Echoing of Trumpets" -- A commentary on
Hitlerian brutality. (Martha Swope/A.B.T.)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Focuses on Military in Advance of Anniversary of D-Day

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif., May 21


Two weeks before he will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the allied invasion
of Europe, President Clinton went out of his way today to put his own stamp on
Armed Forces Day, a holiday first set aside by President Harry S. Truman.

Last year, Mr. Clinton neglected to issue a proclamation officially designating
the holiday, something each of his nine predecessors had done. But he made
amends today in a celebratory appearance at McClellan Air Force Base here, an
installation barely spared from the latest round of base closings.

"The nation's peace and stability are in very capable hands," Mr. Clinton
declared in his belated proclamation of today's holiday, which he signed before
a crowd of 6,000 and a flock of Air Force aircraft including an F-117 Stealth
fighter-bomber. "We are deeply grateful."

Mr. Clinton, who avoided military service during the Vietnam War, has
encountered distrust and hostility from some in the armed forces since he became
Commander in Chief. His aides have expressed some apprehension that his
background could become an issue when he travels to Europe on June 1 to pay
tribute to the sacrifice of the Americans who helped to liberate Rome and led
the D-Day landing on Omaha Beach in 1944.

But in advance of his trip, Mr. Clinton has taken pains to forge a better bond
with the military and its leaders, in part by drawing a firm line in warning the
House of Representatives against further cuts in military spending. The
President also invited Sheila Widnall, the Air Force Secretary, to join him on
his two-day trip to California, and she introduced him here today.

In Washington, the White House was opened to military personnel and their
families in honor of Armed Forces Day. In the days before he leaves for Europe,
Mr. Clinton has also scheduled a further flurry of military-oriented events,
including the posthumous presentation on Monday for heroism in Somalia of the
first two Medals of Honor issued since the Vietnam War.

The President will also speak on Wednesday at commencement ceremonies for the
United States Naval Academy. Aides said that on next Monday, Memorial Day, he
planned to unveil a postage stamp honoring veterans who took part in the D-Day
invasion.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
Perchance to Dream

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Camelot? No, there was no Camelot.

And yet . . .

From the vantage point of 1994, amid the overwhelming clamor of narcissism,
cynicism, crime and the twisted tales of afternoon television, it's not that
easy to recall the extraordinary innocence that prevailed among so many
Americans in the early-1960's.

I think of the time from 1960-63 as the pre-Sixties, a prelude to the hyped-up,
psychedelic years that gave the decade its identity. It was a cool and
relatively quiet transitional period that had stronger ties of kinship to the
1950's than to the tumultuous era that lay ahead. The President throughout 1960
was Dwight Eisenhower.

President Kennedy took office on Jan. 20, 1961, a time when Jack Benny and Red
Skelton were still major prime-time television attractions and dreamy songs like
"Where the Boys Are" and "Moon River" were big hits. Who knew that coming around
the next corner were miniskirts and Vietnam, the riots, the Beatles, a so-called
sexual revolution, hippies, the Black Panthers, and what seemed for awhile like
the assassination du jour?

One of the benefits of innocence is the belief that it's safe to dream. Dreams
blossomed everywhere in the early 60's, and they had about them a blissful,
idealistic quality, especially among the young. That as much as anything made it
a perfect time for John and Jacqueline Kennedy. Young, beautiful, brilliant,
rich, the Kennedys both encouraged and embodied the dreams of that era.
Youngsters joined the Peace Corps, or went to teach among the poor in
Appalachia, or headed south to march in protests for civil rights. Everything
seemed possible, given enough time, enough effort, enough good will. Bad things
could be made good, and good things wonderful.

Robert Frost, at the inauguration, spoke of "A golden age of poetry and power/
Of which this noonday's the beginning hour."

Americans were eager to believe. Camelot, at that moment, did not seem out of
the question. The Kennedys were a fairy-tale couple, the perfect stand-ins for
royalty. And what else is royalty for, if not to embody the hopes and
aspirations, the dreams and fantasies, of the simple folk?

How deep was the innocence? A Gallup Poll in 1961 showed that nearly all
teen-aged girls believed they would be married (for keeps) by age 22, and most
wanted four children. Eventually all families would be as wonderful as the
Kennedys, who, with the adorable Caroline and John-John, were even more perfect
than the television sitcom families.

How widespread were the dreams? Despite the atrocious racial prejudice of the
era, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. could stir the nation with his
profoundly moving expression of his dream for his people, delivered just three
months before President Kennedy was killed.

The capacity to dream seemed infinite. And for so many Americans there was no
better place to project those dreams than onto the First Family, Exhibit A in
the attempt to prove that fairy tales came true.

It was astonishing, really. Jack and Jackie had limitless self-confidence and
never seemed to get upset over anything. They could handle it all, and with elan
-- from the threat of nuclear war to the challenge of raising two young children
in the world's brightest spotlight.

And then, of course, on Nov. 22, 1963, it looked as if it had all collapsed in a
heap. The assassination was a cruel breach of faith and the damage to the
nation's psyche was enormous. In fairy tales you don't kill off the hero. But
nothing dies harder than a dream in America. So there was Jackie in the
immediate aftermath, grief-stricken but as dignified and perfect as ever,
providing a focus for the nation's sorrow even as she organized the rituals for
our collective grief.

The country could not let her go. She moved out of the White House but she
remained the First Lady, still charged with the safekeeping of the fantasies and
dreams of so many. She carried out that charge for the rest of her life.

Was that brief period in the early-60's Camelot? Perhaps not. But it's the
closest we'll ever come. And the fact that for more than 30 years we thought of
Jackie as ever young and invulnerable is evidence that we held onto a dream of
something like Camelot right up until the end.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LISTINGS/British Television;
Forget 'Middlemarch.' Bring on the Nun With the Nudes

BYLINE: By Richard W. Stevenson

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: LONDON


For the "Masterpiece Theater" set, it seemed like a dream come true. The British
Boradcasting Corporation announced this month that it hopes to establish cable
and satellite networks in the United States and around the world. At last, hope
for an oasis in the 500-channel cultural wasteland of the airways. "Middlemarch"
instead of "Married with Children."

But if British television enjoys a highbrow reputation in the rest of the world,
its standing at home is considerably less exalted. Yes, the BBC does period
dramas and in-depth documentaries better than just about anyone, and some people
even watch them. Commercial television here is capable of producing top-notch
series like "Prime Suspect" and attracting the likes of Helen Mirren to star in
them.

British television, however, is also capable of producing Mr. Blobby, a
mindless, bowling pin-shaped character who, despite doing nothing but chanting
"blobby, blobby, blobby," helped make a big hit earlier this season out of
"Noel's House Party," the Saturday night BBC variety show on which he appears.

It's hard to build a critical case for "EastEnders" or "Coronation Street," the
early evening soap operas that are perpetually the nation's highest-rated shows,
or for "999," the British knockoff of "Rescue 911," or for the goofy game shows
that are a staple of prime-time schedules.

Americans, wrote Cosmo Landesman, a columnist for the Sunday Times, know all
about "Brideshead Revisited" and the like, "but what would they say after a
night of 'Blind Date,' 'Beadle's About' and 'Noel Edmonds's Crinkly Bottom'?"

BRITISH PROGRAMMING FOR MONDAY, MAY 16



PUBLIC
BBC1
6:00 NEWS
7:00 THAT'S SHOWBUSINESS

The Brits love quiz shows. Here soap opera stars and fading comedians identify
old film clips and face challenges like humming the them song from "Dallas."
7:30 WATCHDOG

Reports for consumers.
8:00 EASTENDERS

The venerable soap about Cockney life is getting a bit creaky, but it got quite
the publicity coup a few months back when one of its stars, Gillian Taylforth,
sued a tabloid for reporting that she and her fiance had been charged with
engaging in a lewd sexual act while parked in their Ranger Rover on the side of
a motorway. For weeks the papers were full of her efforts to convince the jury
that she had only been trying to help him relieve some pancreatic pain. When she
lost and was ordered to pay legal costs of $750,000, she fainted in court, a
performance that some would argue was more compelling than anything seen of late
on the show.
8:30 A QUESTION OF SPORT

"That's Showbusiness" in shorts and cleats.
9:00 NEWS
9:30 PANORAMA

An example of the in-depth journalism and documentary making that the BBC does
so well. This week, an investigation into political shenanigans in the
Westminster Council, the local government in London that is a showcase for the
Conservative government.
10:00 STARK

Australian comedy.

BBC2
6:00 INVADERS FROM MARS

(1953 American film) Kid finds a flying saucer on his lawn.
7:30 TELLING TALES

Documentary.
8:00 HORIZON

Medical show.
8:50 SISTER WENDY'S GRAND TOUR

Sister Wendy Beckett is a 63-year-old Carmelite nun with bad teeth and a passion
for art. The BBC decided to send her to museums across Europe to record her
thoughts on the great works, and she's become a cult hit. But it's unclear
whether viewers are captivated by her insights, or by the sight of someone in a
habit unblushingly discussing nudes and pointing out the "lovely, fluffy pubic
hair."
9:00 RESTING PLACE

(1986 American film) Vietnam hero returns to Georgia to bury a black soldier.
10:30 NEWSNIGHT

COMMERCIAL

ITV
6:00 HOME AND AWAY
6:25 LONDON TONIGHT
7:00 WISH YOU WERE HERE?

If there was not enough evidence of the British penchant for travel, a poll last
year found that 49 percent of the population wanted to emigrate. The desire to
be as far away from home as possible is fed by the travel shows that dot the
television schedule, invariably, as with this night's episode, concentrating on
the warm and sunny -- in this case Bermuda and the American West.
7:30 CORONATION STREET

Soap opera.
8:00 BENNY HILL

Toilet humor is big here, and when Benny Hill sits on a whoopee cushion, the
laugh track roars.
8:30 HEARTBEAT

Police show.
9:30 THE 10%ERS

British television has produced some truly funny sitcoms, including "Absolutely
Fabulous" on the BBC. But most of them are as hackneyed as anything in the
United States. This one is about a London talent agency. Tonight, a neurotic
director flies in from L.A., makes clear that he is incredibly self-conscious
about his toupee, and then is inadvertently booked into a hotel hosting, yes, a
convention of toupee-wearers.
10:00 NEWS
10:30 LONDON TONIGHT
10:40 SPORT IN QUESTION

Or was that A question of Sport? Tonight, Lennox Lewis.

Channel 4
6:00 BABYLON 5

The American sci-fi series. Channel 4, the newest of the four over-the-air
broadcasters, runs more American programming than its rivals, including
"Roseanne," "Home Improvement" and "NYPD Blue."
6:50 MIGHTY MOUSE

Cartoon.
7:00 NEWS
7:50 GIMME HEALTH

Premenstrual tension.
8:00 THE BRAVE NEW WORLD

First of three parts on the ethics of genetic engineering.
8:30 ONLY WHEN I LAUGH

As one reviewer here put it, a dangerous title for a British comedy.
9:00 THE PULSE SPECIAL

Breast cancer: Why does Britain have the highest mortality rate for this
disease?
10:00 NORTHERN EXPOSURE

More American fare -- the comedy about Alaska.
10:55 GLOBAL IMAGE

Video impressions of life in East Harlem, Los Angeles and Miami, done by
teen-agers.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sister Wendy Beckett (BBC)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Unexploded Bombs Take Toll in Laos, Too

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


To the Editor:

It is good, if painful, to be reminded of the tragedy that surrounds Khe Sanh
plateau, where unexploded projectiles from massive 1968 American bombing still
wound and maim Vietnamese children and farmers at the rate of one a day, with an
unknown number of others killed (front page, May 13). The untold story, however,
remains the legacy of American bombing in neighboring Laos.

In an April 9 letter to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, 48 Americans
living and working in Laos urged re-examination of our human rights record in
light of the appalling unexploded ordnance problem in Laos. More than two
million tons of ordnance, equivalent to a planeload of bombs every eight
minutes, were rained on Laos by American forces from 1964 to 1973. A land filled
with live antipersonnel cluster bombs remains, ready to explode at the touch of
a farmer's hoe or a curious child.

Americans in Laos welcome lifting of the trade embargo against Vietnam, but note
other United States moral obligations. A tiny fraction of the billions of
dollars spent on bombing Laos would have a substantial impact on the ordnance
problem and the daily lives of thousands of Laotians. Laos, a small country,
always seems lost in the shuffle, except for the nine years when it was the most
heavily bombed country in world history.

TOBY ALICE VOLKMAN
Director, Southeast Asia Program
Social Science Research Council
New York, May 13, 1994

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Revisited: A periodic report.;
Security Tactics in Vietnam Still Inspire Widespread Fear

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The terror of arbitrary arrests, secret trials and penal servitude that gripped
Vietnam in the decade after "liberation" has begun to fade against the glare of
the nation's economic dawn. But fear still casts a subtle shadow over this
long-suffering country.

By 1988 Vietnam's Communist leaders began a struggle to improve their nation's
image and attract desperately needed foreign investment. It is believed that by
then, all but a few hundred of the tens of thousands of political prisoners held
in the country's network of prison camps had been freed.

But although overt opposition to the Government is quiescent, the police still
make midnight calls on sleeping families, and an unlucky suspect can expect to
spend up to a year in jail before being tried. Political trials, which are
closed to foreign observers, still result in long prison sentences for such
vaguely defined crimes as "counterrevolutionary propaganda." Prudent citizens
choose their words carefully, even in casual conversation.

For some, the stress of uncertainty has proved insuperable.

The proprietor of a leather-goods store in this city, which many people still
refer to as Saigon, told a visitor that two of his brothers had recently
committed suicide, fearing that they were about to be re-arrested and sent for
another term in a "re-education camp" or one of the "new economic zones" set up
immediately after the war -- Vietnam's equivalent of Siberian gulags. The family
was friendly with many American customers before the fall of Saigon in 1975, and
like many Vietnamese with American contacts, they were subjected by the
Communists to severe hardships.

Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, PEN American Center, the Catholic and
Buddhist churches and the State Department, among other organizations, are
sharply critical of Vietnam's disregard of Western perspectives on human rights.
But criticism makes Hanoi bristle.

Le Mai, Deputy Foreign Minister for American affairs, said in an interview that
"foreigners who come here to press their ideas about human rights on Vietnam are
not welcome." Another Government representative was asked for an interview with
Doan Thanh Liem, a lawyer serving a 12-year sentence for associating with a
privately sponsored American relief project known as the Shoeshine Boys that
helped street urchins. He replied, "Human rights questions are very delicate,
and your request is unwelcome."

The Communists overturned society in South Vietnam when they conquered the
country in 1975, and deep scars remain.

Most of the hundreds of thousands who had served in South Vietnam's armed forces
were sentenced to terms of up to 13 years in the re-education camps, where
duties included breaking rocks and clearing mine fields.

Owners of shops or land were thrown into the streets, and their belongings were
confiscated. In some cases they were shipped to the "new economic zones" --
drought-stricken wilderness in the scrub jungles of Song Be Province and similar
regions -- where they were expected to farm and to feed themselves.

Foreign critics of the Government acknowledge that some of those arrested have
been terrorists, who are not considered "prisoners of conscience."

Early last year the police arrested 18 overseas Vietnamese who returned to
Vietnam and were accused of plotting to set off bombs in the country. The
defendants, who included several United States citizens, were sentenced to terms
ranging from 15 to 20 years. The State Department, hoping to protect the
prisoners' legal rights, has asked for access to all United States citizens
arrested in Vietnam.

Buddhist Monks Seen as Challenge

Vietnam's Communist Party sees a much greater potential challenge to its
authority from some of the nation's Buddhist monks, and the Government has
responded vigorously. Hanoi is aware that most Vietnamese are at least nominal
Buddhists, and even under Communism, Buddhist monks have immense influence.

One year ago, exactly 30 years after Buddhist monks began a campaign that ended
in the overthrow and death of President Ngo Dinh Diem in South Vietnam, a new
generation of monks threw a scare into the Hanoi Government. The episode began
in May 1993, when a man entered the Linh Mu pagoda in Hue, set himself on fire
and burned to death.

The incident recalled the fiery 1963 protest suicide of the monk Thich Quang Duc
in Saigon, an incident that ignited a nationwide wave of unrest.

After last year's immolation, the Hue police tried to arrest the pagoda's chief
monk, Thich Tri Tuu, but the arrival of the police at the pagoda prompted a
large anti-Government demonstration.

Thich Tri Tuu and three other monks were charged with inciting the
demonstration, and all were convicted. Thich Tri Tuu and Thich Hai Tang received
four-year sentences, and Thich Hai Chanh and Thich Hai Thinh were each sentenced
to three years.

[A chain of informants that reaches into the prison camps has kept track of the
imprisoned monks, and on May 14, the International Buddhist Information Bureau
in Gennevilliers, France, reported that all four were "dangerously ill" as a
result of a hunger strike, and were being fed intravenously. The Government said
that the monks were not being mistreated and that their hunger strike was
unjustified.]

Many Monks Feel Intimidated

A visit to several Buddhist monks who were active in the 1963 insurrection
against the Saigon Government found them intimidated and fearful of arrest.

"Because I have known you for three decades," one of them said, "I couldn't turn
you away, but please don't mention that you have seen me. The police watch this
pagoda all the time. Monks from Hue and Vung Tau are in prison now, and many
others could be arrested tomorrow, even though we have done nothing. You can't
help any of us, except by remaining silent."

Rolando Medina, the Vietnam specialist on the staff of the London-based human
rights organization Amnesty International, said Vietnam's monks have little
freedom of action.

"The leader of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam, Thich Huyen Quang, has
been under house arrest since 1982, and we regard him as a prisoner of
conscience, even though he is not formally imprisoned," Mr. Medina said. The
Government banned the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam in 1981, and has tried
to replace it with a Government creation, the Vietnam Buddhist Church.

Last December, despite his house arrest, Thich Huyen Quang issued a statement in
which he asked the Government to abandon the one-party system and hold
elections. But the national leader of Vietnam's Buddhists remains confined and
isolated in his pagoda.

The Government also exercises control over the Catholic priesthood here, and has
asserted a right to veto Vatican appointments of archbishops in Vietnam.

Attention Demanded By Rights Group

Some of the human rights cases taken up by Human Rights Watch/ Asia, an
organization based in Washington, demand urgent attention, officials of the
group say.

On March 7, Nguyen Van Ho, a former Communist Party cadre and founder of a
Vietcong veterans' group, was arrested at his home here. According to Dinah
PoKempner, a spokeswoman for Human Rights Watch, Mr. Ho is believed to have been
arrested for writing and distributing an article urging party leaders to permit
greater freedom of expression and to restore human rights in Vietnam. Family
members have not heard from him since his arrest, she said.

Two other political prisoners championed by international human rights
organizations are Dr. Nguyen Dan Que, an endocrinologist sentenced to 20 years
for calling publicly for democratic reforms, and Doan Viet Hoat, an English
professor who published an underground newsletter, who drew a 15-year sentence.
According to his wife, Mr. Hoat began a hunger strike in early April, and
although he is in poor health, he is compelled to work on a punitive hard-labor
gang.

During a visit to Vietnam in August, Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia tried
to bring medicine needed by Dr. Que to the prison camp where he was held, but he
was rebuffed by Vietnamese officials.

Human rights groups also fear that the forcible repatriation of some 60,000
Vietnamese emigres now in prison camps in Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia, the
Philippines and Japan will bring further misery to many thousands.

Pervasive Control Not Always Harsh

Although the hand of Hanoi's Communist authority presses heavily on some
Vietnamese, many others find Government influence ubiquitous but not necessarily
harsh.

"We haven't had any real trouble with the police or the District People's
Committee," said a shopkeeper in a Mekong River delta town, "but sometimes we
get called in by the police, which is always frightening. Lately the police have
been encouraging some of us to write to relatives who are living abroad, to
invite them to visit Vietnam. Naturally, the police know very well which of us
have Viet Kieu relatives."

Viet Kieu, or overseas Vietnamese, of whom there are about one million, are
regarded by Hanoi as Vietnamese citizens, regardless of what other citizenship
they hold.

Many Vietnamese say that the 19 years that have elapsed since the end of the
Vietnam war have softened the harsh Marxist-Leninist cast of government, and
that even a certain degree of criticism is tolerated. One public figure who is
permitted some freedom of expression is Nguyen Xuan Oanh, a Harvard-educated
economist and one-time Deputy Prime Minister of the South Vietnamese Government,
who remained in Vietnam when Saigon fell in 1975.

Dr. Oanh, now an adviser to the Hanoi Government on economics and trade, is no
respecter of ideology, and he believes that Communism for many party leaders is
a doctrine of faith rather than a political system.

"When any religious group challenges the Government, the Government naturally
reacts," he said. "What would you expect? For some party members, Communism is a
kind of religion. When they are challenged by leaders of another religion, they
feel threatened on their own terms."

Another southern Vietnamese believes that time will heal Vietnam's wounds. "The
old guard, both persecutors and their victims, are dying off or growing senile,"
he said. "Little by little, Vietnam is rejoining the world, and our children or
grandchildren will know better times."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam's Government regards Buddhist monks as a potential
challenge to its authority, and many monks are fearful as a result. Here a woman
made a incense offering yesterday at a pagoda in Ho Chi Minh City. (Lois
Raimondo for The New York Times)(pg. A8)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Ho Chi Mihn City. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 860 words



International A2-9

EMBARGO TIGHTENS IN HAITI

As the economic noose drew more tightly around Haiti, its military leaders vowed
to overcome the hardship and seemed confident there would be no militarty
intervention from the United States.  A1


WHERE TERROR IS NOT FORGOTTEN

Nearly two decades after the fall of Saigon, fear has been eclipsed by economic
development, but in many quarters it is not extinct.  A1

DEFENSE, NOT IMPERIALISM

The Russian Defense Minister is going before NATO seeking special status and
presenting a plan for Moscow's top-heavy military that he sees as a legitimate
defense of Russian interests, not an empire-building exercise.  A6

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn is homeward bound.  A7

THE MASS MIGRATIONS OF AFRICA

Driven by fighting or famine, thousands of Africans often find themselves
refugees on their own continent and even within their own countries, giving
Africa about 16 million, or three-fifths of the world's "internally displaced."
A3

ISRAEL ON GUARD AFTER ABDUCTION

After threats of large-scale retaliation by Muslim militants for the Israeli
abduction of a guerrilla leader from his home in Lebanon, Israel put its forces
on alert.  A2

Journal: McTrouble in Cracow.  A4

Protestants killed a man in a bungled attack in Dublin.  A2

Rebels seized the airport and a military base in Kigali.  A3

Yemen's south marches on with its secession.  A2

National A10-13, B6

BATTLE OF MILLIMETERS

Opponents of President Clinton's national health insurance plan have seemed
entrenched, but now some are giving a little ground.  A1

Political contributions by the health care industry set records.  B6

CABLE TV SEES A SLOWDOWN

After a decade of boom, cable television executives now paint a bleak picture
for their industry. The most acute symptom of the industry's malaise is its
sudden lack of interest in adding new channels.  A1

WORRIES ON THE HOME FRONT

Pentagon officials are deeply worried because violence in military families has
been increasing steadily since the late 1980's.  A1

PAST BECOMES THE FUTURE

After years of jet aircraft being dominant in air travel, less expensive
propeller planes are making a comeback, flying more and more passengers on
routes long served by jets.  A1

CONTINUING A CRUSADE

After recent defeats, the National Rifle Association is trying new tactics to
attract new members and stop gun-control measures.  B6

WHEELS WITHIN WHEELS

A courtroom battle in Charleston, S.C., by a woman seeking admission as a full
cadet at the Citadel is sometimes overshadowed by a wider disagreement about the
roles of men and women.  A10

MATTER OF TIMING

With its image already tattered, Miami suffered a double blow from the recent
hijacking of a tourist bus just before a huge world tourism trade show was held
there.  A10

QUESTIONS OF PROCEDURE

Because the immigration authorities no longer have a fingerprinting operation,
convicted criminals from other countries or terrorists may have been granted
residency or other benefits in the United States.  A12

AN EYE ON THE GIANT

Rising interest rates and falling military spending are squeezing California,
and that could leave President Clinton in a perilous position in a re-election
campaign.  A13

Metro Digest B1

FOCUS ON LAWYERS FOR INDIGENT

Originally intended to provide lawyers in just a sliver of cases, the Assigned
Counsel Plan now provides private lawyers for 40 percent of the indigent
defendants in New York City, costing the public millions while its quality is
questioned.  A1

Sports C1-10

Baseball: Yanks fall to Orioles.  C9

Phillies sweep Mets.  C9

Basketball: Knicks dethrone Bulls in Game 7.  C1

Tears in Bulls' locker room.  C6

Bucks get top choice in lottery.  C7

Columns: Vecsey on Knicks and Bulls.  C1

Anderson on Keenan and Lemaire.  C3

On pro basketball.  C7

Golf: Lehman captrures Memorial.  C10

Hockey: Two key Rangers hurting.  C2

Tennis: Capriati was previously in counseling.  C4

Track: Joyner-Kersee makes second-longest jump for woman.  C4

Obituaries B7

Alec Nove, economist.

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-15

Mary Cleere Haran, not singing.  C11

The road to prime time.  C11

Theater: "Suburbia." C11

One-act plays.  C13

Film: Wild cards at Cannes.  C13

"Desperate Remedies." C14

Music: The Knack at CBGB.  C13

Dance: American Ballet Theater's "Nutcracker." C14

Books: T. S. Eliot on metaphysical poetry.  C15

Television: Last episode of "Star Trek: The Next Generation." B10

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Far apart on welfare reform.

The splendid spring of '94.

Get tough with garbage collectors.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Response to a threat.

William Safire: Let's make a deal on health.

Jack Greenberg: Identity crisis.

Benjamin C. Schwarz: Is capitalism doomed?

Bridge B10

Chronicle B8

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Strong Yen Aids Japan's Asian Rivals

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1395 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea


When Mitsubishi Motors of Japan said recently that it might buy steel from the
Pohang Iron and Steel Company in South Korea, it created headlines on both sides
of the Sea of Japan. Japanese auto companies, as a rule, have never bought
Korean steel.

But with the rise of the Japanese yen, Korean steel is now about 20 percent
cheaper than Japanese steel, Mitsubishi said, a difference too great to ignore.

Even as it squeezes Japan's famous steel, auto and electronics companies, the
strong yen has given new life to their competitors in South Korea and elsewhere
in Asia, pushing growth throughout what is already the world's fastest growing
region.

"It's a tail wind for us," said Kim Sun Hong, the chairman of Kia Motors,
Korea's second-largest auto maker. The company is doubling capacity at its main
factory in anticipation of greater exports and is trying to break into the
American market by advertising the price advantage its $8,500 Sephia has over
Japanese cars.

The impact of the strong Japanese currency varies from country to country and
company to company, and there are harmful effects as well as beneficial ones.
But by and large, executives and analysts say, the effect on Asia has been
positive.

Owing in part to the yen's rise, South Korea's economy is booming again after
two years of sluggishness. Economists expect 7 to 8 percent growth this year,
compared with 5.6 percent last year and 5 percent the year before that. New
factories are going up everywhere and the Government has decided to allow 20,000
foreign workers into the country to help fill job vacancies.

"The most important factor is the yen," said Lim Dong Sung, president of the
Samsung Economic Research Institute. "The economic recovery is led by heavy
industry -- cars, shipbuilding, electronics. Most of these industries compete
with Japan."

The yen is now worth about 7.7 Korean won, a gain of 22 percent from 6.3 won at
the end of 1992. That has given Korean products a price advantage of 10 to 25
percent over Japanese ones, Korean executives say.

With such an advantage, South Korea's shipbuilding industry surpassed Japan's in
1993 to become the world's largest in terms of orders received. Korean auto
exports soared 40 percent in 1993, to 640,000 vehicles, and another strong gain
is expected this year.

The South Korean consumer electronics industry has benefited as well. "The
export business is really booming," said Bae Soon Hoon, president of Daewoo
Electronics. Daewoo's exports in the first quarter were up 48 percent, to $511
million.

Some of these exports are products that are sold by Japanese companies under
their own names. "In the U.S. market if you buy a Sanyo, Toshiba or some other
product and look at it carefully, you'll see the 'Made in Korea' label on the
back," Mr. Bae said.

In most cases, Korean products are displacing Japanese ones in the United
States, Europe, Asia and Latin America, not in Japan itself. But even the
Japanese market, which has been tough for Korean companies to penetrate, is
opening somewhat. In the first quarter, South Korea's exports to Japan rose 12.4
percent after having fallen for three straight years.

The rise of the yen has also produced benefits for other Asian nations, most of
which have currencies that are loosely pegged to the dollar.

"We are on the verge of an endaka boom," said C. H. Kwan, head of Asian economic
research at the Nomura Research Institute in Tokyo, using a Japanese word for
the rise of the yen.

The mechanism works differently in different countries. As does South Korea,
other relatively advanced countries like Taiwan and Singapore benefit from
having their products gain a price advantage against Japanese ones. But the
effect is somewhat smaller than in South Korea, some economists say, because
these countries have fewer heavy industries that compete directly against Japan.

For the less advanced nations of Southeast Asia and China, the benefit of the
high yen comes from Japanese companies themselves, which are shifting their
manufacturing to these countries to escape the high costs in Japan.

Other Factors Cited

Still, some economists say the importance of the yen's rise should not be
exaggerated. "Certainly it has had some positive impact, but I don't think that
it's a major factor," said Nam Sang Woo, senior fellow at the Korea Development
Institute, a Government-sponsored research organization.

Mr. Nam said the strong yen helped only exports, which account for just 25 to 30
percent of South Korea's economy. And some of the rise in exports results from
the recovery of the United States economy and the fast growth in Asia. He said
the main reason for South Korea's recovery was cyclical resurgence in investment
by companies in new plants and equipment.

Others note that the yen's rise is not an unmixed blessing. Industry in South
Korea is highly dependent on advanced components and production machinery from
Japan -- robots and machine tools, wafer steppers for making computer chips,
optical pickups for compact disk players. With a stronger yen, those Japanese
products, for which there is often no substitute, become more expensive.

Because of this, as South Korea's overall exports grow, its imports from Japan
also grow. In the first quarter of this year imports from Japan rose 21.6
percent, almost twice as much as South Korea's exports to Japan.

In the rest of Asia as well, the expansion of manufacturing by Japanese
companies means greater imports of Japanese components and production machinery,
providing what Mr. Kwan of Nomura Research called a "built-in stabilizer" for
Japan's exports.

Japan's Exports Climb

Even though the strong yen hurt the competitiveness of Japanese products, the
volume of Japan's exports to East Asia climbed last year, while the volume of
exports to Europe and the United States declined. Japan's trade surplus with
East Asia exceeded Japan's surplus with the United States last year for the
first time.

Another drawback of the higher yen is that many companies in Asia, as well as
Asian governments, have debts denominated in yen. As the yen has gained
strength, payments of interest and principal have become more onerous in terms
of the local currency.

Kia Motors, for instance, obtains technology from the Mazda Motor Company of
Japan and borrows in yen to pay for it. Last year, Kia had a foreign exchange
loss of about $33 million, curtailing otherwise strong profits.

Korean officials say that problems still remain in their economy. Encouraged by
the shift toward democracy in the late 1980's, which gave new voice to workers,
wages are two and a half times their level of five years ago, Mr. Lim of the
Samsung economic institute said.

Even though South Korea's wages are at about half the level of those in Japan,
they are high compared with other Asian nations. While heavy industries that
compete with Japan are growing, light industries like footwear, clothing and toy
manufacturing are migrating out of South Korea to lower-wage countries, as they
have done in Japan.

Behind in Many Areas

Moreover, manufacturers here realize they are still behind Japan in
productivity, technology, product quality and brand image. An average Korean
auto worker produces only 20 to 25 cars a year, while a Japanese worker produces
45, according to an analysis by Weekly Chosun, a Korean magazine. Were it not
for lower wages and cheaper raw materials, Korea would not be able to compete
with Japan.

And executives here fear that the price advantage may be only temporary. Either
the yen will fall again or Japanese companies will gradually adjust by improving
productivity or shifting manufacturing offshore.

Japanese shipbuilding companies have already been cutting prices and battling
back. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries of Japan recently won an order for five
supertankers from Saudi Arabia. "I'm still very suspicious about how they cut
their prices," grumbled a sales manager for Hyundai Heavy Industries, Korea's
largest shipbuilder.

Despite the company's current export boom, Daewoo Electronics is cutting costs
by slowly reducing production capacity in South Korea and adding it in China,
Myanmar and Vietnam.

"The Japanese will come back sooner or later," Mr. Bae, Daewoo's president,
said. "If they come back, we're in trouble, so we have to prepare."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The rise in value of the Japanese yen has given some Asian
countries a price advantage. South Korea's shipbuilding industry, in yards like
Hyundai's, above, has passed Japan to become No. 1 in orders received. (Saba)

Graphs showing the percentage change in yen/dollar rate, the percentage change
in Japan's foreign direct investment in East Easia, and the economic growth of
East Asia from '82-'93. (Source: Nomura Research Institute) (pg. D2)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater: Suburbia;
Aimless Youth, Shouting Out Its Angst

BYLINE: By DAVID RICHARDS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1239 words


"Suburbia," Eric Bogosian's new play, takes place in front of the 7-Eleven in a
town called Burnfield. Do not think that name was picked out of a hat. It is a
clear declaration of Mr. Bogosian's artistic intent. In this scathing study of
rootless youth, he practices a scorched-earth policy.

The third offering in the Festival of New American Plays that Lincoln Center
Theater has been holding this season in the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater,
"Suburbia" recounts a night and the morning after in what one character calls
the "pizza and puke capital of the world." And that qualifies as a delicate
utterance in a work as ferocious as Mr. Bogosian's own one-man shows.

In fact, any of the seven 20-something characters, for whom the 7-Eleven parking
lot is home away from home, could be turned into a Bogosian monologue. Their
abiding concerns, after all, are sex, drugs and rock-and-roll. They rant and
rage against a society that strikes them as so much "spiritual oatmeal."
Granted, none of them end up pounding nails in the floor with their foreheads,
as the author did in his most recent solo outing. But they hurl themselves
furiously against one another, bounce off the concrete walls and career into the
Dumpster that serves no apparent use, since they throw their empty beer cans and
uneaten junk food directly on the pavement.

They are not a pretty bunch. However, they are acted with such terrifying truth
by a perfect cast that you watch in horror and fascination and, yes, even sorrow
at the aimlessness of their wasted lives. If Mr. Bogosian is following a
Chekhovian blueprint, it is Chekhov high on speed and Twinkies. The director,
Robert Falls, allows the characters their fuzzy dreams and their sour
prejudices, but he never lets them off the hook. They're damned. He knows it.
And in the end, they probably do, too.


The nihilism of "Suburbia" is right in keeping with the Festival of New American
Plays as a whole. Early in the season, Howard Korder plunged us deep into the
moral corruption of the city in "The Lights." Then, in the musical "Hello
Again," Michael John La Chiusa reduced the joy of sex to the frenzy of
copulation. Mr. Bogosian may concentrate on the gang at the 7-Eleven, awaiting
the return of Pony, their high school comrade who has since become a minor rock
sensation. But the emptiness of an American way of life is his underlying
concern. Derek McLane's set is such an authentic piece of photo-realism that you
can imagine, just offstage, all the aluminum-sided tract houses with their
wishfully named family rooms. Although the festival has come up with some of
this season's most compelling dramatic fare, nobody would pretend it's cheering
stuff.

The only thing honorable about Tim (Tim Guinee), an alcoholic with a short fuse,
is the discharge he got from the Air Force after he accidentally cut off the tip
of a finger while doing KP. Jeff (Josh Hamilton), the would-be intellectual,
hasn't quite dropped out of community college, but he's down to a single course:
the history of Nicaragua. Buff (Steve Zahn) pretends to be a video artist,
having stolen a camcorder at the mall, which he aims at the television set,
clouds, his mother praying, whatever.

Mr. Zahn, who gave a similarly arresting performance in October at Playwrights
Horizons in "Sophistry," combines two qualities, a blissful flakiness and a
volcanic recklessness, that should cancel each other out but don't. He's a
tornado of imbecility, Art Carney for the 90's, or, as one character describes
him, "a post-modern idiot savant."


The women in "Suburbia" are hardly more together. An aspiring feminist
performance artist with the torn hose to prove it, Sooze (Martha Plimpton) sees
herself as the next Karen Finley, if she can only escape to New York. Bee-Bee
(Wendy Hoopes), freshly sprung from a drug rehabilitation center, doesn't
nurture any ambitions at all. Surviving another day takes all her energy.
Already a ghost, she just hasn't found the time to die.

Eventually, Pony (Zak Orth) shows up in a limousine ("I never saw a black one
before," marvels Sooze). But despite the back-clapping and the protestations of
friendship, he's no longer the guy they knew. He even travels with a press
agent, Erica (Babette Renee Props), California cool and Bel Air spoiled. The
play's major plot development involves Erica, who likes to flirt with danger and
does so this particular evening. Mostly, though, "Suburbia" is one of those
plays in which a lot goes on but nothing happens.

From the start, tempers are strained and frustrations acute. A reprimand from
the Pakistani immigrants (Firdous E. Bamji and Samia Shoaib), who run the
7-Eleven and are trying as best they can to uphold the American Dream,
infuriates the youths. But then so does a scalding slice of pizza or dopey
television fare. Everyone blows up for some reason sooner or later.

Curiously, the blanket volatility accounts for the play's major shortcoming: a
dramatic sameness. (Mr. Bogosian's three favorite colors, you could say, are
black, blacker and blackest.) Any one segment of "Suburbia" really tells you no
more than the next. Shuffle them, and the script would not be grievously harmed.


It's the performances that rivet you to your seat. Scrappy and rebellious, Ms.
Plimpton recalls at one point the baby brother who wandered off and drowned in
an icy river. Before the speech is over, she has become a lost child herself.
Mr. Guinee is as disturbing as those Vietnam vets who, one fine morning,
machine-gun a shopping center, except that he doesn't have Vietnam as an excuse.
Mr. Hamilton's frayed decency may make him the good guy here, although he, too,
comes dangerously close to snapping.

To single out specific performances is misleading, however. This is an ensemble
effort. The cast members have that intuitive understanding of one another that
is born of a shared past, common deceptions and the same taste in music. You
encounter it often in life, hardly ever on the stage. Raw as the material is,
Mr. Falls's superb direction is subtle and disciplined. All the brawling,
slovenly carryings-on don't overpower the unspoken yearnings Mr. Bogosian's
characters have for something better.

They are unlikely to find it, of course. Even the rock star admits that "away
isn't so great, either." In "Suburbia," some basic American ethic has gone
kerflooey. By the conclusion, the parking lot is one big garbage dump, and
Kenneth Posner's inquisitorial lighting seems to be singling out every piece of
trash.

The best hope lies in abandoning Burnfield and starting over someplace else.
Someplace clean, unmarked and underpopulated. But isn't that how the endless
suburban sprawl came about to begin with?


Suburbia

By Eric Bogosian; directed by Robert Falls; sets by Derek McLane; costumes by
Gabriel Berry; lighting by Kenneth Posner; sound by John Gromada; fight
director, David Leong; general manager, Steven C. Callahan; production manager,
Jeff Hamlin. The third play in a Festival of New American Plays presented by
Lincoln Center Theater, under the direction of Andre Bishop and Bernard Gersten.
At the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.

Tim . . . Tim Guinee
Buff . . . Steve Zahn
Jeff . . . Josh Hamilton
Norman Chaudry . . . Firdous E. Bamji
Pakeeza . . . Samia Shoaib
Bee-Bee . . . Wendy Hoopes
Sooze . . . Martha Plimpton
Pony . . . Zak Orth
Erica . . . Babette Renee Props

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steve Zahn, left, Josh Hamilton, center, and Tim Guinee in
"Suburbia," a play by Eric Bogosian. (Joan Marcus/"Suburbia")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chinese Military's Business Empire Puts Profits Into Commerce, Not Arms

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1781 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, May 23


Ever since the People's Liberation Army went into business more than a decade
ago, Western intelligence agencies have been concerned that profits from its
vast commercial enterprises would go toward the purchase of tanks, missiles and
fighter aircraft.

But over the last two years, the agencies have come to a new conclusion: China's
military enterprises are pyramiding their successes, plowing profits into new
and bigger commercial enterprises, hotels, truck and shipping companies -- even
discos.

As a result of this new analysis, assumptions about the pace of China's military
modernization, its ambitions as a regional military power and the true size of
its overall military spending are being scaled back, a number of Western
analysts say.

While this assessment may provide a measure of comfort to neighbors who fear
China's growing military power, its military goals may not be totally
non-threatening, especially when it comes to disputed areas in the South China
Sea, where a number of other Asian governments are vying for oil exploration
rights.

Profits Not Going to Arms

The new analysis is significant in assessing China's overall military strength,
Western analysts say, because profits from the ventures are either being
invested in new commercial activity or are being spent on the welfare of the
military units that control businesses that sprang up in the era of economic
reforms after decades of "starvation" military budgets.

"The answer to whether they are plowing back these profits into more bombs,
rockets, ships and guns is no," said David Shambaugh, a China scholar at the
University of London who has recently completed a study of Chinese military
spending.

Even the rapidly declining revenues from overseas sales of Silkworm anti-ship
missiles, F-7 fighters and ballistic missiles appear to be financing science and
technology research academies, not military procurement, the analysts say.

In China's booming coastal provinces, military commercialism has produced a
generation of top military officers who are more likely to have driven a newly
purchased Mercedes-Benz in the last year than a tank or armored personnel
carrier.

Source of Corruption

At the same time, Western officials say, big military businesses have also led
to corruption, the dimensions of which have not been reported by China's
leadership even as they give wide publicity to an anti-corruption campaign in
civilian businesses.

"From China's standpoint," a Western diplomat here said, "one of the problems is
that the military is too busy making money to think about national defense."

The explosion of growth in China's military industries has also raised the
profile of its exports to the United States, including everything from assault
rifles to toys to toilet seats. Some members of Congress now advocate imposing
penalties on China's military industries to punish China for its record on human
rights, an idea that some China specialists warn would be counterproductive.
Specialists argue that because the military is expected to be the key
institution for stability in China after the death of Deng Xiaoping, the senior
leader, punishing military industries is fraught with problems of definition and
practicality.

Trying to Bring Order

In response to this shift toward commercialism in the armed forces, President
Jiang Zemin and his top military adviser, Adm. Liu Huaqing, have since last fall
tried to bring order to the military's corporate structure, and they have been
joined by a number of other top Chinese military leaders. Still, it remains to
be seen whether a new emphasis on training and readiness will reimpose
sufficient discipline so Communist Party leaders can maintain stability in the
ranks.

"The commercialization of the P.L.A. has had a very deleterious effect on
readiness and training," Mr. Shambaugh asserts.

But prosperity is well received among the troops, most of the analysts agree.
For the first time in decades, there is meat on the table for soldiers, who were
forced like other Chinese to scrounge for rice husks and eat grass soup during
the deprivation years of the 1950's and during the Cultural Revolution, from
1966 to 1976.

"I have actually overheard an officer criticizing a superior for being too
interested in taking money from commercial activity and turning it over to the
central Government," a Western diplomat said. "He told him he should be more
concerned about the living standards of his comrades."

Making Many Products

Today, China's military runs a pharmaceutical empire with earnings of $1 billion
a year; it produces satellite television dishes and cellular phones as well as
food, clothing, trucks, boats, motorcycles and contact lenses. In Shanghai, the
city's hottest disco, JJ's, is a joint venture between the military, which owns
the building, and a Hong Kong investor. The cavernous warehouse throbs each
night under a constellation of strobe lights while a prostitution trade takes
place outside.

"Companies are putting more profit into dual-use civilian production:
motorcycles instead of fighter aircraft and commercial space launches instead of
military rockets," a Western diplomat said. "Chinese weapons are not in high
demand."

At the Chengdu Aircraft Company in south-central Sichuan Province, for instance,
the production line for F-7 fighter aircraft scarcely has customers for the
dozen or so units it produces each year.

"The production line is still producing fighters, but they are just lining them
up out there on the ramp with no one to sell them to, except for the few that go
to Pakistan or Bangladesh," said a recent visitor to the plant. "The majority of
the work force is involved with making three different varieties of motorcycles,
and this is just to make money."

Making Airliner Nose Cones

The factory's military managers tell visitors that 70 percent of their income
comes from the motorcycle business and most of the rest from a joint venture
with McDonnell Douglas to produce nose sections for the MD-80 commercial
airliner.

"They have been making those nose sections for the MD-80 for five years," a
Western diplomat said. "They float them down the Yangtze River and ship them
back to Long Beach, where they are fitted onto the MD-80's that are sold around
the world."

But the profits from these commercial ventures are not going into the
operations, maintenance or procurement budgets of the military, Western analysts
say.

"It is not benefiting the military in the direct sense a lot of people used to
think and some who still do," the diplomat said.

In testimony to Congress, the Central Intelligence Agency estimated last year
that the proceeds of China's military enterprises had reached $5 billion
annually.

Mr. Shambaugh, the China scholar, estimated that the figure could be as high as
$10 billion, but added, "I don't think anyone, including the military, knows how
much they make on commercial activities."

Official Figure Not Believed

China's military spending level has long been a mystery. After two decades in
which spending actually declined and forces atrophied, China's officially
acknowledged military budget has increased by more than 10 percent a year since
1989, to about $7 billion.

But a Western diplomat said of Beijing's officially announced budget: "Nobody
believes the figures they give on defense."

Many analysts agree that a more realistic estimate is $20 billion to $40
billion. That is less than one-tenth of the United States military budget and on
a par with Japanese military spending, but with three million people under arms,
China's greatest costs are supporting them.

"Even after the increases, we are just able to maintain the minimum standards of
living for the forces," Xu Xin, former deputy chief of staff of the military,
said in a recent interview.

In November, as get-rich fever seemed to be getting out of control in the
military, President Jiang summoned the military leadership to set some rules,
including a decree that said military enterprises at the lower command levels
should be turned over to the civilian authorities. So far, it is uncertain how
many such business have been transferred.

In Business to Stay

Mr. Jiang in his decree may have been trying to bring order out of the chaos,
but he also enshrined the principle that the Chinese military, at the highest
levels, was in business to stay. There now are "scores" of power centers in the
military that are consolidating their business empires, Western analysts say.

Even Mr. Jiang's admonition to the assembled military brass sounded a
contradictory note when he said the army should "stick to the principle of
building up its combat strength while engaging in production and business
activities."

The President, who exercises his role as commander in chief as chairman of the
Central Military Commission, told military leaders that they should rationalize
their business investments in a way that reduced China's overall financial
burdens and improved the living standards of troops.

"Ever since then, there has been a strong increase in training and conducting
military exercises," a Western diplomat said.

And in recent months, the civilian leadership has begun to enforce more strictly
the retirement age for top military officers, a decision that Western analysts
say will make the military more professional. A diplomat said it would also
remove incentives for corruption typified by the attitude that "if I am not
going to get promoted, then I am going to get mine while I can."

Concern Abroad Remains

If the new analysis of Chinese military financing means that Beijing is spending
less on the military, it will probably reduce the concerns of regional powers
like Japan.

But concern remains nonetheless. China has embarked on building up
well-equipped, rapid deployment forces that could be thrown into any number of
territorial disputes on China's periphery, particularly in the Taiwan Strait and
over a disputed group of islands in the South China Sea called the Spratlys.
There, China is forging ahead with oil exploration despite rival claims from
Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei.

At the same time, China continues to search for relatively inexpensive weapon
systems that can deliver firepower decisively in the opening stage of a
conflict. To that end, its aviation design bureaus are working on a boxy
prototype of a Stealth bomber, similar to the American F-117 that was so
decisive against Iraq in the Persian Gulf war.

"They have a program," a Western diplomat said. The question, he added, is what
they will do with it.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "WEAPONS AND TROOPS: China's Military" shows the military budget
in billions of yuan from '91-'94. (Sources: People's Liberation Army: "The
Military Balance," by the International Institute for Strategicf Studies, London
(manpower)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

DEATH OF A FIRST LADY: The Overview;
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Is Buried

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1593 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


Eulogized by President Clinton as a "remarkable woman whose life will forever
glow in the lives of her fellow Americans," Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis was
buried today on an Arlington hillside next to her martyred first husband, the
35th President of the United States.

The eternal flame that Mrs. Onassis lighted three decades ago as a 34-year-old
widow flickered in a summery breeze as the President spoke of her courage at the
time of John F. Kennedy's assassination, when her poise and dignity helped to
salve the nation's wounds, and of her kindness to him and to Hillary Rodham
Clinton as they searched for ways to shield their daughter, Chelsea, from the
corrosive glare of publicity.

"God gave her very great gifts and imposed upon her great burdens," Mr. Clinton
said. "She bore them all with dignity and grace and uncommon common sense."

In keeping with Mrs. Onassis's passion for privacy, it was a modest, 11-minute
ceremony, with fewer than 100 people standing near the grave in the midday sun.
There were brief readings by the two children, John F. Kennedy Jr. and Caroline
Kennedy Schlossberg, whose then-tiny hands so tightly clutched those of their
mother at their father's funeral -- a heart-rending picture that is burned into
the memory of every American old enough to remember.

Finally, 64 bells rang out from the tower of the Washington Cathedral across the
Potomac River, one for each year of a life suddenly cut short by lymphoma, a
form of cancer.

At the funeral Mass at St. Ignatius Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan
this morning, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts recalled that Mrs.
Onassis had once said that "if you bungle raising your children, nothing else
much matters in life." She did not do so, he said, for all the obstacles that
fate had cast into her path, and her two children, he said, "are her two
miracles."

Despite her dazzling successes in the White House, despite her second marriage
to the the shipowner Aristotle Onassis, despite the paparazzi who dogged her
steps, Senator Kennedy said that "she never wanted public notice -- in part, I
think, because it brought back painful memories of an unbearable sorrow, endured
in the glare of a million lights."

Since she died last Thursday evening in her Fifth Avenue apartment after a short
illness, Mrs. Onassis has been praised by politicians, historians and news
commentators for her style, her taste, her bravery in the face of crushing
tragedy, her devotion as a mother and her stubborn insistence on living by her
own lights. Her passing broke a link to a time when politicians were often
heroes, a time of sweet optimism that was soured by Vietnam and Watergate.

In a vulgar era when celebrity is something to be cashed in on, she seemed to
many to symbolize a more refined and more ordered way of life.

The historian Michael Beschloss argued that Mrs. Onassis was one of the two most
important First Ladies of the century, the other, in his view, having been
Eleanor Roosevelt. Pierre Salinger, the White House press secretary in the
Kennedy White House, insisted that she was a figure of substance as well as
glamor. President Lyndon B. Johnson, he said, wanted to nominate her as
Ambassador to France, but she dissuaded him.

"She made a rare and noble contribution to the American spirit," said Senator
Kennedy. At no point did he or any other speaker at the funeral Mass make the
slightest allusion to Mrs. Onassis's second marriage, which was widely
criticized in the news media at the time as inappropriate.

Touchstone of Continuity

The church, a 96-year-old neoclassic limestone structure on Park Avenue at 84th
Street, was the same one where Jacqueline Bouvier was baptized as an infant and
confirmed as a teen-ager -- a continuity rare in modern America, where people's
lives often carry them far from their origins. Perhaps in memory of those days,
the officiating priest, the Rev. Walter Modrys, pronounced her name in the
French manner, zhak-LEEN, as she preferred when young, and not in the American
way, JACK-well-in, as became common later.

Tradition was also served in the preponderance of family members among the
readers, pallbearers and other participants in the Mass. One pallbearer was
William Kennedy Smith, a nephew of Mrs. Onassis, who was acquitted on rape
charges in December 1991, after a late-night drinking incident in Palm Beach,
Fla., that March.

John Kennedy Jr. said that the family had struggled to set the right tone for
the funeral and had finally decided that three things "defined my mother's
essence: her love of words, the bonds of home and family and her spirit of
adventure."

Maurice Tempelsman, Mrs. Kennedy's companion of recent years, read a favorite
poem, "Ithaka," by the Alexandrian Greek, C. P. Cafavy. Mrs. Schlossberg read
another, "Memory of Cape Cod," by the American poet Edna St. Vincent Millay.

Outsiders were also involved. Mike Nichols, the director , who occasionally
escorted Mrs. Onassis in New York in the 1970's, read a scriptural passage, and
the soprano Jessye Norman sang a pair of hymns, Franck's Panis Angelicus and
Schubert's Ave Maria.

Daryl Hannah, the actress friend of John Kennedy Jr., was there, as were four
senators with close ties to the family: John Glenn of Ohio, Daniel Patrick
Moynihan of New York, John Kerry of Massachusetts and Claiborne Pell of Rhode
Island. With the aid of a plastic cane, Lyndon B. Johnson widow, Lady Bird, now
silver-haired and rarely seen in public, moved slowly up the steps of the
church, at Park Avenue and 84th Street.

Mrs. Clinton attended the Mass, but her husband did not. He met the chartered
plane carrying Mrs. Onassis's body to Washington at National Airport and rode
with the hearse and members of the family to Arlington, Va.

The family arrived at Arlington National Cemetery in three long, black
limousines. The grave itself was covered in green cloth and with greenery that
was carefully arranged and sprayed with water for freshness just before the
family arrived.

The retired Roman Catholic Archbishop of New Orleans, the Rev. Philip J. Hannan,
an old family friend, conducted the service. As auxiliary bishop of Washington
in 1963, he conducted John F. Kennedy's funeral.  Today, he chose six sad words
to capture the mood. Mrs. Onassis, he said, was "so dearly beloved, so sorely
missed."

Mrs. Onassis' coffin was carried to the grave by professional pallbearers who
were preceded, at a steady and somber gait, by Archbishop Hannan and the five
Kennedy cousins and another friend of the family who served as honorary
pallbearers. They were Robert F. Kennedy Jr., Timothy Shriver, Christopher
Lawford, William Kennedy Smith, Edward M. Kennedy Jr. and Jack Walsh, a retired
Secret Service agent who guarded both Caroline and John throughout their
childhoods.

The archbishop's magenta surplice and skullcap and the bright peach-colored
lapels on Mrs. Clinton's black suit were the only splashes of color in the
black-clad procession.

Among the people gathered at the grave for the burial service were Mrs.
Onassis's sister, Lee Radziwill Ross; her stepbrother, Hugh Auchincloss, and
three Kennedy sisters -- Jean Kennedy Smith, Patricia Kennedy Lawford and Eunice
Kennedy Shriver -- as well as Senator Kennedy, who is the only survivor of the
four Kennedy brothers.

Also at the grave were Nancy Tuckerman, who worked for Jacqueline Kennedy in the
White House and remained a friend and sometime spokeswoman; Providencia Paredes,
who was her personal maid in the White House; Ms. Paredes's son, Gustavo, who
grew up with John Jr. and remains a good friend, and Ms. Hannah, the actress. No
relatives of the late Mr. Onassis were there.

Rose Kennedy, the family matriarch, who will be 104 years old in July, was
unable to attend.

Some members of the group dabbed at their eyes as the 11-minute service
progressed. Archbishop Hannan gently reminded them that a funeral is as much
"for the consolation of the living as it is for the comfort of the deceased."

Mr. Clinton recalled his conversations with Mrs. Onassis and the time that he
spent sailing with her when he and his family vacationed on Martha's Vineyard
last summer.

"In the end she cared most about being a good mother to her children," he said,
"and the lives of Caroline and John leave no doubt that she was that, and more."

The President concluded: "We say goodbye to Jackie. May the flame she lit so
long ago burn ever here and always brighter in our hearts."

John Jr. read from Thessalonians 4:13-18, and Caroline read Psalm 121. Thirteen
white-clad Navy Sea Chanters, the same group that sang at President Richard M.
Nixon's funeral last month, sang "Eternal Father, Strong to Save," which is also
known as the Navy Hymn.

Only the second First Lady to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery -- Mrs.
William Howard Taft, also interred next to her husband, is the other -- Mrs.
Onassis now rests in a cluster of Kennedys on the slope below the creamy Doric
columns of the Custis-Lee mansion. In addition to President Kennedy, they are
his brother, Robert F. Kennedy, assassinated during the 1968 Presidential
campaign; her unnamed daughter, stillborn in 1956, and her infant son, Patrick,
who died in 1963.

Afterward, Caroline and John Jr. kneeled at the grave, selected flowers from a
bouquet and kissed their mother's coffin. Caroline went to join her husband
then, but John walked on, leaning down to touch the graves of his father and
Patrick, before he joined the family for a brief walk to Robert's grave.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John F. Kennedy Jr. touched his father's gravestone yesterday
after he and Caroline Kennedy Schlossberg, right, kissed their mother's coffin
at the conclusion of services at Arlington National Cemetery. (Reuters) (pg.
A1); Jacqueline Kennedy and her children, John and Caroline, visiting the grave
of President John F. Kennedy in Arlington National Cemetery in 1964, six months
after his assassination on Nov. 22, 1963. (Associated Press) (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
In the Nixon White House, Day by Day

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words


The Haldeman Diaries
Inside the Nixon White House
By H. R. Haldeman
Illustrated. Introduction and afterword by Stephen E. Ambrose. 698 pages. G. P.
Putnam's Sons. $27.50

With his death last month, Richard M. Nixon seemed to achieve the rehabilitation
in the nation's memory that he had sought with such persistence for so long. The
former President, who left office in disgrace in 1974, was eulogized as a
visionary foreign-policy maker who had helped to end the cold war. He was
praised for his doggedness, his determination, his political savvy. Forgotten
(or at least played down) was the Other Nixon, the Nixon of Watergate and the
Cambodia bombings, the Nixon who kept an enemies list and turned red-baiting
into a ferocious campaign tactic. President Clinton hailed "the significant
value of his contributions to our nation" and said he hoped Nixon "left us with
enough of his wisdom to guide us safely into the next century."

The elegiac mood surrounding Nixon's funeral, however, will surely be
interrupted, if not altogether broken, by the publication of "The Haldeman
Diaries," a daily record of White House activities kept by President Nixon's
chief of staff, H. R. (Bob) Haldeman, from January 1969 through April 1973, when
Mr. Haldeman (along with the President's adviser John Ehrlichman) resigned under
fire for his role in the Watergate affair.

Set down in dry, deadpan prose, the diaries give the reader a minutely detailed
portrait of a White House obsessed with image and spin control, a White House in
which paranoia, manipulation, self-pity and cynicism reigned supreme. In a
foreword to the book, Mr. Haldeman -- who died in November at the age of 67 --
writes that he decided to make the diaries public because they "provide valuable
insights for historians, journalists and scholars, as well as the general
public."

Mr. Haldeman -- who served 18 months in prison after being convicted of perjury,
conspiracy and obstruction of justice for his part in the Watergate cover-up --
was renowned during his tenure in the White House for his loyalty to President
Nixon. Indeed, Mr. Haldeman described himself in an earlier book ("The Ends of
Power") as "a robot" in service to his boss: "I was a good machine," he wrote.
"I was efficient, I didn't require a lot of 'oiling.' " President Nixon himself
admonished his Cabinet to defer to his bristling, crew-cut-wearing chief of
staff. "From now on," he told them, "Haldeman is the lord high executioner.
Don't you come whining to me when he tells you to do something. He will do it
because I asked him to and you're to carry it out."

Certainly this volume of diaries attests to Mr. Haldeman's chilly efficiency as
President Nixon's "S.O.B." Although some of the earliest notations evince a
boyish delight in the perks of Presidential power ("President received beautiful
silver cigarette box from Bob Gray. Presidential seal and name on top, date on
front, plays 'Hail to the Chief' when lid lifted, most appropriate!"), the bulk
of entries (even those dealing with Mr. Haldeman's own resignation) are
bizarrely devoid of emotion and introspection.

The decision to bomb Cambodia, the Vietnam peace negotiations, the
ground-breaking trip to China, the 1972 re-election campaign, the Watergate
affair, all are discussed here in cold-blooded terms of logistics, strategy and
public-relations maneuverings; no thought is given to the moral consequences of
the President's actions, or to their ultimate effect, be it on soldiers fighting
in Indochina, the public morale of the country or the fate of the Constitution.

In fact, President Nixon emerges from these entries as a man obsessed with his
image: there are endless entries dealing with staff efforts to "establish the
mystique of the Presidency," and to "create a more friendly image" of the "P"
(as Mr. Haldeman routinely refers to the President). Given this obsession with
appearances, the Watergate cover-up emerges not as an isolated mistake of
judgment, but as business as usual in the Nixon White House.

And what of this book's revelations on Watergate? Mr. Haldeman's diary entries
suggest that the President and his top staff did not know of the initial
Watergate break-in, but participated fully in its cover-up (or what Mr. Haldeman
insisted on calling its "containment"). The diary entries also suggest that the
Central Intelligence Agency was told in the summer of 1972 to tell the Federal
Bureau of Investigation that the bugging of the Democratic National Committee
office was a C.I.A. operation and the F.B.I. should back off and that in January
1973 an unsuccessful attempt was made to blackmail President Lyndon B. Johnson
into stopping Congressional hearings by threatening to reveal that President
Johnson had bugged Mr. Nixon's airplane during the 1968 campaign.

Both the Watergate and non-Watergate material in "The Haldeman Diaries" tends to
reinforce the dark portrait of President Nixon already familiar to us from his
own famous tapes, and earlier books about him and his Administration. In the
1982 book "Witness to Power," for instance, Mr. Ehrlichman wrote that President
Nixon believed blacks to be "genetically inferior" to whites; in these diaries,
Mr. Haldeman writes that the President believed "there has never in history been
an adequate black nation, and they are the only race of which this is true."

Once again, we hear about President Nixon's obsession with the Kennedys, his
hatred of intellectuals and the press and his penchant for "dirty tricks." Among
the "plots" Mr. Haldeman says President Nixon wanted hatched were one to
"infiltrate the John Gardner 'Common Cause' deal and needle them and try to push
them to left" and another to establish "a front that sounds like S.D.S. to
support the Democratic candidates and praise their liberal records."

If much of "The Haldeman Diaries" reads like a Jacobean drama -- full of
scheming and secrecy and skulduggery -- there are also moments of out-and-out
farce: President Nixon having problems getting his new dog, Tim, to like him;
President Nixon watching the Super Bowl, then making calls about Biafra;
President Nixon punishing his Cabinet for not being more supportive by ordering
the removal of the White House tennis court; Henry Kissinger, President Nixon's
national security adviser, worrying that adverse stories about his dating Jill
St. John were being planted by Secretary of State William P. Rogers. In fact,
the continuing battles between Mr. Kissinger and Mr. Rogers are treated as a
kind of comic leitmotif in this volume, with Mr. Kissinger emerging as a highly
insecure neurotic with whom a weary Mr. Haldeman must continually contend.

Were "The Haldeman Diaries" a novel, one would read the book not for its prose,
which is flat-footed and leaden, but for its bizarre cast of characters and its
surreal plot twists. The fact that the diaries are actually a firsthand account
of events in the White House, however, can only depress and perturb the reader.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of H.L. Haldeman (George Tames/The New York Times, 1973)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cuomo's G.O.P. Rival Faces Biggest Challenge

BYLINE: By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section B;  Page 4;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words


State Senator George E. Pataki, the Republican Party's endorsed candidate for
governor, has built a political career out of toppling popular incumbents and
entrenched political machines.

In his first political race, in 1981, he defeated the three-term Democratic
mayor of Peekskill, a Democratic city in northern Westchester County. Three
years later, he handily ousted the Democratic Assemblyman. And in 1992, he
accomplished a rarity in New York State politics: he defeated a sitting
Republican state senator in a primary. He is even fond of describing how he
outmaneuvered a more socially prominent classmate to become senior class
president at Peekskill High School.

Yesterday the Republican Party handed him a much more formidable task: taking on
the wounded yet still widely admired Democratic Governor, Mario M. Cuomo.

To win, Mr. Pataki, 48, must overcome obscurity, the frailties of his divided
party and the wariness of Republican voters who, for all their dissatisfaction
with Mr. Cuomo, disliked the 1990 Republican candidate, Pierre A. Rinfret, even
more.

Closing the Stature Gap

"While voters don't yet have a sense of who Pataki is, they have left the door
open to someone other than Cuomo," said Lee M. Miringoff, director of the Marist
Institute for Public Opinion in Poughkeepsie. "The problem is, can Pataki close
the stature gap? That's what his campaign will have to demonstrate to win."

A rail of a man who stands 6 feet 5 inches tall, Mr. Pataki good-naturedly
acknowledges that his is not a household name. During the Israel Day parade in
Manhattan on Sunday, he gladhanded perplexed bystanders who had never heard of
him while the crowd lustily cheered his two companions: United States Senator
Alfonse M. D'Amato and Jackie Mason, the comedian.

"Everyone was yelling 'Jackie' and I was pretending they were calling 'Pataki,'
" Mr. Pataki said.

But he contends that hard work and a focused assault on Governor Cuomo's record
will win the day. Indeed, friends and foes alike say he is an effervescent and
tireless campaigner whose disarming charm and farm-boy drawl soften the sharper
edges of his ambitious nature.

An Eclectic Platform

And Republican Party leaders believe that Mr. Pataki's eclectic platform is
attuned to the moderate-to-conservative suburban voters who have given
surprisingly strong support to Governor Cuomo in the past.

At the heart of the Pataki campaign is a call for deep tax cuts, reduced
government spending and the death penalty. "Mario Cuomo has the gall to say we
can't afford to cut taxes, but Governor, you're wrong," Mr. Pataki said in his
acceptance speech today. "We can't afford not to cut taxes."

He also promotes strong measures to protect the environment, accusing the
Governor of moving too slowly to clean up hazardous waste sites. And he says he
is "unequivocally" behind a woman's right to an abortion, though critics have
questioned his sincerity because he opposes Medicaid-financed abortions and
supports requiring minors to notify their parents before undergoing abortions.

Detractors say Mr. Pataki's willingness to mix and match conservative and
liberal ideas suggests the lack of a strong ideological core.

"He tells people what they want to hear, which is a good way to get elected,"
said Mary B. Goodhue, the former State Senator ousted by Mr. Pataki in 1992.
"Whether he is a real leader with clear positions to which he will adhere in the
face of opposition, I don't know."

Salving a Party's Wounds

Perhaps Mr. Pataki's greatest challenge will be to bind the wounds of a
fractured party. Indeed, he does not yet know if he will have to face Republican
rivals in a primary before he can confront Governor Cuomo head-on. Both Herbert
London, a college professor and Richard M. Rosenbaum, a former Republican state
chairman, have said they hope to get on the primary ballot by collecting the
required 15,000 signatures.

Mr. Pataki has also earned the enmity of one of the party's most powerful
patrons, the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, because of his links to a
conservative antitax group that has sought to unseat Mr. Marino.

Yesterday Mr. Pataki said he would reach out to all Republicans, including Mr.
Marino. But Mr. Marino did not respond to the overture, saying only that he
would support only the winner of the primary.

A Peekskill Farmer

George Elmer Pataki was born in Peekskill, the younger of two sons born to a
local postman and his waitress wife. Along with 13 cousins, he grew up on a
15-acre farm purchased by his paternal grandfather who had immigrated from
Hungary. Though Mr. Pataki has moved to the town of Garrison in neighboring
Putnam County with his wife and four children, he still manages the farm selling
strawberries and tomatoes at the family's stand in Peekskill.

After graduating second in his high school class and earning varsity letters in
basketball and track, Mr. Pataki won a scholarship to Yale where he studied
history and became chairman of the Political Union's Conservative Party.

After graduating in 1967, he attended law school at Columbia University, which
had become embroiled in student protests against the Vietnam War and the
university's relations with the Harlem community. But the bookish Mr. Pataki
said his involvement in those upheavals was limited to helping conservative
counterprotesters and to smoking marijuana once or twice.

"Mostly it was beer and rock and roll," he said.

After working for several state Legislators, including Ms. Goodhue, he ran for
Peekskill mayor in 1981 on the pledge to revitalize the city's dying downtown.
In his three years in office, he claims responsibility for finding a private
developer to build 500 town houses and encouraging art galleries to open
downtown near a rehabilitated theater.

Often an Outsider

In the State Legislature, Mr. Pataki made less of a mark passing bills than he
did taking stands against party leaders. As a member of the Republican minority
in the Assembly, he was often a lead strategist in trying to slow or kill
Democratic initiatives. And even when he joined the Republican majority in the
Senate, his conflicts with Mr. Marino made him an outsider.

Still, he won plaudits from conservatives and environmentalists. And in 1990, he
was asked by several party leaders, including Mr. Marino, to run for governor,
but he declined, citing the party's disarray at the time.

Now, Mr. Pataki must fight the perception that he is Mr. D'Amato's hand-picked
candidate.

Mr. Pataki says he approached Mr. D'Amato with the idea of running, not the
other way around.

"The clearest sign that I had to earn this thing is that from January to April,
there was a millionaire of the week rumored to be the party's candidate," Mr.
Pataki said recently. "Senator D'Amato was a part of that search for alternative
candidates. But fortunately through hard work and perseverance, we have earned
this ourselves."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


Retired from the Army in 1991, Gen. H. NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF is working his way up
to four-star tele-general at CBS. He is under contract to the network, and has
already made on-the-battle-site documentaries about Pearl Harbor and Vietnam.
Yesterday, he was in Manhattan to talk about his latest project, "D-Day," a
special that will be televised on Thursday from 9 to 11 P.M., Eastern daylight
time.

Sitting in a CBS studio next to his co-host, DAN RATHER, in front of a
floor-to-ceiling American flag, General Schwarzkopf said he had never set foot
on the beaches at Normandy before this assignment, and he was deeply moved.

"You can read about the death and destruction of the invasion," he said, "but
until you stand there on the beach and see the huge embankments ahead and the
incoming tide behind you, you don't understand what it was like. There were only
two types of men on the beach: those who would die and those who would go
forward. There was no going back."

Today, the general said, with satellites and other intelligence-gathering
technology, an invasion like the one on D-day would be impossible. "Our ships
were bobbing around in the ocean several days before the invasion," he said.
"Today, the enemy would look down and say, 'Holy smokes!' "

Mr. Rather said the documentary shows, in film footage, a surprising side of "a
very young-looking Eisenhower."

"He smoked incessantly," Mr. Rather said. "He made Ed Murrow look restrained."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Otis Elevator Is Returning

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 19;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 201 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 25


The Otis Elevator Company signed a joint-venture agreement here today to sell,
install and maintain elevators and escalators in northern Vietnam.

The agreement with Lilama, the Union of Building Companies, will create a
company known as Otis Lilama. Otis previously operated in Vietnam from 1950
until 1975, when the Communists took control of the south and reunified the
country.

Vernon Stait, head of Asia-Pacific operations, said at a signing ceremony: "Otis
is very pleased to be back in Vietnam and proud to be partners with Lilama,
which has a long and impressive track record in engineering and construction
projects.

"We believe that Vietnam's economic success -- annual G.D.P. growth exceeding 7
percent for three straight years -- will eventually spur growth in the
neighboring economies of Cambodia and Laos." Vietnam, he added, "is our focal
point for growth in Indochina."

Mr. Stait said there was substantial potential for elevator sales and service
with the planned construction of offices, hotels and residential and industrial
buildings.

Otis employs nearly 15,000 people and services roughly 80,000 elevators,
escalators and moving walkways a year in Asia and the Pacific.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Bids Navy Graduates Heed World War II Lessons

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., May 25


President Clinton called on graduates of the United States Naval Academy today
to heed the lessons of their World War II forebears and honor responsibilities
to duty and service.

Looking ahead to the 50th anniversary next month of the D-Day invasion of
Europe, Mr. Clinton spoke with admiration of the "era of sacrifice" that is to
be honored. He said the newest class of Navy ensigns and Marine Corps
lieutenants would ultimately be judged by whether they could accomplish so much.

"The World Wars are over, the cold war has been won," Mr. Clinton said. "Now it
is our job to win the peace."

The President's remarks in a Naval Academy stadium whose upper deck is adorned
with the names of World War II battles and naval engagements suggested some
nostalgia for times when enemies were self-evident and sacrifice was noble.

But his appearance also brought a reminder of the awkwardness of his task, as a
Commander in Chief who avoided military service himself, in preparing to
celebrate the shining moment of a war fought by his predecessors and which had
ended before he was born.

Before traveling to Annapolis today, Mr. Clinton and his mostly young aides
spent Tuesday evening preparing for next week's trip to Europe with what
amounted to a joint tutorial on D-Day by prominent historians.

'Honesty and Simplicity'

Paul Fussell, whose book "Wartime" examined the behavior of soldiers in World
War II, was among the scholars, retired military officers and the two members of
the Clinton Cabinet who did fight in World War II who took part in the 75-minute
session in the White House theater and joined Mr. Clinton for a two-hour dinner
afterward.

This morning, Mr. Fussell said he had been touched by the President's gratitude.

"I was struck by his modesty, honesty and simplicity," Mr. Fussell said from his
Philadelphia office. "He knows nothing about war and he knows he ought to know
what was happening in Normandy. He kept saying, 'God, I'm learning a lot.' "

The President leaves next Wednesday on an eight-day journey to Italy, Britain
and France whose centerpiece is the celebration in Normandy to honor the Allied
invasion on June 6, 1944. White House officials have portrayed his speech here
as important in setting forth his vision of the allies' enduring
responsibilities to maintain the peace.

Mr. Clinton told the graduates that the United States must remain willing to
fight to defend its territory and citizens and allies who are threatened. But he
said his willingness to intervene in ethnic and tribal conflicts like those in
Bosnia and Rwanda would depend on a sober assessment of "the cumulative weight
of the interests at stake."

Defense of Bosnia Policy

"We cannot solve every such outburst of civil strife or militant nationalism
simply by sending in our forces," the President said. "We cannot turn away from
them, but our interests are not sufficiently at stake in so many of them to
justify a commitment of our folks."

In the remarks, which provided the clearest picture yet of his view about the
proper use of military power, Mr. Clinton offered a lengthy defense of his
policy in Bosnia as an example of proper prudence in "a new world of
instability, even abject anarchy."

The President was received with no more than polite applause from the academy's
874 graduates and from many in the crowd of 23,000 in the Navy-Marine Corps
Memorial Stadium.

But aides who remembered the murmured asides and then bitter jeers that greeted
his appearances last year aboard the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt and at
the Vietnam Memorial described the relative warmth of the reception as a sign of
his progress in being recognized as a credible Commander in Chief.

The visit to the Naval Academy was just one in a series of military-oriented
events organized by the White House in the days before Mr. Clinton's scheduled
speeches at American cemeteries in Italy and France. But even with that
groundwork done, Presidential aides have left little to chance in planning what
some regard as a politically perilous visit.

Oxford Stopover Delayed

A planned stopover at Oxford University, where Mr. Clinton attended graduate
school, was postponed until after the June 6 anniversary, perhaps because of
concern that the visit would invite recollections that it was while there that
he avoided the Vietnam-era draft and wrote that he "loathed" the military.

Aides to Mr. Clinton have said he also recognizes that he cannot improve upon
the emotional tribute paid by President Ronald Reagan to those who lost their
lives on Omaha Beach. Thus, they add, he has chosen a different setting for his
major D-Day address. Besides the preparatory session with the historians on
Tuesday night, they say Mr. Clinton is devoting much of the week to boning up
for the trip, and has been an avid reader of "D-Day," the new history by Stephen
A. Ambrose.

Today Mr. Clinton reminded the Naval Academy graduates that nearly 400,000
American lives were lost in World War II, a conflict that he described as "the
turning point of our century."

"The question which hangs over your head is the question of what deeds your
generation will accomplish, as the generation of World War II accomplished so
much," said Mr. Clinton, who at 47 is the first American President since that
war too young to have taken part in it. His father, William Blythe, fought in
North Africa and Italy.

Mr. Clinton noted that many of the achievements had taken place after the war,
and said men and women entering the military today might ultimately provide duty
and service in other ways.

Cheating Scandal Touched On

Mr. Clinton touched only briefly on the cheating scandal at the Naval Academy
this year that forced the expulsion of 24 cadets, and he told those who accepted
commissions today that they were helping to serve a first task in a new American
mission. "For this generation to expand freedom's reach," Mr. Clinton said, "we
must always keep America out of danger's reach."

As a student of history and an avid reader, aides said today, Mr. Clinton had a
strong knowledge of World War II before his latest round of briefings began. But
they said he requested Tuesday night's gathering in hopes of gaining more detail
and insight from scholars like Mr. Fussell, Mr. Ambrose and John Keegan, a
British military historian who is the author of "The Face of Battle," among
other works.

Others who attended the session were Secretary of State Warren Christopher and
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen, the only two senior Administration officials
who served in World War II. Those who attended the briefing and the dinner
afterward described the historians and retired military officers recounting
stories and anecdotes for Mr. Clinton and his aides while White House
speechwriters took careful notes.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton tries to catch a new ensign's hat at
graduation ceremonies yesterday at the United States Naval Academy. In a
commencement address, the President said that with the cold war over, it was up
to the new Navy and Marine officers to "win the peace." (Stephen Crowley/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 603 words



The Economy

Sharply disagreeing with a Congressional study, the Federal Reserve's chairman,
Alan Greenspan, testified that new legislation was not necessary to supervise
derivatives, the rapidly growing and sometimes profitable family of products
offered by banks and brokerage firms to corporations and investors. [Page D1.]

Orders for durable factory goods edged up one-tenth of 1 percent in April, below
most expectations, Commerce Department figures showed, more evidence of slowing
business expansion. Separately, home resales climbed 1.2 percent. [D1.]


Companies

Philip Morris said it would take no action for the moment on splitting its
tobacco business off from food and beer operations. But the company made
executive changes that prompted speculation that a split might still be in the
offing. [D1.]

Sandoz executives said the Swiss company's purchase of Gerber Products is part
of a strategy to expand its nutrition business globally while remaining a drug
industry leader. [D1.]

Southern California Edison won clearance from regulators to pass costs of two
nuclear plants on to its clients faster. [D5.]

A principal architect of Bell Atlantic's plunge into interactive television
resigned, offering little explanation. [D5.]

Hewlett-Packard shares dipped after its executives told analysts the growth rate
for orders and revenues would slow. [D5.]

National Airlines became the latest transportation brand to be revived, as a
small Atlanta carrier began using the name. [D5.]

Kopin plans to open the nation's largest factory for production of flat-panel
display screens. [D6.]

International

The travel industry, which has been slowly discovering Vietnam as a tourist
destination over the last few years, is scrambling to cut more deals there since
President Clinton lifted the American trade embargo in February. [D1.]

President Clinton has decided to extend China's trade privileges, even though
the country has made less progress on human rights than the U.S. had hoped,
Administration officials said. [A1.]
 The Venezuelan state of Lara may lack oil, but its diverse and growing
manufacturing economy is charting a Venezuelan future that depends less on oil
revenue. [D2.]

Trying to revive Russia's economy, President Boris N. Yeltsin signed a series of
decrees that would cut taxes on foreign and Russian companies and end
restrictions on exports. [D7.]

Markets

Prices of Treasury securities rose modestly, reversing early losses. The
turnaround came after a decline in a commodity price index and a solid Treasury
auction. [D7.]

Stocks again followed the wobbly path of the bond market, which sank then
rallied after demand for the Government's debt issues proved brisk. The Dow rose
10.13 points, to 3,755.30. [D8.]

The dollar ended lower against most leading currencies because of
weaker-than-expected U.S. economic data and rising European interest rates.
[D15.] Cattle futures prices fell to a nearly six-year low amid concerns about
burdensome supplies. [D15.]

Today's Columns

Who is Judge Stephen Breyer, and where does he stand? Economists see an
intellectual ally in the Supreme Court nominee. Peter Passell: Economic Scene.
[D2.]

Picking auto-supplier stocks used to be in the timing: shares bought before a
boom could reap a nice profit when the recovery ripened. But the rules have
changed. Market Place. [D8.]

Executives of the smallest agency among the more than 40 losing I.B.M. work are
trying to take advantage of a brief, tempestuous stint as an I.B.M. shop. Stuart
Elliott: Advertising. [D18.]

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Paris Journal;
For the Bosnian Cause, Some French Brainpower

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 25


Whether it was Emile Zola denouncing the French Army in the Dreyfus Affair or
Andre Malraux supporting the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War or Jean-Paul
Sartre campaigning against the Vietnam War, French intellectuals have a long
history of influencing French public opinion.

All the stranger, then, that they should have been so silent of late. But the
problem is that students, their natural audience, now worry more about finding
well-paying jobs than about changing France. And with the end of the cold war,
the traditional debate between left and right has also lost its sting.

So, are "les intellos," as they are known here with a peculiarly French mixture
of admiration and derision, threatened with extinction?

This month, to the considerablesurprise of French politicians, they showed they
still carry clout. Led by the philosopher Bernard-Henri Levy, a group of
intellectuals have adopted the cause of Bosnia's Muslims and, overnight, they
have lifted Bosnia to the top of the political agenda here.

Indeed, judging by reactions, it is apparent that France's politicians, press
and public still attribute to intellectuals a moral authority that gives special
weight to their opinions. Even those who disagree with them shy from challenging
their privileged right to be heard.

To make sure they are noticed, 35 of the intellectuals have decided to run on a
pro-Bosnia ticket in elections for the European Parliament next month. They are
demanding a lifting of the international arms embargo on Bosnia's Muslims and
preservation of Bosnia as a multiethnic state in any final peace agreement.

But the main purpose of the ticket, which calls itself "Europe Begins in
Sarajevo," is to stir debate in France about the plight of Bosnia's Muslims. And
in this, it can already claim success. The press has given the initiative
blanket coverage, while both the Government and the opposition have felt obliged
to respond publicly to the group's demands.

"We've also set in motion an important grass-roots movement, unique in Europe,"
Mr. Levy, who has visited Sarajevo six times in the last two years, said in an
interview. "I've received hundreds of letters of support, student committees are
being formed, there is mobilization in the provinces."

True to tradition, of course, the "intellos" are not acting in unison. The
philosopher Andre Glucksmann, the writers Marek Halter, Pascal Bruckner and Juan
Goytisolo and the actress Marina Vlady are among those running in the elections
on June 12. But many prominent names are not on the list.

Part of the problem is Mr. Levy, whose publicity-seeking antics have alienated
many colleagues. A handsome tousle-haired 45-year-old man who has taken to
wearing a khaki T-shirt, he launched his movement after promoting his war
documentary "Bosna!" at the Cannes Film Festival this month, surrounded as ever
by a bevy of admirers.

Last week the satirical newspaper Le Canard Enchaine, which refers to Mr. Levy
simply by his initials, B.H.L., poked fun at him, renaming his election ticket
"Sarajevote for Me" and carrying a cartoon of a Byronic-looking Mr. Levy holding
an automatic rifle and saying, "One-third Rimbaud, two-thirds Rambo."

But there are also intellectuals who have more substantive differences with him.
Guy Sorman, a conservative writer, said he considered it "immoral and unethical"
to encourage "more war" by calling for an end to the arms embargo on Bosnia, an
action that would aid the Muslims against the better-armed Serbs.

"As for a multicultural Bosnia," he added, "it won't work because people no
longer want it."

He further questioned the parallel that Mr. Levy has drawn between the Bosnian
conflict and the Spanish Civil War. "People in Bosnia want peace, but Levy wants
to turn every Bosnian into a hero," Mr. Sorman said. "Of course, what Levy is
really saying is, 'This is the Spanish Civil War and I am Andre Malraux.' "

Mr. Levy, who was one of the "new philosophers" who broke with Marxism in the
early 1980's, still considers himself a leftist. But Regis Debray, another
leftist intellectual, also has doubts about the ticket, saying he would have
greater respect for the intellectuals if they went to fight in Bosnia "for a
just cause."

Yet, for all the sniping at Mr. Levy's penchant for self-promotion, as far back
as 1992 he took the lead in France in befriending Bosnia's Muslims and
denouncing their "betrayal" by the West. This weekend, President Alija
Izetbegovic, the head of Bosnia's Muslim-dominated Government, visited Paris as
his guest and applauded the "Europe Begins in Sarajevo" ticket.

By presenting the Bosnian war as a moral rather than political issue, Mr. Levy
and his group have also discomforted French politicians. Criticized for
supporting the partition of Bosnia, President Francois Mitterrand dismissed the
intellectuals as "sincere voices at times misled by passion." Foreign Minister
Alain Juppe was even more scathing, referring to them as "warrior
intellectuals."

Bernard Kouchner, a former Humanitarian Affairs Minister and a frequent visitor
to Sarajevo, said he welcomed Mr. Levy's initiative, which he said "shakes up
accepted ideas, prevents forgetfulness and relaunches the debate." But he warned
of the danger that the pro-Bosnia ticket might draw few votes.

Mr. Levy has nonetheless made one important convert. After he announced that the
intellectuals would not run in the elections if all the traditional political
parties adopted their position on Bosnia, the Socialist opposition leader,
Michel Rocard, for the first time came out in favor of lifting the arms embargo.
But if he hoped "les intellos" would back his ticket, he has so far been
disappointed.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Led by the philosopher Bernard-Henri Levy, right, a group of
French intellectuals has adopted the cause of Bosnia's Muslims. Mr. Levy and
Giles Hertzog, left, co-authors of a documentary about the war in Bosnia,
welcomed the country's President, Alija Izetbegovic, on his arrival in Paris on
Sunday. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Big-Time Tourism Courts Vietnam

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words


Da Nang is now a stop for cruise ships. Cam Ranh Bay may get Club Med as a
neighbor. And the Hoa Lo Prison, nicknamed the Hanoi Hilton by Americans held
there during the Vietnam War, is really becoming a hotel.

The travel industry, which has been slowly discovering Vietnam as a tourist
destination over the last few years, is scrambling to cut more deals there since
President Clinton lifted the American trade embargo in February, making it
easier for Americans to invest and travel.

Cruise lines are adding Vietnam's ports to their itineraries. Avis, National and
Hertz are negotiating to rent cars there. Club Med wants to open a
multimillion-dollar resort 30 miles north of Cam Ranh Bay, which, like Da Nang,
was the site of an American military base.

And several hotel chains, including Radisson, Marriott and Choice, are talking
to developers about opening hotels in Vietnam.

"It's estimated Vietnam needs as much as $40 billion to upgrade its
infrastructure," said Jim Olson, senior vice president for Hawaii and
Asia-Pacific development of Minneapolis-based Radisson. "With that kind of
demand you'll have lots of businessmen, technicians and support personnel
needing roofs over their head, in addition to the growing number of tourists."

To prevent "our competitors winding up serving our guests," as Mr. Olson put it,
Radisson and potential partners from Thailand and Malaysia anticipate putting up
hotels in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City (the former Saigon), and Da Nang.

Avis is also moving aggressively. "We've had a lot of interest from investors
who want franchises in Hanoi and Saigon," said Michael Collins, an international
vice president, "and because we see good growth opportunities there, we're
moving as quickly as we can to stay ahead of the pack."

Travel companies view Vietnam as an important link in an expected surge in
travel to and within Asia.

Tourist receipts in the Asia-Pacific region will account for 30.6 percent of
$527 billion in worldwide tourist revenue in the year 2,000, up from 15.1
percent in 1990, according to the World Tourism Organization. Air travel in the
region is expected to grow 7.5 percent a year -- nearly twice the world average.

"All the statistics show that Vietnam tourism is on a faster growth track than
any country in Asia, maybe even more than the rest of the world," said Chuck Y.
Gee, dean of the School of Travel Industry Management at the University of
Hawaii.

Competition Intensifying

Some travel experts warn against over-optimism and note that Vietnam is far from
ready to play host to visitors on a large scale. Still, the tourist companies
elbowing to the front of the line envision a market that can average 10 percent
annual growth in the number of visitors throughout the decade and generate much
more than the $230 million that the Vietnamese Tourism Department said the
country earned from 670,000 foreign visitors last year.

Nguyen Thi Hong, a press officer with the Vietnamese Mission to the United
Nations, said the country expected a million tourists this year and 1.6 million
by the end of the century. While that is a far cry from Hong Kong's 8.9 million
annual visitors, or Singapore's 6.4 million, it would be a vast leap from the
20,000 who visited Vietnam in 1986.

"We want to develop tourism, so we welcome everyone," Mrs. Hong said. Americans,
she said, would receive a warm welcome.

Expatriate Vietnamese and American veterans of the Vietnam War are expected to
account for much of the first wave of American visitors. Americans, no longer
forced to obtain Vietnamese visas in Thailand and Hong Kong, can get them in
three to five weeks by applying to the Vietnamese Mission in New York.

Credit Cards in the Future

Lifting the embargo also ended the Treasury Department's $200 daily limit on
expenditures by Americans in Vietnam. When the regulatory agencies work out
details, prohibitions are also expected to be lifted on the use of credit cards
issued by American banks.

Because only a quarter of Vietnam's estimated 22,000 hotel rooms are up to
international standards, dozens of hotels are under construction, most as joint
ventures between the Government and European and Asian hotel companies. A
Singapore group, for example, is teaming up with Vietnam in a $33 million
project to turn the Hoa Lo Prison into a 22-story hotel and office tower in
Hanoi.

About $200 million is being invested in five golf courses. A few months ago, the
Da Lat Golf Club opened the country's first 18-hole course. Memberships in the
club, a $40 million joint venture with Hong Kong investors, range from $15,000
to $60,000.

Several United States airlines are awaiting permission to fly to Vietnam. Which
carriers are awarded the routes will ultimately depend on Washington and Hanoi,
but United, Continental and Northwest have already staked claims to routes. And
Delta Air Lines, with few Pacific routes, recently agreed with Vietnam Airlines
to coordinate flight schedules to an intermediate city in Asia that has not yet
been designated.

Many cruise lines are considering offering Vietnam visits this year, while Royal
Cruise, Holland America, Royal Viking, Orient Lines and Seven Seas Cruise Line
may add more Vietnamese ports to cruises, some of which have been stopping at
Vietnamese ports for several years.

Seabourn Cruise Line was so pleased with two sold-out cruises that called at
Vietnam that it is adding two more next year. The Club Med 2, Seabourn's sailing
ship, will have five weeklong Vietnam cruises. And starting Nov. 21, Pearl
Cruises is offering a 17-day Vietnam trip that will include a 30-hour on-board
seminar with Vietnamese officials and foreign investors in Vietnam.

Book publishers are getting into the act, too. Houghton Mifflin, Lonely Planet
and Passport Books recently published new or revised guidebooks on the country.

While some experts say that the number of American tourists, drawn by the allure
of a destination that has been off-limits for so long, will increase
substantially after normalization of diplomatic relations -- something the
travel industry hopes for no later than next year -- they also warn that some
assertions about Vietnam's tourist potential are overblown.

Skepticism From Rambo

"Some investors will strike it rich," said Dr. A. Terry Rambo, a specialist on
Indochina at the East-West Center in Honolulu. "But everybody and his brother
seems to want into Vietnam, for reasons not entirely economically rational."

"Vietnam only has a few good hotels and not much other infrastructure necessary
to handle a big increase in visitors," said Dan Sullivan Jr., head of Collette
Travel Service in Pawtucket, R.I., a major tour operator. "Our customers are not
talking about visiting Vietnam."

Passport Books warns in its guidebook that the Vietnam tourism industry "is
still unable, because of bureaucratic obstacles, to offer many of the different
services that are readily available in the rest of Asia."

A group of French bankers recently discovered as much when they spent the night
searching for a hotel in Hanoi because the Orient Hotel forgot that the group
had made reservations. And the Vietnamese Investment Review, a journal published
in Hanoi, recently reported that some Vietnam tour agencies sell package tours
without having hotel rooms or rental cars available.

Charles Man, the owner of Sino-American Tours in New York's Chinatown, said it
is hard to sell Vietnam as a single destination. "Because of the distance and
cost," he said, "Vietnam visits have to be combined with other destinations,"
often Hong Kong and Bangkok.

Sino-American, Absolute Asia, South Sea Tour and Travel, All Adventure Travel,
Myths and Mountains and Creative Travel are among the growing handful of
companies offering tours that include Vietnam. Depending on length and
stopovers, most tours from the United States run $1,800 to $5,000 a person, plus
air fare. Visitors from Asian countries tend to spend less.

Trade First

Tourism experts acknowledge that trade, rather than educational or leisure
travel, will initially be more profitable, although they expect each to
complement the other.

"Our best estimate is that there's likely to be $2 billion to $4 billion in
trade between the two countries in the next couple of years," said Virginia
Foote, director of the United States-Vietnam Trade Council in Washington. About
90 percent of that is expected to come in the sale of American goods, she said,
especially consumer products.

But for tourism to develop into a big business, the Vietnamese must have repeat
customers.

"So unless Vietnam improves its inadequate infrastructure," Professor Rambo
said, "all those rosy tourism projections are likely to prove disappointing."


LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 30, 1994, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about travel
to Vietnam misidentified the owner of the cruise ship Club Med 2. The ship is
owned by Club Mediterranee, not Seabourn Cruises.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of a French tour group examining hand-embroidered
T-shirts in Hanoi alongside Hoan Kiem Lake. The shirts, sold for $2 by street
entrepreneurs, symbolize a receptiveness to foreigners and commerce. (pg. D1); A
Hanoi seller of conical hats, left, waits for tourists to leave a silk shop,
where they are being measured for clothes. Other forms of commerce coexist; a
woman carrying a heavy load of produce barely seems to notice. (Lois Raimondo
for The New York Times) (pg. D19)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words



International A2-9

CHINA'S TRADE STATUS RENEWED
President Clinton renewed China's favorable trade status, saying he would stop
using trade as a lever to force Beijing to make progress on human rights.  A1

In wrestling with China, economic interests are the victors.  A1


NEW TACTIC ON TRADE
Signaling a new tactic in the Administration's trade policy, the Justice
Department won a settlement from a British company that keeps it from blocking
American concerns from doing business overseas.  A1

FEAR CREEPS THROUGH GAZA
In Morag and other Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip, a fear deepened by
Palestinian self-rule keeps many from venturing beyond their security fences
unarmed.  A1

VATICAN AT ODDS WITH SCHOLAR
In a documents, a German lay theologian has suggested that Roman Catholics
acknowledge that they share historical responsibility and guilt for the
Holocaust. But the Vatican moved quickly today to say that the draft did not
have the approval of the Holy See.  A3

VICTORS REVISIT D-DAY
As the 50th anniversary of the Normandy landings draws near, soldiers from the
United States, Britain and Canada are everywhere, armed with their memories.  A3


VIETNAM AND U.S. MEND FENCES
The United States and Vietnam announced that they would set up diplomatic
missions, a move the countries consider an important step toward normalizing
relations.  A7

TROOPS SOUGHT FOR GEORGIA
Russian officials said today that Moscow was seeking permission from the
Security Council to deploy several thousand peacekeepers in Georgia to reinforce
a cease-fire.  A3

Officials followed refugees out of the Rwandan capital.  A5

A vast sanctuary for whales was created around Antarctica.  A2

U.S.S. Peleliu Journal: The neverending mission.  A4

National A10-20, B6-7

A BLOW FOR TOBACCO INDUSTRY
Florida's Governor signed a law intended to make it easier to hold manufacturers
responsible for diseases associated with smoking.  A1

The tobacco industry may have influenced a research group.  A16

HARMONY IN ECONOMIC POLICY
What makes the way the Clinton Administration develops economic policy
newsworthy is the remarkable absence of conflict among the prominent officials
involved.  A1

RECOUPING COSTS OF IMMIGRATION
Texas plans to sue the Federal Government to recover costs incurred in dealing
with illegal aliens.  A10

TESTIMONY IN CITADEL CASE
The woman who is suing the all-male military college testified that she sought
relief after learning that her acceptance had been revoked only because of her
sex.  A10

NOT BEGINNER'S LUCK AFTER ALL
Records confirm that Hillary Rodham Clinton received preferential treatment as
she turned a $1,000 investment into $100,000.  A20

MISLEADING MAILINGS
Consumer groups charged that some conservative direct-mail organizations were
scaring elderly people with inaccurate attacks on the President's health plan.
A18

18 HOLES AND ONE JOB LATER
A White House official was dismissed for taking one of the President's
$2,380-per-hour helicopters on a golfing trip.  A20

POSTCARDS VERSUS STUMPS
A report to the Forest Service said recreation and tourism bring in far more
money than timber harvests from national forests, and recommended that logging
be curbed.  B6

Law Page B18

Is justice delayed justice denied for a civil rights-era murderer?

At the Bar: A hirsute lawyer turns hairless, and rumors and clients fly.

Metro Digest B1

BRONX GANG INDICTMENTS
Seventeen gang members were charged with running a sophisticated operation that
required dealers to pay them rent in order to sell drugs in the South Bronx.  A1


Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-28, D17

Urban children meet wild animals.  C1
Multicultural folk festival.  C1
Things to do Memorial Day weekend.  C27
For Children C12
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Big Momma 'n' 'Em." C3
Film: "The Flintstones." C1
Restaurants C20
Diner's Journal C21
Art: W. Eugene Smith photos.  C24
Western artists' African art.C24
Finding Wayne Thiebaud niche.  C28
Inside Art C22
Art in Review C24
Books: Memories of a killer.  C25
Television: TV Weekend D17
Home VideoD17

Sports B9-17

Auto racing: Lyn St. James blazing new trails at Indy.  B11 Baseball: Yankees
flying high.  B10
Eight doubles lift Red Sox.  B10
Pirates, led by veterans, outlast Mets, 11-10, in 13 innings.  B11
Basketball: Nets' Daly quits.  B16
Ewing scores 32 points as Knicks take 2-0 lead over Pacers.  B9
Jazz face 0-2 deficit.  B16
Columns: Vecsey on Rangers.  B9
Araton on Daly's resignation.  B9
Hockey: For Rangers and Devils, it's winner take all in Game 7.  B9
McMullen, Devils owner, struggling in Rangers' shadow.  B13
Sports People B14
Tennis: Krickstein rolls.  B11

Obituaries B8

Joe Brainard, artist, set designer and a poet.
John Devaney, author.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Shortchanging rights in China.
On Denny's menu: discrimination.
I'll fly away.
For a better Board of Education.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Bill Clinton's teachings.
Anthony Lewis: Savaging the great.
Garrison Keillor: Lighten up, graduates.
Louis V. Gerstner Jr.: Our schools are failing. Do we care?

Chronicle B4

Crossword C25

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 132 words



Broker Favored Mrs. Clinton

Newly released records showed that Hillary Rodham Clinton's broker did not
require her to put up the normal sum of cash in a cattle futures trade in the
late 1970's. Page A20.

U.S. Opening Hanoi Mission

In a major step toward normalizing relations, the United States and Vietnam said
they would set up diplomatic missions in each other's capitals in two to three
months. Page A7.

Hate-Crime Laws Overruled

The New Jersey Supreme Court overturned the state's 1981 hate crime statutes,
which were intended to prevent acts like cross-burning and the painting of
swastikas. Page B1.

Knicks Lead Series, 2-0

Patrick Ewing scored a game-high 32 points and had 13 rebounds to lead the
Knicks to an 89-78 victory over the Indiana Pacers. Page B9.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Back to Business on China Trade

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 789 words


Now that President Clinton has decided to keep China in the family of America's
most favored trading nations, despite that country's human rights violations,
sighs of relief are coming from much of Corporate America and from many
individuals -- certainly those who think about China as a source of inexpensive
consumer goods.

China is booming. And that means big business for American companies like Boeing
and McDonnell Douglas, which together sold $2 billion in aircraft to China last
year, and AT&T, which describes China -- not the United States -- as its
fastest-growing market. These companies were loud voices in the lobbying effort
for an extension of China's trade privileges.


China Is 'Critical for Us'

"If 'most favored nation' had not been extended, we would have been impacted
greatly; it is critical for us to be successful in China," said Susan Berman, a
spokeswoman for AT&T, which expects to collect $3 billion in revenues from its
China operations by the year 2000, up from $500 million last year and $250
million in 1992.

Alongside the multinationals, there is the ordinary American. Without realizing
it, he or she may have obtained a few more dollars in selling the family car
because of the China market. This is because Chinese families who are affluent
enough to buy cars are putting upward pressure on American car prices. The
Chinese spent $600 million last year to purchase American-made passenger
vehicles, many of them used cars, the Commerce Department reported.
 But American exporters are not the primary winners. The China boom has opened
up a market for American products, but it is not a big one yet. Exports rose to
a modest $8.7 billion in 1993 from $3.9 billion in 1985. Most of that was the
commercial aircraft and the telecommunications equipment that AT&T is shipping
to China to build a modern telephone network there, one in which AT&T already
has an ownership stake.


A $150 Million Investment

"Over the next 24 months, we will invest $150 million in projects that we know
of now," said Andrew Myers, an AT&T spokesman, "and we have a Chinese work force
of 800, and that will triple over the next two or three years."

The much bigger business, for the moment, is imports. While China shipped only
$3.8 billion worth of products to the United States in 1985 -- roughly
equivalent to what it bought from this country -- by last year Chinese shipments
had jumped to $31.5 billion, or 3.5 times the level of exports. There was some
Chinese machinery and raw materials in the mix, but for the most part, Americans
purchased Chinese toys, bicycles, shoes, kitchenware and, especially, fabric and
clothing.

"If you look at the imbalance of imports over exports, there is more imbalance
with China than with any other country," said Thea Lee, a trade expert at the
Economic Policy Institute in Washington. "Even our trade imbalance with Japan is
less."

Nearly 15 percent of all textiles and apparel shipped to the United States now
comes from China, said Jay Meltzer, a textile analyst at Goldman, Sachs &
Company. That does not please some American textile manufacturers, and they were
not among the lobbyists pushing for the extension of trade benefits for China.

But American retailers were. They buy from China about 6 percent of all the
clothing sold in stores across the country, especially inexpensive clothing. A
few companies, among them Levi Strauss, are cutting back imports from China out
of concern for human rights. But they are far outnumbered by companies like the
Gap, J. C. Penney, Sears, Roebuck and Kmart, which applauded Mr. Clinton's
action yesterday.

The President did, however, cut back the amount of clothing and fabrics that
China can export to the United States, even as a favored nation. If the
President had not extended China's status as a "most favored nation," tariffs
would have shot up for virtually all Chinese imports.



View Held by Retailers

And if that had happened, would these retailers have turned back to American
manufacturers for the same goods?

If the President had canceled China's trading privileges, would the higher
tariffs have made American manufacturers competitive with the Chinese?

Probably not, Mr. Meltzer at Goldman, Sachs said, reflecting the view held by
most retailers.

"The fact is that there are so many other low-wage countries poised to ship to
us, that the goods now coming from China would come from another country," he
said.

"Let's say the China price is 100 and now it will go up to 125. American
manufacturers would still have to compete at 100. If American retailers did not
get cheap dresses from China, they would get them from Mexico, or, hey, Vietnam.
"

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Preserving an Imbalance" shows what the U.S. imports and
exports to China. (Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Agrees To Exchange With Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


The United States and Vietnam announced today that they would set up diplomatic
missions in a move that the two longtime enemies said was an important step
toward normalizing relations.

The agreement comes two decades after the two countries fought a war that
divided the United States and cost more than 1 million Vietnamese lives and more
than 58,000 American lives.

American officials said the missions would open in two to three months and would
help the United States pursue its efforts to account for the 2,233 Americans
still listed as missing in Indochina.

The announcement today is part of the Administration's strategy of gingerly
building relations with Vietnam as President Clinton faces criticism from
veterans groups for not obtaining enough information from Vietnam about missing
Americans.

Not Yet Relations

Michael McCurry, the State Departmnt spokesman, emphasized in a news briefing
today that the exchange of missions did not constitute full diplomatic
relations. He said that before the United States takes the major step of
establishing full relations and embassies, it first wanted Vietnam to do more to
improve its human rights record.

Speaking about the new diplomatic missions, Mr. McCurry said: "This office
should facilitate progress on all issues of concern, particularly P.O.W.-M.I.A.
accounting. The liaison office also will enable us to provide services for an
increasing number of Americans in Vietnam and advance our human rights
dialogue."

Such missions or liaison offices are typically smaller than full-fledged
embassies and are not headed by ambassadors. The American mission will be in
Hanoi, and is expected to have 10 to 20 diplomats.

Administration officials said it would be headed by James Hall, a longtime
Foreign Service officer.

Exchange of Property

American officials said the United States agreed to establish the missions only
after Vietnam committed itself to returning diplomatic property that the United
States owned in South Vietnam before 1975, the year the Saigon government
collapsed.

When President Clinton announced on Feb. 3 that he was ending the 19-year-old
trade embargo against Vietnam, Administration officials said they would agree to
establishing diplomatic missions once the property disputes and several other
disputes were resolved.

Under today's agreement, Vietnam would give back to the United States the old
American Embassy compound in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly known as Saigon. At the
same time, Hanoi would receive the old South Vietnamese Embassy in Washington.
The actual opening of the missions will hinge on completing the agreement to
return each country's diplomatic properties.

According to American and Vietnamese officials, the diplomatic missions would
handle trade and business, tourism and culture.

Trade and Tourist Explosion

Since President Clinton lifted the trade embargo, there has been an explosion of
trade and a flood of American visitors to Vietnam as companies investigate
investment opportunities there. The planned mission in Hanoi is designed to
assist this flow of trade and visitors.

At present, the only official American office in Vietnam is one seeking
information on the Americans missing in action. Vietnam's only office in the
United States is its mission to the United Nations.

Although some veterans groups maintain that Vietnam continues to hide
information about missing Americans, Mr. McCurry said today that "there has been
extraordinarily good cooperation" from Hanoi in helping the United States
investigate its missing soldiers.

Administration officials said Winston Lord, the Assistant Secretary of State for
East Asian Affairs, would probably go to Vietnam late next month as head of a
delegation that seeks further information about missing Americans and discusses
establishing full relations.

This is not the first time that the United States will set up a diplomatic
mission before a full-fledged embassy. After more than two decades without
relations, the United States and China set up liaison offices in each other's
capitals in 1974. Five years later the two nations established full diplomatic
relations.


LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

John Devaney, 68, Author of Books For Young Readers

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 280 words


John Devaney, the author of 80 nonfiction books, most for young readers, died on
Wednesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 68.

The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.

A native of Manhattan, Mr. Devaney served in the Army toward the end of World
War II as a staff member of Stars and Stripes in Paris. He graduated from New
York University in 1949 as he was starting his writing career.

He was a writer and editor at Science Illustrated, Quick and Parade magazines
before becoming a freelance writer in 1961. The subjects of his books, many
still in print, included World War II, sports and the lives of Presidents.

World War II Series

His World War II series for readers 12 and older started with "America Goes to
War, 1941" (1991), followed by "America Fights the Tide, 1942" (1991). Other
volumes cover 1943 and 1944, and he completed one on 1945 for Walker & Company
in January.

He wrote "The Vietnam War" (1992) for children 5 to 8, and biographies of
Presidents Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Lyndon B. Johnson and Ronald Reagan for
roughly the same age group. Other subjects were Gen. George S. Patton, Gen.
Douglas MacArthur and "Adolph Hitler, Mad Dictator of World War II" (1977). In
sports, he wrote about Bo Jackson, Mickey Mantle, Roger Clemens, the Stanley Cup
and winners of the Heisman Trophy.

He was active in civic affairs and was co-founder of an organization called
Thirteen Churches for a Better East Side, which has grown to include almost 40
churches. The organization works for better housing, among other things.

Mr. Devaney is survived by his wife, Barbara, and two sons, John M. of Fairfax,
Va., and Luke R. of Manhattan.

NAME: John Devaney

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

COMPANY NEWS;
A $430 Million Bid for Western Union Brings a Rejection

BYLINE: By ANDREA ADELSON

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 502 words


The First Data Corporation has offered the New Valley Corporation $430 million
for its Western Union Financial Services unit, and New Valley has spurned the
proposal as grossly inadequate.

Robert J. Amman, president and chief executive of New Valley, which controls the
newly reconfigured Western Union, said in a letter on Wednesday that he would
welcome further talks about sweetening the proposal, which First Data made on
Tuesday.

Some industry analysts said they expected that First Data, of Hackensack, N.J.,
would ultimately succeed with its offer. Shares of First Data rose $1.50, to
$46.625, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.

"It appeals to creditors with real money," Thomas Facciola, an analyst at S. G.
Warburg & Company, said of the offer.

The offer was made as a Federal bankruptcy court is reorganizing the remains of
Western Union, which was founded 143 years ago as a telegram service.

Burdened by interest payments, New Valley filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy
protection on March 31, 1993.  Its revenue improved last year, to $477 million,
most of which was generated by the fees charged to wire money across the United
States and to 73 countries, including, as of this week, Vietnam. Western Union
has 18,000 agents in the United States and 6,000 abroad.

The offer from First Data, which was spun off in 1992 from the American Express
Company, went to the four groups that had submitted reorganization plans to the
court. Among those are plans from creditors, including Carl C. Icahn, who are
owed $400 million.

The New Valley plan includes an arrangement that allows Bennett LeBow, who
bought control of Western Union in 1988, to reduce his stake in the company and
make the principal equity investor Apollo Advisers L.P., an investment fund
controlled by Leon Black, a former merger specialist at Drexel Burnham Lambert.
Drexel, an adviser for many of Mr. LeBow's acquisitions, also underwrote more
than $50 million in high-yield bonds for Western Union in the early 80's.

Talks have been held privately with the New Valley creditor groups for at least
a year, said Gary P. Tobin, a senior vice president of First Data. "The offer's
had many incarnations," Mr. Tobin said. "We haven't been able to strike a deal
before."

The terms from First Data include distributing $150 million in cash from New
Valley to creditors and shareholders; the assumption of unfinanced pension
liabilities, estimated at $287 million to $400 million, and obtaining approval
from the Federal Trade Commission.

First Data sends bills to 70 million people a month for transactions involving
credit cards, cable television, mutual funds and health care.

Stephen T. McClellan, a computer-services analyst for Merrill Lynch in San
Francisco, said from a strategic standpoint the proposed deal fit "like a
glove." By consolidating operations and cutting costs, Mr. McClellan said, First
Data could improve its profits fourfold. "Apparently," he added, "there are easy
cost savings to be had."

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 28, 1994, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article in Business Day yesterday about an offer by the First Data
Corporation for the Western Union Financial Services unit of the New Valley
Corporation misstated the amount of the bid. It is $480 million, not $430
million. The article also misstated the number of bills processed by First Data
each month. It is 100 million, not 70 million.


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


New Catechism for Catholics

Despite criticism, American Catholic leaders hope a massive new explication of
doctrine will counter religious illiteracy and uncertainty. Page 9.

There's a Bug in Your Soup

Many retail stores, restaurants and fast food outlets are using tiny hidden
microphones for surveillance in addition to video cameras. Page 6.

But Watch Out for Sunburn

After years of fouled water, pinched vacation budgets and storm damage, this
summer looks promising for beachgoers and businesses. Page 21.

Rollins, Unsuppressed

Edward J. Rollins Jr., the political consultant whose comments stirred
controversy in New Jersey, is joining a New York campaign. Page 21.




George Ball Dies

George W. Ball, a lawyer, banker and presidential adviser over half a century
and a voice against the Vietnam War, died Thursday. Page 26.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Ball (Frank C. Dougherty, 1990)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Past Looks Brighter Than Future for Robb

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1518 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


The old Chuck Robb was back. If only for a moment, he was not one of the most
endangered Democrats in the Senate, fighting to keep his seat and to restore a
reputation tarnished by beauty queens, massages and secret tape-recordings.

On this evening in his Senate office, Mr. Robb drifted back a quarter of a
century, to the glory days when he had returned from Vietnam laden with medals,
to a bride whose father had been President and to whispers that he might even
end up in the White House himself. He was in Philadelphia, he recalled, a
fresh-faced marine from Virginia who managed to win over a crowd of anti-war
protesters.

"I'm there in my major's uniform -- dress blues, ribbons, badges, medals and
everything," he remembered with pride, "and I walked into a complete anti-war
demonstration for my benefit."

But in the end, he was so successful in defusing the confrontation, he said,
that after reports of it in the press, "I got a real nice note from President
Nixon complimenting me."

Days of Glory

Charles Spittal Robb takes comfort from the past, when he was known as the
upstanding officer who married President Lyndon B. Johnson's daughter, Lynda
Bird, and as a Governor of Virginia who brought fiscal responsibility to the
state. But the past is also what has brought Mr. Robb, 54, the lowest popularity
ratings of any Democratic Senator seeking re-election this year.

Soon after he took his seat in the Senate, news reports of his extracurricular
behavior as Governor began to emerge, at first a dribble but then a humiliating
string of disclosures. They portrayed him as a reckless womanizer who attended
wild parties at Virginia Beach where drugs were used and said he accepted a nude
massage from a former Miss Virginia U.S.A. There were also reports of his aides'
plotting to use a secretly tape-recorded telephone conversation of his longtime
political rival, L. Douglas Wilder, to embarrass the fellow Democrat, who
succeeded him as governor.

So damaging were those reports, that by most accounts, the only thing standing
between Mr. Robb and sure defeat in November is Oliver L. North, the Iran-contra
figure who is seeking the Republican nomination -- assuming that both men win
their respective party primaries next month.

"It's easy to characterize this as a race between a number of less than perfect
candidates," Mr. Robb said in an interview. "You have pundits who will just
ratchet up the rhetoric on that. And so I am constantly pulled down into a
matchup that causes people to say, 'A pox on both houses.' "

In a rather cynical recipe for victory, Mr. Robb's supporters hope that the pox
on Mr. North -- with his bitter relations with many Republicans and his
conviction on charges, later dismissed, that he lied to Congress about the
arms-for-hostages deal -- will cancel out their own candidate's character
weaknesses.

"Ollie North is far and away the best thing that Chuck Robb has going for him,"
said Thomas R. Morris, the president of Emory and Henry College in southwestern
Virginia. "Ollie North is No. 1 and Lynda Johnson Robb is No. 2. Obviously, he'd
be politically dead in the water without her strong support. With her at his
side, it certainly mutes the criticism about past personal behavior, at least in
terms of unfaithfulness, in the same way that Hillary Clinton stood by Bill
Clinton."

Comparisons With Clinton

There was a time when Mr. Clinton and Mr. Robb were linked not because of
accusations of marital infidelity but as up-and-coming Southern Governors, known
for their work in the Democratic Leadership Conference, a group of moderate
Democrats. Mr. Robb recalled his successful efforts to persuade Mr. Clinton to
succeed Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia as chairman.

Mr. Robb offers a careful, lawyerly response when asked if he identifies with
the attacks on the President's character. "It's fair to say that he and I have
had some interesting conversations," he said. "If you have been through certain
fire, you have a shared empathy, no matter what the factual basis."

Perhaps taking a cue from Mr. Clinton, Mr. Robb's strategy is to persevere. Like
the President, Mr. Robb at first refused to discuss the accusations about his
personal life. But as he moved closer to the next month's primary, he issued a
carefully worded confessional admitting "socializing under circumstances not
appropriate for a married man," but denying knowingly being in the presence of
drug users. The statement was reminiscent of Mr. Clinton's vague explanations on
avoiding the draft and experimenting with marijuana.

In the interview and in campaign appearances, Mr. Robb dwelled more on his four
years as Governor than his six years in the Senate, which have been overshadowed
by disclosures about his behavior when he was Governor. He wants voters to
remember the fiscal restraint he brought to Virginia's economy, and the jobs he
helped create for the military industry.

But it will not be easy.

Although they are viewed as little threat to his nomination, Mr. Robb's two
challengers in the primary, Virgil H. Goode Jr., a State Senator, and Sylvia
Clute, a Richmond lawyer, kept the character issue at the forefront of a
televised debate this week. "A vote for Chuck Robb, unfortunately, is a vote for
a scandal-ridden campaign," Ms. Clute said.

The usually subdued Mr. Goode posed this question: "Do we want a Senator whose
judgment is so flawed that despite warnings, he continued to hang out with
cocaine users and drug doers?"

If that were not enough, former Governor Wilder is planning to run as an
independent -- a move that some view as an effort to defeat Mr. Robb by dividing
the Democratic vote. Mr. Wilder would no doubt remind voters of the long-running
feud over the illegal tape-recording of a conversation Mr. Wilder, who was then
Lieutenant Governor, had on a car phone with a political supporter in which he
criticized Mr. Robb.

Mr. Robb's critics go well beyond the people who want his job. This week, Mary
Sue Terry, a former State Attorney General who lost in a bid for Governor last
year, endorsed Mr. Goode. She was a law school classmate of Mr. Robb and had
supported him in the past.

Another influential Virginia Democrat who previously backed Mr. Robb,
Representative James P. Moran Jr., also announced recently that he would not
support the Senator.  He would not explain why, but in an interview this was the
best thing he could say about the Senator, "Some might suggest that he's a
better politician than legislator."

One reason Mr. Robb has had difficulty blotting out the negatives is because it
is never easy for a freshman Senator to make a mark; and he, in particular, has
been distracted by the litany of personal disclosures.

While Mr. Robb has not distinguished himself by steering significant
legislation, he cites his votes for the Persian Gulf War and for budgets to
reduce the deficit as showing his mettle as a leader. He does not mention
perhaps his most controversial vote: in favor of the nomination of Clarence
Thomas to the Supreme Court.

Mr. Robb defends his record, and in a familiar strategy for besieged
politicians, blames the press for inaccurately portraying him while refusing to
say exactly how he has been misrepresented. He said his achievements were not
well known because he had never been one "to run for the cameras."

"To be reduced to a caricature is not anybody's idea of either a pleasant
experience or of making life any easier for you," he said. "I've managed to
stick to my knitting and get the job done in a difficult period."

But it may take more than knitting and Oliver North to deflect all the bad
publicity. So in another, rather risky move, Mr. Robb has begun emphasizing his
record of support for homosexual rights, and for overturning the ban on
homosexuals in the military. Most notably, he appeared this month before the
Human Rights Campaign Fund, a national gay political group.

While the move could backfire in a state as conservative as Virginia, Mr. Robb
hopes that if the general election is splintered with a handful of candidates,
homosexuals and liberals will be spurred by his stand to support him.

So far, Mr. Robb has avoided dwelling on Mr. North, though he said he would
never underestimate "the fierce loyalty" of the Republican's supporters, nor the
circumstances that allowed a man who worked in the White House to portray
himself as "a martyr poking his finger in the eye of the establishment."

As Mr. Robb talks about hanging on to his Senate seat, the Washington whispers
about his running for Vice President, or even President, could not seem farther
away. Such a question, Mr. Robb said, "doesn't get asked by journalists
anymore."

But the once-pristine Senator from Virginia says that "believe it or not" some
people harken back to the magical days when he first squired Lynda Bird and
think that bigger things are still in store for him.

"People go back to a storybook wedding or something, and they just think that
the stars were supposed to work out a certain way," he said with a trace of
wistfulness.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles S. Robb, left, one of the most endangered Democrats in
the Senate, campaigning on Thursday aboard a train from Fredericksburg, Va., to
Washington. He faces a primary contest next month. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

George W. Ball Dies at 84; Vietnam's Devil's Advocate

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1922 words


George W. Ball, who as Under Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations argued forcefully but unsuccessfully against United States
involvement in the Vietnam War, died Thursday night in New York Hospital. He was
84 years old and lived in Princeton, N.J.

The cause of death was not immediately determined, but his son, Douglas, said
that Mr. Ball had entered the hospital on Wednesday and that his doctors had
made a diagnosis of terminal abdominal cancer.

Mr. Ball's opposition to the Vietnam War was based on his belief that Europe,
not Southeast Asia, was the central political arena and that the key to
East-West rapprochement and world peace lay in a strong, unified Western Europe.

Mr. Ball, who also served as United States delegate to the United Nations in
1968, retired in 1982 as senior managing director of the New York investment
banking firm of Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb.

Career Began in New Deal

In a career that began in the New Deal and spanned half a century, Mr. Ball was
a lawyer, economist, author, investment banker, high Government official,
diplomatic troubleshooter and adviser to Presidents. He never ran for elective
office and rose no higher than Under Secretary, the No. 2 post in the State
Department, which he held from 1961 to 1966. But he was an influential and often
dissenting voice in the making of American foreign policy in the 1960's.

Mr. Ball was a leading exponent of European economic and political unity and of
aid to underdeveloped nations; a mediator of crises in Cyprus, Pakistan, the
Congo and elsewhere and a member of President Kennedy's inner circle in the 1962
Cuban missile crisis.

But he was perhaps best known as an early and consistent opponent of American
involvement in Vietnam: a devil's advocate who challenged the basic assumptions
about the war, yet never lost his influence within the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations.

As early as 1961, when most Americans had no inkling of where Vietnam was, let
alone what was going on there, Mr. Ball was urging President Kennedy not to send
American servicemen, warning that hundreds of thousands of troops might
ultimately have to go.

The Vietnamese Detour

Later, when the Johnson Administration built up American involvement in the war,
he argued against "the Vietnamese detour with its deep ruts and treacherous
quicksands." Later on, he did not favor unilateral American withdrawal, but
sought reduced involvement and a political settlement with the Communists.

"By a series of small steps, taken in good faith over a period of years," he
said as the conflict swelled, "we have mired ourselves in a frustrating war that
turns our otherwise sensible countrymen into placard-carrying hysterics and
impedes our coming to grips with fundamental problems in our cities, our society
and the world."

His opposition was not founded on pacifism, morality or other principles
espoused by antiwar demonstrators.  Indeed, he found it "stupid and
unattractive" that antiwar protesters engaged "in self-flagellation, declaring
in sanctimonious tones that American policy is thoroughly in the wrong and that
we as a nation are as brutal and viciously ambitious as the other side."

His dissenting views stemmed rather from his belief that Southeast Asia was
peripheral to American interests, diverting attention from the main arena, which
he said lay in Europe.

Focus on Europe

This theme -- that a united Western Europe was the key to American foreign
policy because it would strengthen the Atlantic alliance and provide a cushion
between the United States and the Soviet Union -- was, in fact, the touchstone
of Mr. Ball's vision of global politics.

In this vision, the United States, a unified Europe and the Soviet Union would
come finally to an East-West rapprochement, and these stronger nations of the
northern half of the world, working together, would help the poorer peoples of
the Southern Hemisphere, ultimately bringing peace and plenty to the planet.

With Europe and its problems as his immediate focus, Mr. Ball thus concluded
that the whole Asian mainland, not merely Vietnam, was peripheral to American
interests and that fighting there constituted an enormous waste of human and
national resources.

Communist China, he contended, was overrated as a menace, and its existence
should be accepted forthrightly. He favored trade with China, United Nations
membership for Beijing and abandonment of the "myth" that Chinese Nationalists
on Taiwan represented China.

Views Did Not Prevail

Mr. Ball's views, for the most part, did not prevail while he was in office,
though by the end of the Johnson years many top policy makers believed, as he
had, that the Vietnam War could not be won. For most of his tenure, however, Mr.
Ball was regarded in the Government as a kind of loyal oppositon.

"I've become," as he once said, "a champion of lost causes."

Detractors contended he was being used by Secretary of State Dean Rusk and
President Johnson as a sophisticated yes man who could be relied upon to raise
cogent objections and then be overruled, so critics could not say dissenting
views were unheard in policy-making circles. But Mr. Ball's admirers called him
a team player in the best sense and said his views were valued and had a
moderating influence.

When he resigned as Under Secretary in 1966 to return to private life, Mr. Ball
left on friendly terms and silenced his criticism of the war during the
remaining Johnson years. It was not until after President Nixon took office that
he attacked America's Vietnam policy publicly again.

He was called back several times in the Johnson Administration, serving on a
Presidential advisory group that urged an end to a further buildup of the
Vietnam War and providing counsel when North Korea captured an American
intelligence ship, the Pueblo, in January 1968.

Author and Counsel

In May 1968, President Johnson named Mr. Ball as the United States delegate to
the United Nations after Arthur J. Goldberg, another opponent of the Vietnam
War, resigned, apparently in frustration over his diminishing influence.

Mr. Ball returned to work as an investment banker when President Nixon entered
the White House in 1969, but was called back by President Carter for counsel on
crises in Iran and the Persian Gulf and on the Panama Canal Treaties. He also
continued to write articles and books, occasionally stirring controversy with
his views on Israel, the Middle East and other subjects.

Mr. Ball was the author of five books, "The Discipline of Power: Essentials of a
Modern World Structure," published in 1968; "Diplomacy for a Crowded World," in
1976; "The Past Has Another Pattern," a memoir, in 1982; "Error and Betrayal in
Lebanon," in 1983, and "The Passionate Attachment," a history of
American-Israeli relations, written with his son, Douglas, in 1992. At his
death, he was working on a book about America at the end of the 20th Century.

Tall, burly, with white wavy hair, a cleft chin and gray eyes behind dark-
rimmed spectacles, Mr. Ball was a forceful speaker whose style, in writing too,
struck an academic tone with literary flourishes. His sentences often began
ponderously but wound up with stingers in the tail. In a memo to President
Kennedy, for example, he wrote: "Whenever we extend the hand of friendship to
President de Gaulle, he puts into it a dead fish."

Native of Iowa



George Wildman Ball was born on Dec. 21, 1909, in Des Moines, the third son of
Amos and Edna Wildman Ball. His mother was a teacher and his father was a
Scottish immigrant who became a vice president of Standard Oil of Indiana.

The family moved to Evanston, Ill., when George was 11, and he later enrolled at
Northwestern University. He majored in English, founded a literary magazine,
graduated in 1930 and earned his law degree from Northwestern in 1933.

Eager to become a part of the New Deal, he went to Washington and worked in the
Farm Credit Bureau and in the Treasury Department. But his enthusiasm soon paled
and he returned to Chicago in 1935 to join a tax law firm, one of whose partners
was Adlai E. Stevenson. The two became close friends, and Mr. Stevenson, who
went to Washington in 1941, helped place Mr. Ball in 1942 as a lawyer with the
Lend-Lease Administration.

In London in 1944-45, Mr. Ball was director of the United States Strategic
Bombing Survey, appraising the effects of the air war against Germany. It was in
this capacity that he met and became close to Jean Monnet, who was to become
known after the war as the architect of the European unification movement.

Captivated by Mr. Monnet's vision of Europe as a unified political-economic
entity that could be a bulwark of Western strength, Mr. Ball after the war
supported the unification cause, in effect becoming its Washington
representative.

Lobbied for Common Market

He became a founding partner of the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen & Ball,
which represented the Common Market and the European Coal and Steel Community,
and he pushed the first abortive efforts of British entry into the Common
Market.

It was a short step into the political arena after Mr. Stevenson, then Governor
of Illinois, joined the race for President in 1952. Then, and again in 1956, Mr.
Ball was chief of volunteers in the Stevenson Presidential campaigns. In 1960,
he backed John F. Kennedy.

When the Kennedy Administration took office, Mr. Ball was named Under Secretary
of State for Economic Affairs. But less than a year later, when Chester Bowles
resigned in November 1961, Mr. Ball was named Under Secretary of State.

Mr. Ball became an Administration trouble-shooter, shuttling between Athens,
Ankara and Nicosia to mediate crises over Cyprus, and dashing off to Pakistan,
the Congo, the Dominican Republic and other trouble spots to ease tensions or
halt fighting. He was a prodigious toiler and traveler, often working six days a
week and 70 hours at a stretch, and was usually at his best under pressure.

In Kennedy's Inner Circle

He was one of a small circle of advisers to President Kennedy in the Cuban
missile crisis in 1962, when the discovery that Soviet missiles were being
transported and installed in Cuba raised the specter of nuclear war with the
Soviet Union. Mr. Ball urged a naval blockade of Cuba coupled with a demand that
the Soviet missiles be withdrawn, the course that was successfully followed.

After Mr. Kennedy's assassination in November 1963, Mr. Ball was one of the
leaders who went to the White House to work out a transition to the new
Administration. Resigning as Under Secretary in 1966, he joined Lehman Brothers
and, except for his service at the United Nations and occasional duty as a
Presidential adviser, remained with the firm for the rest of his career.

In the Carter Administration, Mr. Ball helped draft long-range American policy
in the Persian Gulf. As an adviser to the National Security Council on Iran, he
was critical of supporting Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, and favored formation of
a broad coalition government in Teheran. He also helped mount a bipartisan
effort for Senate ratification of the Panama Canal Treaties.

Mr. Ball's wife, Ruth Murdoch Ball, whom he married in 1932, died last August.
He is survived by two sons, John Colin Ball, of West Concord, Mass., and Douglas
Bleakly Ball, of Rockville Centre, L.I., and two grandchildren. A memorial
service will be held at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York on June
21.

NAME: George W. Ball

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I've become a champion of lost causes," George W. Ball, left,
once said of his role as the loyal opposition on foreign policy issues in the
Kennedy and Johnson administrations. He conferred with Secretary of State Dean
Rusk, second from left, President Johnson and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
(United Press International, 1964)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Christopher Presses Policy Of Engagement With Asia

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 5;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 496 words


Secretary of State Warren Christopher, speaking in New York yesterday, cast
President Clinton's decision to renew China's preferred trade status as part of
a stepped-up policy of engagement throughout Asia.

In a speech to the Asia Society, Mr. Christopher said President Clinton's
decision on Thursday to engage China, rather than punish it, was part of a
strategy to build stability in Asia and share the continent's prosperity.

"The President's decision reflects a comprehensive U.S. strategy of engagement
and leadership in the Asia-Pacific," arena, he said. "It encourages Chinese
cooperation in building a new regional and international order based upon peace
and security."

He said extending China's trade privileges was part of a policy the
Administration pursued in several ways this week: exchanging diplomatic missions
with Vietnam, resuming talks with Japan over its trade barriers, and announcing
talks with North Korea on its nuclear program.

The North Korean Angle

Eager to respond to criticisms of the President's decision, Mr. Christopher also
noted that China's cooperation was important for a chief foreign policy goal:
persuading North Korea to abandon its nuclear program.

"Our relationship with China is important to all Americans," he said. "China
possesses the world's largest army, a nuclear arsenal, and, not insignificantly,
a veto in the United Nations Security Council."

Defending the President's decision, Mr. Christopher said China was too important
to be isolated and too big to be pushed around. He added that its huge,
fast-growing economy is a lucrative market for American companies.

Mr. Christopher asserted that the United States would continue to keep the heat
on Beijing to improve its human rights performance.

"We're not backing away in any way from pursing human rights problems," he said,
asserting that Washington's human rights dialogue with Beijing would intensify.

His speech was part of the Administration's damage control after lawmakers and
human rights groups accused the President of flip-flopping after he had
condemned President Bush for coddling China's rulers.

In an interview, Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who heads a House caucus
that has pushed for tough measures on China's human rights performance, said
that although the President said on Thursday he would ban imports of Chinese
weapons and ammunition, he "didn't announce any real sanctions yesterday."

She and other lawmakers are drafting a broader sanctions bill that is expected
to call for denying favorable tariffs to products made by industries owned by
China's military -- a measure that is expected to cover close to $1 billion of
China's $30 billion in exports to the United States. It is estimated the ban on
munitions will affect only $100 million in trade.

At the address, Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch,
voiced concern that the sanctions adopted were of only "token" significance.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Warren Christopher spoke to the Asia Society
yesterday on relations with China. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Step Up, Folks! Check It Out! Nationhood!

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2425 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FRANK MANKIEWICZ SAYS THE HAZY nature of the relationship between Washington,
D.C., and reality dawned on him on June 5, 1980.

"Jimmy Carter was giving the Medal of Freedom -- this is the country's highest
civilian honor -- to John Wayne," Mr. Mankiewicz, the former Democratic
strategist, recalled not long ago, "and the citation read that he was getting
the medal because he was a great American. And I thought to myself: Wait a
minute! John Wayne wasn't a great American. He wasn't even a great actor. He
just played great Americans."

As does Washington itself. It's an Academy Award performance -- and an act that
the city guards jealously.

Disney is learning the hard way. Since the Walt Disney Company announced last
winter that it would build a vast new theme park near the capital -- a sort of
thrill ride through American history -- citizens have reacted not with glee, as
might almost any other town, but rather as if the company had staged a coup and
installed the Shaggy Dog as President. "Synthetic history," they hissed; America
as Fantasyland.

Washington does this to people. It's all that broad-shouldered, verdigris
majesty. But the deeper truth is that Washington and Anaheim are both brilliant
fantasists. If Istanbul is the T. E. Lawrence of world capitals, sword
unsheathed and racing on horseback toward another clash with history, then
Washington is Indiana Jones -- handsome and dashing in its porkpie hat and
bullwhip, but only playing a part. Sure, the millions of American pilgrims who
kick off the annual summer throng to the capital this weekend will find an
inspiring city studded with blinding white monuments and priceless artifacts,
redolent of a great nation's greatest achievements.

But the Washington Monument is not George Washington; indeed, George Washington
never served here. The Spirit of St. Louis, dangling from a Smithsonian ceiling,
took off for Paris from Long Island, not from the Mall. The Iwo Jima Memorial is
a re-creation of a photograph of an event 7,600 miles away that was itself posed
after the fact.

"The first totally synthetic capital city," the geographer Wilbur Zelinsky wrote
of Washington in 1990, "a metropolis of dazzling symbolic expressiveness." Real
history tends to be overwhelmed by the symbolic. Even, for example, the rail
station where James A. Garfield was assassinated in 1881 long ago gave way to a
grand relic-house, the National Gallery of Art.

More than any other place, except perhaps Hollywood, Washington creates its own
reality. It passes off Moon Pies as the Moon, and the public gobbles them up. To
millions, the Spirit of St. Louis is the physical manifestation of the American
spirit, and the Iwo Jima Memorial is American valor epitomized. The Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, with its endless black roster of the dead, seems at times to
have risen above the war itself.

To that extent, the real outcry over Disney's plans for a theme park, in a
Virginia exurb freckled with Civil War battle sites, is not really whether
Hollywood should be making myth out of history. It's whether Washington's
grander myth should remain a monopoly.

Certainly the Disney company, no piker in the dramatic arts itself, doesn't
think so.

Disney's marketers saw the Federal City lure 20 million tourists a year and
decided there was room for competition. Its entry, "Disney's America," is a
1,200-acre theme park and greensward 35 miles west of Washington that would be
15 times larger than Anaheim's original Disneyland.

THE PLANS ARE NOT FIRM. BUT the early blueprints included nine attractions keyed
to American history: a Civil War fort and village; an Ellis Island; a World War
II airfield sporting virtual-reality rides in ersatz fighters. Wilderness flume
floats with Lewis and Clark, a Norman Rockwell-style family farm and state
fairgrounds, and a hall filled with talking, gesticulating, thoroughly robotic
former Presidents.
 Prominently absent were Mickey, Goofy and Snow White's castle; the planners
cast Disney's America as the only amusement park with a doctorate in civics.
They talk of putting real historical researchers in exhibits and of gimcracks
like a working newspaper office that would impress visitors with the historic
role of the press.

"If they've seen them and read about them in the history books, here they can
come and live them," one of Disney's chief planners, Bob Weis, said of the
proposal at the unveiling last November. "We can make you a Civil War soldier.
Through an emotional statement, we can make you feel what slavery was like
during that time period, and what it was like to escape on the underground
railroad."

It can be argued, and some do, that Washington could use some historical
context. A trip to the Capitol, by far the city's grandest and most historic
building, is utterly befuddling to many tourists, who can spend days there
without ever learning how laws are made or what lies down the many roped-off
hallways.

"The monuments are set up to be user friendly, but what's given the least
attention is a real insight into history and the way the process really works,"
said Norman Ornstein, a Washington political scholar. "Can Disney do some of
that? My guess is they'll do a small share of it. But that may be more than
anyone else."

That said, many professional historians and arbiters of Washington culture --
the Civil War scholar Shelby Foote; President Kennedy's biographer Arthur
Schlesinger Jr. -- seem aghast. Some of the furor stems from the park's location
amid Civil War sites that could well be infested by the ticky-tack that always
attaches to big tourist draws. But much seems rooted in the belief that Disney
will trivialize the American saga, indoctrinating visitors in its own
coonskin-cap version of events.

"The Disney people will do to American history what they have already done to
the animal kingdom -- sentimentalize it out of recognition," Mr. Foote warned
earlier this month at a news conference called to publicize opposition to the
park. The historian David McCullough, who received the Pulitzer Prize in
biography in 1992, branded it "an attempt to create synthetic history."

Well, of course -- and in the television age, no one has done it more often or
more osmotically than the Disney empire. Millions of middle-agers grew up
believing the most important American to come out of the early frontier was Fess
Parker's Davy Crockett (and not, say, President Andrew Jackson -- though the
real Crockett, too, wandered between soldiering and Washington politics).
Disney theme parks present images of Victorian main streets, frontier forts and
Indian villages that are cartoonish compared with the real thing. For better or
worse, American children may believe forever that Cornelius Vanderbilt, Andrew
Carnegie and all the monopolists of their rapacious era were merely variations
on Scrooge McDuck.

But Washington's brand of myth making is no less slick. The real difference is
that its myths were spun to fill a yawning hole in the psyche of a nation that
had no indigenous culture to draw on at its birth.

"Washington has been deep in 'enshrinement' since its earliest days," said Grady
Clay, the Louisville landscape architect who headed the panel that chose the
stunning design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. "What happens to national
capitals is that the hopes and fears of all the years and races and other
components get gathered together in one place."

The District of Columbia became that place largely because it had no history of
its own. Far more can be found in on Boston's Freedom Trail, in New York, the
first capital, or in Philadelphia, the seat of government from 1790 to 1800.
Washington was the post-revolutionary version of modern Brasilia and Ankara, a
city built solely to house the bureaucracy and serve as a national symbol.

It since has done both to a fare-thee-well. George Washington learned about
symbolism early. Upon hearing in 1791 that Pierre L'Enfant had earmarked a
hilltop for a man-on-horseback statue of him, he ordered it erased from the city
blueprints. Civic leaders waited until he died, then erected a 555-foot-5
1/8-inch-tall marble tower in his honor on the site.

The passion for symbols has only deepened over the years. The remarkable
popularity of the Vietnam Memorial's wall is obvious. Less so is the Federal
commission that has labored for four decades to conceive a proper memorial to
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who wanted only -- and so far has gotten only -- a
desk-size block of stone with his name chipped into it.

At least the Vietnam War was directed from Washington, and Roosevelt was
President here. Some recent additions, however widely praised, have more tenuous
ties: a planting of trees to honor slain police officers; a spectacular museum
to the Nazi Holocaust, which, logic suggests, could just well have been in Tel
Aviv or Berlin or New York.

That they are in Washington is testament to the city's remarkable standing as a
sort of secular Mecca where national relics are available for veneration.

And, it can be argued, for public entertainment. The two-mile Mall stretching
from the Capitol to the Lincoln Memorial was plotted by the same architects who
laid out Chicago's famous Columbian Exposition of 1893, with its first Ferris
wheel and its fabulous White City of neo-classical buildings.

The idea, says Robert A. M. Stern, head of the New York architectural firm that
bears his name, was to create "a kind of permanent world's fair for America --
an American fair."

A theme park, one might say today.

"You go to see where your congressman and senator do their work, and in that
sense your trip is an experience of the actualities of government," he said.
"But you also spend time looking at monuments, which of course are
representations. Then you go to museums in which you see real things --
paintings, sculptures -- but they're not just for themselves but as
representations of the power and might and imagination and whatever of American
culture. They're all there, collectively, to create and sustain a myth of an
America that will triumph over the heterogeneous nature of the society."

Mr. Stern would be expected to make such points. He sits on Disney's board, and
the company is a major client (he has designed corporate buildings and hotels at
the company's troubled Euro Disney park, near Paris). He argues that Disney
would complement Washington's myth making, not demean it.

The real question is whether Disney's America would.

"BLACKS CAN SEE IN THE Lincoln Memorial something very different than whites,"
said John M. Findlay, a University of Washington historian and author of the
book "Magic Lands," about Disneyland and other western urban sites. "When you go
into the private confines of Disneyland, you've got to expect that your ability
to do that is more limited. The Vietnam Memorial is in many ways haunting, as no
doubt the Holocaust Museum is. I don't think the Disney people want anybody to
go away haunted."

A more accurate and less likely Disney park might include a Bay of Pigs shooting
gallery, a New Orleans French Quarter of senatorial scandals and a thrill ride
through the harrowing drug markets near Capitol Hill. A more accurate -- and
less awesome -- Washington might include a ride through a building filled with
Federal Trade Commission antitrust analysts and a White House exhibit that
chronicles the evolution of backbiting and ladder climbing among hotshot
Presidential aides.

The question of whose Lincoln is more historically accurate -- Washington's
columned memorial, with its pensive statue, or Disney's top-hatted,
homily-spouting mannequin -- could be argued for years. But the question of
which is real is easy to answer: neither. And, in the most curious way, both.

The Disney plan, Mr. Mankiewicz mused, is "not virtual reality --it's one stage
removed from reality."

He paused for just a second. "No, I got it!" he said. "It's virtual unreality."



Washington Never Slept Here
A LITTLE REAL HISTORY THAT HAPPENED IN WASHINGTON

Finding genuine history amid -- and under -- symbolic Washington is no mean
feat. See if you can match the following little-known locations with the
historic events that occurred there:

1. The White House, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue
 Meriwether Lewis lived here from 1801 to 1803 while planning the Lewis and
Clark expeditions.

 2. The Octagon House, 1799 New York Avenue N.W.
 President James Madison lived here after the British burned the White House in
the War of 1812. The Treaty of Ghent, ending the war, was signed here. Two
ghosts are reported to haunt it.

 3. 1519 Connecticut Avenue N.W.
 The nation's first licensed television station broadcast from here in 1928,
transmitting only dark silhouettes.

 4. The Washington Hilton, 1919 Connecticut Avenue, E Street entry.
 Ronald Reagan was shot here in 1981.

 5. Howard Johnson Inn, 2601 Virginia Avenue N.W., room 723.
 From here a lookout saw the police entering the Watergate office complex on
June 17, 1972, and warned the White House burglars inside the Democratic
National Committee headquarters. They were arrested anyway.

 6. The private office of Senator Mark Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, on the
second floor of the United States Capitol.
 Samuel F. B. Morse's lab, scene of the first practical demonstration of the
telegraph. He impressed Congress into giving him research dollars by
telegraphing news about the comings and goings of senators.


 7. The National Gallery of Art, Sixth and Constitution Avenues N.W.
 On July 2, 1881, a disturbed office-seeker, Charles J. Guiteau, shot President
James A. Garfield in the B&O Railroad Station that stood here then.

 8. Dumbarton Oaks, 3101 R Street N.W.
 As World War II broke out, Dr. Vannevar Bush and other military scientists
convened here to plan the Manhattan Project and the world's first atomic bomb.


 9. Golo's Restaurant, 604 H Street N.W.
 Mary Surratt and John Wilkes Booth plotted Lincoln's murder in this onetime
boarding house; she was later hanged.

 10. Yenching Palace, 3524 Connecticut Avenue N.W.
 In October 1962, as the world teetered at the brink of nuclear war, the ABC
News reporter John Scali and an emissary of Nikita Khrushchev, Aleksandr Fomin,
met at this restaurant and worked out the compromise that ended the Cuban
missile crisis.


Credit: "On This Spot: Pinpointing the Past in Washington, D.C." Douglas E.
Evelyn and Paul Dickson, Farragut Publishing Co., 1992.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Mouse-Eye View of America The preliminary plans for Disney's
"America" park, released last November and still subject to change, included: 1.
Crossroads U.S.A., an 1840's entrance with barge and steam train rides. 2.
Hotels. 3. Presidents' Square, with animated early Presidents. 4. Native
America, with an Indian village and Lewis and Clark raft ride. 5. A Civil War
fort, with re-enactments of land battles by day and a Monitor-Merrimac clash by
night. 6. An Ellis Island replica. 7. Enterprise, a factory town with a thrill
ride through a blazing steel mill. 8. A World War II airfield with simulators
that let visitors fly fighters or jump with paratroops. 9. A state fair with a
Ferris wheel and wooden coaster. 10. A family farm with cow milking exhibits, a
country wedding and a barn dance. (Walt Disney Company)(pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Daniel Flood, 90, Who Quit Congress in Disgrace, Is Dead

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 34;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


Daniel J. Flood, who as a Congressman helped direct the billions of tax dollars
that poured into Federal social programs in the 1960's and 1970's but resigned
in disgrace in 1980, died yesterday at Mercy Hospital in Wilkes-Barre, Pa. He
was 90 and lived in Wilkes-Barre.

The cause was pneumonia, according to the hospital.

Mr. Flood left the House of Representatives after 31 years of service when he
pleaded guilty to one count of conspiracy to violate the Federal campaign laws
by taking payoffs from five people.

He had originally been charged by Federal prosecutors with having lined his
pockets with hundreds of thousands of dollars from contractors and lobbyists. A
jury voted 11 to 1 to convict him on five bribery and three perjury counts. The
only juror to vote for acquittal was the subject of a jury tampering
investigation and failed two lie detector tests, but no further legal action was
taken in that case.

Sentence of Probation

Mr. Flood agreed to enter the guilty plea before the start of a second trial,
which had been postponed four times. He was sentenced to a year's probation. He
was later the target of Federal investigations into drug abuse and ethics
violations but they ended without resolution.

Mr. Flood's source of power was the chairmanship of the Subcommittee on Labor,
Health, Education and Welfare of the House Appropriations Committee, a position
he held from 1967 to 1979.

In the 1960's and 1970's, amid the outpouring of Federal legislation that was
aimed at social problems, Mr. Flood was among a small group of committee and
subcommittee chairmen in the House and Senate who shaped the amounts and
directions of financial aid for schools and hospitals. They also helped draft
the legislation that was to provide money for the unemployed, needy and sick. At
one time his subcommittee alone drafted legislation that directed $75 million a
year.

Mr. Flood, who had been a Shakespearean actor in his youth and spoke with
mellifluous tones, was a sartorial dandy who was known for his waxed mustache
and often referred to as "Dapper Dan" on Capitol Hill. Yet he also was viewed
with affection and even awe by the widows and orphans of his district in eastern
Pennsylvania, which never lacked for Federal money if he could help it.

Rerouted Highway

A grateful constituency emblazoned his name throughout his district. There is a
Daniel J. Flood Elementary School, a Daniel J. Flood Rural Health Center and a
Daniel J. Flood Industrial Park.

Mr. Flood forced Federal planners to route a major interstate highway through
his district, and he was instrumental in getting an airport and a large new
veterans hospital. Millions of dollars in military contracts were channeled into
his district during the Vietnam War.

"Little birdies fly by and drop these goodies on my desk," he once joked.

Repeatedly re-elected, he often received as much as 70 percent of the vote.

Mr. Flood graduated from Syracuse University, and after his fling at acting,
studied law and became deputy attorney general of Pennsylvania. First elected to
Congress in 1944, he was defeated after serving one term, won again in 1948 only
to be defeated again in 1952. He was elected again in 1954 and was a House
member until his resignation in 1980.

He is survived by his wife, Catherine, of Wilkes-Barre.


NAME: Daniel J. Flood

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Daniel J. Flood. (Associated Press, 1979)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Addiction Programs Opening Up For Disabled

BYLINE: By PHILLIP LUTZ

SECTION: Section 14LI;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 2206 words


OVER the last 10 years, as increasing numbers of the disabled have sought care
for drug and alcohol addiction, almost no treatment programs have accepted them.

Now, under pressure from rights advocates, the programs are opening up, albeit
slowly. Treatment agencies are no longer routinely rejecting people with
disabilities, and they are improving coordination with other agencies that deal
with the disabled.

But the treatment agencies have had more success providing services for people
with mental disabilities than for the physically disabled, for whom traditional
settings are often inaccessible, experts in the field say.

"The problems accessing services are extremely significant," said Ken Perez, who
is in charge of developing programs for disabled addicts for the State Office of
Alcoholism and Substance Abuse Services.

Last year, when many service agencies were cutting back, admissions to drug and
alcohol treatment on Long Island declined slightly from 1992, as did admissions
of people with mental illness and retardation. All the declines were 3 percent
or less.

In that period the number of treatment admissions for people with sight,
hearing, mobility or speech impairments declined more steeply, 12, 15, 19 and 28
percent, respectively.

"There is no one out there saying, 'Come on in,' " said Richard P. Ratner,
assistant to the commissioner of drug and alcohol addiction in Nassau County.

In general the disabled make up an unexpectedly large percentage of admissions
to drug treatment, Mr. Perez said. In each of the last two years Long Island
treatment agencies recorded more than 4,000 admissions of the disabled, or 13.5
percent of the 30,000 total admissions.

Of the 4,000 admissions 1,500 were for drug treatment, more than 15 percent of
all admissions to such treatment on the Island.

At Apple, the largest complex of treatment centers on the Island, 16 percent of
300 people in six Suffolk County centers were classified as disabled in a survey
last month.

'There's a Lot of Pressure'

One reason for the unexpectedly large percentage of the disabled is advocates'
stepped-up activity. That apparently helped raise admissions of people with
other, so-called miscellaneous, disabilities 8 percent last year over 1992.

"There's a lot of pressure being brought to bear," Mr. Ratner said.

"We as a movement are putting on the pressure," said June Roberts, executive
director of Self-Initiated Living Options, an advocacy and service organization
for the disabled in Medford that is affiliated with the nationwide
independent-living movement.

In speeches, conferences and other settings, the advocates, citing the Americans
With Disabilities Act of 1990, have tried to put the spotlight on addictions of
the disabled and have had some success, especially for addicts with mental
disorders.

"We are recognizing and diagnosing it more and trying to develop strategies,"
said Dr. Bruce Taylor, who runs programs for mentally ill addicts at the
Veterans Administration Medical Center in Northport and ran such programs at
Brunswick Hospital in Amityville and the Pilgrim State Psychiatric Center in
West Brentwood.

Awareness and Acceptance

"There is an awareness and more of an acceptance in the community," said
Virginia Cottrell, who creates programs for mildly retarded addicts at the Young
Adult Institute, a rehabilitation agency in Manhattan that runs group homes on
the Island. "The A.D.A. is forcing people to look at the whole area."

The number of people entering psychiatric hospitals with addictions to drugs or
alcohol has more than doubled in 10 years, up to as much as 70 percent, Dr.
Taylor said.

Of the admissions to drug and alcohol centers on the Island, people with mental
illness made up the largest group of the disabled, with nearly 40 percent of all
admissions of the disabled.

For mentally ill addicts, the Kings Park and Pilgrim State Psychiatric Centers
and the Central Nassau Guidance and Counseling Services center, among other
places, provide services.

There is also a new acronym, MICA, for mentally ill chemical abusers.

For one alcoholic who has had several failures, Paul Belotte, 45, the system is
offering a new approach.

Mr. Belotte has severe depression and post-traumatic stress syndrome resulting
from his Vietnam War experience and a failed marriage. Mr. Belotte, who lives
with family members in Lynbrook, said that his addiction and mental illness fed
off each other and that he has been in the Northport veterans' hospital four
times to detoxify. "It's a very vicious cycle."

Counseling at Family Service Group

After he "got a little crazy" last summer and began shouting at his family in an
alcohol-induced rage, a judge ordered Mr. Belotte to go to Treatment
Alternatives to Street Crime, a referral agency that sent him to the Family
Service Association of Nassau County in Hicksville. He attends counseling there.

He was also referred to the Educational Assistance Corporation, which, with the
State Office of Vocational Educational Services for Individuals With
Disabilities, sent him to a laboratory assistant's course at the National Center
for Disability Services in Albertson. Mr. Belotte hopes to receive a certificate
this month.

The agencies involved with Mr. Belotte are seeking to repeat that process with a
$275,000 state grant.

Training for Hempstead Office

The Nassau Department of Drug and Alcohol Addiction, which now screens addicts
for learning disabilities, has hired a worker to train vocational-rehabilitation
employees in Hempstead to recognize the signs of addiction and refer suspected
addicts to treatment.

At least 1 in 5 people in vocational rehabilitation have drug or alcohol
problems, Mr. Ratner said, adding, "The office in Hempstead never really
addressed the problem of drug use."

Through the program, which is to run three years, the agencies plan to assess
900 people and serve 360, he said. Officials are trying to develop a policy on
referrals.

A sense of urgency about treating addicts with disabilities is growing, Mr.
Ratner said. That is fostered in part by an increasing number of people with
injuries related to crack, he added. Victims are arriving at treatment centers
suffering injuries from violence, strokes and automobile accidents.

"You get a lot of people shot and beat as a result of dealing activities," Mr.
Perez said.

Structured Program

Sharon Middleton, 32, attributes her hearing loss to being involved with crack.
Ms. Middleton, who said last Sunday marked the second year that she has not used
drugs, met her former husband through drugs. He hit her many times on the head,
she added, and she has nerve damage, wears hearing aids and reads lips to
communicate.

"Drugs kept me with him," Ms. Middleton said. That was until 1992, when she was
arrested, and a judge sent her to Apple in Hauppauge. She has been in various
Apple centers, following a highly structured program that she will soon finish.

Ed Ahern, who has used a wheelchair since a car accident in 1991, also traces
his disability from a chemical dependency. Mr. Ahern, 29, who coordinates
substance-abuse prevention for Self-Initiated Living Options, was drunk at the
time of his accident.

As many addicts become disabled, many people with disabilities are developing
addictions, experts said.  "It's safe to say that they are using at a higher
rate than the general population because of the disabilities themselves," Mr.
Ratner said.

"The drugs find them," said Muriel Farkas, executive vice president of Apple.

"Dealers have found certain disability groups are good markets," Mr. Perez said,
adding that he had heard that crack sellers were targeting the deaf.

Problem of Overprescribing

Another vulnerable market has disabled people who take pills to relieve pain.
The pills' addictive qualities have prompted treatment officials to accuse
doctors of overprescribing.

Doctors, Ms. Farkas said, sometimes "don't appreciate the fact that the person
is exhibiting drug-seeking behavior and are overprescribing."

"That's the position of physicians," Mr. Ratner said. " 'I can really help them
with their pain.' "

Dr. Taylor cautioned against manipulative patients, but said he did not think
that doctors usually overprescribed. Just as often, he said, they
underprescribed. "In general," he added, "we're afraid to treat."

Critics, including professionals in medicine, say standard medical training
provides little guidance.  "What medical schools have done in this area is
pathetic," Dr. Taylor said. "The subject is grossly undertaught. The curricula
have not at all kept up with the huge, huge problem."

Nobody knows what to do about people in chronic pain, he said, adding: "These
are the most difficult patients to treat. It's extraordinarily frustrating."

Complicating the question, the use of painkillers can sometimes lead to other
drugs, addicts say. That happened to Larry Posner. Addicted to Demerol at 15
after an ileostomy, Mr. Posner, now 40, moved to marijuana and alcohol and,
finally, to crack in 1987 after a series of intestinal operations.

Mr. Posner, who said he looked forward to his operations because of the
painkillers he would receive, came from what he called a normal household in
East Meadow and used crack in part because of his feelings about his disability.
"I was accepted on the outside, but I never accepted it inside," he said.

After being arrested in September in Jamaica while trying to buy crack, Mr.
Posner entered treatment at Apple on a judge's order.

For people like Mr. Posner, the treatment system has been accommodating. But
many experts are questioning the ability to accommodate people with more severe
physical disabilities. The sight of a wheelchair at a treatment center is rare.

"Are we failing these people?" Mr. Ratner asked.

Across the state about half the programs are accessible to people in
wheelchairs, Mr. Perez said.

In Nassau, Topic House is the sole county-operated residential treatment center
for drug addiction. Topic House, an 80-bed center in Plainview, has no elevators
and is not accessible to people in wheelchairs, Mr. Ratner said.

Travail of Long Trips

On the other hand a county-run residential alcohol-treatment program in
Plainview in the old county tuberculosis hospital has an elevator and is at
least partly accessible, Mr. Ratner said. The center has 50 beds.

For patients needing outpatient treatment, he said, the system is vast enough to
accommodate almost anyone. But participating in an accessible treatment program
could entail a long trip which, for a disabled person, could be difficult and
expensive.

In Suffolk, Apple has some buildings that are fully accessible, although people
in wheelchairs do not often seek treatment, Ms. Farkas said, adding that it is
unclear whether they are discouraged by perceptions of inaccessibility or other
factors.

Most Alcoholics and Narcotics Anonymous meetings are in inaccessible church
basements or other buildings, Mr. Ahern of Self-Initiated Living Options said.

By law efforts must be made to integrate the disabled into treatment settings
with nondisabled people. But, Ms. Roberts said, support groups for the
handicapped have begun springing up out of necessity. "We don't like to see
segregated groups of any kind," she said. But "we don't see any of the
traditional groups' opening up to people with disabilities."

Source of Financing

Last year Mr. Ahern began a self-help support group for people with all types of
disabilities that meets once a month. Organizations serving people with specific
conditions have also formed support groups. "This is an area of real growth,"
Mr. Perez said.

Self-Initiated Living Options receives financing for its drug-abuse-prevention
council from the state and county antidrug agencies and the Brookhaven Youth
Bureau. It recently received $8,000 from the forfeiture of drug money seized by
law-enforcement officials.

The program used the money in part to pay for a conference on disability and
addiction.

Beyond improving physical accessibility, conference participants, including
treatment officials, discussed how to develop and adapt addiction programs for
the disabled. People with disabilities often have low self-esteem, Mr. Ratner
said. For them, he said, programs based on the 12-step tenet of accepting one's
self as powerless might be injurious.

Dr. Taylor said he was aware of suicides in patients with psychiatric
disabilities who had been advised by support groups to give up all drugs,
including therapeutic lithium. "They don't address very well problems that are
specific to the disability," Dr. Taylor said.

On the other hand some counselors have successfully adapted the 12 steps for
people with a variety of handicaps, simplifying the language for the retarded or
translating the steps into sign language for the deaf. But such programs remain
few and far between.

"The best of all possible worlds is to have a specialized program," Mr. Ratner
said. "Right now most programming is not set up with that in mind."

But, he added, "we're looking at the whole thing a lot differently."

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart comparing admissions to drug and alcohol treatment by disability
for 1992 and 1993.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 951 words



International 2-5

NO PANACEA FOR HAITI
Intelligence officials feel the United States could easily reinstate the exiled
President of Haiti using force, but that it would not end violence there and
that troops would have to remain there to keep order.  1



DOMINICAN LEADER YIELDS
The leader of the Dominican Republic, whose border with Haiti has been porous,
has agreed to enforce sanctions, apparently to reduce American pressure over
charges of voter fraud in recent elections.  4

IN ISRAEL, PACT BRINGS DOUBTS
Israelis are anxious over the self-rule pact for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip
and Jericho -- glad that Israel has pulled out but uncertain where the policy
will lead.  1
The Palestinian self-rule pact worries refugees in Jordan.  5

SHOWDOWN OVER CRIMEA
A standoff in which two men claim to be head of law enforcement in Crimea points
up the tension there in the efforts of the largely ethnically Russian population
to gain independence from Ukraine.  2

FOR SOLZHENITSYN, A QUEST
News analysis: Now that Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn has returned home, the
question is whether there is a Russia that waits for and wants him and whether
the Russia that he is seeking is still there.  2

QUESTIONS ON SANCTIONS
While the United Nations has strengthened sanctions on Haiti to try to weaken
its military rulers, the sanctions on Yugoslavia are proving to be only an
irritant.  3

EX-COMMUNISTS WIN IN HUNGARY
Former Communists in Hungary, in a comeback, won parliamentary elections and
appeared to be able to form a Government on their own, without a coalition.  3

JAPAN'S CHIEF BANKER
Yasushi Mieno's tenure as governor of the Bank of Japan covers one of the most
tumultuous and humbling periods in the country's financial history.  33

Congressional leaders warned of sanctions for North Korea.  5

Two centrists are finalists in Colombia's presidential race.  3

Ouagadougou Journal: A Samaritan makes manna for Africa.  4

National 6-7, 22-24

CRITICISM OF VACCINE PLAN
Members of Congress and makers of drugs say the Clinton Administration has gone
far beyond what Congress intended when it passed legislation on vaccinations for
children.  1

CLERGY AT A CROSSROADS
A deepening shortage of priests is forcing a transformation of Catholic life in
the United States, including the handing of vast new responsibilities to women.
1

AFTER HIGH SCHOOL, THEN WHAT?
High school graduates who are planning to go straight to work are being offered
the same low wages and the same part-time hours as the after-school jobs they
held as students.  1

NATION OF ISLAM FIGURE SHOT
Khallid Abdul Muhammad, the former Nation of Islam spokesman known for
controversial remarks on Jews and whites, was shot and wounded by a black
gunman.  6

WHITE HOUSE'S WORK REVIEW
A report by a commission created by President Clinton, calling for easing
labor-management hostilities, is seen as a blueprint for legislation the
Administration might propose.  33

THE NATION'S TROUBLED CAPITAL
With a mayoral campaign in full swing, a main issue is who is responsible for
the steep decline in the fortunes of Washington.  6

SAN ANTONIO IN POLITICAL BIG TIME
With the Alamodome in mind as the setting, the city has launched a furious bid
for one of the 1996 national political conventions.  6

A FUTURE WITHOUT ROSTENKOWSKI
Lawmakers from both parties wrangled about what it would mean if the powerful
Illinois Democrat surrendered his leadership of the Ways and Means Committee.
23

FIRST LADY CENTRAL
On a campus where reference to Hillary can only mean one person, Presidential
wives were the talk at Wellesley College graduation.  23

Metro Digest 17

POLITICAL ANIMAL HOUSE

Sam cooks, Dick cleans, George collects the rent and Chuck raids the
refrigerator. Weeknights, they shoot the breeze in the living room, where two of
them sleep. Weekdays, they are members of Congress.  1

Business Digest 33

Arts/Entertainment 9-13, 38

Mac Wellman, theatrical inventor.  9

Theater: "The Last Sortie." 13

Music: The Spoleto Festival.  9

The Eagles' reunion.  9

The Wedding Present.  10

Yosuke Yamashita, jazz pianist.  10

Salt-n-Pepa at Radio City.  12

Dance: City Ballet in "Ives, Songs." 12

Ballet Theater's "Sylphide." 13

Books: "Walking Shadow" and "White Shark." 13

Television: "Roommates." 38
Sports 25-32
Auto Racing: Unser Jr. wins at Indy.  25

Baseball: Braves trade Sanders.  27

Royals topple Yanks.  31

Mets pound Reds.  31

Phillies lose no-hit bid.  31

Basketball: Knicks find 68 hard to believe.  25

Pacers happy not to have a break.  28

Rockets slip past Jazz.  28

Columns: Vecsey on the Knicks.  25

On Baseball 27

Hockey: Bure takes Canucks along for the ride.  25

Rangers skate into the unknown.  26

Soccer: U.S. coach still goes largely unnoticed.  27

Obituaries 40

Erich Honecker, former leader of Communist East Germany.

Julius Boros, professional golfer.

Editorials/Op-Ed 14-15

Editorials

The world's shrinking armies.

Let the Chancellor intervene.

Applying antitrust to insurance.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Guilt for Vietnam.

William Safire: That $100,000 "profit."

Kip Sullivan, Keith W. Sehnert: Unhealthy maintenance organizations.

Edward McCabe: Our "just say no" school board.

Arthur S. Flemming and Ray Marshall: Tyranny of the minority.

Bridge 38

Chronicle 20

Crossword 10

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Company's Vietnam Pact

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 38;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 99 words

DATELINE: HANOI, May 29


A United States company said today that it had joined the scramble for a share
of Hanoi's growing property market in competition with Singaporean, Hong Kong,
Thai and other Asian companies.

The Leon D. DeMatteis Construction Corporation, of Elmont, L.I., said in
newspaper advertisements here that it had received a license last month with its
partner, Dragon Age Investments, based in the British Virgin Islands, for a $9.9
million joint-venture office tower.

DeMatteis and Dragon Age are 70 percent partners with two Vietnamese firms in
the West Lake International Tower Company.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 35 words


Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Thursday about travel
to Vietnam misidentified the owner of the cruise ship Club Med 2. The ship is
owned by Club Mediterranee, not Seabourn Cruises.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Guilt For Vietnam

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


In the years 1969 through 1972, when Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger made
policy on Vietnam, 20,492 Americans died in the war. At the end of that time the
United States got out the same way it could have at the beginning: on terms that
led before long to a Communist victory.

President Nixon and Mr. Kissinger understood all along that there was no
feasible way to "win" in Vietnam. They knew that after all the U.S. forces were
gone, a South Vietnamese Army that would not fight was likely to be overwhelmed
before long. But they wanted to delay that denouement for political reasons.

Anyone who doubts that political self-interest dominated Vietnam policy-making
in the Nixon White House should look at the newly published diaries of the late
H. R. Haldeman, its chief of staff. On Dec. 15, 1970, he wrote this entry:

"K came in and the discussion covered some of the general thinking about Vietnam
and the P's big peace plan for next year, which K later told me he does not
favor. He thinks that any pullout next year would be a serious mistake because
the adverse reaction to it could set in well before the '72 elections. He favors
instead a continued winding down and then a pullout right at the fall of '72 so
that if any bad results follow they will be too late to affect the election."

It was the fall of 1972 -- during the election campaign -- when Mr. Kissinger
announced, "Peace is at hand." After further heavy U.S. bombing of North
Vietnam, designed to overcome South Vietnamese resistance to the terms, the
agreement was signed in January 1973. By then Mr. Nixon had been re-elected.

All of that may seem ancient history, but it is not. For in the United States
Senate last week the argument was made that a man who protested those four added
years of the Vietnam War -- a man who thought lives mattered more than politics
-- should therefore be barred from public office.

That attack was made on Sam Brown Jr., whom President Clinton nominated last
November as Ambassador to the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
Republicans delayed the nomination for months in committee and are now
filibustering to keep it from coming to a confirmation vote on the floor.

Sam Brown was a leading activist against the Vietnam War. He was in the centrist
part of the movement, opposing extremist tactics. He headed one of the most
successful protest efforts, the Vietnam War Moratorium in 1969.

Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, denounced Mr. Brown last
week as "a radical anti-war protester" who "publicly supported our Communist
enemies in Vietnam." He said "the Sam Browns of the world are the people who
throughout the cold war opposed what we did to fight Communism."

The attack on Mr. Brown was really an attack on President Clinton. Senator Smith
made that explicitly clear, saying that "many" of Mr. Clinton's "national
security nominees" were "unabashed anti-war activists or radical extremists."

"The President continues to surround himself," Senator Smith said, "with the
type of people he protested with in the golden years of the anti-war movement.
And it is having a devastating effect on the quality and the effectiveness of
our national security policy."

Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, a decorated veteran of the
Vietnam War, said Senator Smith and some of his colleagues were attacking the
right to dissent, "a reverse form of political correctness." And Sam Brown's
dissent, Senator Kerry said, turned out to be right. Even Richard Nixon and
Henry Kissinger eventually "adopted his judgment, which was that we had to get
out."

If people are to be punished for the views they held on Vietnam 25 years ago, it
would be more logical to punish those who were wrong. We would then bar from any
position of public trust persons involved in the Kissinger-Nixon policy that
uselessly sacrificed 20,492 Americans and many times that number of Vietnamese,
North and South. But I am against such bills of political attainder.

In the current Republican mood in Washington, a mood of slash and burn,
philosophical niceties have no place. Shutting off a Senate filibuster requires
60 votes. Two attempts to bring Sam Brown's nomination to a vote failed last
week, the first winning 54 votes and the second 56. Supporters may try again
after the Memorial Day recess. The result will say a lot about the state of
American political life.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 452 words



The Economy

Some old assumptions about inflation may no longer hold. Business is booming at
the Georgia-Pacific linerboard plant near Monticello, Miss., which is running at
beyond 100 percent of its intended capacity. But the plant exhibits few
characteristics of previous boom times. Defying the conventional inflationary
assumptions, American factories appear to be undergoing a profound shift that
finds them doing more with less. [Page A1.]

The Federal Communications Commission is about to overhaul its plan for selling
off radio frequencies covering a new generation of wireless telephone and data
"personal communication services" in an effort to make the licenses more
attractive to bidders. [D1.]

After 12 years of perceived neglect by the Federal Communications Commission,
the role of members of minority groups in broadcasting has moved up on the
agenda as the commission tries to increase minority ownership and employment.
[D1.]

International

Responsibility for millions of dollars in damages from certain types of nuclear
accidents outside the United States could shift from private companies to the
Federal Government, under a draft proposal for a new international nuclear
liability treaty sought by the Clinton Administration. [D1.]

Germany's medical establishment is in turmoil over accusations by the nation's
biggest health insurer that medical supply companies bribed surgeons at public
hospitals to overcharge the national health care system by millions of dollars
annually for artificial heart valves. [D1.]

Six years after Vietnam began changing to a market economy, the country's
scientists have lost their Government subsidies for research and are now
struggling to feed their families. [C9.]

Companies

Farm equipment makers are repeatedly surprising Wall Street lately with sharp
earnings increases, thanks to stronger-than-expected sales of tractors, combines
and other equipment, and following more than a decade of drastic cost-cutting,
losses and consolidation. [D1.]

Forget Karl Malden. Soon, if you leave home without them, you can buy your
American Express travelers checks at the automated teller machine. [D6.]

Markets

International financial markets were mixed in light trading, with exchanges
closed for holidays in the United States and Britain. The dollar was up against
leading European currencies. [D4.]

Today's Columns

Efforts to root out welfare fraud with electronic fingerprinting are generating
renewed interest in companies that make the almost-foolproof systems. Market
Place. [D4.]

Time again to ask 20 questions inspired and provoked by advertising and
marketing. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D7.]

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

G.E. in Vietnam Venture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 101 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 30


The General Electric Company and an Australian company plan to build a
natural-gas power plant and fertilizer factory for $810 million in Vietnam, a
report said today. G.E. will supply gas turbines for the power plant, located 40
miles southeast of Ho Chi Minh City, the Vietnam Investment Review reported in
its current issue. Electricity generated by the plant will supply a nearby
fertilizer factory. G.E. and the Broken Hill Proprietary Company, based in
Melbourne, are establishing a consortium to finance and build the two plants,
which could begin operations by the end of 1998, the review said.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Germans Remember Little Good of Honecker, and Much Evil

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, May 30


Few tears were shed in Germany today over news that Erich Honecker, East
Germany's longtime Communist leader, had died Sunday in Chile.

Politicians and news commentators recalled him as a harsh dictator who built the
Berlin wall, enthusiastically joined the Soviet-led invasion of Czechoslovakia,
and rejected efforts to humanize Communist rule in East Germany.

Even his former comrades had only mixed praise for his role, lamenting that he
had not changed with the passage of time.

Mr. Honecker was deposed in a palace coup in October 1989 after 18 years as the
senior leader of East Germany. He fled to Moscow to avoid prosecution, but was
later sent back to face trial in connection with the deaths of East Germans who
were killed while seeking to flee westward.  In January 1993 he was released
because of his advancing cancer, and flew to Chile to join relatives there.

[Funeral rites were held at a cemetery in Santiago, followed by cremation, The
Associated Press reported. Hundreds there waved red flags.]

"Honecker failed in his political goals," said Dieter Vogel, chief spokesman for
Chancellor Helmut Kohl. "His policies brought suffering to countless people in
Germany."

Konrad Weiss, a film director who was persecuted under Mr. Honecker and who is
now a member of the German Parliament, blamed Mr. Honecker for "turning a great
social utopia into a farce."

"Erich Honecker's tragedy was that he was a victim of persecution who became a
persecutor, a brave antifascist who betrayed the humane dream of freedom,
equality and brotherhood."

But Egon Krenz, who succeeded Mr. Honecker as East German leader, said Mr.
Honecker's freedom of action had been limited by the cold war and his
obligations to the Warsaw Pact. "Honecker was a man of his time, formed by the
circumstances around him," Mr. Krenz said.

The Honecker Solidarity Committee, whose members supported Mr. Honecker during
his trial and exile, issued a statement praising him for helping to stabilize
Central Europe and supporting anticapitalist movements in Vietnam, Cuba,
Nicaragua, Mozambique and Ethiopia.

"The years during which Erich Honecker held high posts, among them General
Secretary and head of state, were years of important developments in East
Germany," the statement said. "But at the same time, he was responsible for
failures and deformations."

Newspaper commentaries also ranged from mildly to harshly critical. One called
Mr. Honecker "a mediocre and unimaginative politician," and another blamed him
for "imprisoning 16 million people and persecuting all among them who dared to
question his orders."

"What death does one wish for a tyrant?" asked the Hannoversche Allgemeine
Zeitung in an editorial.  "Erich Honecker was able to die peacefully with his
family. That is more than he allowed many people whom he saw as 'traitors,'
'escapees from the republic,' or 'enemies of socialism.' "

The mass-circulation Bild published a front-page commentary describing Mr.
Honecker as "a dictator but also a man, a bad one."

"He stole 40 years of life from 16 million people," the commentary said. "He
spied on his entire nation.  His heart was cement."

Neues Deutschland, formerly the official organ of the East German Communist
Party and still sympathetic to leftist causes, said Mr. Honecker had been "firm
in his convictions and obviously untroubled by self-doubts."

"Erich Honecker wanted a world of social equality, and for it he risked nothing
less than his life," the newspaper said. "Honecker's mentality, which never
allowed him to see the growing problems of socialism, is understandable in the
light of history and his biography, although it cannot be excused."

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Recalls Nation's Debt to Veterans

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 13;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


Preparing for his trip to Europe and the 50th anniversary of D-Day, President
Clinton today urged Americans to remember "the high cost of freedom" won by the
veterans of World War II.  But for the second straight year, his Memorial Day
address was interrupted by a protest, this time from a lone heckler, who called
attention to Mr. Clinton's avoidance of military service during the Vietnam War.

"Go back to Oxford, you traitor, draft-dodger," the man shouted from the rear of
an amphitheater at Arlington National Cemetery, where Mr. Clinton was addressing
about 5,000 people. The President, who was a Rhodes Scholar in England when he
took steps to avoid the Vietnam-era draft, appeared somewhat rattled but did not
acknowledge the insult.

A year ago, Mr. Clinton chose the Vietnam Veterans Memorial as the setting for
his major holiday speech, and aides had hoped this year to avoid the jeers that
provoked. But with his schedule for next week filled with visits to American
military cemeteries in Italy, Britain and France, today's episode served as a
reminder of the hostility his not having served in the military could provoke.

Timing of Oxford Trip

Mr. Clinton, who leaves for Europe on Wednesday, has postponed his return visit
to Oxford University so it will fall two days after the June 6 anniversary of
D-Day.

The President himself was born a year after World War II ended, and he said
today that his generation and the one after still knew too little about the
deeds of their parents and grandparents.

"To honor, we must remember," Mr. Clinton said, adding that only then was it
possible to understand "that America is the way it is today because of what
people gave up 50 years ago."

Mr. Clinton began the day with a White House breakfast for veterans and the
unveiling of 10 new Postal Service stamps commemorating D-Day and other crucial
events in World War II.

"Our nation is in your debt," the President told about 200 veterans at an East
Room ceremony that was also attended by Defense Secretary William J. Perry, and
the country's top military commanders, including Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

At the morning event, Mr. Clinton also signed two proclamations, one declaring
today to be Prayer for Peace, Memorial Day and the other setting aside June 6,
when he will be in Normandy, as D-Day National Recognition Day.

Death of a 'Remarkable Man'

Today, the President made only passing reference to Vietnam and his appearance
last year at the black granite memorial, where the crowd was mostly supportive
but some veterans booed, turned their backs or jeered. He remembered that he was
joined there last year by "a remarkable man who became a friend of mine," Lewis
Puller Jr., the Pulitzer-prize-winning Vietnam veteran who killed himself this
month.

Mr. Puller is buried in Arlington National Cemetery, and Mr. Clinton spoke today
of "the countless heroes he has joined and the terrible sacrifices men and women
have been willing to make for this great land."

In the final months of his life, Mr. Puller had joined other veterans in an
effort to draw attention to the fact that like Mr. Clinton, many of his top
appointees at the White House did not serve in the armed forces.

Veterans in White House

A study conducted by John Wheeler, a West Point graduate and Vietnam veteran who
led fund-raising efforts for the Vietnam Memorial, identified only 7 of 66 men
with management posts in the office of the President, or 11 percent, as having
served in the military.

A senior White House official who insisted on anonymity insisted last week that
the true percentage was higher, but declined to produce an official figure,
saying that Office of Personnel Management records were incomplete.

In a letter to Mr. Wheeler last month, Steven M. Hilton, a deputy assistant to
Mr. Clinton, sought to call attention to the pattern across the Administration,
saying that 26 percent of the men appointed by Mr. Clinton to top Presidential
posts were veterans.

That compares with 29 percent in the Bush Administration, according to White
House officials. They point out that some of Mr. Clinton's most senior aides,
including David R. Gergen, the President's counselor, and Samuel R. Berger, the
deputy national security adviser, served in the military.

But critics like Mr. Wheeler say that even the Administration-wide record is
inadequate. They have sought to steer the attention that Mr. Clinton has
bestowed on the military in recent days to win a pledge from him to do more to
make the White House representative of a population in which 48 percent of men
35 and older are military veterans.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Memorial Day was a day of salutes for and by President Clinton.
David Wood of the Veterans of Foreign Wars National Honor Guard saluted as "The
Star-Spangled Banner" was sung at Arlington National Ceremony, where Mr. Clinton
said that remembering of World War II veterans made it possible to understand
"that America is the way it is today because of what people gave up 50 years
ago." (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Scientists Struggle To Survive in a Market Economy

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Science Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


SIX years after Vietnam's leaders began converting the country's economy from a
rigidly controlled form of state socialism to a market economy, scientists have
had to find a new way to carry on their work.

Although the country has modestly prospered since the 1988 decision, the change
brought a collapse of government subsidies for research, and the beginning of a
desperate struggle by Vietnamese scientists to feed their families.

Little if any "pure" research is carried on in Vietnam these days, but
scientists are learning to live by their wits. In an environment where a
scientist in a teaching post generally earns no more than $25 a month
(comparable to the pay of other professionals, who also scramble for a living),
ingenuity is a requisite for survival.

In some of their most successful ventures, chemists and chemical engineers are
banding together to create commercial enterprises -- state-owned manufacturing
enterprises that are allowed to operate almost as if they were private,
profit-making companies.

Among the most successful of these new plants is the Essential Oils Enterprise
(Enteroil) in the Tu Liem suburb of Hanoi -- a semi-independent branch of the
government's National Center for Natural Science and Technology. Using
improvised distillation columns, crystallization chambers and other simple
industrial tools, the engineers and scientists at Enteroil extract volatile
flavoring oils from various costly spices and herbs grown in Vietnam.

Improvising From Crude Supplies

Neither time nor money is available for original research, but the chemists have
created jobs for themselves by applying their technical knowledge toward
improvising complex plant machinery from the crude materials on hand.

Products include cassia oil, which is used as an ingredient in cola beverages,
menthol used in mentholated cigarettes, and citronella, anis and sassafras oils,
used in food products and perfumes.

Dr. Le Trong Vong, general director of the enterprise, says it is the first
privatized manufacturing company to be able to pay its workers regularly each
week. Workers and managers share in the plant's profits, he said.

One of the main problems the organizers faced, they say, was convincing foreign
buyers that they could count on consistent quality in Enteroil's products. Some
visitors to the plant have been startled by its somewhat primitive appearance. A
row of storage tanks in the plant's warehouse, for example, was assembled from
tank trailers detached from abandoned United States Army trucks seized at the
conclusion of the Vietnam War in 1975.

"Our first task in finding customers," said Dr. Nguyen Quyet Chien, "was to
establish a reliable system of quality control."

This meant that each batch of each product had to be sampled and analyzed for
purity, using analytical methods internationally recognized as accurate and
valid.

Seeking American Equipment

"We desperately needed modern laboratory equipment," said Dr. Chien, who
received his doctoral degree from the University of Halle in the former East
Germany. "But because of the United States embargo, we had problems getting the
American apparatus we wanted."

Dr. Chien, who speaks fluent English, gestured toward a bench loaded with
scientific equipment made by Hewlett-Packard and other American companies. "We
had to buy this equipment through third-party intermediaries, and it was
expensive doing it that way," he said, "but the important thing is that we can
now offer our customers proof of the quality of our products."

Although many scientists have abandoned their specialties to become commercial
traders, Dr. Pham Khoi Nguyen, vice director of the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Environment, believes that his government's new emphasis on the
development of national scientific information networks will stimulate
industries and help scientists.

"We need appropriate technology -- the kind that will one day allow us not only
to assemble computers but to manufacture their components," he said. "We are
making progress. And at its last session, our National Assembly enacted a law
requiring each proposed plant to prepare an environmental impact study, so we
are not ignoring our environment as we push forward."

But scientific pursuits that cannot be directly applied to making money are
starved of support.

Effect on Education

Dr. Vu The Long, a scientist at Vietnam's Institute of Archeology in Hanoi,
believes the shortage of money is having a devastating effect on both science
and national education in Vietnam.

"It used to be that everyone in Vietnam had at least 10 years of education, but
today far too many youngsters drop out after a few years, many unable even to
read," he said. "We studied even during the war. When the B-52 raids on Hanoi
got too bad in 1969, our whole class from the University of Hanoi moved into a
forest out of town, where it was safer. We dug holes for shelter and lived on
manioc root, but we worked and studied, because we had heart.

"But now scientists can hardly live on what we earn, and young people tell us,
'What's the point of studying, if you can't make a living from what you learn?'
"

Dr. Long sometimes collaborates with foreign scientists in studies of Vietnamese
fossils found in limestone caves. In a recent project with Dr. Ian Tattersall,
curator of anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History in New York,
and Dr. Jeffrey H. Schwartz, professor of anthropology at the University of
Pittsburgh, Dr. Long and his colleagues identified some previously unknown
species of extinct primates. Their discoveries suggest that early man, Homo
erectus, had a large variety of contemporary competitors, including the huge
extinct ape Gigantopithecus.

"But we have no money to undertake expeditions," Dr. Long said. "At present, the
government is excavating a lot of limestone, partly to widen the main coastal
road, and partly to quarry limestone used as a raw material in the cement
plants. We get to look at some of this limestone for fossils, and that gives us
something to examine," he said.

Along with foreign scientists who try to help colleagues in Vietnam, many
overseas Vietnamese scientists are lending a hand.

Last December, Dr. Tran Thanh Van, a high-energy physicist who lives in Paris,
organized an international conference on particle physics and astrophysics in
Hanoi. Vietnam has no large particle accelerators or major astrophysical
research programs, but the conference was intended as a gesture of support for
Vietnamese science.

"We read of the complaints by American scientists about their lack of money
these days," said a Vietnamese physicist, "and we can only sympathize. We know
what it's like to have to live by hustling. That's how all of us in this country
survive."

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 31, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words



International A3-9

U.N. PRESSING NORTH KOREA
The United Nations Security Council unanimously issued what amounts to a final
warning to North Korea for monitoring of its nuclear fuel, and the United States
asked China to use its influence in the matter.  A1

IN EAST EUROPE, REACTION
News analysis: When the Soviet Union fell, many predicted that Eastern Europe
would quickly become prosperous, but with expectations unmet, country after
country is returning old leaders to power.  A1



ENGLAND'S SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY
With the 50th anniversary of D-Day coming up, much of Britain seems to have been
swept back in a tide of nostalgia and melancholy, remembering hard times and
hard victories of World War II.  A1

NO WOMEN PRIESTS, POPE SAYS
Pope John Paul II reaffirmed his position that women could not be considered for
the priesthood. It was the second action in a week to reinforce an impression of
a papacy wary of feminist intrusion.  A8

IN GAZA, INTO THE FOLD?
In the Gaza Strip, groups that formerly spent their time defying Israeli
authorities must now decide whether to bow to the self-rule authorities, and
some are testing the resolve of the new police force.  A3

BOSNIA TALKS THREATENED
The Bosnian Government threatened to boycott talks that are seen as a test of
whether a truce is possible, saying Bosnian Serbs had failed to withdraw from a
mandated area around the town of Gorazde.  A8

SHOOTING EPISODE IN JAPAN
A shot was fired near the former Prime Minister of Japan by a suspected
right-wing militant, apparently in anger over the former leader's apologies for
Japan's behavior in World War II.  A6

GERMAN BRIBE ACCUSATION
Germany's largest medical insurer accused medical supply companies of bribing
surgeons to overcharge for artificial heart valves.  D1

Rwanda talks set steps toward a cease-fire.  A5

Few tears were shed for the former East German leader.  A9

Soweto Journal: New voices for a new age.  A4

National A10-14

ROSTENKOWSKI SAYS HE WILL FIGHT
Breaking months of silence about a Federal corruption inquiry, Dan Rostenkowski
said "truth is on my side" and vowed to fight an imminent Federal indictment.
A1

Text of Mr. Rostenkowski's statement.  A11

CARDINAL WITH A HIGH PROFILE
John Cardinal O'Connor, a magnet for protest on issues like abortion and
homosexuality, presides over a changed church in a different, more fragmented
city.  A1

Bishop Daily of Brooklyn shares many views with the Cardinal.  B5

NEW WISDOM ON INFLATION
In the current economic expansion, American factories are defying the old
assumptions by running near or at maximum capacity without triggering
inflationary forces.  A1

GUNMAN IN SHOOTING IDENTIFIED
The man who shot Khallid Muhammad, the former spokesman for the Nation of Islam,
was identified as an expelled member of the group who was trying to build a
following.  A10

Khallid Muhammad's list of enemies has been growing for months.  A10

GAINING DIPLOMA, LOSING DOCTOR
Of the students receiving college diplomas this spring, 20 percent will be
uninsured once their college health plan expires, or once they no longer qualify
as dependents.  A12

CLINTON'S WAR GHOSTS RETURN
President Clinton's Memorial Day address was interrupted by a lone heckler who
called attention to Mr. Clinton's avoidance of military service during the
Vietnam War.  A13

NEW YORK VS. A SMALLER ISLAND
Edisto Island Journal: Since taking over an island newspaper, a Village Voice
columnist has run into trouble with a headline on erosion, a subject taken
seriously by the locals.  A13

HOMICIDES RISE IN NEW ORLEANS
Visitors to New Orleans see the city's beguiling facades, but residents are
increasingly obsessed with crime. Murder is booming in New Orleans.  A14

Stanford professors campaign against grade inflation.  A14

Metro Digest B1

A GLUT OF HOSPITAL BEDS
Only a few years after hospital space was at a premium, the number of empty
hospital beds in the New York City area is growing steadily. Reduced demand has
already caused layoffs of almost 2,000 workers.  A1

Sports B6-13

Auto Racing: Penske machine delivers.  B13

Baseball: Yanks lose to White Sox.  B9

Mets routed by Rockies.  B9

Griffey sounds off.  B9

Basketball: Pacers beat Knicks to tie series.  B7

Columns: Vecsey on Knicks.  B7

On Baseball B9

On Pro Basketball B12

Hockey: New level for Leetch.  B7

Canucks are at ease.  B10

Horse Racing: Holy Bull redeemed.  B10

Lacrosse: Princeton takes title.  B6

SportsPeople B6

Tennis: Sunny day for Ivanisevic.  B13

Science Times C1-10

Researchers are pursuing genetic attacks on the AIDS virus.  C1

An early sedentary group domesticated pigs before crops.  C1

Miscoding in the brain is seen as the basis of false memories.  C1

The director of AIDS research takes a deliberate approach.  C3

New technique may help solve a mystery about songbirds.  C4

Personal Computers C5

Peripherals C7

Q&A C8

Vietnam's scientists struggle to survive.  C9

Panel proposes U.S. join Europeans in particle accelerator project.  C10

Business Digest D1

Fashion Page A15

Togs for working out, or maybe just for going out.

Patterns

By Design

Obituaries D9

Ezra Taft Benson, president of the Mormon Church.

Sonny Sharrock, jazz guitarist.

Arts/Entertainment C13-16

Backstage at Ballet Theater.  C13

Booksellers' convention.  C13

Anti-gun announcements.  C15

Spain debates opera project.  C16

Music: Oregon at Symphony Space.  C16

Dance: Celebrating the Lindy.  C16

Role debuts at City Ballet.  C16

Books: "The Confirmation Mess," by Stephen L. Carter.  C15

Television: Following a true drama.  C16

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

The reformer vanishes.

Cocaine injustice.

Getting to know Judge Breyer.

Letters

Russell Baker: The danger stage.

A. M. Rosenthal: Beijing's new prisoner.

Rob Nixon: White farms, black claims.

Gary Chapman: The high-tech gravy train.

Chronicle A14

Chess C11

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

INDICTMENT OF A CONGRESSMAN: THE SUCCESSOR;
Inheriting the Helm of a Vital Panel

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


After 32 years in Congress, 13 of them in the shadow of the larger-than-life Dan
Rostenkowski, the relatively obscure Sam M. Gibbons today became acting chairman
of the Ways and Means Committee, the most powerful panel in the House of
Representatives.

Mr. Gibbons, who has been on the losing side of previous leadership battles in
the House, has long aspired to the chairmanship. But in the end, the 74-year-old
Tampa Bay Congressman ascended on the basis of seniority, a system he once
deplored. Once Mr. Rostenkowski was indicted, the title of acting chairman went
automatically to the person next in line. Had there been a vote, some said
privately, Mr. Gibbons would probably have lost.

A courtly and somewhat contrary Southerner, the affable Mr. Gibbons lacks the
legendary deal-making and politicking skills of his predecessor. His reputation
is that of a loner; he has never been called an insider. Not at the center of
power, he has had little chance to bestow favors on colleagues; as a result, few
representatives owe him anything in return.

But just because his style differs from Mr. Rostenkowski's does not mean that
Mr. Gibbons cannot succeed as chairman. "The question," a top Congressional aide
said, "is how well can he move and motivate the committee? Given Rostenkowski's
reluctance to share power, very few members have had a tryout, so it's hard to
say."

Ready for Command

Mr. Gibbons, who has headed the trade subcommittee, said he was ready to take
the helm of the full committee.

"I don't see how I could be any better prepared, frankly," he said in an
interview in his office. On the walls were photographs showing the evolution of
the Ways and Means Committee over the years, with a slowly aging Mr. Gibbons
steadfastly to the right of the slowly aging chairman.

"I love the work," he said, "and I think I would enjoy the challenges that it
would throw at me." The committee writes all tax legislation and covers most of
the budget's biggest spending programs, including welfare, Social Security and
Medicare.

On health care, the central legislation before the committee, Mr. Gibbons
initially supported a system in which a single payer, the Government, would pay
virtually all the bills. But after realizing that such an approach had little
political support -- and in his desire to appear more accommodating to his
colleagues as the chairmanship loomed -- Mr. Gibbons came out four-square for
President Clinton's health plan.

Where Mr. Rostenkowski is a facilitator, Mr. Gibbons is perceived as a man of
firmly held convictions. He is one of Congress's staunchest defenders of free
trade. He has also long despaired of the Federal income tax system as
cumbersome, complex and unfair and has outspokenly advocated its overhaul.

"He tends to try to bring people to where he is, rather than finding the
center," the aide said.

James Corman, a former Democratic Congressman from California who served on the
Ways and Means Committee, said: "Sam will have a disadvantage that Danny does
not in that he's starting from scratch as chairman. A chairman builds loyalties,
and there's no way you can do that without being chair. It will take him a
little time to build up those chits."

A Lobbyist in the Family

Another drawback in amassing those chits is Mr. Gibbons's relationship with his
son Clifford, a Washington lobbyist whose corporate clients are keenly
interested in Ways and Means affairs and who lobbies his father's committee.
Clifford Gibbons has also organized fund-raising events for his father's
re-election campaigns.

"He doesn't lobby me," Sam Gibbons said flatly, waving away any suggestion of
even the appearance of impropriety. He also said that as chairman he had no
intention of setting any strictures for himself or his son, because they did not
talk business. "I don't know who his clients are," the father said.

Of his son's lobbying committee members, Mr. Gibbons added: "They're all grown
people. If they don't want to talk to him, they don't have to."

The Wall Street Journal and the St. Petersburg Times in Florida have reported
details of the family relationship, including instances in which the father has
changed positions on issues after concerned corporations hired the son as a
lobbyist. Federal Election Commission reports show that some of Clifford
Gibbons's clients have contributed to Sam Gibbons's campaigns.

While Sam Gibbons sees nothing wrong, others do.

"The combination of lobbying and campaign contributions creates a nexus that is
completely unacceptable, even by Washington standards," said Ellen Miller,
executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics, a watchdog group based
in Washington. "Mr. Gibbons senior is going to have to show some level of
sensitivity to this if he's going to be a credible chair."

Most Ways and Means Committee members receive substantial donations from
corporate political action committees, but Mr. Gibbons receives a larger share
than most. "His financial profile looks like that of a Republican," Ms. Miller
said.

A Hybrid, Politically

His political profile is more mixed. A liberal on most social issues, Mr.
Gibbons voted for the government to provide abortions to military personnel
overseas; he also voted to require a seven-day waiting period to buy a handgun.
The Consumer Federation of America has consistently rated him highly, while the
Chamber of Commerce and various anti-tax groups rate him rather low.

He is the author of the guaranteed student loan program and initiated individual
retirement accounts. But he said he is proudest of standing up for free trade,
adding, "America has really profited from the policies that I've enunciated."

The only remaining member of the House to have parachuted behind enemy lines on
D-Day, Mr. Gibbons now tends toward caution about sending American troops into
combat. He opposed United States intervention in the Persian Gulf in 1991, even
though his Florida district has an important military command center.

The vote he most regrets, Mr. Gibbons said, was for the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution in 1964, which opened the way for President Lyndon B. Johnson to wage
a war in Vietnam.

Although Mr. Gibbons eventually parted with Johnson over Vietnam, he was one of
his earliest allies, managing Johnson's 1964 Presidential campaign in Tampa and
shepherding his anti-poverty legislation through the House. When Johnson chose
him for that task, Mr. Gibbons said, the President said, "I like you, Gibbons,
because you can talk Southern and vote Northern."

Mr. Gibbons voted for the Voting Rights Act of 1965, for anti-poverty programs
and for a 1966 open-housing bill that was killed in the Senate, but he voted
against the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968.

"They didn't need my vote," he said of those two landmark bills, adding that he
and the House leadership understood that he "couldn't survive that vote in my
part of the world."

Though Mr. Gibbons and Mr. Rostenkowski have sat next to each other for years,
and though Mr. Gibbons says he will seek Mr. Rostenkowski's guidance as the
health-care bill progresses, the two men are not particularly close. Depending
on what happens to Mr. Rostenkowski, Mr. Gibbons said he hoped to run for
permanent chairman of the committee.

NAME: Sam M. Gibbons

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The indictment of Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois,
changed the power structure of the Ways and Means Committee. Replacing Mr.
Rostenkowski, right, as chairman was Sam M. Gibbons, center. Sitting with them
at a recent committee hearing was Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of Manhattan.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Ordered to Reinstate Nurse Forced Out as a Lesbian

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 1


A Federal judge in Seattle ordered the military today to reinstate a highly
decorated nurse who was forced out of the Washington State National Guard after
acknowledging that she is a lesbian.

The judge, Thomas S. Zilly of Federal District Court, ordered Col. Margarethe
Cammermeyer back to the job she held in 1992, ruling that the military's policy
on homosexuals at that time was based solely on prejudice and was a clear
violation of the Constitution's equal-protection clause.

At a hastily convened news conference in Seattle today, Colonel Cammermeyer
beamed with delight and told reporters: "I feel a little bit like a general who
has won a war. There is exoneration."

Judge Zilly's decision dealt with the Pentagon's old policy on homosexuals, not
the new regulations that Congress and the Clinton Administration agreed on last
year. The new rules permit homosexuals in the military as long as they remain
silent about their sexual orientation.

But the new "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue" rules share many similarities
with the old ones, and the Administration is defending the old policy in court
to set precedents that would make challenges to the new policy more difficult.
Judge Zilly is the latest of several Federal judges to find the old policy
unconstitutional, raising concern in the Administration that the same analysis
could be applied to the new policy.

Pentagon officials said tonight that they were reviewing Judge Zilly's decision
and considering whether to appeal.

Gay-rights advocates today hailed the ruling as one of a growing number of
Federal court challenges to the old policy that, collectively, could cut away at
the undergirding of both old and new rules.

"This is yet another statement from the courts that they're looking at the
constitutionality of this policy, and it's failing the test," said William
Rubenstein, director of the American Civil Liberties Union's Lesbian and Gay
Rights Project.

Indeed, Judge Zilly struck at a basic assumption in the old and the new policy:
that homosexual orientation signifies an intent to engage in homosexual conduct.
The judge concluded "there is no rational basis for the Government's underlying
contention that homosexual orientation equals 'desire or propensity to engage'
in homosexual conduct."

Judge Zilly ordered the National Guard to expunge any record of Colonel
Cammermeyer's sexual orientation in order to prevent the military from taking
any further action against her when she returns to service.

While Federal district judges around the country have shown some support for
striking down the ban on homosexuals, appeals courts are only just beginning to
consider the cases. In the next few years, these cases are ultimately expected
to reach the United States Supreme Court, which would have the final say.

Sympathy of Commanders

The United States Courts of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit and for
the Ninth Circuit, which covers nine Western states, are two of the most
important appeals courts in the country and both are expected to issue decisions
in the next few months.

Colonel Cammermeyer's case drew special attention because of the way the
military discovered she was homosexual and the widespread support among her
commanders to ignore the ban and let her stay on duty.

Even Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who championed the move on Capitol
Hill to maintain restrictions on openly gay service members, expressed sympathy
with Colonel Cammermeyer's plight.

During a top-secret security clearance review in 1989 that was required for
admission to the Army War College, Colonel Cammermeyer was asked about her
sexual orientation, and she told the interviewer she was gay. Under the
Administration's new policy, that question is no longer asked. And if it was,
she would not be required to answer.

But under the old policy, her statement was ground for discharge. Even so,
Colonel Cammermeyer's superiors at the Washington State National Guard told her
she could continue to serve as the guard's chief nurse unless the Army
Department pressed the issue.

Bronze Star and More

Indeed, Colonel Cammermeyer's record was the stuff of recruiting posters. When
she was a child, her family fled the Nazis after they invaded her native Norway
in World War II. After coming to the United States, she joined the Army as a
nurse in 1961.

She was awarded the Bronze Star after serving 15 months in Vietnam, supervising
a hospital for wounded and dying soldiers. In 1985, she was chosen from 34,000
candidates nationwide as the Veterans Administration's Nurse of the Year.

Colonel Cammermeyer, who is 52, served as chief nurse for three years after she
admitted her homosexuality, while military review boards debated her fate. Gov.
Booth Gardner of Washington appealed to Defense Secretary Dick Cheney to retain
Colonel Cammermeyer.

But on June 11, 1992, Colonel Cammermeyer was dismissed with an honorable
discharge, apparently becoming the highest-ranking officer to be discharged
solely because of homosexual orientation. At the Washington National Guard
headquarters, Colonel Cammermeyer wept, as did her commanding officer, Maj. Gen.
Gregory P. Barlow. She then vowed to fight the military's ban.

Fear as Basis for Policy

She was vindicated, at least for now, in Judge Zilly's ruling. "The Government
has discriminated against Colonel Cammermeyer solely on the basis of her status
as a homosexual and has failed to demonstrate a rational basis for doing so,"
the judge wrote in a 51-page ruling.

Judge Zilly, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, noted that military
experts "conceded that their justifications for the policy are based on
heterosexual members' fear and dislike of homosexuals." He added, "Mere negative
attitudes, or fear, are constitutionally impermissible bases for discriminatory
governmental policies."

Since her discharge, Colonel Cammermeyer has worked as a clinical specialist at
a Veterans Administration hospital in Tacoma, Wash. She has also written a book
on her experience that is to be published in October by Viking.

In a telephone interview, Colonel Cammermeyer said that, barring an appeal by
the Government, she was looking forward to continuing her work at the Veterans
Administration hospital, but in her old National Guard rank. "I have no
reservations about going back, but I know I'll have butterflies," she said.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer after the ruling yesterday.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Dark Moral Tale of Old New York

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words



The Waterworks
By E. L. Doctorow
253 pages. Random House. $23.

The inspiration for E. L. Doctorow's haunting new novel, "The Waterworks,"
clearly comes from a mysteriously sinister four-page story, "The Water Works,"
which appeared in the author's 1984 collection, "Lives of the Poets." In the
story, the narrator follows a black-bearded man to an artificial reservoir
somewhere north of a city, and watches as the man pulls a drowned child from the
water and drives away in a carriage.

If you take the elements of the story, which appears in slightly altered form as
a dream late in the novel, you have the foundation of the mystery unfolded by
one McIlvaine, a New York City newspaper editor who describes a strange series
of events that took place in 1871. As McIlvaine tells it, early in that year his
most brilliant freelance, Martin Pemberton, announced one day that his father
was still living.

McIlvaine understood him to be speaking in general, of the times, for
Pemberton's father, Augustus, was a rich war profiteer and slaver who had died a
year earlier, yet whose evil spirit McIlvaine saw reflected in the way the
corrupt ring of boss William Marcy Tweed kept its political stranglehold on the
city. But when Martin stopped showing up for book-reviewing assignments and
McIlvaine started looking into his whereabouts, he learned that the young man
had meant what he said quite literally: twice Martin had recently caught sight
of his father riding with other men in a carriage.

McIlvaine then enlisted the help of Edmund Donne, a rare honest police captain,
and together they picked up the trail that Martin had followed in the search he
had undertaken for his father. To make a fascinatingly ominous mystery seem cut
and dried, they learned that instead of dying, Augustus Pemberton had struck a
Faustian bargain with a menacingly brilliant doctor whose experiments involved
the orphaned children of the city. Thus the dark vision of Mr. Doctorow's short
story is expanded into a nightmare from which Martin Pemberton barely awakes.

Now, without giving away too much, one can describe "The Waterworks" on one
level as a Gothic tale with the same concern about amoral science that moved
Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley to write "Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus."
But Mr. Doctorow's novel is far from a period piece.

First, the modern elements of the narrative rescue it from datedness: "I want to
keep the chronology of things but at the same time to make their pattern
sensible, which means disrupting the chronology," explains McIlvaine at one
point. "After all, there is a difference between living in some kind of
day-to-day crawl through chaos, where there is no hierarchy to your thoughts,
but a raucous equality of them, and knowing in advance the whole conclusive
order . . . which makes narration . . . suspect."

Then, the novel's themes do have their contemporary relevance. Mr. Doctorow is
not so much commenting on 19th-century science as on any technology undertaken
without moral guidelines, and the victimized children could be the innocent
homeless of any era. As for the period, which the narrator describes as a time
of recovery from the Civil War: this has parallels in the present post-Vietnam,
post-cold-war era, when the country's future commitments have still to be
defined.

Yet neither the Gothic plot nor the contemporary thematic parallels are what
lend this novel its unusual vitality. What keeps the reader absorbed from page
to page is the author's marvelous historical imagination, which conjures an era
out of details like the red and blue papers that people used to put in their
windowpanes on the Fourth of July, like the cold showers used in morgues to keep
the cadavers fresh and like the anti-Darwinian Sunday sermons that once
constituted Monday-morning news.

And what lends the narrative its tension is a familiar quality in Mr. Doctorow's
fiction, namely the threat he perceives in untrammeled power. In these pages
power breeds conspiracy, which battens on the innocent, almost as if New York
City's industrial vitality were the dynamo in Henry Adams's "Education" bent on
electrocuting helpless children. As Mc Ilvaine sums up what he and the police
captain eventually expose: "So I will not say Donne did not appreciate the depth
of the conspiracy -- that it was not only a concordance of wealth, and
government, and science but a profound . . . derangement of the natural order of
fathers and sons. There was a more fathomless threat there than to Christianity
. . . that left my eyes blasted to peer into it."

Opposing this derangement is the curious sense of peace that Mc Ilvaine's old
age seems to promise. Near the end of his story, he offers a sort of apology for
his fulminations. "I'm an old man now and I have to acknowledge that reality
slips, like the cogs in a wheel." He concludes, "And time estranges us from the
belief we are all given -- the pious and blasphemous alike -- that we are born
to live in pleasure or pain, happiness or despair, but always in great moral
consequence."

Yet there is always the city, humming with its conspiratorial power.  On the
final page of his story, Mc Ilvaine imagines he can put a stop to it all. He
ventures downtown on an icy winter day and finds the city inert. "Of course it
was Sunday, the day of rest. But my illusion was that the city had frozen in
time. All our mills and foundries and presses were still . . . our lathes and
our boilers . . . our steam engines and pulleys and pumps and forges." And: "Our
brickworks . . . our makers of ink and our paper mills . . . our book publishers
. . . our mowers and harvesters and sowers and reapers -- all still, unmoving,
stricken, as if the entire city of New York would be forever encased and frozen,
aglitter and God-stunned."

But Mr. Doctorow's eloquently troubling evocation of our past cannot end on this
static note. The narrator would like to leave us with this illusion of his world
come to a stop, "though in reality we would soon be driving ourselves up
Broadway in the new Year of Our Lord, 1872." And presumably onward into a
fearful modern age of unfettered power and conspiracy.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of E. L. Doctorow. (Lisa Garcia/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Vet Suicide Didn't Drink at End

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


To the Editor:

Much has been written and said about the life and death by suicide May 11 of
Lewis B. Puller Jr. (news article, May 14), veterans' advocate and Pulitzer
Prize winner for "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet." Most of it has
been accurate.

Unfortunately, at least one significant aspect of Lewis Puller's life and death
has been reported and discussed incorrectly. Lewis Puller had not resumed
drinking before he died.

I have lived next to Lewis Puller and his family since 1981. Our homes have been
virtually interchangeable. My wife and I were with him several times a week
almost every week since we became neighbors and friends. That was especially so
during the last year of his life, when he struggled mightily with important
decisions in and about his life. During all that time, Lewis Puller never had a
drink of alcohol. Nor had he taken drugs since he left the hospital in early
February.

It is important to the memory and legacy of Lewis B. Puller Jr. that his life
and all it entailed and stood for be remembered accurately. But it is essential
for those who remain, who struggle daily against the demands of alcohol or other
drugs, that they know that there once was a man who found the strength to avoid
those demons -- even while he contended every day with other serious burdens of
a kind that almost none of us must face.

Lewis B. Puller Jr.'s decision to leave us was not made in a fog of drugs or
alcohol. His autopsy confirms that.

JOHN N. HANSON
Mount Vernon, Va., May 25, 1994

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton, in Rome, Starts Tour of Europe to Burnish Image

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1351 words

DATELINE: ROME, Thursday, June 2


Bill Clinton began the second major European trip of his Presidency today in
much the same way he began the first, still struggling to convince the principal
allies of the United States that he is a worthy leader of the world's only fully
functioning superpower.

Air Force One landed at Ciampino Airport, southeast of Rome, a few minutes after
midnight, and Mr. Clinton will plunge into a characteristically ambitious
program this morning.

The centerpiece of the eight-day journey will be the 50th anniversary of the
epic amphibious landing in Normandy, France, on June 6, 1944, by British,
Canadian and American forces, for which commemorative events worthy of Cecil B.
de Mille have been planned. He will also mark the capture of Rome by Allied
armies two days earlier.

There will also be substantive discussions along the way with Italian, British
and French leaders and with Pope John II, who left the hospital only a few days
ago after surgery for a broken thigh.

About Clinton the Man

If the official agendas focus on matters of high policy like the slaughter in
Rwanda, strife in Bosnia and nuclear weapons in North Korea, a more personal
question will preoccupy many of the Europeans: will Mr. Clinton, who was elected
on a promise to pay more attention to domestic policy and less to foreign
affairs, grasp the baton of international leadership like every President since
Franklin D. Roosevelt, or does he represent a reversion to a more inward-looking
America?

At home, the President's advisers believe, there will inevitably be comparisons
to Ronald Reagan, who shone so brightly on the Normandy stage 10 years ago.

But in Europe, it is the future that preoccupies the politicians and policy
analysts. Over the weekend, European newspapers made much of Mr. Clinton's
acknowledgment of the "relentless criticism" of his foreign policies, and of his
pledge to begin "changing whatever it is that is not inspiring people's
confidence in me."

From the European perspective, what is missing is a clear Presidential
definition of the national interests of the United States and what he will do to
protect them.

Twinges of Nostalgia

"When he came to Europe last summer," one foreign minister said this week, "he
said all the right things. But since then the sounds coming out of Washington
have not been reassuring. Instead of decisive leadership, we have seen
confusion, contradiction and delay."

A senior civil servant conceded that "there is a considerable nostalgia for the
good old days of Kissinger, Eagleburger, Scowcroft and Baker" -- the mainstays
of the foreign-affairs teams of recent Republican Administrations.

Many recognize that there are no easy answers to Rwanda or Bosnia on either side
of the Atlantic. But even a generally sympathetic commentary like that today in
The Independent in London said "Washington has been its own worst enemy" in its
dizzying inconsistency on issues like Haiti.

However much Mr. Clinton is able to counter such impressions, his sternest test
will come on D-Day at Pointe du Hoc, the cliff commanding the American invasion
beaches that was scaled by a brave and audacious Ranger force. On that spot 10
years ago, Mr. Reagan -- one of the great masters of American political theater
-- staged a boffo performance that was repeated, on tape, through his 1984
re-election campaign.

Tough Act to FollowThe Generation Gap<that's the blurb

It will not be easy for Mr. Clinton to match Mr. Reagan, and the President knows
it.

Not only was Mr. Reagan's whole political personality perfect for the part; he
was the right age, too, a member of the World War II generation well situated to
remind his countrymen of the heroism of Normandy, even if he himself spent the
war years making training films on a Hollywood sound stage.

Mr. Clinton, by contrast, was born the year after the global conflict ended.
When war confronted his generation, in Vietnam, he managed to avoid service, and
he wrote to his draft board from Oxford University that he loathed the military.

As President, he has had rocky relations with the military, and although 30,000
veterans and their families are expected in Normandy, many others have said they
would pass them up because of their antipathy toward Mr. Clinton's views.

To soften the comparison between Mr. Clinton's wartime sojourn amid the dreamy
spires of Oxford and the bloody experience of young men on the beaches of
northern France, Mr. Clinton decided not to receive an honorary degree from
Oxford during his time in England on June 4 and 5. Instead, he will stop there
on his way home from Paris on June 8, after the festivities are over.

Characteristically, the President plans to try to turn the disadvantage of his
nonmilitary background into an asset. His purpose, a member of his staff said
last month, will be to convince members of his generation and those younger than
he how much they owe to their parents and grandparents and their battlefield
sacrifices.

Before leaving Washington on Wednesday for Rome, the President sought to set out
his theme, stopping at the 1st Infantry Division monument just outside the White
House grounds and quoting the outfit's motto, "No mission too difficult, no
sacrifice too great, duty first."

The Big Red One, as the division is known, was one of two that hit Omaha Beach,
where the fighting was fiercest, in the early hours of D-Day. (The other was the
29th Infantry Division.) It was also the first into France during World War I,
one of the first into Vietnam and the first to breach Iraqi defenses during the
gulf war.

The Strength of Allies

Mr. Clinton pointed to the partnerships between the United States, Britain and
other nations in World War II as the model for those who seek a more democratic
world after the cold war. Urging patience, he borrowed a line from F.D.R.: "Our
successes will not come with rushing speed, but we must see our battles to the
end."

"Fifty years ago on this day and at this hour," he said, "the men and women of
America saved democracy in Europe and changed the course of history for the
world. Wherever you are then, I hope you will have some time to look at the
ceremonies. I hope you will think about how we will honor their legacy by
carrying it on. That is the greatest honor of all."

Once he reaches Normandy and his every word and action are broadcast to the
world, Mr. Clinton will have the chance to prove he can play the visionary.

The Presidency is really two jobs wrapped in one. He has excelled, especially on
the domestic side, when concentrating on politics and policy -- the prime
ministerial role, in the old European model. But so far, unlike Mr. Reagan and
John F. Kennedy, he has had trouble playing the unifying, uplifting role that
was once played by the crowned heads of Europe.

A Diligent Student

Mr. Clinton has risen to such challenges before, winning plaudits where some had
expected failure. He did it on his first trip to Europe and his first economic
summit conference, at his first big meeting with Russian leaders and at his
pioneering Pacific Rim summit conference in Seattle.

For this trip, he has made unusually thoroughly preparations, undertaking an
extensive reading program and asking a group of veterans and historians to give
him a detailed briefing last week. To a man, they were impressed by the
seriousness of Mr. Clinton's purpose.

"I was struck by his modesty, honesty and simplicity," said Paul Fussell, the
author of "The Great War and Modern Memory" (Oxford University Press). "He knows
nothing about war and he knows he ought to know what was happening in Normandy.
He kept saying, 'God, I'm learning a lot from you.' "

But many a political land mine awaits the President, starting today.

He will meet the new Italian Prime Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, whose Government
includes neo-Fascist ministers, and he will have a private session with the
Pope. Vatican officials have promised that the Pope will challenge the
Administration's push for abortion rights in international population-control
programs.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "SCHEDULE: The President's D-Day Trip"

June 2: Arrives in Rome for meeting with Italian leaders and Pope John Paul II.

June 3: Arrives in Nettuno, Italy, to commemorate the Allied liberation of
Italy.

June 4: Arrives in England. Visits Cambridge, site of the largest U.S. cemetery
inEngland. Meets with Prime Minister John Major in London; dines inPortsmouth
with Allied leaders.

June 5: Attends ceremony inPortsmouth commemorating beginning of the D-Day
operation.

June 6: Arrives in Colleville-sur-Mer, France, for D-Day memorial ceremonies.

June 7: Arrives in Paris; addresses National Assembly.

June 8: Goes to Oxford, England, to receive a honorary degree, then to
Washington.

Map of Europe showing route of President Clinton's tour.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Now, the Small Generation

BYLINE: By Rich Cohen;   Rich Cohen is a contributing editor at Rolling Stone.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 3;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 674 words


Megan has the use of 72 words. Of these 72 words, at least 10 are dedicated to
colors, like red, blue, green, yellow and orange. Though Megan can say orange,
she cannot really distinguish that color from the color blue and sometimes, when
looking at a clear summer sky, she points and says "orange." As far as orange
juice goes, she likes it only when mixed with apple juice and calls both of
these things "milk."

Megan, who recently turned 18 months, is part of a new generation, a group born
after the Rodney King affair but before Rwanda, after Desert Storm but before
"testilying," a generation that has known no President other than Bill Clinton
and seems likely to call Hillary Clinton mother.

Even more than Generation X, that cynical group of 20-somethings currently
featured on the cover of Newsweek, for whom divorce really is Vietnam, and even
more than the kids still adrift in junior high cafeterias, a group that New York
magazine recently dubbed Generation Y, kids like Megan McCartle (not her real
name) seem lost and confused and just not very smart. And though a proper tag
has yet to be found, it somehow doesn't seem fitting to affix them with a
letter, such as Z, since so few of them can spell even their own names. To
reflect what they suggest about this country's future and backward slide in the
global standings, it seems best to call them by their distinguishing physical
characteristic: The Small Generation.

Even more disturbing than the Small Generation's lack of motor skills are their
recreational habits. This is a group that has turned away from traditional
drugs, such as marijuana and heroine, drugs we know something about, in favor of
exotic household substances. And we're not just talking about glue. A few weeks
ago, Megan was left alone in her playroom with a six-pack of Play-Doh. Twenty
minutes later, when her parents returned, the blue and the red containers were
empty, and Megan was bug-eyed.

And what about dreams? Each night, this young generation is haunted by cryptic
messages. They talk about these nocturnal sojourns in only the vaguest of terms
("Flying, Mommy"). Still, they say just enough to piece together a rough pattern
-- a pattern of distortion and fantasy.

In a recent dream, Megan was a dog. A dirty dog. A dog so dirty she went
unrecognized by her owners, and was forced to wander the earth alone. Of course,
this says a great deal about isolation, about loneliness, about loss. But most
telling was that moment when the dog had something to say, something important.
She opened her dog mouth and out came a billion jelly beans. Just how important
is candy to this new generation?

The Small Generation shows real discomfort when presented with the American way
of life. Not only have they shunned traditional careers (almost none of them
work), they have a sailor's disregard for hygiene. They pick their noses and
soil their briefs and cry about it, expecting someone else to clean up the mess.

When presented with such issues, Megan turns away. She doesn't want to talk
about it. She wants to talk about something else. Her mind wanders. She sits
there in her playroom, staring out a window. She is surrounded by Play-Doh
empties, by Magic Markers with the smell all gone -- right up Megan's nose.
She's mad at Mommy, she loves Daddy. She's mad at Daddy, she loves Mommy. She is
fickle and doesn't know why. She's an American woman and cannot read, and to her
the basic tenets of mathematics are as veiled and mysterious as her own mind.

Why did you do it, Megan? Why did you pick up the cat by its tail? Why have you
soiled yourself again, Megan? Why have you let America down? How many bombs will
it take until America learns humility, Megan? Why don't you talk back? Why don't
you talk? Why did you eat all the Flintstones vitamins? Why are you letting all
the mommies and daddies and sports writers and sociologists and anchormen of
this world down again, Megan? Why are you ignorant of geopolitical reality?
Megan, why are you so darn small?

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Contributes To Polio Eradication

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, June 2


Vietnam's success against polio bolsters hopes of eradicating the disease
worldwide by the year 2000, health officials said today.

Nearly 10 million Vietnamese children, about 85 percent of those under age 5,
were vaccinated against polio during nationwide immunization days last year, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported.

In 1988, the World Health Organization set its sights on eliminating polio from
the world by the year 2000. Given recent progress in China, Laos and the
Philippines as well, health officials believe that success is at hand.

"We are on line to eradicate polio by the end of the century," said Dr. Nick
Ward of the W.H.O., which works with the C.D.C. on international health issues.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend;
'Alice' in Wasteland: It's Really a Wonder

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


"Great Books" begins its second season tomorrow with a look at "Alice in
Wonderland." The talking heads include, of course, the Red Queen, who wants to
chop off everybody else's.

Using animation, puppets, re-enactments, photographs from Victorian times, the
famous illustrations of John Tenniel and whatnot, the program tells the story of
Charles L. Dodgson, who became Lewis Carroll, and of Alice Liddell, who became
simply Alice. The relationship of a lovely child and an unmarried professor of
mathematics given to drawing nude prepubescent girls invites speculation about
his sexual longings and propensities. They are alluded to here, but propriety
reigns.

The hourlong, steadily interesting program is appropriately appreciative of
Carroll's accomplishment. The experts on hand, mainly from the Lewis Carroll
Society of North America, a sort of fan club, offer no revolutionary thoughts
but touch on many themes. (Grace Slick, of the Jefferson Airplane, is given time
for her opinions, too.) Is "Alice" a fantasy, a psychedelic trip, an exploration
of dreams, a satire on Victoriana, an exercise in the uses of logic, an account
of growing up? Sure, all this and more. Donald Sutherland narrates and John Hurt
speaks Carroll's and Alice's inimitable words.

"Great Books," which belongs to an endangered species on television, continues
next week with H. G. Wells's "War of the Worlds." Keeping a book program on
television must be a world-class war of its own.

'Investigative Reports: Naked Washington'
A&E, tonight at 9 P.M.

In the course of this report on the news media's treatment of Presidents, from
Camelot to Vietnam to Watergate to Iran-Contra to Whitewater, Bill Kurtis
interviews White House press corps heavies and Washington players past and
present. Included are the sometime Nixon confidant John D. Erlichman, who says
he considered killing himself when press pressures grew oppressive; the Reagan
image maker Michael K. Deaver, and the current press secretary, Dee Dee Myers,
who had better watch her sound bites. She is heard saying tonight, "You have to
try not to get caught." Maybe she was thinking about how much easier a press
secretary's job was in John F. Kennedy's time, when the boss's undercover
activities went uncovered.

The program is preceded by an hourlong profile of Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who
has had his own messy encounters with the news hounds.

'Coming and Going'
PBS, tonight
(Channel 13, New York, at 9)

This three-part celebration of transportation begins tonight with long haulers:
ship, truck and freight train. If you've been wondering whether anything
actually gets where it is supposed to anymore, and on time to boot, "Over the
Long Haul" provides some examples, with due tribute to the people who do the
job. Next week "Coast to Coast" looks at the lure of cross-country travel, and
the final program, "Road to the Future," tells of efforts to deal with problems
created by the automobile.

Among the major movers behind "Coming and Going" are the United Steel Workers of
America and several big steel producers, the Laborers' International Union of
North America and the UPS Foundation. When it comes to mutual back slapping,
capital and labor can evidently cooperate. Wonder why the Teamsters didn't kick
in.

Great Books
Alice in Wonderland
The Learning Channel, tomorrow night at 10

"Alice" segment written and produced by Eugenie Vink. For Great Books: Denise
Schrier Cetta, associate producer; Nancy LeBrun, series producer; Jonathan Ward,
senior producer. For Discovery Productions: Anne Hubbell, associate producer;
Tim Cowling, executive producer. John B. Ford is the executive producer for the
Learning Channel. A presentation of Discovery Productions in association with
Cronkite Ward & Company.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

How Big an Army, for What?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 414 words


With the end of the cold war, armies everywhere are slimming down to match
shrunken threats and changing the way they prepare for battle, as this page
noted on Monday. But the U.S. Army has yet to adjust sufficiently to the
radically altered circumstances.

Although it is demobilizing eight divisions, the Army still wants more troops
than it needs, largely because it is preparing to re-fight the last war, not the
most likely next war.

The Army wants the capability to wage two Iraq-size regional wars at the same
time -- without having to rely on America's allies. That requires substantial
ground forces: 10 divisions on active duty and 6 in the reserves, plus 3 Marine
brigades. Even so, these plans could leave the Army ill prepared for military
contingencies like peacekeeping, which require different strategy, force
structure, weapons and training.

Demobilization is greatest in Europe, where the Red Army has come apart and
Germany is considering cutting its army to 200,000 troops, down 40 percent from
341,000 in 1989, even after absorbing 120,000 soldiers from East Germany. The
U.S. Army is cutting its active duty personnel by a third to just over 500,000.
But it is slow to rethink its role in ways that would permit still steeper
cutbacks.

The Army long prepared for war against a tank-heavy, artillery-laden Red Army in
Europe. In waging war with Iraq it was fortunate to face a small-scale version
of that threat, complete with Soviet equipment and Soviet-style tactics -- and
in desert terrain ideal for U.S. maneuverability, reconnaissance and air power.

The Army's success in Iraq only reinforced its conviction that it should rely on
tanks and artillery and prepare for more large-scale set-piece battles. The Army
now plans to fight a resurgent Iraq and North Korea at the same time. That
sounds like preparing for one massive ground war too many.

Such wars are very different from peacekeeping operations, like Somalia, or
low-intensity conflicts, like Panama and Grenada, where there are no clearly
demarcated fronts and it is difficult to distinguish foes from noncombatants.
Such missions are likely to have less use for the firepower of armored divisions
and more use for lightly armed troops trained in the restrained use of force.

The Army is understandably wary of waging counterinsurgency wars like Vietnam.
But the Army cannot afford to stand still. It needs to rethink what it has to
protect, and how best it can prepare.



LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi, Not Nixon, Set Pace of Vietnam Peace

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


To the Editor:

No one will begrudge Tony Lewis ("Guilt for Vietnam," column, May 30) the fun of
returning to the battles of his youth, in the process blaming the United States
Government and not Hanoi for American casualties, and repeating the contemptible
lie that the terms achieved in 1972 were available in 1969. Like the Bourbons,
Tony Lewis has forgotten nothing in the interval, but neither has he learned
anything.

Mr. Lewis gleefully pounces on a single entry in 600 pages of the H. R. Haldeman
diaries to "prove" that President Nixon's Vietnam policy was driven by electoral
politics. He chooses not to consider the voluminous written record that proves
the contrary. He ignores that there is no comparable comment in the rest of the
text and many comments emphasizing the strategic purposes of our policy.

The Vietnam strategy of the Nixon Administration grew out of a study extending
over many months early in his term. It was explained repeatedly to the American
people. The internal memoranda of the Nixon Administration do not support Mr.
Lewis's allegation.

In my memoirs and in my recently published book, "Diplomacy," I have summarized
or printed many of these documents; so did President Nixon in his memoirs, as
well as other participants in the process. Nor was the strategy described in the
alleged quotation ever carried out.

I have no personal recollection of the episode recounted in the Haldeman diary
-- probably because it was submerged in the public relations chatter emanating
from Mr. Haldeman's office.

What seems to have happened, according to the diaries, is that President Nixon,
disappointed in the results of the Congressional election, told Mr. Haldeman in
December 1970 that he needed to withdraw from Vietnam in 1971 to avoid an
electoral setback in 1972.

The choice of addressee suggests that President Nixon was blowing off steam,
rather than discussing a change in strategy. Had he meant for this to be
implemented, he would have sent a memo to the National Security Council or
discussed it with me.

A few days later -- if the diaries are to be believed -- I told Mr. Haldeman
that withdrawal would not even serve a political purpose and that we should
stick to the strategy of winding down the war unilaterally. Had I treated the
matter seriously, I would have written a memo to President Nixon or talked to
him.

The diary "reveals" the obvious -- that President Nixon was concerned about his
re-election and that I opposed unilateral withdrawal. That both of us wanted to
see the war ended in the first term should be thought to be inherent in the
nature of a democratic society.

But this is a far cry from the allegation that we designed our strategy to fit
in with the election campaign. Nor was the strategy implied in the quotation
ever carried out.

Mr. Lewis uses his "discoveries" to prove the opposite by means of a fantasy
version of what happened in 1972. According to Mr. Lewis, in fulfilling the plot
to end the war before the election, I announced "Peace is at hand," and
President Nixon accepted terms available since 1969.

Not a word of this account can be supported by the record. I challenge Mr. Lewis
to produce a shred of evidence that the terms offered by Hanoi in 1972 existed
since 1969.

If Mr. Lewis's knowledge matched his passion, he would know that only one issue
prevented a settlement: For year after year, Hanoi insisted that the United
States overthrow the political structures put in place by the Kennedy and
Johnson Administrations.

We were prepared to withdraw and told Hanoi so, starting in April 1970; we were
not prepared to cap retreat by dishonor and to turn over to the Communists those
who in reliance on the promises of our predecessors had cast their lot with
America.

President Nixon had made clear repeatedly in January 1972 and again in May 1972
that the Vietnamese people must decide their own political future. On Oct. 8,
1972, Hanoi accepted that condition for the first time, and we kept faith with
the American people by settling rapidly.

Mr. Lewis must face the facts:

It was Hanoi, not his government, that is responsible for the death of American
servicemen.

It was Hanoi, not President Nixon, that determined the timing and the pace of
the negotiations.

It was Hanoi that tried to use the election.

It was Hanoi -- not electoral politics -- that produced the "Peace is at hand"
press conference.

We were forced to hold the press conference because Hanoi radio broadcast the
text of the agreement as it stood and asked us to send an emissary to sign it.
Even then, we claimed less than Hanoi, which proclaimed the agreement as already
concluded.

It was Hanoi, not President Nixon, that insisted on peace before the election by
yielding terms never previously available and by insisting on signing an
incompleted agreement that we were keeping secret.

Is it not about time to end the self-indulgent moralism that revels in America's
travails and refuses to face the reality of serious moral dilemmas?

HENRY A. KISSINGER
London, June 1, 1994

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE D-DAY TOUR: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Clinton Faces Heroes: Judgment Day

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words

DATELINE: ROME, June 3


The salute gave it away, of course. Where there should have been snap, there was
only chagrin.

In a photo opportunity arranged by the White House, President Clinton was
welcomed at the American cemetery in Nettuno by June Marion Wandrey, a
73-year-old pint-sized former Army nurse who fought death in Sicily, Cassino,
Anzio, Naples and Dachau.

Proud that she could still fit into her 51-year-old brown wool uniform, with
eight battle stars bespeaking her heroism, Mrs. Wandrey greeted the President
with a saucy smile and the crisp salute of a professional.

Mr. Clinton returned the salute slowly, tentatively, a self-conscious gesture
that reflected his ambivalence about using the fraternal greeting of a military
he once said he "loathed." As much as he may love being Commander in Chief, his
salute often falters in a military setting, as though he fears a silent reproach
about his right to use that mark of mutual respect in light of the years he
spent evading the draft and protesting the Vietnam War.

It was a morning full of uncomfortable imagery for the 47-year-old Arkansan, the
first President since Franklin D. Roosevelt to be elected without having served
in the military (even in the peripheral Hollywood way of a Ronald Reagan).

An Audience of Heroes

The President gave his speech honoring the veterans of the Italian campaign
facing neat rows of white marble tombstones. His audience included thousands of
surviving war heroes, famous men who were badly wounded, like Senator Bob Dole
and Senator Daniel K. Inouye; and men who are not famous, like John Bender of
Aberdeen, Md., a heavyset 71-year-old Army veteran with a perky flowered tie
whose left arm was crippled by a mortar shell on the 17th of May, 1944, in the
drive to liberate Rome.

"It bothers me a little, his activities during the war protests and so forth,"
Mr. Bender said. "But he grew up. Maybe he's changed. I hope so. He should be
aware of things. There's too much at stake."

Even the sweet Mrs. Wandrey looked down and paused for a long moment when asked
if it was time to let the President move beyond his problems with the military.

"Well, each to his own," she said, finally. "You have to look in your own heart
and see what you can forgive."

Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, a Vietnam veteran who was
part of the Congressional delegation, was more tart. "We are here to honor those
who sacrificed," he said. "We all know who they were and who they weren't."

Mr. Clinton was not merely trying to slide through this potentially awkward week
of D-Day celebrations in Europe. He had a more ambitious aim with his speech
today, a new bid to move beyond the rancor about the draft and replace one image
from his past with another. Instead of bearded war protester cloistered at
Oxford, Mr. Clinton presented himself as the proud son of a soldier in the
campaign in Italy and North Africa, someone who can build on "the world they
saved" and "the difference their generation made."

He evoked a sentimental snapshot of the father he never knew, who died in a car
crash on a rainy road before he was born, the father who did go to war in a time
when the contrast between good and evil seemed clear to everyone. William
Jefferson Clinton recalled William Jefferson Blythe's Army service in Italy:
"Back home, his niece had heard about the beautiful Italian countryside and
wrote him asking for a single leaf from one of the glorious trees here to take
to school," the President said, amid the majestic rows of Italian pines and
cypresses. "My father had only sad news to send back -- there were no leaves;
every one had been stripped by the fury of the battle."

Mostly, the mood today was soft and forgiving; veterans of the Italian campaign
seemed willing to give their President the respect of his office, and more, to
give him the benefit of the doubt.

"Experiences like this are maturing him as commander in chief," said William
Clark, a 79-year-old from El Paso, dapper in a white suit and Panama hat, who
was an Army medic.

Jerry Halpern, 68, a veteran of the 45th Infantry Division from Little Rock who
said he knew Mr. Clinton when they both were on the staff of the University of
Arkansas law school, said that the President deserved respect. But, he added
with a smile, he did hope his military advisers would teach the young President
"how to salute."

Facing Up to the Critics

The White House has been dreading the inevitable comparisons to Mr. Reagan's
knockout speech at Pointe du Hoc on the 40th anniversary of D-Day, especially
since Mr. Clinton will also give a speech there on June 6..

When he was asked in a Voice of America interview, before leaving for Europe,
how he would answer the inevitable criticism on the trip about his lack of
military service and comparisons to the Great Communicator, he replied:
"President Reagan didn't have conventional military service in World War II. He
did a good job and he did a very important thing. And it didn't stop him from
being an effective Commander in Chief, first of all.

"Secondly, I think most Americans know that we were united in what we thought
about World War II. And that we were divided in what we thought about Vietnam.
Maybe they'll still be judged in the future, but many of my friends in the
Congress who are Vietnam veterans ultimately came to the same conclusion I did
at an earlier point that our idealism and our desire to uphold our end of the
Cold War led us into a degree of involvement there which was an error.

"That was my belief. That has nothing to do with my devotion to what happened to
this country in World War II and the ideals behind it and the institutions and
policies that followed from it. I have no problem with it at all and I can't
wait to go."

Backhanded Star Billing

Quote of the day: the unpredictable Ray Flynn, former Boston Mayor and now
Ambassador to the Vatican, was the host at a reception for the Presidential
party this afternoon at the American Embassy.

Introducing his boss, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Mr. Flynn said: "If
only he looked like Gregory Peck, he'd be the greatest politician in America."

Mr. Christopher, who followed Mr. Flynn to the microphone to introduce the First
Lady, did not look amused. (Although with the dyspeptic-looking Secretary, it is
hard to tell when he's annoyed and when he's ebullient.) He murmured that he
would have to take Mr. Flynn's comment under advisement before deciding if it
was diplomatic.

And Playing Second Fiddle

Headline of the day: La Repubblica, one of Italy's leading newspapers, handed
down chauvinistic judgment on the relative merits of the Armani-wearing,
politics-disdaining wife of Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Veronica Lario,
and President Clinton's wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton: "The Former Actress at Her
Debut Beats the First Lady: Veronica the 'Housewife' Pleases Romans More Than
the Gritty Hillary."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: June Wandrey and the President at the cemetery in Nettuno,
Italy. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Temporary Sanity

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 444 words


A Federal judge in Seattle has righted, at least temporarily, an egregious wrong
committed by the military against an outstanding nurse. Federal District Judge
Thomas S. Zilly this week ordered the military to reinstate Col. Margarethe
Cammermeyer, who was forced out as chief nurse of the Washington State National
Guard after she acknowledged to military security officials that she was a
lesbian.

The decision may well be appealed, but for now at least some sanity has been
injected into this bizarre case. Colonel Cammermeyer's plight has illuminated,
more than any previous case, the irrationality of the military's ban on gay
service members.

Her service record over three decades was undeniably brilliant. She volunteered
and served in Vietnam for 15 months, where she supervised a hospital for wounded
and dying soldiers and earned the Bronze Star for distinguished service. In 1985
she was chosen as the Veterans Administration Nurse of the Year, and later she
became chief nurse of the Washington Guard.

Yet her career began to unravel in 1989 when she applied to the Army War College
and, during a top-secret security check required for admission, was asked about
her orientation and acknowledged that she was a lesbian. She called it an
emotional orientation that did not imply sexual activity. But that was enough
for the military. She was given an honorable discharge in 1992.

Gov. Booth Gardner of Washington appealed for her retention, calling her
discharge "a senseless end to the career of a distinguished, longtime member of
the armed services." Her commanding officer wept at her dismissal.

In ordering her reinstatement, Judge Zilly pegged his decision to what he, and
other judges before him, deemed a weak spot in the military ban on homosexuals.
He concluded that the only motivation put forth for the ban was the anticipated
fears and prejudices of heterosexuals if they found homosexuals in their ranks.
And that, he said, was an unconstitutional reason for excluding anyone.

The judge was ruling on the military's old policy against homosexuals, not the
new policy agreed to by President Clinton and Congress last year. But his
reasoning might apply to the new regulations as well.

The legal issues raised by this case and others now working their way through
the courts seem destined to be resolved by the U.S. Supreme Court. But any
fair-minded American can understand the social injustice of banning individuals
simply because others might not like them. And in Colonel Cammermeyer's case,
even that appears untrue. She was an outstanding and beloved figure, dismissed
in mindless obeisance to a benighted policy.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Books for Vacation Reading

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 7733 words



Art, Music & Popular Culture

A CHEF'S TALE: A Memoir of Food, France and America. By Pierre Franey with
Richard Flaste and Bryan Miller. (Knopf, $25.) Assisted by two former colleagues
at The New York Times, Mr. Franey covers some 70 years of gustation in two
countries in this mouthwatering memoir (nearly 40 percent recipes).

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN. Edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night. By Bill
Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr. Letterman $1
zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.

MASTERS OF AMERICAN SCULPTURE: The Figurative Tradition From the American
Renaissance to the Millennium. By Donald Martin Reynolds. (Abbeville, $67.50.) A
clear, readable guide, handsomely illustrated, to modern American figurative
sculpture.

ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition
of African-American Humor That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery to
Richard Pryor. By Mel Watkins. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) The creative dealings
of black folk with the paradox of life in a land professing equality; by a
former editor at the Times Book Review.

SIT! The Dog Portraits of Thierry Poncelet. With text by Bruce McCall. (Workman,
$19.95.) Seventy "aristochiens," 19th-century portraits, each overpainted with a
suitable dog's head, accompanied by thumbnail biographies.

UNDERSTANDING COMICS. Written and illustrated by Scott McCloud. (Kitchen Sink
Press/Harper Perennial; paper, $20.) Beginning with the idea that the language
of comics is rich, complex and subtle, Mr. McCloud, like a practiced modernist,
deconstructs the comic code with both pictures and words.

Biography & Autobiography

A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir. By Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr. Hamill's
brutally honest account of his drinking (and his father's) is the organizing
theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more fundamental matter is a fine
portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a New York that is no more.

EDITH WHARTON: An Extraordinary Life. By Eleanor Dwight. (Abrams, $39.95.) This
life of the novelist in whose work architecture serves virtually as a language
lays special emphasis on the houses and gardens Wharton inhabited and carefully
made her own; copious illustrations.

ELDEST SON: Zhou Enlai and the Making of Modern China, 1898-1976. By Han Suyin.
(Hill & Wang, $27.50) An affectionate and persuasive portrait of the man who was
China's prime minister for 27 years and whose role in history was to ride the
tiger of Mao Zedong.

E. M. FORSTER: A Biography. By Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general
reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally
punctuated by little bursts of liberation.

EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs. By William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an
autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish
short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both
of re-creation and forgiveness.

GEORGE WALLACE: American Populist. By Stephan Lesher. (William
Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $29.95.) Governor Wallace presented as above all a
populist protest politician, articulating the complaints of "average" people.

GOEBBELS. By Ralf Georg Reuth. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) How a cunning,
hardworking and fanatical political operative had the good sense to attach
himself to Hitler's rising star.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life. By Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A
substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and
to other controversial works by Stowe.

IMAGES: My Life in Film. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

JAMES BEARD: A Biography. By Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A
painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food
writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism,
spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937. By Robert
Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's
economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor
whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.

JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart. By Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random
House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this
biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of
French revues, cabaret and film.

KAY BOYLE: Author of Herself. By Joan Mellen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A
fervent telling of the turbulent and unexamined life of a modernist author whose
popularity peaked in the 1940's.

KNIGHT'S CROSS: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel. By David Fraser.
(HarperCollins, $30.) A thoughtful, most readable life of a remarkable soldier,
by a senior British general.

LEADING WITH MY HEART. By Virginia Kelley with James Morgan. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.50.) This intimate, posthumously published memoir throbs with the vitality
of its gregarious, gambling, hard-drinking author, who was also the President's
mother.

LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War
Zones. By Peter Arnett. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of
reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the
last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the
gulf war.

LEARNED HAND: The Man and the Judge. By Gerald Gunther. (Knopf, $35.)
Penetrating and delicate, this study of a judiciary eminence known for his
self-restraint and fortitude explores the inner tensions and doubts that shaped
Hand's character.

LEAVING HOME: A Memoir. By Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really
trying to do with his humor, Mr. Buchwald says, is get even for a dark,
poverty-stricken childhood. Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography. By James E. B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

NIXON: A Life. By Jonathan Aitken. (Regnery, $28.) A Tory Member of Parliament
argues that Nixon was not only the 20th century's most innovative foreign-policy
President, but also wrongly condemned for Watergate and the 1972 Christmas
bombing of North Vietnam.

PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White. By Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.)
This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a complex work of
vivid self-scrutiny, a portrait of the worldly education of a young black man
who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother whose life was ended at 22 by
gunshots.

A PLACE AT THE TABLE: The Gay Individual in American Society. By Bruce Bawer.
(Poseidon, $21.) A sharply argued polemic by a conservative homosexual, full of
autobiographical detail and debates the author has had with himself and his
critics.

RAGE AND FIRE. A Life of Louise Colet: Pioneer Feminist, Literary Star,
Flaubert's Muse. By Francine du Plessix Gray. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A
well-documented and spirited biography of the beautiful, impetuous and
indiscreet Parisian poet with whom Flaubert had a stormy affair while working on
"Madame Bovary."

A REBEL IN DEFENSE OF TRADITION: The Life and Politics of Dwight Macdonald. By
Michael Wreszin. (Basic Books, $30.) An enthusiast of Macdonald describes the
intellectual journalist's peripatetic path through American letters and American
politics.

ROALD DAHL: A Biography. By Jeremy Treglown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
This deft, revealing unauthorized biography of the bullying author of children's
books serves as an antidote to Dahl's own sparky but none-too-truthful image of
himself.

SHOT IN THE HEART. By Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Although the obvious
appeal of this highly personal family memoir, by the youngest of Gary Gilmore's
brothers, is voyeuristic, the book is also a tale of the author's exclusion from
his violent family.

THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath & Ted Hughes. By Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In
the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed
by odious male poet), Ms. Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about
the values, and value, of biographers.

SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell. By Sarah Bradford.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) Ms. Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates
the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being
taken at their own valuation.

VERDI: A Biography. by Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This
portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted
understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and
self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and
compassion.

A WAY IN THE WORLD. By V. S. Naipaul. (Knopf, $23.) A brilliant, probing
autobiographical meditation on empire and inheritance, made of complementary
narratives about characters from the author to Sir Walter Raleigh.

W. E. B. DU BOIS: Biography of a Race, 1868-1919. By David Levering Lewis. (John
Macrae/ Holt, $35.) The first half of the epical life (it lasted till 1963) of
the man who by World War I had become the most outspoken, eloquent and
influential black American.

Business & Economics

INSANELY GREAT: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed
Everything. By Steven Levy. (Viking, $20.95.) An unabashed fan of the Macintosh
gives an enthusiastic account of how a bunch of freewheeling thinkers developed
the first friendly computer.

LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of
Flexibility. By Bennett Harrison. (Basic Books, $25.) An economist's polemic
against analysts who see small, efficient businesses as the models for social
organization in a world of rapid change.

LOOKING AT THE SUN: The Rise of the New East Asian Economic and Political
System. By James Fallows. (Pantheon, $25.) Firsthand insights into 11 nations
are expanded into the argument that the United States has misunderstood East
Asia's growth because its own laissez-faire economic traditions do not fit the
Asian experience.

MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner. By Connie Bruck.
(Simon & Schuster, $25.) The inner truth of this amazing entrepreneur may not be
within human grasp, but Ms. Bruck, a staff writer for The New Yorker, makes
known what seems knowable.

PEDDLING PROSPERITY: Economic Sense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished
Expectations. By Paul Krugman. (Norton, $22.) In a wide ranging and lucid
compendium of acute observations about economic thinking, a superstar of the
economic world deplores the "age of the policy entrepreneur: the economist who
tells politicians what they want to hear," extracting larger lessons about the
tension between academically correct and politically useful ideas.

Children's Books

CITY DOG. Written and illustrated by Karla Kuskin. (Clarion, $14.95.) A city dog
gets a dream holiday in the country, and the reader gets a verbal and visual
romp. (Ages 5 to 8)

FLIP-FLOP GIRL. By Katherine Paterson. (Lodestar/Dutton, $13.99.) Vinnie and
Lupe, two girls whose lives are in tatters, find friendship and ways of coping
in this fine and moving novel. (Ages 8 to 12)

FLOUR BABIES. By Anne Fine. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) A dismal class of
14-year-old boys must treat six-pound bags of flour like babies for three weeks,
with results that are both moral and comic. (Ages 10 and up)

TIME FLIES. Written and illustrated by Eric Rohmann. (Crown, $15.) One dark and
stormy twilight, a bird flies into what seems to be an old museum filled with
the skeletons of prehistoric creatures, and they are, for a while, magically
transformed. (Ages 4 to 7)

TUTANKHAMEN'S GIFT. Written and illustrated by Robert Sabuda. (Atheneum,
$15.95.) In this appealing, boldly illustrated story, a meek and shy boy becomes
a pharaoh and honors the Egyptian gods. (Ages 6 to 9)

Crime

DEADMAN. By Jon A. Jackson. (Atlantic Monthly, $20.) Sgt. Fang Mulheisen of
Detroit cuts out for Montana to track down an arrogant hit man named Joe
Service.

DOGS OF GOD. By Pickney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) There are
forces so malevolent in this lyrical, violent existential thriller about a
mountain man named Tannhauser and a simple knight named Goody that one fears for
the sanity of the storyteller.

A SUPERIOR DEATH. By Nevada Barr. (Putnam, $19.95.) A sternly beautiful novel,
in which Anna Pigeon, the rugged heroine of "Track of the Cat," takes an
assignment in Lake Superior's Isle Royale National Park and finds herself
surrounded by weirdos and fears of the deep.

TAKE. By Bill James. (Foul Play/Countryman, $20.) This witty, tragicomic British
police procedural examines every angle of an ill-fated robbery and finds that
cops and crooks are made of the same foolish stuff.

THE YELLOW ROOM CONSPIRACY. By Peter Dickinson. (Mysterious Press/Warner,
$18.95.) A violent death in an English country home uncovers a great scandal in
this intellectual shell game whose resolution is delightfully disorienting.

Essays, Criticism & Letters

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth. By Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF HAROLD CLURMAN: Six Decades of Commentary on Theater,
Dance, Music, Film, Arts and Letters. Edited by Marjorie Loggia and Glenn Young.
(Applause Books, $49.95.) Fully a third of the journalism of the theater's
distinguished gadfly and cheerleader over a long, long time.

THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY. Edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia
University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and
authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.

THE CORRESPONDENCE OF SIGMUND FREUD AND SANDOR FERENCZI: Volume 1, 1908-1914.
Edited by Eva Brabant, Ernst Falzeder and Patrizia Giampieri-Deutsch under the
supervision of Andre Haynal. (Belknap/Harvard University, $39.95.) These letters
between the commanding Freud and an influential, mercurial disciple promise a
major contribution to the exploration of psychoanalysis in the making.

ONE ART: Letters. By Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so
small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.

SISTERS OF FORTUNE. By Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University
Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New
Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of
California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope
over experience.

Fiction

THE ALIENIST. By Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A fast-paced novel set in
turn-of-the-century Manhattan about a psychologist and a New York Times reporter
on the trail of a serial killer.

ALLIGATOR DANCE: Stories. By Janet Peery. (Southern Methodist University, cloth,
$22.50; paper, $10.95.) Short stories that offer insight into how people assess
and change their lives, written with rigorous attention to what makes people
decide to act, or not act, in any ordinary moment.

ANCESTRAL TRUTHS. By Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/ Holt, $22.50.) Ms. Maitland's
splendid novel is formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is
peculiar, each in a different way; her prime focus is on a woman trying to
remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted
him dead).

AS MAX SAW IT. By Louis Begley. (Knopf, $21.) A short, powerful AIDS novel that,
with Jamesian obliquity, never mentions AIDS, and underscores the failure of
human beings to acknowledge their responsibility to one another.

BILLY. By Albert French. (Viking, $19.) A racial incident turns into
hair-raising tragedy in a classical mode when a black boy kills a white girl in
this novel of rural Mississippi in 1937.

THE BINGO PALACE. By Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

THE BIRTHDAY BOYS. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Carroll & Graf, $18.95.) A lively,
subversive historical novel that penetrates the stoic official heroes of Scott's
Antarctic expedition of 1912 to discover the individual silly boys within.

BONE BY BONE: Stories. By Gary Krist. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Without cliche
or trickery, Mr. Krist manages in these 13 stories to make ordinary worlds new
and disturbing.

BRAZIL. By John Updike. (Knopf, $23.) In the vast, trackless wilds of a Brazil
the author freely admits making up out of whole cloth, a tragicomic
knight-errant and his dolly, madly in love, break all the rules of class and
race.

THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE. By George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus
Ledbetter, Mr. Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye
who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) Three
previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright
unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of
Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.

CROSSING THE RIVER. By Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a
half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the
irreversible African diaspora.

DARKTOWN STRUTTERS. By Wesley Brown. (Cane Hill, paper, $11.95.) A vivid,
disturbing historical novel that makes freewheeling use of the facts to focus on
the personal identities of blacks and whites in 19th-century America.

THE END OF THE HUNT. By Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This
splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the
civil war of the 1920's. Analogies will be drawn with the present.

THE FAVOURITE. By Meredith Daneman. (Knopf, $19.) Humming with rare humor and
moral intelligence, Ms. Daneman's fourth novel is told in alternating time
frames -- that of a girl growing up painfully in the 1950's and that of the
rueful wife and mother she becomes in the 1970's.

FORDING THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS, by Dubravka Ugresic. (Northwestern
University, paper, $14.95.) A teeming politico-literary satire by a Croatian
(written in 1988, before the breakup) in which delegates from various East bloc
nations suffer the insults of history.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN. By William Gaddis. (Poseidon, $25.) Mr. Gaddis's fourth
novel, easier to like than his previous work, constructs a harsh, misanthropic
but hilarious comedy from the language of law and litigation, in fantastic
combination and obsessive detail.

GOING NATIVE. By Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

HERE: Stories. By Elizabeth Inness-Brown. (Louisiana State University, $19.95.)
Short stories concerning chiefly people encompassed (or imprisoned) wholly by
the present, without a clue how to get out of it or beyond it.

HERE WE ARE IN PARADISE: Stories. By Tony Earley. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A
first collection, set mostly in North Carolina but universal in the sure touch
that lets the author patrol his tough subject: love of person, place or thing.

MAKE ME WORK. By Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Short stories
that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and
the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.

MARBLE SKIN. By Slavenka Drakulic. (Norton, $20.) A finely wrought novel that
explores the relationship between a mother and daughter with such a simple but
volatile mixture of revulsion, eroticism and intimacy that by the novel's end
the reader knows an entire array of women through this single pair.

MERRY MEN. By Carolyn Chute. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) In her third rendition of
the tar-paper town portrayed in "The Beans of Egypt, Maine," Ms. Chute adds blue
bloods to her characters and continues to mix choppy concreteness with
idiosyncratic elegance in her prose.

MESHUGAH. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) The third
(so far) posthumously published novel by Singer is set in the early 1950's; its
characters, despite their high spirits and unstoppable gab, are haunted by
stories that can't be forgotten and can't be told.

MILLROY THE MAGICIAN. By Paul Theroux. (Random House, $24.) Mr. Theroux's 20th
work of fiction is a dark satire of our national obsession with trim bodies and
religious television, embodied in a single eccentric prestidigitator.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA. By Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

THE PARTISAN. By Benjamin Cheever. (Atheneum, $21.) Families are made, not born,
in Mr. Cheever's funny, sad second novel, whose college-boyish hero is
pervasively and fortuitously intruded upon by a preposterously handsome and
sophisticated writer.

PROFANE FRIENDSHIP. By Harold Brodkey (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) The story
line of Mr. Brodkey's second novel is strong and simple, but the story is far
less the point than is the fact that Mr. Brodkey's principals become, as figures
in good fiction always do, a part of our own active memory.

THE RIFLES. By William T. Vollmann. (Viking, $22.95.) The hyperactive dream
logic of this third book in a projected meganovel of North America conflates
Franklin's fatal Arctic expedition of 1845 with a novelist's adventures in 1989.

QUICKSAND. By Junichiro Tanizaki. (Knopf, $22.) A novel about a woman who casts
such a spell on her lesbian lover and the lover's husband that they long to die
for her, by a writer whose constant themes were self-destructive sexuality and
the double image of woman as goddess and demon; first published in Japan in
1928-30.

SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND. By Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft,
affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can
plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.

SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD. By Doris Betts. (Knopf, $23.) The main event in Ms.
Betts's first novel in 13 years is the death of a child; out of it is spun a
deep understanding of grief, of the pungency of Southern small-town life and of
the inevitable injuries reality inflicts.

THE STONE DIARIES. By Carol Shields. (Viking, $21.95.) A panorama of
20th-century life is revealed in a diary-shaped novel that probes the most
delicate layers of consciousness in tracing one woman's existence from birth to
grave.

STONES FROM THE RIVER. By Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the
highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to
1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.

THE SUMMER HOUSE: A Trilogy. By Alice Thomas Ellis. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.)
Edgy, bright, subversive fictions about women's inner lives and experiences,
each narrated by an Englishwoman whose existence is under revision.

SUNDAY'S CHILDREN. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $16.95.) In his second
autobiographical novel, the Swedish director revisits childhood in beautifully
realized set pieces through which the psychological drama is developed.

TEN TALES TALL & TRUE. By Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Stories of
zany boldness, by a weirdly talented multimedia artist, that dramatize symbioses
of oppression between willing victims and victimizers.

THE TRACK OF REAL DESIRES. By Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $21.) At the center of this
comic, spirited novel are a terrific dinner party and a story of loss, malice,
ruin, envy and, finally, trust.

THE TROUBLESOME OFFSPRING OF CARDINAL GUZMAN. By Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow,
$25.) Mr. de Bernie res's third novel set in the imaginary Latin American city
of Cochadebajo de los Gatos concerns good and evil and a clergyman who has his
inner demons removed, surgically.

THE WAY TO THE CATS. By Yehoshua Kenaz. (Steerforth Press, $20.) An
unremittingly bleak novel of age, death and decay, set in a Tel Aviv hospital
where there are few visitors, and they as disagreeable as the patients.

WHAT IS TOLD. By Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) In a narrative
presided over by presences from the spirit world, this genially pessimistic
first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of cosmopolitan
Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to places like Free
Fall, N.J.

WITHOUT A HERO: Stories. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Boyle's
unaverted gaze, caustic sensibility and attraction to everything queasy are all
evident in his fourth collection of short stories.

History

AFRICAN AMERICANS AT MARS BLUFF, SOUTH CAROLINA. By Amelia Wallace Vernon.
(Louisiana State University, $29.95.) What was a community of black rice growers
doing 60 miles from the sea in the heart of cotton country? This important and
surprising book transcends the domain of local history.

D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II. By Stephen E.
Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) Drawing on 1,200 oral histories of veterans,
Mr. Ambrose evokes the daring and the horror of individual ordeals played out
along the bloody beaches of the Calvados coastline of Normandy.

THE DEATH OF THE MESSIAH. From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the
Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels. By Raymond E. Brown. (Anchor Bible
Reference Library/Doubleday, 2 vols., $37.50 each; boxed set, $75.) A 1,600-page
treatment by a distinguished scholar; meant for experts, readable by any
interested person.

DIPLOMACY. By Henry Kissinger. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) Mr. Kissinger's "great
man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and
shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.

FRAUEN: German Women Recall the Third Reich. By Alison Owings. (Rutgers
University, $24.95.) Ms. Owings hoped, by interviewing German women 70 and
older, to find they had been nobler than German men in the Nazi era. They
weren't, but the excursion is fascinating.

IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent. By Timothy Garton Ash.
(Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history
examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the
collapse of Communism? A hard question, approached with respect for its
ambiguity.

THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA. By H. J. A. Sire. (Yale University, $45.) A splendidly
illustrated history of a colorful, aristocratic religious order, founded in
1113, that has survived numerous historical disasters and always discovered good
works to do; at present its members care for the sick and run the smallest
sovereign state in the world.

PAUL REVERE'S RIDE. By David Hackett Fischer. (Oxford University, $27.50.) No
rehash of Longfellow but a historian's careful account of the ride and the
surrounding events, emphasizing the broad-based, communal nature of the
Revolutionary movement in New England.

RUSSIA UNDER THE BOLSHEVIK REGIME. By Richard Pipes. (Knopf, $35.) This
painstaking, literate final volume of a trilogy begun 20 years ago reflects its
author's long involvement with Soviet policy and scholarship and, like its
predecessors, does not withhold moral judgment.

STORIES OF SCOTTSBORO. By James Goodman (Pantheon, $27.50.) A well-written and
kaleidoscopic account of the 1931 Alabama rape case that grew to become a symbol
of the oppression faced by black Americans in a region where white supremacy was
an uncontested fact of life.

THE SOVIET TRAGEDY: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991. By Martin
Malia. (Free Press, $24.95.) Not a work of research but of interpretation, this
study aims to reassert the primacy of ideology and politics over social and
economic forces in explaining what happened.

SOWING THE SEEDS OF DEMOCRACY IN CHINA: Political Reform in the Deng Xiaoping
Era. By Merle Goldman. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A Western expert on China's
intellectual dissidents turns to the latest decade and the misfortunes of the
educated democratic elite.

SPECIAL TASKS: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster. By
Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P.
Schecter. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A valuable book about Stalin's terror
apparatus by a man who served it, written with the help of his son and two
journalists.

THE UNQUIET GHOST: Russians Remember Stalin. By Adam Hochschild. (Viking,
$22.95.) Through interviews with survivors of the Gulag, prison camp guards and
the children of both, the author effectively places Stalinism in a modern
context.

WHEN CHINA RULED THE SEAS: The Treasure Fleet of the Dragon Throne, 1405-1433.
By Louise Levathes. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The historical lacuna filled by
this meticulously researched book is the story of the Chinese expeditions west
across the Indian Ocean, led by the imperial eunuch Zheng He.

Medicine & Psychology

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter. By Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail.

LISTENING. By Hannah Merker. (HarperCollins, $20.) A prolonged lyrical
meditation, wise and instructive, on the importance of sound in the lives of the
creatures of this planet, by a writer, editor and former librarian who lost most
of her hearing when she was 39 years old.

LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF DEATH: Tuberculosis and the Social Experience of Illness
in American History. By Sheila M. Rothman. (Basic Books, $25.) A social history
of tuberculosis using the "illness narratives" of patients to chart a disease
from the unscientific perspective of the patients.

MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS: The Legacy of Loss. By Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley,
$23.) In this moving and valuable treatment of a neglected subject, Ms. Edelman
mingles her own denial and anger and yearning at the death of her mother with
the stories of nearly 200 women who have lost theirs.

RAISING THE DEAD. By Richard Selzer. (Whittle Books/Viking, $17.50.) The author,
a former surgeon unusually sensitive to the contingency of life, describes his
own near-death experience, an ordeal in which the only comfort was his survival.

REMEMBERING SATAN. By Lawrence Wright. (Knopf, $22.) This story about the perils
of recovered memory concerns a man who, charged by his daughters with sexual
abuse, proceeded to summon up what he assumed were blocked memories of the
events.

SUGGESTIONS OF ABUSE: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma. By
Michael D. Yapko. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A simple explanation from an expert
on hypnosis about why recovered memories, dredged up with the help of abuse
therapists, are so unreliable.

SURGERY: An Illustrated History. By Ira M. Rutkow. (Mosby-Year Book/Norman
Publishing, $99.) A large, attractive volume by a surgeon, chronicling the art
of wounding to heal from prehistory to the present, with 368 handsome (and
non-sick-making) illustrations.

TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World. By Leah Hager Cohen. (Houghton Mifflin,
$22.95.) Ms. Cohen's personal journey through a school for the deaf (she hears
normally, but grew up there because her father is its superintendent) is also an
introduction to an exceptional society that is still deciding how it should
live.

UNCHAINED MEMORIES: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found. By
Lenore Terr. (Basic Books, $22.) A psychiatrist relays tales of lost memories,
including that of a woman who recovered the memory of her father murdering her
childhood friend 20 years before.

Poetry

COLLECTED POEMS. By Thom Gunn. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) The classical
clarity of finely honed meter and incisive rhymes marks the work of this British
poet who has lived in this country for 40 years. He brings Augustan assurance to
demotic, often gay, experience.

CROSSROADS. By David R. Slavitt. (Louisiana State University, cloth, $15.95;
paper, $8.95.) Perhaps best known for his verse translations of Latin poetry,
David Slavitt is an adept formal poet with a sharp eye for the hard and fine
lives of ordinary people. He is also a wicked satirist and can be wildly funny.

EARTHLY MEASURES. By Edward Hirsch. (Knopf, $20.) In our secular time it comes
as a jolt when a poet makes it clear the search for God comes first. These are
poems of immense wonder, rigor and eloquence, filled with generosity and
heartbreaking longing.

GARBAGE. By A. R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and
splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of this year's
National Book Award.

A SILENCE OPENS. By Amy Clampitt. (Knopf, $20.) Amy Clampitt always delivers the
sheer richness of the observed world, but for all her sometimes dizzily elevated
language she is a poet of history and politics, and these poems are her
shrewdest yet.

WHEN TIME FOLDS UP. By Kathleen Fraser. (Chax Press, paper, $11.) One of the
most distinguished poetic nonconformists in the country uses a collage-like
syntax and playful "errors" to create poems that directly reflect how we think.
Her poems are playful, sometimes astonishing, always enormously stimulating.

Politics & Current Affairs

BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag. By Harry Wu and Carolyn
Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr. Wu's memoir of 19 years
in labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and
surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign
right in the heart of the prison system.

BLOOD AND BELONGING: Journeys Into the New Nationalism. By Michael Ignatieff.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) The author travels to such places as Croatia,
Kurdistan and Northern Ireland to offer vivid vignettes of contemporary
nationalists and to issue somber warnings about their threat to liberal
cosmopolitanism.

CERTAIN TRUMPETS: The Call of Leaders. By Garry Wills. (Simon & Schuster, $23.)
A popular historian and journalist seeks to analyze leadership, and finds that
the leader and the led must be mutually indebted and must have the same goal.

CHILDREN FIRST: What Our Society Must Do -- and Is Not Doing -- for Our Children
Today. By Penelope Leach. (Knopf, $22.) No amount of advice to parents suffices,
an outstanding advice giver concludes; she proposes social programs that would
cost plenty, in money and in effort.

THE CONFIRMATION MESS: Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process. By Stephen
L. Carter. (Basic Books, $21.) A law professor argues cogently that the Federal
confirmation process has become a monster, grotesquely unfair to nominees of
both right and left.

DOGMATIC WISDOM: How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America. By
Russell Jacoby. (Doubleday, $29.95.) A punchy and effective effort at taking the
tired culture wars onto different ground, noting, among other things, that in
most colleges the question of which books are essential to a liberal education
is moot: very little literature, history or philosophy is taught.

DREAM CITY: Race, Power, and the Decline of Washington, D.C. By Harry S. Jaffe
and Tom Sherwood. (Simon & Shuster, $24.) The sad story of the rise and fall of
Marion Barry, and the sadder tale of how the once placid, middle-class city of
Washington has been allowed to descend into addiction and despair.

THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now. By Alma Guillermoprieto. (Knopf, $24.)
An experienced reporter's essays on Latin American realities as they are lived
and felt as the region copes with urbanization and market economics.

THE HOMELESS. By Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $17.95.) Mr. Jencks's
careful review of the large body of accumulated research on the homeless
contradicts the received wisdom of both liberals and conservatives; he proposes
sensible discussion and incremental remedies.

LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade. By
David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental, insightful account of
the profound transformation in American attitudes about sexuality that
culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a
constitutional right.

LIVING A POLITICAL LIFE, by Madeleine Kunin. (Knopf, $25.) Ms. Kunin tells how
she came to be a three-term Governor of Vermont and develops the thesis that a
"woman's political culture," with the power to transform politics benignly, has
arisen and is growing in this country.

ONLY WORDS. By Catharine A. MacKinnon. (Harvard University, $14.95.) A polemic
by a militant feminist and legal reformer who sees a close link between the
flourishing pornography industry and the abuse of women.

THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS. By Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class
in question is the black middle class, and Mr. Cose's account leaves little
doubt that the people who belong to it are daily humiliated by white people, and
don't like it a bit.

REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS. By Murray Kempton. (Times
Books/Random House, $27.50.) Pieces long and short by a journalist whose abiding
fidelity to the radical impulse and the baroque style has made him as inimitable
as he is indispensable.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal. By Zlatko Dizdarevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

WHO WE ARE: A Portrait of America Based on the Latest U.S. Census. By Sam
Roberts. (Times Books/ Random House, $18.) The urban affairs columnist for The
New York Times breaks down the 1990 census into thematic chunks, looks at the
numbers every which way and makes it all accessible.

Science

THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time. By Jonathan Weiner.
(Knopf, $25.) A fascinating look over the shoulders of biologists who watched
natural selection in motion over some 20 years in finch populations.

BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy. By Kip S. Thorne.
(Norton, $30.) A physicist proposes that modified, limited time travel is
possible, clarifying his arguments for lay folk with illustrations and
anecdotes.

THE HUBBLE WARS: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar
Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. By Eric J. Chaisson. (HarperCollins,
$27.50.) An insider's absorbing history, a technological thriller and an expose
of the space project that has burned a huge hole in the nation's pocket.

HYPERSPACE: A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the
Tenth Dimension. By Michio Kaku. (Oxford University, $25.) Everything would make
better sense, a physicist maintains, if there were 10 dimensions instead of 4;
it remains to find the absconded dimensions, which are probably awfully small.

THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT. By Steven Pinker. (Morrow, $23.) A lucid guide for lay
people to current Chomskyan linguistics and its central thesis: we are born
programmed for language, with all the grammar we need right in our heads.

THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind. By Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday,
paper, $12.95.) By studying memory, a neurobiologist seeks to bridge the gap
between chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental
results.

THE RED QUEEN: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. By Matt Ridley.
(Macmillan, $25.) A thoughtful work about sociobiology, arguing that sex is the
main force behind evolution and that species evolve not to win the struggle for
survival but to avoid losing it.

A SCIENTIST IN THE CITY. By James Trefil. (Doubleday, $23.95.) The author, who
has written popular-science books that deal with the creation and the seashore,
has a fine sense of what lay folk don't understand; his rendition of the city's
potential and the constraints on it is fascinating.

WRINKLES IN TIME. By George Smoot and Keay Davidson. (Morrow, $25.) An
astrophysicist (Mr. Smoot) and a science writer relate an adventure yarn
(exciting outdoor experiments go blooey) that is also an entree to modern
cosmology, the science of where everything came from.

Science Fiction

PARABLE OF THE SOWER. By Octavia E. Butler. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $19.95.)
A gripping account of the gospel according to 15-year-old Lauren Oya Olamina,
who not only survives the unraveling of law and order in 21st-century California
but becomes the prophet of a new religion based on a sober revelation: "The only
lasting truth is Change. God is Change."

THE IRON DRAGON'S DAUGHTER. By Michael Swanwick. (Avonova/Morrow, $23.) At the
heart of this fantasy is the relationship between Jane, a feisty human
changeling, and Melanchthon, a factory-built dragon bent on destroying the
"technomancers" who created him and then abandoned him.

GREEN MARS. By Kim Stanley Robinson. (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper,
$12.95.) In this generously conceived, meticulously detailed sequel to "Red
Mars," a disputatious band of scientists dabble in utopian politics and
literally rebuild the planet by "terraforming" -- transforming Mars into
something like Earth.

I, ASIMOV: A Memoir. By Isaac Asimov. (Doubleday, $25.) A posthumous addition to
Asimov's nearly 500 volumes of fiction and nonfiction, this new autobiographical
work offers ample rewards for anyone interested in a mind that roamed freely
through the formidable constructs of modern science and returned to tell the
tales in lucid, energetic English sentences.

CRASHCOURSE. By Wilhelmina Baird. (Ace, paper, $4.99.) The only way for the poor
and powerless to escape their dead-end prospects on a decadent near-future Earth
is to sell their lives as raw footage to the snuff-film merchants. This nasty
premise energizes Ms. Baird's breathlessly paced, all-too-persuasive first
novel.

Spies & Thrillers

LAST RIGHTS. By Tim Sebastian. (Morrow, $22.) Mr. Sebastian's deft novel
concerns an Englishman; his mother, who left the Soviet Union 30 years ago, and
the dead body of a Russian who pilfered material from old K.G.B. files.

LOUISIANA BLUE. By David Poyer. (St. Martin's, $22.) The latest in the Tiller
Galloway series is a terrifying adventure in which the hero starts out taking a
job on an oil rig and ends up 1,000 feet down in the brine with the odds stacked
against him.

OPERATION REMISSION. By Paul Johnson. (Nefyn & Shaw, paper, $12.95.) A timely
and remarkable novel about an unconventional ex-soldier who turns out to have
been one of the Americans exposed to radiation after World War II and decides to
get revenge by releasing radioactive gas into Congress.

SENATOR. By Richard Bowker. (Morrow, $22.) A smooth thriller about a Republican
politician from Massachusetts with a tattered marriage and a re-election fight
on the line who visits his mistress only to find her murdered.

THIN ICE. By Meg O'Brien. (Perfect Crime, Doubleday, $18.50.) A keen
intelligence and a sense of mounting horror drive this thriller about a woman
biochemist who is murdered after developing a cure for cancer and AIDS.

Sports

THE POLITICS OF GLORY: How Baseball's Hall of Fame Really Works. By Bill James.
(Macmillan, $25.) The celebrated sabermetrician uses statistical analysis in an
effort to determine who does -- and does not -- deserve to be in baseball's Hall
of Fame.

LORDS OF THE REALM: The Real History of Baseball. By John Helyar. (Villard,
$24.) A financial journalist examines the national pastime as big business.

DON'T LOOK BACK: Satchel Paige in the Shadows of Baseball. By Mark Ribowsky.
(Simon & Schuster, $23.) A carefully researched biography tells the life of one
of the greatest pitchers and personalities in baseball history.

THE CURSE OF ROCKY COLAVITO: A Loving Look at a Thirty-Year Slump. By Terry
Pluto. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A hilarious but penetrating examination of
the Cleveland Indians' miserable history, written by a veteran sportswriter and
long-suffering Tribe fan.
Travel, Nature & Adventure ANIMAL HAPPINESS. By Vicki Hearne. (HarperCollins,
$20.) The author of "Adam's Task" investigates, in these essays, what pleases
animals; she finds, in many cases, that though creature comforts are important,
what really tickles the beasts is the sense of a job well done.

HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS. Edited by Richard Howard. (Library of
America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the (as it were)
aggregate, densely but never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for
abroad he usually was) of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration, immodest
but justified by the sequel, had put it) was lost.

JOHN JAMES AUDUBON: The Watercolors for "The Birds of America." Edited by
Annette Blaugrund and Theodore E. Stebbins Jr. (New-York Historical
Society/Villard, $75.) The originals for the great engravings, handsomely
reproduced, illuminated by helpful essays.

OKAVANGO: Africa's Last Eden. By Frans Lanting. (Chronicle, $45.) These moody
photographs of the vast green wetlands in the center of the Kalahari Desert
create a sense of unease, mystery and loneliness, and bear witness to our moral
obligation to the land.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              241 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 58;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1929 words


This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1993
Christmas issue.

AFTER TET: The Bloodiest Year in Vietnam
By Ronald H. Spector. Vintage, $13.
Government policy following the 1968 Tet offensive.
THE AMERICAN WAY OF BIRTH
By Jessica Mitford. William Abrahams/Plume, $12.
Alternatives to high-tech hospital deliveries.
ANATOMY OF LOVE: The Mysteries of Mating, Marriage, and Why We Stray
By Helen Fisher. Fawcett Columbine, $12.50.
Biological answers to intriguing questions.
ANGELS & INSECTS: Two Novellas
By A. S. Byatt. Vintage International, $12.
Re-creations of a bizarre Victorian universe.
ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade
By Vincent Scully. St. Martin's, $24.95.
The history of what we live in.
ARE YOU MINE?
By Abby Frucht. Grove, $12.
A novel about a marriage and an unplanned pregnancy.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History
By Robert D. Kaplan. Vintage Departures, $12.
Tracing the roots of the ethnic hatreds in Bosnia.
BLACK DOGS
By Ian McEwan. Bantam, $7.95.
Fiction about mysticism and marital dissolution.
BOILING POINT: Democrats, Republicans, and the
Decline of Middle-Class Prosperity
By Kevin Phillips. Harper Perennial, $13.
The economic consequences of the 1980's.
BONE
By Fae Myenne Ng. Harper Perennial, $11.
A novel about a death in a Chinese-American family.
THE CALL OF THE TOAD
By Gunter Grass. Translated by Ralph Manheim.
Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $10.95.
A satirical story about foreign relations, love and death.
THE CERTIFICATE
By Isaac Bashevis Singer. Translated by Leonard Wolf. Plume, $10.
Fiction about a young Polish Jew and Palestine in 1922.
CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave
By Ernest B. Furgurson.
Vintage Civil War Library, $14.
The most dramatic Confederate victory of the war.
CHICAGO LOOP
By Paul Theroux. Ivy, $5.99.
A novel about a businessman who finally lives out his murderous sexual
fantasies.
THE COLLECTED STORIES
By John McGahern. Vintage International, $12.
Irish characters' harsh lives and their means of escape.
THE COLLECTED STORIES
By William Trevor. Penguin, $16.
Eighty-five works, most about the author's Ireland.
COME TO ME: Stories
By Amy Bloom. Harper Perennial, $10.
A collection about families in crisis.
COMPLEXITY:
The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos
By M. Mitchell Waldrop.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $12.
The attempt to find the pattern behind all patterns.
COMPLEXITY: Life at the Edge of Chaos
By Roger Lewin. Collier/Macmillan, $10.
More on why order often triumphs over disorder.
CROSSED OVER:
The True Story of the Houston Pickax Murders
By Beverly Lowry. Warner, $5.99.
The troubled lives of two young people, one a killer.
THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica
By David G. Campbell. Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.
Celebrating the species that thrive in extreme cold.
DAYS OF OBLIGATION:
An Argument With My Mexican Father
By Richard Rodriguez. Penguin, $11.
Essays about embracing a Hispanic heritage.
DEAD MAN WALKING: An Eyewitness Account of the Death Penalty in the United
States
By Helen Prejean. Vintage, $12.
A nun's reflections on why society shouldn't kill.
DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal
By Townsend Hoopes and Douglas Brinkley.
Vintage, $17.
A biography of the first Secretary of Defense.
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS
By Alan Lightman. Warner, $7.99.
Fables by a physicist about the passage of time.
THE ENGLISH PATIENT
By Michael Ondaatje. Vintage International, $11.
Fiction about lives that converge in an Italian hospital toward the end of World
War II.
THE FATE OF THE ELEPHANT
By Douglas H. Chadwick. Sierra Club, $14.
The natural history and habitats of a species in peril.
FRAUD
By Anita Brookner. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A novel about a woman's emotional disintegration.
GENIE: A SCIENTIFIC TRAGEDY
By Russ Rymer. Harper Perennial, $10.
The true story of a horribly abused child.
GENIUS: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman
By James Gleick. Vintage, $14.
A biography of a Nobel Prize-winning physicist.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED
By Susanna Kaysen. Vintage, $10.
A memoir of adolescent years in a mental hospital.
GUNFIGHTER NATION: The Myth of the Frontier
in Twentieth-Century America
By Richard Slotkin. Harper Perennial, $20.
How the Wild West has influenced our society.
HANNAH ARENDT -- KARL JASPERS:
CORRESPONDENCE, 1926-1969
Edited by Lotte Kohler and Hans Saner.
Translated by Robert and Rita Kimber.
Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $19.95.
Letters from two scholars, commenting on their times.
A HARD ROAD TO GLORY:
The African-American Athlete in Baseball
The African-American Athlete in Boxing
The African-American Athlete in Basketball
The African-American Athlete in Football
The African-American Athlete in Track & Field
By Arthur R. Ashe Jr. with Kip Branch, Ocania Chalk and Francis Harris.
Amistad Press, five volumes, $9.95 each.
A comprehensive history of black Americans in sports.
THE HEALER
By Aharon Appelfeld. Translated by Jeffrey M. Green. Grove, $11.
A novel about assimilated Jews in prewar Vienna.
HENRY JAMES. The Imagination of Genius: A Biography
By Fred Kaplan. Quill/Morrow, $15.
The expatriate author's hidden life.
HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives
By Alan Bullock. Vintage, $20.
The kinship between two brutal dictators.
I, TITUBA, BLACK WITCH OF SALEM
By Maryse Conde. Translated by Richard Philcox.
One World/Ballantine, $10.
A novel about the colonial slave accused of sorcery.
THE INFINITE PLAN
By Isabel Allende. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden. Harper Perennial, $12.
Fiction about a barrio boyhood and a war-torn adult life.
INNER CIRCLES
How America Changed the World: A Memoir
By Alexander M. Haig Jr. with Charles McCarry.
Warner, $14.99.
Foreign policy from the cold war through the gulf war.
THE ISLAND: Three Tales
By Gustaw Herling. Translated by Ronald Strom.
Penguin, $9.95.
A Polish author's stories about his adopted land, Italy.
JESUS' SON: Stories
By Denis Johnson. Harper Perennial, $10.
Tales of addiction, narrated by a young drifter.
JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES
Volume One: Hopes Betrayed, 1883-1920
By Robert Skidelsky. Penguin, $15.95.
The first book in a biography of the great economist.
THE KOMMANDANT'S MISTRESS
By Sherri Szeman. Harper Perennial, $12.
A novel about the relationship between a Nazi commander and a Jewish prisoner.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire
By David Remnick. Vintage, $14.
A Pulitzer Prize-winning account of Communism's fall.
THE MALE CROSS-DRESSER SUPPORT GROUP
By Tama Janowitz.
Washington Square/Pocket Books, $12.
Fiction about a childless New York woman and a waif.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET:
A Portrait of Georges Simenon
By Patrick Marnham. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $14.95.
The psychology of the prolific Belgian-born novelist.
MARLENE DIETRICH
By Maria Riva. Ballantine, $14.
A biography of the actress, written by her daughter.
THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY
By Roberto Calasso. Translated by Tim Parks.
Vintage International, $13.
Greek mythology, recast and retold.
MURDOCH
By William Shawcross.
Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $15.
The strategies and cunning of a media mogul.
MYSTERY RIDE
By Robert Boswell. Harper Perennial, $12.
A novel about a love that transcends divorce.
NEW AND SELECTED POEMS
By Mary Oliver. Beacon, $14.
A collection that won a 1992 National Book Award.
NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic
By Donna Williams. Avon, $10.
A sufferer's fitful progress toward an independent life.
NOW YOU KNOW
By Michael Frayn. Penguin, $9.95.
Satire about the workings of a British lobbying group.
OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession
By Philip Roth. Vintage International, $12.
A novel about a writer, his impersonator and Israel.
ORIGINS RECONSIDERED:
In Search of What Makes Us Human
By Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin.
Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
Thoughts on evolution and the development of morality.
OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage
By Mary Daly. HarperSanFrancisco, $13.
A trip from Roman Catholicism to New Age feminism.
THE PASSION OF MICHEL FOUCAULT
By James Miller. Anchor/Doubleday, $14.95.
The parallels between the philosopher's life and work.
PAST IMPERFECT: French Intellectuals, 1944-1956
By Tony Judt. University of California, $14.
How Sartre, Beauvoir et al. supported Stalin.
PIGS IN HEAVEN
By Barbara Kingsolver. Harper Perennial, $13.
A novel about a white woman threatened with the loss of her adopted Cherokee
daughter.
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
By Paul Kennedy. Vintage, $14.
Future challenges, economic and environmental.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories
By Thom Jones. Back Bay/Little, Brown, $9.95.
Characters fighting for their lives, in and out of the ring.
THE QUEEN'S THROAT: Opera, Homosexuality and the
Mystery of Desire
By Wayne Koestenbaum. Vintage, $12.
Why and how gay men worship the opera.
RACE MATTERS
By Cornel West. Vintage, $9.
Essays on the relations between blacks and whites.
REMEMBERING DENNY
By Calvin Trillin. Warner, $9.99.
A memoir about a gay man's hidden life and suicide.
RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church,
1880-1920
By Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham.
Harvard University, $14.95.
How religious women helped foster racial progress.
THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE
By T. Coraghessan Boyle. Penguin, $10.95.
Characters at the Kellogg sanitarium in 1907.
SACRED HUNGER
By Barry Unsworth. Norton, $11.95.
A novel about an 18th-century utopia gone awry.
SCREENING HISTORY
By Gore Vidal. Harvard University, $9.95.
Reflections on politics and culture.
SECOND FRONT:
Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War
By John R. MacArthur. University of California, $10.
The control of information during the war with Iraq.
THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS MERTON
By Michael Mott. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $17.95.
An account of the life of this Trappist monk and scholar.
SHYLOCK: A Legend and Its Legacy
By John Gross. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
The mythic stature of a literary character.
STELLA
By Peter Wyden. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
The story of a Jewish woman turned Nazi collaborator.
TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education
By Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood.
Back Bay/Little, Brown, $11.95.
A memoir by the former Chancellor of the New York City schools.
THINKING OUT LOUD:
On the Personal, the Political, the Public and the Private
By Anna Quindlen. Fawcett Columbine, $12.
Essays from the author's Public & Private column in The New York Times.
THIS LITTLE LIGHT OF MINE: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer
By Kay Mills. Plume, $12.95.
The biography of a civil rights heroine.
TURNING POINT: A Candidate, a State,
and a Nation Come of Age
By Jimmy Carter. Times Books/Random House, $12.
The former President looks back on his first election.
UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church
By Samuel G. Freedman. Harper Perennial, $12.
Finding hope in a poverty-ridden parish in Brooklyn.
VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES
By Stanley Elkin. Penguin, $10.95.
Novellas about ordinary folk, extraordinary situations.
VINDICATION
By Frances Sherwood. Penguin, $10.95.
A novelization of the life of Mary Wollstonecraft.
THE WORST OF TIMES
By Patricia G. Miller. Harper Perennial, $12.
An oral history of abortion before Roe v. Wade.   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Setting the Standards For War Pictures

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 34;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1548 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AT FIRST GLANCE, "REPORTING the War: The Journalistic Coverage of World War II"
at the National Portrait Gallery in Washington looks like the kind of show that
only a World War II buff could love. Lots for them to love here: documents,
reading matter, fine photographs like W. Eugene Smith's from Saipan -- though
most of the photographs are not shown to great advantage. A few, like Margaret
Bourke-White's spectacular view of an air raid on Moscow, are impressively
enlarged, then cropped to fit into archways.

As for the visual material about reporters, it is by and large less interesting
than their words, appropriately enough. And memorabilia like the helmet of the
writer Richard Tregaskis or Edward R. Murrow's microphone, though they may
quicken many a pulse, will induce narcolepsy in some viewers.

Yet what "Reporting the War" (on view through Sept. 5, and partly supported by a
grant from Scripps Howard) lacks in visual scintillation it more than makes up
for in information, not so much about the war as about what the title promises.
How World War II was presented to civilians, how it could be presented, marked a
departure from all previous wars and signaled general shifts in communications
that have affected the world ever since. The exhibition catalogue even suggests
that the news media, which made Americans far more aware of the course and costs
of war than ever before, played a powerful role in maintaining the sense of
national purpose and minimizing civilian complaints in the face of rationing and
shortages.

For most of the world's history, war reporting had followed Thucydides's method,
detailing events long after the dust had settled. Narrating history under
pressure did not really replace recollecting it in tranquillity until the
invention of the telegraph, the railroad, the steam-driven press and photography
in the 19th century, when the mass audience was also effectively invented.

Accounts and images of the Crimean War and the American Civil War in the 1850's
and 60's reached a large public within months or weeks or sometimes even within
days of battle. In the 1870's, a writer remarked: "No record of previous wars
can surpass those of the years between 1861 and '71. Anterior to these events we
spoke of Napier, Thiers, Gibbon, Bancroft. They were compilers from old
documents. Now we speak of The Tribune, Times, World, Herald. They have been
eyewitnesses."

World War II broke out just as technical changes made fuller and more nearly
immediate accounts possible and cultural changes made people expect them.
Limited camera capabilities had slowed images of World War I to the approximate
pace of a pageant, but the 35-millimeter camera proved fast enough to catch some
of the destructive frenzy of the Spanish Civil War. By the mid-30's, photographs
could zip across continents and oceans by wire or radio, arriving simultaneously
with the news.

The news was everywhere, in word and image and sound. Copiously illustrated
tabloids were increasingly successful. Improved presses and inks brought on the
picture magazines: Life began in 1936, Look in '37. (Before Life began, one of
Henry Luce's advisers told him that "a war, any sort of war, is going to be a
natural promotion for a picture magazine.") Newsreels played in every movie
theater; a few theaters played nothing else. ("Reporting the War" does not cover
newsreels or feature films, both of which helped shape the public image of war.)

RADIO NEWS, WHICH AROUND 1930 had consisted of a brief evening broadcast five
times a week, grew like Topsy throughout the 30's. The catalogue for "Reporting
the War," written by the curator, Frederick S. Voss, a historian at the Portrait
Gallery, reports that in 1938 a majority of Americans regarded newspapers as
their main source of news, but by 1941 the balance had shifted to radio. The
medium may have created then what television apparently has now: a class of
people who do not read very much daily and may not have access to good
newspapers yet are up to date on the headlines.

In 1938, Edward R. Murrow's and William L. Shirer's on-the-spot broadcasts from
Europe within two days of Hitler's march into Austria gave a new sense of
immediacy and proximity to events overseas -- as radio continued to do
throughout the war. The catalogue gives credit to the medium for moderating
America's prewar isolationism. Unfortunately, text and photographs do little
justice to radio in the museum; it shows up best here on the medium that
succeeded and in some cases overwhelmed it, television, in the form of
videotaped interviews with broadcasters.

The exhibition salutes the proliferating means of presenting war by including a
couple of Milton Caniff's wartime "Terry and the Pirates" cartoon strips and
drawings by Bill Mauldin. In a videotaped interview, Mauldin talks about Gen.
George Patton's fury over Willie and Joe, Mauldin's unshaven, draggletailed,
exhausted, wildly popular cartoon infantrymen, who Patton thought were fostering
disrespect of officers among the rank and file.

Communications clearly had reached a stage of development virtually guaranteeing
that World War II would be more thoroughly, more avidly reported than any
previous war. And the coverage, with its rapid transmission in a variety of
media, set standards that people instantly became accustomed to. On Aug. 14,
1945, Robert St. John, having made a shrewd guess when signaled that news of
major importance was on the way, reported Japan's surrender on NBC radio about
20 seconds ahead of the competition. Roughly an hour later, he was asked to
repeat the announcement on a new medium with a limited audience: television.

The most surprising war reportage on view is the paintings and drawings by
professional painters at the front. From the 1850's through World War I, English
and American periodicals had printed eyewitness illustrations by artists like
Winslow Homer, but it was clear early in World War II that the great visual
reporting would be made by the camera. Life's picture editor later said that
"World War II was a photographer's war."

This exhibition will not change that estimate, despite the talent of some of the
artists. Yet the art has an important place in the history of wartime
communications. It was in color, first of all, unlike almost all published
photographs of World War II. It covered some events no photographer ever saw,
presented a highly personal response to the war and was seen by millions.

In 1943 the Army organized an artist corps, only to have it voted out by
Congress several months later. Most of the newly unemployed painters were
quickly hired by Life, which had already commissioned many illustrations of the
war and which estimated its audience at 22 million people. The pictures then
toured major American museums. Painters still respond to wars today, but World
War II appears to have been the last time the hand of the artist was routinely
called on to inform a mass audience on this subject. Photography's precision,
intensity and instantaneity simply took over.

The show also has good material on women's contributions and on blacks',
including the struggle blacks waged to support their country and at the same
time fight its racism. Occasionally reporters had their own dramas: Ernest
Hemingway, sent to report on the war, violated the international injunction
against armed participation by correspondents; the Army conducted a pro forma
hearing and exonerated him. Another correspondent's article may have tipped off
the Japanese to the fact that the Allies had broken their code.

The question is whether the news media have changed responses to war. World War
II established expectations of extensive and rapid coverage; technology and the
internal policies of communications empires continued to expand along that path
-- at least until the military clamped down after Vietnam. George Will wrote in
Newsweek in 1983: "If there had been television cameras at Gettysburg, there
would be two countries: the carnage would have caused the North to let the South
go."

Perhaps. The United States Government forbade publication of pictures of dead
Americans during World War II for fear they would harm morale on the home front.
But when civilians grumbled about their difficult lives, President Roosevelt
decided it might help if they understood where the real sacrifices were being
made. In 1943 the first images of American dead appeared. After that they did
not stop (though the more gruesome were censored), yet Americans continued to
believe they were fighting a "good war."

Did the Holocaust pictures stop genocide? Did television influence America's
entry into and departure from Somalia? Hint: The answers to those questions are
not the same -- yet one leads into the other. "Reporting the War" makes clear
that coverage of World War II was the multimedia operation of its day, and that
the news media's power was widely respected.

What it also makes clear is that the clampdown on the press in Grenada, Panama
and the Persian Gulf signaled not simply a reaction to the openness in Vietnam
but a kind of return to the limited reporting that prevailed before technology
and a news-hungry public produced the first widespread and timely coverage of a
war in history.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "William Shirer and Edward R. Murrow in Paris" (circa 1938), by
an unidentified photographer -- On-the-spot broadcasts. (Edward R. Murrow
Center, Tufts University/National Portrait Gallery)(pg. 35); A detail of
Margaret Bourke-White's view of an air raid on Moscow, at the National Portrait
Gallery in Washington. (Life Magazine/National Portrait Gallery)(pg. 34)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
On Rikers Island, Armed With Only a Camera

BYLINE: By CHARLES STRUM

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 972 words


JON ALPERT, A MAN WHO HAS eagerly lugged his video camera through war-torn
jungles, unspeakable slums and, most recently, America's largest jail complex,
has turned bashfulness into an asset.

"You might laugh, but I'm too shy to do this without the camera," said Mr.
Alpert, expressing reservations common to reporters. "It gives me a reason for
being at Rikers, when under normal circumstances I have no business being
there."

A new made-for-television documentary, "Lock Up: The Prisoners of Rikers
Island," is his latest effort to bring an audience face to face with something
stark and impolite: predators and survivors who inevitably raise doubts about
humanity's potential for goodness. Ten months in the making, "Lock Up" is on HBO
tomorrow night at 10:15.

The invitation to Mr. Alpert's brand of video verite -- as basic as a home
movie, but smarter -- comes in the first few moments, with white words on a
black screen: "If you are arrested in New York City and cannot make bail,
welcome to Rikers Island."

For the next 75 minutes, Mr. Alpert, unseen except for glimpses of his hand and
forearm and unheard from except for a few clarifying questions, moves from cell
block to dormitory, from mental ward to maternity hospital to guards' stations.
Aside from the corrections officers, who tersely announce each stop on the tour,
no narrator is present.

Instead, prisoners talk at length about crime and remorse, about getting by and
getting out, about going straight and knowing they probably won't.

It's a video snapshot about two kinds of hell: the burnout of the streets and
the menacing banality of jail. Rikers is a place of hardened criminals and
luckless drug addicts; men with AIDS, women with babies, people with a future
that often means a return to Rikers. All of them inhabit an island that New York
City has set aside for those awaiting trial -- a 415-acre Alcatraz in the East
River with more than 15,000 inmates and 8,200 guards, where 92 percent of the
captive population is black or Hispanic, 90 percent have no high school diploma,
and 25 percent of the women are H.I.V. positive. A year in Rikers costs 58,000
tax dollars.

For Mr. Alpert, who is 45, the Rikers project and one in production on the
troubles of a New England mill town reflect a recent focus on problems in
America. "Lock Up" also departs from a crusading tone that critics sometimes
found in his earlier work from war zones around the globe.

"I think there was a time when every single tape we were making was part of an
overall plan to change the world and make it a better place," Mr. Alpert said in
an interview in his studio, home and video school in a century-old firehouse on
Lafayette Street in Manhattan. "And I'm afraid that this may be a reflection on
my advancing years, but maybe it's not always to change things now but sometimes
to understand things."

Mr. Alpert is a self-taught reporter, a man who indulged a growing video habit
after his graduation from Colgate University in 1970. He and his wife, Keiko
Tsuno, relied on youthful urgency and unpolished technique to focus on local
problems like Chinatown sweatshops, then turned to larger game.

THROUGH THE 1970'S AND 80'S, Mr. Alpert ran off to the world's hot spots --
Cuba, Cambodia, Vietnam, Central America, the Persian Gulf -- often taking on
projects before he knew who would broadcast his work. Mr. Alpert's freelance
adventures for NBC's "Today" program and others won eight Emmys. But he and Ms.
Tsuno still live on a shoestring, plowing income back into their not-for-profit
video school, Downtown Community Television Center.

Those familiar with Mr. Alpert's work will notice in "Lock Up" a departure from
his hallmark style. Formerly Mr. Alpert talked and filmed at the same time,
firing the most rudimentary questions at his subjects in a manner that one
critic -- without malice -- likened to that of a game-show host. But some
reviewers felt his manner, while a refreshing change from the anchorman in
safari jacket, was too intrusive.

In the Philippines, for example, he once came across a place called Smokey
Mountain, a garbage dump that doubled as a permanent home for scavengers.

"What are you going to do with that grapefruit there -- you going to eat that?"
he asked a young pregnant woman who had harvested spoiled fruit from the trash
mounds. "So this is like a health food for you?"

There are only a few such moments of Alpert chatter in "Lock Up." Introduced to
two men in a jail unit set aside for gay inmates, he encouraged them to talk
about sexual behavior behind bars. With the camera focused squarely on them, Mr.
Alpert asks, "So, can you guys have sex?"

They laugh, embarrassed. "I mean, what happens?" Mr. Alpert persists, matter of
factly. "Yeah, you can," one man says. "Where there's a will, there's a way."

Sheila Nevins, HBO's vice president for documentaries, said she had been drawn
to Mr. Alpert's "subjective, uninterrupted documentary." She commissioned five,
including the Rikers piece.

Unlike film, she said, "video is accessible, because it looks like something you
can shoot yourself. You feel it happened a minute ago."

But immediacy takes time: 80 hours of Rikers tape for a final cut of an hour and
15 minutes. For a maker of documentaries, particularly one as driven as Mr.
Alpert, patience is everything. And, perhaps, he says, it helps not to be a
television superstar.

He counts this among the reasons his subjects are willing to grant him
unrestricted access to their lives.

"We're about as regular as you can get," he said of his crew. "To some degree,
people, especially the guys in the jail who are rather street smart, can tell
whether you're there as Joe Blow from midtown trying to cream something off for
himself and get a payday or whether you're really interested."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jon Alpert, above, outside the Downtown Community Television
Center, where he and his wife operate a not-for-profit video school. Left, a
scene from "Lock Up," to be shown on HBO tomorrow night. (Don Hogan Charles/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

G.O.P. Delegates Leave 19th C.D. to a Primary

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 14WC;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words


WESTCHESTER Republicans, meeting in convention, failed to agree on a candidate
for the 19th Congressional District last week, leaving the choice to a
Republican primary in September.

The seat is being vacated by its 13-term Republican incumbent, Hamilton Fish,
for health reasons. A week earlier, Mr. Fish's son, Hamilton Fish Jr., won a
surprise victory at a Democratic convention, but the ultimate winner is also
likely to be determined in a fall Democratic primary.

Unlike the Democrats, who restricted their convention vote to those towns and
cities actually in the 19th Congressional District, which includes northern
Westchester, Putnam County and parts of Orange and Dutchess Counties, the
Republican leadership, under the party chairman, Anthony J. Colavita, sought to
have the entire convention select their 19th Congressional District candidate.

That would have favored the candidacy of Guy Parisi, a lawyer who has long been
active in Republican ranks, because the Yonkers delegation, which traditionally
dominates party conventions, favored Mr. Parisi, who was Mr. Colavita's choice.

"This is the way we have always done it," Mr. Colavita explained before gaveling
the convention to order as he began to feel pressure from delegations
representing other candidates to restrict the voting to localities within the
Congressional district.

Bowing finally to pressure from upcounty Republicans, Mr. Colavita decided to
restrict the vote to those communities in Mr. Fish's district. Mr. Parisi then
decided that he did not want to compete under those restrictions and said he
would seek his party's nomination in the primary.

Two of the five remaining candidates followed Mr. Parisi's lead and also
withdrew their names from the convention balloting. They were John Flanagan Jr.,
a former pilot in the Vietnam War and brigadier general in the Air Force
Reserve, and Susan Kelly, a Katonah resident.

That left three candidates willing to test their support in the Westchester part
of the district. They were Paul W. Bucha, a Somers resident, Assemblyman Paul
Warren of Fishkill and former Representative Joseph J. DioGuardi of New
Rochelle.

Mr. Bucha won the ensuing vote, getting 222 votes to 89 for Mr. DioGuardi and 49
for Mr. Warren. There were 87 abstentions. Mr. Colavita said there was no
winner, since Mr. Bucha did not achieve a majority of the votes cast, which the
Republican leadership ruled to include abstentions. There was no second level of
balloting.

This left many delegates unsatisfied, prompting some boos and catcalls. Many of
the delegates to the convention stayed on in clusters, as dissatisfied with the
results as they were with the accommodations, an airless room in the White
Plains Y.M.C.A. too small to contain enough chairs for all the attendees and
with a faulty public address system.

Mr. Parisi, in dropping out of the Wednesday night convention vote, said: "There
appears to be a dispute over party rules, and my candidacy has become a pawn in
this dispute. It is also driving this party apart." Rather than allow his name
to be put in nomination, he said he would start Tuesday to collect signatures
for the September primary.

Mr. Bucha, who described his business as international marketing and said he was
on the board of directors of a variety of other companies, said he was not sure
what to make of the night's events. He said, "Ask the boss," pointing at Mr.
Colavita.

Asked if he had support in the other counties of the district, Mr. Bucha said,
"I came in first in Putnam and second in Orange on a first ballot, but they
never designated anybody, quitting after going to four ballots." He said he came
in second in Dutchess County and was hoping for Conservative Party support
districtwide.

Six Are Better Than None

Mr. Flanagan said the evening's process was democracy at its "very, very best
where the people are going to get an opportunity to choose without prejudice of
any manipulations of political machines, or any other gerrymandering or
persuasion behind the scenes."

Mr. Colavita claimed to be delighted with the outcome. He said, "There are six
fine candidates, and the outcome is the healthiest thing that could happen in
this situation, and the people of the 19th Congressional District will decide.

"Our rules do not provide for a runoff. We have never done that. I think having
six candidates is better than having no candidate," a reference to his
experience as state Republican chairman in 1986 in not finding "anyone from
among 2.6 million party members to run for Governor."

Mr. DioGuardi, a two-term Congressman who was defeated by the incumbent,
Representative Nita M. Lowey, said he planned to move from his home in New
Rochelle, which is out of the district he is seeking to represent. He put his
house on the market last September, he said, and will move to Mount Pleasant.

The convention came closer to settling on a candidate in the 89th Assembly
District, which is held now by a Democrat, Naomi C. Matusow. The delegates,
again restricted to those from state district, narrowly selected Robert Spolzino
of Mount Kisco over County Legislator Richard A. Flynn. The vote was 103 to 97.
Mr. Flynn said he would challenge Mr. Spolzino's nomination in a primary.

In the 84th Assembly District, where James G. Pretlow, a Mount Vernon Democrat,
is the incumbent, the Republicans selected Eric G. Lustig of Yonkers, a
programmer-analyst in an advertising agency. Mr. Colavita said a Republican
candidate for the 85th District, where Ronald C. Tocci, a New Rochelle Democrat,
is the incumbent, would be named later.

The Republicans selected Gerard Gershonowitz of Hartsdale to challenge the
incumbent Democratic Assemblyman, Richard L. Brodsky, in the 86th District.

County Legislator Michael J. Spano, who served less than a year in the Assembly
to fill out the unexpired term of Terence M. Zaleski when he was elected Mayor
of Yonkers, was chosen as the candidate in the 87th District to replace
Republican Assemblywoman Cecile D. Singer, who is retiring.

In the 88th District, held by Audrey G. Hochberg, a Scarsdale Democrat, the
Republicans chose Robert Walsh of Eastchester, a retired transportation
executive. The 90th District candidate, Gary Ajello, a Yorktown Councilman, will
face Sandra R. Galef, the Democratic incumbent from Ossining.

As expected, the convention endorsed the candidacy of Assemblyman Vincent L.
Leibell 3d for the State Senate seat in the 37th District being vacated by
Assemblyman George E. Pataki, who is challenging Mario M. Cuomo for the post of
Governor. Mr. Leibell will face former Westchester County Executive Alfred B.
DelBello, whose last elected office was Lieutenant Governor under Mr. Cuomo.

In other Senate races, the convention backed Republican incumbents Guy J.
Velella and Nicholas A. Spano for re-election in the 34th and 35th Districts but
put off selections in the 33d and 36th Districts, where Democratic incumbents
Joseph L. Galiber of the Bronx and Suzi Oppenheimer of New Rochelle are seeking
re-election.

The convention also selected four candidates for county judge: the incumbents
Joseph K. West and Kenneth Lange, Fred Shapiro, chief court attorney for the
State Supreme Court in Westchester, and Mary Smith, a Yonkers city judge.

In other Congressional contests, the Republicans endorsed Joseph Giambo of the
Bronx for the 17th District, now held by Representative Eliot L. Engel, and
supported the bid of Andrew Hartzell of Scarsdale for the 18th District, now
held by Ms. Lowey, both Democrats.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MAY 29-JUNE 4: As You Were;
Judge Reinstates Gay Army Officer Who Was Asked and Told

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer is the stuff of recruiting posters. A 26-year Army
nurse who earned the Bronze Star in Vietnam, she was the Veterans
Administration's Nurse of the Year in 1985.

But her career ended abruptly in 1992 after an investigator asked about her
sexual orientation during a top-secret security clearance review, and she said
she was a lesbian. The Army dismissed Colonel Cammermeyer with an honorable
discharge.

Last week, a Federal judge in Seattle ordered the Washington State National
Guard to reinstate 52-year-old Colonel Cammermeyer to her former job as chief
nurse, ruling that the military's ban on homosexuals was based solely on
prejudice and was a clear violation of the Constitution's equal-protection
clause.

The ruling by Judge Thomas S. Zilly dealt with the Pentagon's old policy, not
the regulations that Congress and the Clinton Administration adopted last year.
Those new rules, known as "don't ask, don't tell, don't pursue," permit
homosexuals to serve if they keep their sexual orientation private. Under this
policy, Colonel Cammermeyer would not have been asked about her orientation.

"The Government has discriminated against Colonel Cammermeyer solely on the
basis of her status as a homosexual and has failed to demonstrate a rational
basis for doing so," Judge Zilly said.

Gay rights advocates hailed the ruling as the latest in a string of recent
Federal district court rulings that could cut away at the undergirding of both
policies.   ERIC SCHMITT

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Margarethe Cammermeyer

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
On the Internet, Dissidents' Shots Heard 'Round the World

BYLINE: By PETER H. LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


POLITICAL dissidents of all nationalities are discovering a homeland in the
worldwide web of computer networks known as cyberspace.

Five years ago today, Chinese dissidents used facsimile machines to call world
attention to the Government's violent crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators
in Tiananmen Square. Today, many human rights activists are exploring an even
more powerful medium, the computer web called the Internet, as a way of defying
censorship.

Human-rights organizations have been embracing electronic mail as a means of
communicating with their members around the world. And just last week, Human
Rights Watch, Amnesty International, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and
the writers group PEN were among the groups that met in New York to explore the
possibility of establishing a human rights communications system over the
Internet.

"As more and more people have access to the Internet, it will be practically
impossible for governments to ban something," said Siobhan Dowd, who is the
program director of the Freedom to Write committee of PEN.

There are places on earth that the Internet cannot reach, and in countries where
the flow of information is no problem, copyright laws sometimes are. But
already, the writings of dissidents and political prisoners are circulating on
the Internet, which connects more than 20 million people worldwide.

An unusual library opened its electronic doors two weeks ago with a catalogue
that so far consists entirely of excerpts from two books banned in the authors'
home countries. "I was 16 when the Cultural Revolution broke out in 1966," one
of them begins.

These words from the autobiographical manuscript "Searching for the Truth," by
the Chinese dissident Wei Jingsheng, along with excerpts from the book "This
Earth of Mankind," by the Indonesian novelist and dissident Pramoedya Ananta
Toer, are the first in what could become a global repository of banned and
censored writing, distributed freely over the Internet. Some of the work of
Esmail Fassih, an Iranian diarist, is to go on line this week.

None of the authors have access to the Internet, as far as anyone in cyberspace
can tell. There are no Internet host computers in Beijing, where Mr. Wei, having
been imprisoned for years and finally released, was recently placed under house
arrest after speaking to Western journalists about human rights in China. Nor is
Mr. Toer on line in Indonesia, where he has been barred from leaving the country
and his activities are said to be closely monitored. But the new electronic
library, which is called the Digital Freedom Net, demonstrates the Internet's
power in opening pathways around government censors.

The Digital Freedom Net was established by Howard Jonas, whose company,
International Discount Telecommunications of Hackensack, N.J., provides
long-distance telephone and Internet service to businesses. The excerpts on the
network are accessible to anyone in the world with a personal computer, a modem,
a telephone line and a way to tap into the Internet.

Compared with the uncoordinated, small-scale use of facsimile machines by
dissidents in China and the former Soviet Union, the rapidly growing Internet
holds the promise of great speed and scope.

Messages travel from one Internet site to another, even around the world, in
seconds. It is as easy to post messages to thousands, or even hundreds of
thousands, of users as it is to send a single fax. Once retrieved, it can be
passed on to other computer networks or by more conventional means. And because
information travels in "packets" of data that are typically scattered and
reassembled at the receiving site, it is much harder to intercept or trace
messages.

"The notion of using the Internet to transcend international boundaries that
have been used to suppress information is a very visionary one," said Gara
LaMarche, associate director of the Human Rights Watch, an international human
rights monitoring organization based in New York.

But Ms. Dowd of PEN, and others, have practical concerns about the Digital
Freedom Net, including the mechanism for deciding which works would be included,
and the fact that most censored publications require translation. Not the least
of Ms. Dowd's concerns is rights and royalties. "Putting things up on the
Internet without getting copyright permission wouldn't be right," she said. "We
are a writers group, after all."

Ms. Dowd cited as an example Salman Rushdie's novel "Satanic Verses," which was
banned in several Islamic countries but published commercially elsewhere.
"Putting it up freely on the Internet could take away the market," she said.

Before posting the excerpts from "The Earth of Mankind," the Digital Freedom Net
received permission from Mr. Toer's publisher, William Morrow in New York. But
Mr. Wei's manuscript, which was has never been formally published, was made
available to the Hackensack computer by the Index on Censorship, a London-based
group that had printed the excerpts in the organization's magazine -- without
the writer's authorization but on the assumption that he had permitted the
manuscript to be smuggled out of China in order to share it with the world.

Still, skeptics wonder about the practical reach of Internet communication,
since the computers capable of tapping into it are concentrated in North America
and Europe.

"If something is banned in Bangladesh, putting it on the Internet wouldn't help
because most people in Bangladesh don't have computers," Ms. Dowd said.

But Mr. Jonas, the network's founder, said: "It's the business leaders and
intellectual groups in universities, where opinion is made, where people in
those countries have access to the Internet. The information will get through,
unless a government is willing to close down every school and every business
that has an Internet account."

John S. Quarterman, an Internet consultant and author in Austin, Tex., said
approximately 60 countries and territories have Internet connections capable of
tapping directly into the Digital Freedom Net, which is known as a "gopher"
site. Gopher is a navigational tool for streamlining the search for information
on the Internet.

But dozens of other countries without such sophisticated Internet capabilities
can gain indirect access to the information, which can be relayed by the less
complicated system of electronic mail. Mr. Quarterman says more than 40 million
computer users worldwide can exchange E-mail. Using his computer keyboard to
explore the Internet's backwaters, Mr. Quarterman found only one site in Africa
between Cairo and Cape Town, and no sites in Iran. In all of China he has found
only one, a commercial venture in Shanghai.

"Networking is subversive, and that's why the Chinese don't want it," Mr.
Quarterman said.

But he added that there might be some electronic exchange across the Chinese
border -- "given the changing political tide and economic conditions, especially
Hong Kong." He also noted that Internet traffic into and out of Vietnam has
surged since the United States lifted its trade embargo.

The Digital Freedom Net goes beyond basic electronic mail by storing files that
can be read, copied and printed. (The Internet address is "gopher.iia.org" for
those with the gopher tool.)

There is no charge beyond the user's own Internet fees, and Mr. Jonas said all
material posted to the library would be selected by reputable human rights
groups.

Mr. Jonas, who is 37 years old, said his company was donating the computer space
and phone lines, and that many of his employees were volunteering their time,
often well into the night, to maintain the library. "We wanted to use technology
to do something great," he said, "like eliminate censorship."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
True to Form: Life Styles Of the Infamous and Venal

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


HERE is the main difference between Democratic and Republican corruption:
Democratic corruption tends to involve hands in the public till; in one word,
graft. Republican corruption is more likely to entail abuse of the power of
government.

Not always, of course. But as is the case with many stereotypes, there is more
than a kernel of truth. The latest example was the 17-felony indictment last
week of Representative Dan Rostenkowski, who as chairman of the Ways and Means
Committee was one of the most influential Democrats in Congress.

Consider the main charges, which are not yet proved: trading stamp vouchers for
cash; padding his payroll with ghost employees who did little or no public work
and who sometimes kicked back part of their pay to his office; putting gifts to
friends on his office expense account; using Government cars for his and his
family's private purposes; ordering an employee to lie to the grand jury
investigating him.

This is the kind of graft that characterized the Democratic big-city political
machines from Boss Tweed's in New York in the 19th century to Richard J. Daley's
in Chicago in the middle of the 20th century, where Mr. Rostenkowski cut his
teeth.

Abscam, the mostly Democratic scandal of the 1970's in which Congressmen took
money from an investigator posing as a sheik in return for putative legislative
favors, amounted to graft. So did the offenses of Jim Wright, the Democratic
Speaker of the House who left office in 1989 largely because of money he made
from a phony book deal. In the last two years, four other Democratic Congressmen
have been convicted of what was essentially graft -- Nick Mavroules of
Massachusetts, Albert Bustamante of Texas, Larry Smith of Florida and Carroll
Hubbard of Kentucky.

Now, compare that with the Watergate and Iran-contra affairs. Richard M. Nixon
had the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency and
even a special group on the White House staff called "plumbers" conduct
surveillance of his political enemies. He wanted the Internal Revenue Service to
harass his critics. He raised the Government's milk-price supports for his
political gain. He ordered the bombing of Cambodia without Congressional
approval and kept the details from the American public.

Under Ronald Reagan, United States policy in Iran and Nicaragua was turned over
to and carried out by a secret band of shady private operators. As was the case
with Watergate, the fundamental processes of Government were undermined.

Obviously, there are enough exceptions to fill a cesspool. Right now,
Representative Joseph M. McDade of Pennsylvania, the top Republican on the
Appropriations Committee, is under indictment on bribery and racketeering
charges that resemble Democratic-style graft. Spiro T. Agnew, Mr. Nixon's Vice
President, was charged with kickbacks, bribery and extortion. On the other hand,
when the Kennedy Administration had the F.B.I. put wiretaps on the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., it was an abuse of the power of Government.

More often than not, however, the rule about Democratic and Republican
corruption rings true.

Corrupting Power



 When Democrats are caught abusing the power of their office, as was the case
when Lyndon B. Johnson used a minor incident in the Tonkin Gulf to justify an
expansion of the war in Vietnam, the party is unforgiving. But graft seems more
easily pardoned. In private conversations last week, one Democratic lawmaker
after another defended Mr. Rostenkowski, saying that many of the offenses he was
accused of -- putting gifts to constituents on his expense account or using
staff members for personal errands -- are commonplace in Congressional offices.
"Maybe these are ethical violations," a friend in Congress said of the charges
against Mr. Rostenkowski, "but felonies? No way."

Many Republican politicians see nothing wrong with what the Reagan White House
did in the Iran-contra affair, and some still defend Mr. Nixon in Watergate.

When corrupt Republicans want to make a few bucks off their public office, they
do not dip directly into the Government's petty cash drawer the way dishonest
Democrats sometimes do. Rather, they twist the rules of government. In the
Reagan Administration, for example, private developers hired prominent
Republican lobbyists to get friendly hearings for their grant and subsidy
requests at the highest levels of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development.

Some Republicans may also tend to be more skeptical of the worth of government
in the first place. "If you believe the entire enterprise is suspect, you're
more likely to try to undermine it," said Representative Barney Frank, a
Democrat from Massachusetts.

Former Senator Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire, agreed more or
less with that assessment. "Most Republicans are contemptuous of government," he
said, although he excluded himself from that category. "Few Democrats are."

Frank Mankiewicz, a public relations executive here with deep ties to the
Democratic Party, said the difference was grounded in a class distinction. "The
lower classes steal," he said. "The upper classes defraud. The Republicans don't
need walking-around money."

Another difference did not arise in the Rostenkowski case: sex.

With a very few exceptions (the case against Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon is
one), the sex scandals of recent note have involved Democrats: all three Kennedy
brothers; Gary Hart; Wilbur D. Mills and his plunge into the Tidal Basin with
the stripper Fanne Foxe; Wayne Hays and his secretary, Elizabeth Ray, who told
reporters, "I can't type. I can't file. I can't even answer the phone"; Senator
Charles S. Robb, whose re-election this year is threatened largely because of a
tryst he had with a former beauty queen.

It is hard to imagine Richard Nixon or Gerald Ford or Ronald Reagan or George
Bush facing the same questions Bill Clinton does about promiscuity.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE D-DAY TOUR: THE OVERVIEW;
U.S. and Britain Honor Knights on Wings, Raising Glasses, Voices and Some
Specters

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words

DATELINE: PORTSMOUTH, England, June 4


President Clinton led a tribute today to the World War II fliers -- "these
knights borne on wings," he called them -- whose exploits gave the Allies the
air superiority they needed above the Normandy beaches on D-Day.

Speaking at the American military cemetery a few miles from Cambridge, northeast
of London, Mr. Clinton recalled the days, a half-century ago, of "Lindy hops in
London and kids from Milwaukee invited in for high tea." Prime Minister John
Major reflected in another speech that, as the hour of attack approached, every
30th person in Britain was an American serviceman -- a total of more than 1.5
million.

Tonight, Mr. Clinton heard Queen Elizabeth II speak at a glittering formal
dinner here of the heroism of the troops who gave up "their carefree youth" to
shoulder the awesome responsibility of carrying out the invasion, known as
Operation Overlord.

Like the President earlier this week, she observed that "the peace which victory
brought is a fragile thing." But the "mighty deed" of the invasion, she said,
"proved what can be achieved, against daunting odds, when Governments and people
act together with conviction in a common cause."

Cheers and Tapping Toes

A sweet breath of nostalgia mingled with more reverential notes during a long,
eventful day in the nation that provided the launch site for the assault against
Hitler's redoubt.

When a refitted B-17 Flying Fortress bomber, with a British Spitfire fighter at
one wingtip and an American Mustang at the other, flew low over the 30 acres of
white marble headstones at the Cambridge cemetery this morning, old aviators and
their families cheered. And when an Air Force band played Glenn Miller tunes --
"American Patrol," "In the Mood," "Moonlight Serenade" -- more than a few tapped
their feet or sang the lyrics, sotto voce.

Miller, the most popular bandleader of the time, died while flying across the
English Channel to entertain front-line troops. His name is one of 5,126 listed
on a 472-foot Wall of the Missing at the cemetery. Another is that of Joseph P.
Kennedy Jr., the oldest son of what became a famous political dynasty, who
disappeared while on a secret bombing mission over the continent.

World Affairs for Lunch

At midday, President Clinton flew west to Chequers, near Oxford, which is the
country home of British prime ministers, for a luncheon meeting with Mr. Major
that focused on Bosnia but also included discussions of the looming nuclear
crisis in North Korea.

After that, he talked briefly with Margaret Beckett, the acting head of the
Labor party, whose leader, John Smith, died last month.

Tonight, the President and Hillary Rodham Clinton boarded the Royal Yacht
Brittania, berthed here in Portsmouth, the channel port southwest of London that
has been the main base of the Royal Navy since the time of Henry VIII. They were
greeted by Queen Elizabeth II, whose father, King George VI, came to symbolize
British unity during the war.

Then, with the leaders of the other countries whose fighting men took part in
the cross-channel attack, Mr. Clinton attended the gala dinner given by the
Queen in the Guildhall here.

In her dinner speech, the Queen quoted her father's radio speech on June 6,
1944, in which he said, "We and our allies are sure that our fight is against
evil and for a world in which goodness and honor may be the foundation of life
of men in every land."

Pomp and Jitterbug

Among the other guests of honor at the banquet, the largest of its kind ever
given by the British Government, were King Harald of Norway, King Albert II of
Belgium, Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, President Francois Mitterrand of
France, President Lech Walesa of Poland and Prime Minister Jean Chretien of
Canada.

The Clintons, who are making their first official visit to the country where he
studied and protested against the Vietnam War during the late 1960's, were
spending the night on the 412-foot yacht.

George VI's widow, Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, who is still active at 93,
took part in a ceremony this afternoon. Her bright yellow dress standing out
against the lowering skies, she watched bands and honor guards march across a
parade ground on Whale Island in Portsmouth harbor to symbolize the embarkation
of the gigantic invasion fleet.

There was also an exhibition of that wartime dance-floor craze, the jitterbug.

Eisenhower's Window

Fifty years ago today, Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Allied commander, peered
out at rain slashing down in "horizontal streaks." Fearful that allied planes
would be grounded, he postponed the invasion for 24 hours.

The suspense was immense. As Eisenhower later wrote in his memoir, "Crusade in
Europe:"

"The southernmost camps where assault troops were assembled were all surrounded
by barbed wire to prevent any soldier leaving the camp after he had once been
briefed as to his part in the attack.

"The mighty host was as tense as a coiled spring, and indeed that is exactly
what it was -- a great human spring, coiled for the moment when its energy
should be released and it would vault the English Channel in the greatest
amphibious assault ever attempted."

The next day, with a simple "Okay, let's go" he put the vast undertaking back
into gear.

Historically Correct Fete

Both decisions were made at his headquarters, Southwick House, a venerable
Georgian manor on the outskirts of Portsmouth. This afternoon, a thousand
guests, including invasion veterans of many nations and the Queen's sister,
Princess Margaret, gathered there for a garden party. It rained, of course, and
the guests had to huddle in a reception hall or under tents, their shoes in the
mud.

"It would have been historically incorrect to have good weather 50 years on,"
said Gen. John M. Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

After his visit to the Anzio battlefield on Friday, Mr. Clinton stopped this
morning at the cemetery at Madingley, near Cambridge, bringing a second straight
dose of military pageantry and emotion for a President with no military
experiences of his own to draw upon.

To compensate, he brought along Treasury Secretary Lloyd M. Bentsen, a wartime
pilot who flew 35 missions as commander of a squadron of B-24 Liberators.

"Boys grew into men far too fast," the Secretary said in a vivid recollection of
his experiences. "They circled these green fields, assembled and headed for
Europe in formation.  Coming back, they were strung out across the Channel,
fewer in number -- a feathered prop, a smoking engine, holes in the fuselage
where a gunner once stood.

"They squeezed the oxygen hose to break up the frozen breath particles clogging
their face masks. They cranked down the landing gear by hand because the
hydraulic lines had been shot out. And how the ground crews cheered when their
plane made it home."

Mr. Bentsen was introduced by Walter Cronkite, the retired CBS News anchorman,
who was a war correspondent for United Press.

The flatlands of East Anglia east of Cambridge were like a giant aircraft
carrier late in the war, dotted with dozens of relatively primitive airfields
from which British and American bombers and fighters flew. The terrain was
ideal, and so was the geography -- East Anglia is the region of Britain closest
to Germany.

More than 50,000 airmen were killed or lost on operations launched from this
country. The Madingley cemetery holds 3,812 graves, arranged in concentric arcs.
An inscription in the memorial chapel speaks of those who, "from these friendly
isles, flew their final flight."

Lieut. Col. Johnny R. Almond, an Air Force chaplain who acted as master of
ceremonies for the memorial event, called them "men and women who gave up all
their tomorrows so we could have today."


LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton and Queen Elizabeth II at the Guildhall in
Portsmouth, England, yesterday at a dinner marking the D-Day anniversary.
(Associated Press)

Chart: "SCHEDULE: Some of the D-Day Ceremonies" lists events slated for today
and tomorrow in England and France.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Anti-Congress Candidate for Senate

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 26;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, June 4


He cast himself as a pugnacious outsider, intent on fighting the political
establishment in Washington, with no interest at all in forging friendships or
coalitions.

But now that Oliver L. North has won the Virginia Republican nomination for the
United States Senate, defeating James C. Miller 3d today at the state party
convention, political experts wonder how his obstreperous and conservative
campaign themes will play while the party keeps searching for unifying themes
after the divisive national convention of 1992.

With no record as a lawmaker and a campaign dominated by his open disdain for
Congress, for its treatment of him seven years ago after the Iran-contra
scandal, Mr. North has dwelled on his maverick role and the boilerplate themes
of conservative Republicanism -- traditional family values, less government, a
strong defense, lower taxes -- at the expense of a more well-rounded, fully
articulated agenda.

Roots of His Populism

"Part of his populist rhetoric flows out of political necessity," said Douglas
Bailey, a Republican consultant in Falls Church, Va. "But he will never be
perceived as one of the boys, and he will never become one of the boys."

Throughout a two-year campaign that climaxed with his victory today, Mr. North
drew in thousands of new Republican voters as he traveled around the state --
even in the face of criticism by the icon of conservatism, former President
Ronald Reagan, and by Virginia's leading Republican, Senator John W. Warner.

With the sheer force of an engaging personality, Mr. North has argued as he did
again today that America is falling victim to the liberal policies of the
Clinton Administration, that government has no place in people's lives, that
family structure remains the backbone of American society, that the country can
ill afford any more cuts in military spending.

He also uses his experience as a daring Marine officer in Vietnam to reinforce
his image as a can-do guy, even if what he can do or would do are not so well
defined.

"I've never been afraid to fight despots or dictators anywhere on this globe,"
he said in his speech today, leaving unclear whether he meant people in Congress
or foreign leaders.

But Mr. North, 50, has taken strong positions on other issues as well: he is
against special rights for homosexuals, cuts in social security benefits for
wealthy people, more restrictive gun laws, higher taxes and anything but English
as the official language of the country. He favors giving Presidents the right
to veto specific items in the general budget bill, term limits and a balanced
Federal budget.

The furthest he wanders from a strict conservative agenda is supporting three
exceptions for abortion: when the life of the pregnant woman is at risk, and in
the cases of rape and incest. By comparison, Mr. Miller favored only the
exception in the first instance.

But beyond what Warren B. Rudman, a moderate Republican and former Senator from
New Hampshire, called "a bunch of nice-sounding homilies and not too much
substance," much of Mr. North's politics have been eclipsed by his constant,
forceful harangues against the "imperial Congress" as a den of pampered,
misguided hypocrites and professional politicians.

His is the voice of a rebel, motivated in no small measure by his personal
six-day war of 1987, when a special House-Senate committee, which included Mr.
Rudman as co-chairman, grilled him over his role in the arms-for-hostages deal.
As a staff member of President Reagan's National Security Council, Mr. North was
a central figure in a scheme to sell arms to Iran and divert the money to forces
fighting the Marxist Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.

Theme That Never Dies

His role in the scandal is a theme that never dies and for many Virginia
Republicans remains the basic reason they support him.

But other Republicans regard his bluster as more style than substance. And they
worry that the substance will always be overshadowed by his past, leaving even
some of his supporters uncertain how his insurgent tendencies would serve the
state in Washington.

"For me," said William Ward, a state delegate from Surry County in southeast
Virginia, "the question about North is how effective he would be as a
legislator. I just don't know."

Sally-Anne Stewart, a delegate for North from Buckingham, in central Virginia,
was somewhat more optimistic. "I think he'll work with them," she said.
"Eventually."

Republican party leaders have also expressed concern that Mr. North would
undermine the party's attempts in Congress to develop unity and cohesive
policies.

More than a few times during the two-day convention, the Republican party
chairman, Patrick M. McSweeney, stressed the need for party unity, promising
that the party would would leave Richmond intact.

But long before the convention began, the moderate wing was off in another
direction, led by Mr. Warner, who said weeks ago that he would not support Mr.
North for the Senate.

"He would be a very polarizing force, no question about it," Whitfield Ayres, a
Republican consultant in Atlanta, said of Mr. North. "He's not the kind of
candidate that could force coalitions. He may be a force for disaffected
Republicans, like Perot voters and people who are angry with the party. But he
is clearly not the kind of unifying Republican Ronald Reagan was."

Mr. Bailey agreed, suggesting that the qualities that got Mr. North nominated
might work against him in the fall, or beyond, in the Senate.

"Clearly, Oliver North is a two-edged sword," Mr. Bailey said. "He clearly
appeals to fundamentalist voters, anti-Washington voters who do not always vote.
At the same time, he offends large numbers of people in the middle."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Development Is Enemy of Vietnam's Forests

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 237 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 4


Pollution and deforestation are major problems facing Vietnam, United Nations
agencies said today.

Logging and nomadic "slash and burn" agriculture are destroying at least 375,000
acres of tropical forest every year in Vietnam, said a statement from the United
Nations Development Program and other agencies marking the United Nations World
Environment Day.

"It is estimated that only 6.75 million acres of high-value forest actually
remain," the statement said.

This compares with 47.5 million acres and an estimated 17.5 million to 20
million acres of forest shown in a 1981-82 survey of satellite photographs.

The report said groundwater contamination produced unsafe drinking water that
was causing extensive health problems, including cholera.

Vietnam's forests suffered extensive damage in the Vietnam War.

The statement warned against excessive clearing of mangrove swamps for the
cultivation of seafood, a growing industry in southern Vietnam. The report said
that clearing one-third of the mangrove forests, more than 250,000 acres, had
contributed to the decrease in the number of plant and animal species and left
the coast more vulnerable to typhoon damage.

Roy Morey, the representative of the development program and the top United
Nations official in Vietnam, said the Government was committed to protecting the
environment but needed to strengthen its institutions and planning capacity.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 551 words


With America less threatened than it has been in many decades, ordinary citizens
can relax. But Presidents are left with precious few opportunities to earn
foreign policy glory. That has proved an especially acute problem for Bill
Clinton, who has shown an uncanny knack for making sensible, undramatic
stewardship appear clumsy and inept.

But when glory cannot be earned, it can sometimes be borrowed. And Mr. Clinton
is borrowing copiously on his current European swing through the legendary
battle sites where American and Allied armies turned the tide against Fascism in
Western Europe a half-century ago.

Beginning Friday with the blood-drenched beachhead of Anzio and continuing
through tomorrow's climax on Normandy's rain-swept shores, the President is
making the most of what the accidents of historical anniversaries and the
powerful symbolism of his office have thrown his way.

The glory is borrowed, but fairly so. The heroism of these epochal battles
belongs to all Americans; not just the World War II veterans of Mr. Clinton's
father's generation but, as the President himself put it at Nettuno Friday, to
all "the sons and daughters of the world they saved."

Mr. Clinton has honored the past and its U.S. and Allied heroes with dignity.
Both American veterans sensitive to the issue of Mr. Clinton's avoidance of
Vietnam military service and foreign leaders nervously alert to any unsteadiness
at the helm of their most vital ally have been reassured by the President's
performance. Mr. Clinton and his speechwriters have done their homework, and it
shows.

The President has dodged pitfalls and grasped opportunities. In his meeting with
the Pope, Mr. Clinton combined courteous respect with principled disagreement
over abortion and contraception. He honored democracy by endorsing Italy's newly
elected right-wing coalition Government. Though the presence of neo-Fascists in
Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi's coalition is jarring, especially during these
anti-Fascist anniversaries, any snub of Mr. Berlusconi would have pointlessly
insulted Italian voters.

In England, Mr. Clinton's main risk is unflattering comparisons with wartime
leaders like Churchill and Roosevelt. At Pointe du Hoc tomorrow, the comparisons
will be with Ronald Reagan's rhetoric a decade ago.

In his first year and a half, Mr. Clinton has generally looked better at foreign
policy when he travels than he has in Washington. Recall his positive notices in
Vancouver, Tokyo, Seoul and at the Asia-Pacific summit meeting in Seattle. On
these occasions, the reality of continued American power is self-evident; the
usual roar of domestic criticism, partisan and otherwise, momentarily falls
still. And perhaps foreign leaders are somewhat more aware than most Americans
of the changed dynamics of a world no longer clearly defined by a Communist East
and democratic, capitalist West.

When the President returns to Washington on Wednesday, it will be back to hard
decisions on North Korea, Haiti and any number of other continuing crises. But
if past form holds, Mr. Clinton will probably come back with a temporary boost
of energy and stature from his time abroad. He may also benefit, for a few days
at least, from an infusion of borrowed glory from a more dangerous, if more
heroic, past.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial
Borrowed Glory

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Clinton's War Story

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


"What did you do in the war, Daddy?" is the question American children of my
generation asked their fathers, and the answers were the stuff of a thousand
unforgettable bedtime stories. As my own father, who served in the
China-Burma-India Theater during the war, said to me as I turned 45 last week:
"I can't remember what I was doing when I was 45, but I still remember
everything about what happened on D-Day, when I was 23."

Many of today's children must ask their fathers a radically different question:
"How did you get out of the war, Daddy?" And the answer can be simple or
complex. Of the many American men who eluded service in the Vietnam War, only a
fraction can boast that they resisted the draft, paying a price in exile or jail
or both for that principled stand. The rest of us, as strongly opposed to the
war on moral grounds as we might have been, found other, easier, often devious
ways out -- from a high number in the draft lottery (my lucky case) to the
intricate manipulation of educational and medical deferments (which would have
been my case had I been less lucky).

This, of course, is the Bill Clinton story, and as he heads toward Normandy for
the 50th anniversary of the Allied invasion, his draft history of a
quarter-century ago threatens to paralyze his Presidency. From his
post-inaugural waffle on homosexuals in the military to his inconsistent and
often incoherent policies on Bosnia, Haiti, China and Rwanda, he is addled by
any issue that involves even the rumor of war. And the ante keeps rising, most
alarmingly now in North Korea.

Mr. Clinton must pull himself out of this quandary. But he isn't likely to do so
as long as he tries to pretend to be what he is not. Instead of boning up on
D-Day to gild his disingenuous Commander in Chief photo ops -- as he showily did
by conferring with the scholar Paul Fussell pre-departure -- he might better
acknowledge his solidarity with the millions of men of his age who stopped at
nothing, from using pull to get into the reserves to faking transvestism, to
escape duty in Vietnam. Only if the dirty little secret of the cold-war
generation is fully declassified will the national dialogue be candid enough to
sort out the country's mission in the post-cold-war world.

The phrase "dirty little secret" I borrow from the writer James Fallows, whose
1989 book "More Like Us" offers a ruthless account of what went on during the
Vietnam draft. Mr. Fallows describes how he, as a Harvard undergraduate with a
low lottery number, depressed his weight and psychological profile to flunk his
draft examination. So did four out of five of his peers. Calling the Vietnam War
"America's most blatant class war since the Civil War" -- in which Northerners
bought their way out of the draft -- Mr. Fallows recalls how "the
college-educated class" stayed at home while "the less educated and less
privileged" went to Vietnam.

That college-educated, war-shirking class of the Vietnam era is the one running
the United States today. It includes not only Mr. Clinton but Dan Quayle, Newt
Gingrich and the vast majority of the White House staffs in both this White
House and the last, not to mention most 40-something pundits, left and right.
The pretense that Bill Clinton's behavior was anomalous among ambitious,
affluent and white draft-age students of the Vietnam era is absurd. Senator Bob
Kerrey's war service is the exception; Mr. Clinton's behavior was the norm.

That history cannot be rewritten now. It's the hand the country has been dealt.
No matter how much we all bone up on our fathers' inspiring D-Day recollections
this weekend, we cannot transform today's generation of leaders into
yesterday's. Nor, short of an upset Bob Dole victory in '96, will we elect a
World War II hero President again.

Mr. Clinton has lately taken to attributing his foreign policy woes to failures
of communication; he has just quadrupled the staff in his foreign policy press
office. But this President is a brilliant communicator when he has something to
say. To find his voice, he needs to free himself from the past that is choking
it. Were he to articulate honestly where he's been, then maybe he could figure
out where he is going. The antiwar generation that shares his dirty little
secret might even follow him into battle, if only he would stop posturing and
start to lead.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PRO BASKETBALL;
The Art of Trash Talk Not Limited to a Court

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


Three of the greatest trash talkers in the history of sports -- Muhammad Ali,
Henry Kissinger and Marge Schott -- made encore performances recently as if to
remind the current designated mouths that there have been giants in the field.
Call it Homeric boasting, bench jockeying, psyching out, trash talk is the
latest label for a line of hostile chatter that goes back at least to Cain
putting down Abel before eliminating him from the race.

The verbal sparring between Reggie Miller of the Pacers and Spike Lee of the
Knicks Fanatics, Mark Messier's promise to win the sixth game against the
Devils, even the needling notes that Yankees left in teammate Jim Leyritz's
locker, are contemporary, although hardly classic, variations of the attempt to
divert or pump up or straighten out.

It was Ali, first as Cassius Clay, who brought bodacious black style to the
global village as a way of talking his opponents off balance and publicizing his
fights. He sold real tickets along with wolf tickets. The cultural commentator,
Nelson George, has pointed out that Ali's descriptions of himself as "pretty"
was the "mack talk" of pimps and his assigning animal names to his opponents --
Sonny (the Big Ugly Bear) Liston and Floyd (the Rabbit) Patterson -- was in the
African tradition of elevating oneself by dehumanizing one's enemies. George
even saw Bundini Brown, Ali's assistant trainer for uplift, as a kind of Mr.
Interlocutor from the minstrel shows.

The mostly black-on-black trash talking in pro basketball delights some, offends
others. Is it a further expression of creative style (hip-hop hoops?), a
reflection of street-corner desperation; is it indicative of the game's tilt
from finesse to confrontation?

As can the more formalized "dozens," trash talk can get out of hand; on several
occasions, Ali lost control of the scene he was creating, and opponents
physically attacked him at news conferences and during TV interviews. His
bewildered reply to news that he had been reclassified as fit to be drafted for
the Vietnam War -- "I got nothing against them Vietcong" -- was interpreted out
of context by much of America as treacherous trash talk.

It took almost 30 years, but Ali topped that line several weeks ago without even
saying a word. Cruelly diminished by he what he calls Parkinson's syndrome, he
traveled to Vietnam with American families whose relatives were still missing in
action.

Meanwhile, in New York, Henry Kissinger, the Sort-of Secretary of State for the
World Cup, was trash-talking countries.

In a funny, smart and mean speech at the Spanish Institute, Kissinger
characterized national personalities through their soccer play. He sounded like
a Teutonic rapster.

The Africans, said Kissinger, lack "the stamina and tactical ability to beat the
top European teams," but are great crowd pleasers because of their "reckless"
play. The Germans, he said, are well trained and can run endlessly, but unless
they are ahead late in the game "a great melancholy falls" and they believe
"life is unfair," at which point "anything can happen."

The Italians, he said, will not train; they play "like Machiavelli," spending
the first half trying to "disconcert their opponents . . . rattle them with
operatic performances." They are the "most strategic" and if "they can get a
quick goal in the second half, they will put their engine on defense."

The Brazilians, he said, are "the most fun to watch because they look like a
samba band always on attack; but they are so infatuated with the elegance of
play they forget the point is to score."

The English, he said, have "character, discipline and training" but because
"they did not modernize fast enough," they "cannot now beat advanced teams."

Anticipating that the English would qualify for the World Cup, said Kissinger,
American organizers planned to place the team in Los Angeles to discourage their
hooligan fans from flying over. The L.A. police sent a task force to Britain,
according to Kissinger, and reported that there was nothing to worry about
because "those people are rank amateurs compared to the people we deal with in
central L.A."

This, of course, got the biggest laugh of the night. It might have gotten Spike
Lee mad enough to elevate his game; he would have dashed out and made a hit
movie. Because Kissinger is a diplomat, it is not clear how much of what he said
he actually believed or was even true; in any case, it was almost a primer of
world-class trash talk.

Marge Schott is rarely characterized as a diplomat, which may be a mistake; how
could she have gotten away for so long trashing races, religions and sexual
orientations unless she had a constituency somewhere? Dog lovers love her, her
car customers support her, and much of Cincinnati, whose Reds she kept in town,
certainly see her as salt of the earth, a German-American princess, a widow, an
outspoken, hard-driving social conservative. In New York, host of this month's
Gay Games, her trash-talk against her ballplayers wearing earrings ("only fruits
wear earrings") sounded like a bias crime or, even worse, out of touch; New York
construction workers seem to be getting bored with their diamond studs.

Inexorably, all this leads to the democratic town meeting of trash talk --
sports radio -- where we all get a chance to dump and run.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Paper Tigers -- and Real Ones

BYLINE: By James Fallows;   James Fallows is author of "Looking at the Sun: The
Rise of the New East Asian Economic and Political System."

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 17;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The conventional wisdom is that the Clinton Administration has horribly bungled
its dealings with East Asia. It has surrendered to China on human rights, it has
zigged and zagged in its trade strategy with Japan, it has temporized with North
Korea and in general it has illustrated what "policy disarray" means.

The reality is both better and worse. It is better in that the Administration
has avoided several pitfalls in Asia and has attained several significant goals.
It is worse in that the challenges soon to come from East Asia will involve
issues more fundamental than one U.S. President's operating style.

The Administration may be shy about emphasizing its recent successes with Asia
because each is embarrassing or awkward to mention. For example, ending the
trade embargo against Vietnam increased America's economic and political
leverage in Asia, but President Clinton probably prefers not to highlight
anything involving Vietnam.

A more significant achievement is the new "framework" agreement for trade with
Japan. For decades, U.S. and Japanese negotiators have wrangled over which was
more important -- how hard Japan tried to open its markets, or what the results
of those efforts were. A year ago, the U.S. announced that it would concentrate
on results, not efforts.

Last month, behind a variety of face-saving pleasantries, Japan finally agreed
to this approach. The camouflage consisted mainly of U.S. promises not to use
any one number in measuring results, as the Reagan Administration had done with
semiconductors. Instead, the U.S. will combine several measures. But since the
Japanese Government had spent the previous months declaring that it would never,
ever agree to a "results" approach, the Clinton Administration is now tactfully
soft-pedaling what it achieved.

Even the end of the Administration's China drama was something other than the
humiliating sellout generally portrayed in the American press. Here the problem
was the President's 1993 promise to remove China's "most favored nation" trade
status if the regime did not liberalize.

From the moment that promise was made, it was viewed throughout East Asia as
being unenforceable. Denying the trade privileges would be a declaration of
economic war: almost the only countries that don't enjoy such benefits are those
whose governments the U.S. has tried to overthrow, like Cuba and North Korea.
Neither China nor its neighbors believed that the U.S. was ready for such an
all-out confrontation with China. The President made himself and the country
seem less paper-tigerish by getting out of this unwise commitment. But since he
set the trap in the first place, he can hardly brag about the escape.

Now the real difficulties begin, based not on subtleties of U.S. policy but on
fundamental changes in economic strength. The two great phenomena of modern Asia
-- its rapid growth and its increasing regional integration -- will lead to more
and more political showdowns with the U.S.

America's relief at Japan's supposed economic collapse has dulled awareness of
how powerfully the whole East Asian region continues to grow. Savings rates in
East Asia are, on average, three times as high as in the U.S. Asia's share of
the world's investable capital has more than doubled in the last decade. East
Asian countries are the world's main growth markets for airplanes, cars,
cellular phones and construction equipment.

It is because Japanese companies dominate these Asian markets so thoroughly --
just look at the cars on the jammed roads of Thailand and Indonesia -- that they
have maintained their global market share in most manufacturing industries
despite the slowdown at home.

Most East Asian countries still rely on the U.S. as their most important
customer. Last year Japan had a trade surplus of more than $50 billion with the
U.S.; taken together, the rest of the region did, too.

Yet in every one of these countries, trade with America is falling in relative
importance, and trade within Asia continues to grow. Japan sends twice as large
a share of its foreign investment to Asia as it did a decade ago, and has as
large a trade surplus with the rest of Asia as with the U.S. Companies in South
Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong have set up branches in China, Malaysia and Vietnam.

Despite the jealousies and differences that separate Japan from China or
Thailand from Vietnam, their economies also share a consciousness of having
history on their side -- which makes them more assertive about redressing
history's grievances. A principal grievance, barely recognized in the U.S.,
involves the centuries in which first Europe and then America set the rules for
international behavior.

What was "fair" in world trade, what was "humane" in domestic policies, was
defined by the Westerners, with their machines and money. When Asian governments
fell short of these standards -- locking up dissidents, rigging trade to promote
their own industries -- they had to apologize for not yet having evolved to
full, Western refinement.

Now the apologies are over. On matters from dealing with vandals to censoring
newspapers, some Asian governments are assertive about having found what they
consider a better way. Many Westerners assume that as societies prosper they
will inevitably become more liberal.  In parts of Asia this may turn out be
true. For instance, in South Korea, Christianity raises a serious challenge to
the power of the state. But in many other countries -- Taiwan, Singapore,
Malaysia -- an "enlightened authoritarianism," which enriches the economy while
limiting individual rights, could last for years and years.

The Asian episodes of the last few months, from caning in Singapore to trade
benefits for China, give Washington a taste of what it will be like to coexist
with this increasingly self-confident system. For the U.S., the easiest part of
the job will be dealing with trade disputes. Though East Asia's economic
strength is the source of its political confidence, trade complaints do not
strike at the heart of a country's internal order. Washington could impose
sanctions on Beijing for wholesale copyright piracy or other aggressive trade
practices without provoking the snarling response of the "most favored nation"
controversy.

Defending Western political values will be harder and will require a shift in
the American mentality. The U.S. often chooses not to intervene -- in Hungary in
1956, in Bosnia and Rwanda today -- but our political culture often assumes that
America could win any fight or change any outcome if it chose to.

For the foreseeable future, the U.S. cannot control the politics of East Asia.
It cannot directly force China to liberalize. It cannot prevent a shift of
economic momentum to a region that is now celebrating authoritarianism.

America will have to learn how to keep speaking up for liberal values and
devising indirect means to advance them, knowing that in the short run, no
matter how skillful its leaders, it will probably fail.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Other Words . . .

BYLINE: By RICHARD B. WOODWARD

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 8;  Column 2;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 1618 words


The new Random House Historical Dictionary of American Slang has to be the only
guide to the English language ever published to quote Public Enemy and "The
Valley Girl Handbook" more often than Henry James or the Bible.

It is not a book for literary bluenoses or the politically correct. An epochal
compendium of colloquial, profane, underground and just plain informal
expressions, the book is demonstrating how, in the last 300 years, Americans
have concocted their own shadow language, with thousands of synonyms for
standard words and phrases that can be collected under the umbrella of slang.

One of the dirtiest books of the year (the last half of the "F" section alone
may drive some librarians to keep it under lock and key), it is also one of the
most acclaimed. Lexicographers on both sides of the Atlantic are hailing it as a
landmark publication. Sidney I. Landau, the president of the Dictionary Society
of North America, has called the first volume "an absolutely outstanding work of
scholarship." And John A. Simpson, the chief editor of the Oxford English
Dictionary, has endorsed it as "one of those rare books which prompts the
realization that you have never seen the subject in sharp focus before."

This monumental project, which will extend to three volumes (the first, running
1,006 pages and covering letters "A" through "G," was just published, $50), has
been one man's obsession for most of his life. J. E. Lighter, 45, an English
instructor at the University of Tennessee, in Knoxville, the book's chief
editor, has spent more than two decades tracking down the history of unusual
phrases that have caught his ear or eye -- phrases like "A-O.K." or
"babelicious." Mr. Lighter estimated there will be 300,000 notated entries when
he's finished.

"I was always interested in words, especially words I couldn't find in the
dictionary," he said recently over lunch at An American Place in Manhattan. A
retiring man in vernacular attire that included a denim jacket and running
shoes, he said he had never been interviewed before. And so he brought along his
Random House editor, Jesse T. Sheidlower, to share the burden.

Mr. Lighter said he actually began work on his dictionary when he was a
teen-ager in New York, keeping notebook records of the verbal oddities he found
in the streets and in the news. By the time he entered New York University in
1970, he had switched from notebooks to index cards, filling several shoeboxes.

One of his professors, a Chaucer scholar, suggested that he gather and publish
material that he had researched on the slang of the American expeditionary
forces in World War I. Accepted by the journal American Speech in 1972, it was
-- and still is -- the longest article the journal has ever published, 137
pages.

"I thought, "Whoa, now I've got something to build a graduate-school career on,"
Mr. Lighter said. The article soon ballooned in his mind into a historical
dictionary of American slang. "I thought it was something I could do in four or
five years, and by the time I was 26 or 27, I'd be ready to do something else,"
he said, waiting a few beats. "Wrong."

Mr. Lighter said he tried not to contemplate the story of the great English
lexicographer John Murray, who died many years before the first volume of his
life's work, the Oxford English Dictionary, went to press.

The origins of slang, both as a word and as a concept, are murky but relatively
recent. The works of Chaucer and Shakespeare were loaded with ribald language,
but no evidence exists that the authors were aware of this special category of
words now called slang, according to the introduction to Mr. Lighter's book.

"Before you have slang, everybody must be familiar with standard language and
also understand that departures are to be looked down upon," he said. "And you
have to have an educational system that stresses or inculcates this."

He has found little medieval commentary on the quality of English vocabulary. He
dates awareness of this distinct, if broad, category of synonymous terms to the
mid-19th century. (The introduction quotes a character in George Eliot's
"Middlemarch" (1871): "I shall invent a new game; I shall write bits of slang
and poetry on slips and give them to you to separate.")

At a time when new words enter speech with electronic speed, the H.D.A.S., as it
is called, dwarfs all earlier efforts to collect such words. Whereas much of the
slang found in the pioneering works of Eric Partridge (1936) and Harold
Wentworth and Stuart Berg Flexner (1960) originated in jazz nightclubs, on docks
or in barracks during World Wars I and II, many of the new terms in Mr.
Lighter's tome have their roots in the Vietnam War, psychedelic drugs, the
sexual revolution, hip-hop, television, movies, computers and the space program.
The book is, in a way, a history of American culture.

Specimens in this language museum can be as extinct as a "dot-and-go one" (a
person who limps or uses a wooden leg, an expression first recorded in 1785) and
as up to date as "chocolate chips" (the sand-colored camouflage uniforms worn by
American troops in the Persian Gulf war).

Mr. Lighter and Mr. Sheidlower talked all through lunch about the importance of
written "cites" (their abbreviation for "citation") as evidence of a word's
having been disseminated. "Most people don't have great memories when particular
words were in use," Mr. Lighter said. "Unless the word was associated with a
specific period of their lives, such as military service."

Mr. Sheidlower jumped in: "A good example is 'barf' -- to vomit. We do have a
cite from 1947 for 'barfer,' a term of abuse: 'You barfer!' That, combined with
the recollection of an older colleague of John's who remembers specifically that
his college roommate used the word 'barf.' He says he had never heard it before.
That is enough to make some kind of statement about the word."

Some words have been around a long time, but semantic mutations happen. The
dictionary says that the word "bodacious," for instance, was a Southern term in
the 1840's meaning "enormous, formidable." By the 1960's, it could be construed
as "impudent, insolent"; by the 70's, as "very exciting or impressive," and in
the 80's, as "sexually attractive; having large breasts."

"Every day, people are saying or thinking trillions of words in the United
States, and the meanings are shifting slightly," Mr. Lighter said, his
observation conjuring up a vision of choirs of English-speakers going slowly out
of tune. "It's only when you look over a long period of time from Old to Middle,
and from Middle to Modern English, that you see the big differences, which are
the result of countless, microscopic changes. Over time, the language of
'Beowulf' became the language of Tom Wolfe."

The notations range from literature (the humorist George Ade and the novelist
James T. Farrell were champion slang slingers) to periodicals (a 1985 New York
magazine article is credited as the source for "brat pack"); from television
("dyn-o-mite" cites the character J. J. in the 1970's sitcom "Good Times") to
Mercury astronauts (Alan Shepard seems to be the first to have transmitted the
term "A-O.K." outside the tiny circle at Cape Canaveral).

The National Lampoon, a rich source of student slang during its prime in the
late 60's and early 70's, is quoted throughout the book, along with a staggering
number of 19th-century journals and newspapers that only Mr. Lighter seems to
have looked at since they were new.

"If I see a source that is likely to have some good slang cites in it, I'll look
it over," said Mr. Lighter, who has neither a wife nor children to throw him off
the scent of his research. "Fortunately, there are some distractions I don't
have."

Both Mr. Lighter and Mr. Sheidlower feel confident that they have settled the
long-running argument over which aspect of human behavior has produced the most
synonyms: sex, drunkenness or money. "Sex," Mr. Lighter said. "By far."

But, as Mr. Sheidlower pointed out: "Sex is one of those semantic domains where
all popular terminology, as opposed to medical or scientific, is perceived of as
slang. And with sexuality, you have acts, body parts, etc. It's not quite fair
to compare."

Mr. Lighter said he could not have met his deadline without the aid of his
editor. Mr. Sheidlower, 25, another native New Yorker, had worked for the Oxford
English Dictionary as a citation reader while doing language research at
Cambridge University. After being named the dictionary editor at Random House in
1991, Mr. Sheidlower pulled Mr. Lighter's project out of a drawer. Mr. Lighter,
who had begun the work before the invention of personal computers, had tens of
thousands of index cards. He sent them to Mr. Sheidlower, who edited on a
computer.

Mr. Lighter had found a kindred spirit. They are also the co-authors of a paper
called "A Recent Coinage? Not!" on the Wayne and Garth locution that was on a
lot of people's lips a couple of years ago. "There is no question that the
national currency of the expression derives from the movie, 'Wayne's World' ,"
Mr. Sheidlower said. "But we have been able to date it back to just before
1900."

Their paper, published last year in American Speech, gives examples from the
writings of F. Scott Fitzgerald, Theodore Dreiser and Edmund Wilson. (From
Wilson's diary of the 20's: "Held up by cyclone at South Amboy . . . Wicked
little boy who kept jeering at us, 'You'll get there tonight -- not!' ")

So far, no luck, on finding an ancient cite for "schwing!" (the term Wayne and
Garth use when sexually aroused). "It might be out there," Mr. Lighter said,
laughing. "But I wouldn't want to bet on that one."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Historical Dictionary of American Slang will have 300,000
entries, said its chief editor, J. E. Lighter, left, with Jesse T. Sheidlower,
his editor. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE D-DAY TOUR: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Retracing History: Clinton's 20-Something Aides

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: PORTSMOUTH, England, June 5


President Clinton and his top White House aides have only read the history that
many here have lived through. And as the Administration flotilla started across
the Channel to re-create the invasion of Normandy, there were signs everywhere
that this is not exactly the Lindy Hop, Spam fritter and "Pennsylvania 6-5000"
crowd.

In a fashion statement that it is hard to imagine Brent Scowcroft making, Calvin
Mitchell 3d, a National Security Council official on the D-Day memorial tour,
wore a gold hoop in his left ear.

At 32, Dee Dee Myers, the White House Press Secretary, is so young that even her
father was too young for World War II. (He was a Navy flier in Vietnam.)

Andrew Friendly, the President's 25-year-old personal aide, had trouble getting
in for the advance work on a restaurant in the Eiffel Tower where Mr. Clinton
was considering dining with his Ambassador, Pamela Harriman, because the
managers were scandalise: he was not wearing a tie.

Chad Griffin, 20, a communications official, blazed today in neckwear that no
Republican would be caught wearing: a Save the Children tie.

And when the President's young aides found out it was going to be muddy at the
drumhead ceremony today to honor the troops, they all simply pulled out the
running shoes they always keep in their suitcases for jogging.

Do's and Don'ts

When the President visited the American Military Cemetery near Cambridge on
Saturday, United States Embassy officials handed out reproductions of a 1942
booklet that was given to servicemen going to England to prepare for the
invasion of Europe. Titled "Over There," the booklet aimed to acquaint soldiers
with British ways and warn the troops not to give the Jerries a helping hand by
spreading "distrust" between Limeys and Yanks.

Important do's and don'ts included:

*"Don't make fun of British speech or accents," even when "all the a's in
'banana' sound like the a in 'father.' "

*"Stop and think before you sound off about lukewarm beer or cold boiled
potatoes."

*"If British civilians look dowdy and badly dressed, it is not because they do
not like good clothes or know how to wear them. All clothing is rationed."

*"Don't play into Hitler's hand by mentioning war debts" of Britain from World
War I.

Perhaps the Embassy should have given the President a copy.

Mr. Clinton broke one of the most important rules just before he arrived here.
In a section called "Keep Out of Arguments," the United States War Department
advised: "You can rub a Britisher the wrong way by telling him 'We came over and
won the last one.' Each nation did its share.' "

In a June 1 speech in Washington, the President gave the United States sole
credit for liberating Europe, in the view of the snarling British press.

"Fifty years ago, the men and women of America saved democracy in Europe and
changed the course of history for the world," he said.

The Daily Mail of London tartly replied with an article titled " 'How America
Set Europe Free,' by Bill Clinton," quoting an unnamed official at the British
Embassy in Washington as complaining, "The least he could have done was mention
the word 'Allies,' " and a long-suffering Canadian diplomat as muttering, "We're
getting used to it."

The President was a little more diplomatic at Cambridge this weekend. "The
British gave our troops the feeling that they were not so far from home after
all," he said. "The British gave us inspiration; the Americans gave in return
hope."

Misplaced Salute?

Wearing a U.S.S. George Washington cap with "Commander in Chief" and
gold-braided "scrambled eggs" on the edge, the President swore in 62
re-enlisting seamen during his visit to the nuclear powered aircraft carrier,
the largest ship in the world.

Always a fast learner, Mr. Clinton had much improved his salute by today,
finally giving it the stiff-wristed snap at the end that puts it nearly on a par
with the one Ronald Reagan polished as a celluloid warrior.

But even as Mr. Clinton perfected this military greeting, some of his top
advisers were fretting that he shouldnot be saluting at all. They pointed out
that, until President Reagan made it a practice, protocol dictated that the
troops salute Presidents but that Presidents not salute back. Dwight D.
Eisenhower, they said, never saluted back, and he should have known.

Like Ronald Reagan, however, Bill Clinton enjoyed giving a little salute to
crowds during the campaign. An aide speculated that he might feel, if he stopped
now, that it would seem as though he felt guilty about not having served in the
military.

It may not be so easy to get him to stop. With the sailors, the President was
clearly relishing his new panache, having so much fun with that greeting that he
followed it up with a second: a firm handshake.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Uncharted Law for a Man Between Life and Death

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, June 5


Joey Fiori was 21 years old in 1971, a Vietnam veteran looking forward to a Navy
career as an officer specializing in nuclear physics and planning to marry his
childhood sweetheart.

It was not to be.

A motorcycle accident 10 days before the wedding left him extensive brain
damage. After more than a year in rehabilitation, he could speak two words --
"itch" and "I" -- and play card games. Doctors hoped for further progress.

Then in 1976, a Veterans Administration Hospital here neglected to medicate him
properly. Mr. Fiori suffered an epileptic seizure that left him in what doctors
call a persistent vegetative state. His eyes are open, but they move
involuntarily, without purpose or recognition. Doctors say he cannot think,
feel, speak, see, hear, smell, move or swallow. Tubes attached to his throat and
stomach supply air and nourishment.

He lives here in a nursing home, where private nurses attend him around the
clock, periodically stretching his limbs and rolling him over. His mother,
Rosemarie Sherman, does his laundry, coordinates the nurses' schedules and
visits him daily.

His father, whom his mother never married, has played no part in Mr. Fiori's
life.

$150,000 a Year for Care

The Federal Government, acknowledging responsibility for the hospital's
malpractice, pays more than $150,000 a year for Mr. Fiori's care. Doctors say he
could survive this way for decades.

Two years ago, Ms. Sherman, who holds prayer vigils with friends by her son's
bedside, said she finally gave up hope that he would either recover or die on
life support.

"My Joey's between two worlds," she said recently as she held his hand. "I want
my son to die with dignity."

Ms. Sherman asked the nursing home to remove her son's feeding tube so he could
drift into death. The nursing home said it required a court order to do so.

That is when Ms. Sherman's legal problems began. Pennsylvania had just enacted a
law that permits an individual to leave medical instructions in a living will or
to designate someone else to make decisions on health care should the individual
be unable to communicate.

But Mr. Fiori left no instructions 23 years ago, and the law is silent about
what his mother's options are now.

State Wants 'Convincing' Proof

Prosecutors in the Pennsylvania Attorney General's Office concede that the law
is unclear. But they have argued in court that Ms. Sherman cannot have her son's
life support removed unless she can prove with "clear and convincing evidence"
that he had expressed a preference, orally or in writing, for death in this kind
of condition.

"The best outcome of this case would be for this issue to be addressed by the
Legislature," Louis J. Rovelli, the executive Deputy State Attorney General,
said in an interview.

By calling for clear and convincing evidence, the prosecutors are trying to have
the courts adopt the most conservative legal standard, used only in New York and
Missouri, when an individual has not left instructions in such a case. Nearly
half of the states permit family members to make the decision, based on their
judgment of the patient's best interest.

Ms. Sherman, a retired waitress, has no evidence of her son's preference other
than her intuition. "Joey's been with me all his life except for two and a half
years in the Navy," she said. "So who knows better than his mother what his
wishes would be? Joey was an intellectual, with an I.Q. of 147.

"He was an outdoors person. He was interested in sports, surfing and bowling. If
he could speak, there is no way he would want to live this way."

Mr. Fiori's three half-brothers and three half-sisters favor removal of his
feeding tube, Ms. Sherman said.

Appeal to Be Heard Soon

Ms. Sherman won her fight in a trial court last year, but lost it on appeal to a
three-member panel of the State Superior Court. The decision left many
questions, however, and the panel withdrew its decision, deferring to the full
seven-member court, which is expected to hear the case late this month. The
decision could be appealed to the State Supreme Court.

Pennsylvania is not alone in having unclear laws governing the right to die, and
courts in many other states are filling the legal gaps case by case.  The
resulting regulations across the country, many legal experts say, are redundant,
inconsistent and agonizing for many families like Mr. Fiori's.

"The Fiori case is a symbol of how much in flux we are about these things and
how slowly courts and legislatures are coming around," said James M. Hoefler, a
political scientist and author of "Deathright: Culture, Medicine, Politics, and
the Right to Die," a book published this year by Westview Press.

Statistics on spending for patients in persistent vegetative states are hard to
come by. But Mr. Hoefler said he estimated conservatively that about $1 billion
a year was spent in this country for the care of about 10,000 such patients.
Most of the money comes from the Government, insurance companies and relatives.

Courts and legislatures had to step up their review of the right-to-die issue
after 1990, when the United States Supreme Court, in Cruzan v. Missouri
Department of Health, recognized an individual's constitutional right to refuse
medical treatment. But the Court delegated the regulation of this right to the
states.

Uniform Law Is Proposed

To bring order to the patchwork of laws that have resulted, the American Bar
Association in March began circulating to all state legislatures a proposed
right-to-die law, called the Uniform Health-Care Decisions Act. "Our act is
intended to replace the conflicting systems in most states," said David M.
English, the act's principal author and a law professor at the University of
South Dakota.

The National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, an organization
of state representatives, recently recommended that all state legislatures enact
the bar association's proposed law.

The comprehensive act would authorize an individual to write a living will,
delegate someone else to make life-and-death decisions and permit legal
guardians to make these decisions in the absence of any specific directions from
a patient.

That would clearly give Ms. Sherman the right to determine the best interests of
her son. And she has no doubt what they are.

"Every night I pray that God will take him," she said.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rosemarie Sherman, with her son Joey Fiori, 44, who has been
unable to think, feel, speak, see, hear or smell for 18 years, at the Mayo
Nursing Home in Philadelphia. He suffered serious brain damage in a motorcycle
accident in 1971 and later entered a vegetative state after an error in his
medication. (Bill Cramer for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Woodstock Meets the 90's;
Two Days of Peace, Music and Interactive Video

BYLINE: By JACQUES STEINBERG

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words


After 25 years, it has come to this: the festival commemorating Woodstock this
summer in Saugerties, N.Y., will be broadcast live on pay-per-view television,
just like Wrestlemania II, championship boxing and Howard Stern's New Year's Eve
Party.

And that is only one telling difference between the definitive countercultural
event of the late 1960's and the attempt by the original organizers, now paired
with a $4 billion entertainment company, to rekindle its spirit for another
generation.

Like it or not, Woodstock is getting a facelift for the 90's.

While the original Woodstock is remembered, at least in popular lore, as a
communal mud bath that symbolized peace, love and free expression, this
Woodstock is shaping up as a meticulously orchestrated, more commercial affair,
with admission arranged by Ticketmaster and hamburgers dispensed by a stadium
concessionaire.

Consider that this time around, tickets to the two-day rock-music festival will
sell for $135, which is $135 more than what most people paid to attend the
original. In addition to two stages that will blare music continuously, this
Woodstock -- known as Woodstock '94 -- will feature an interactive video theme
park, where concertgoers will sample the latest advances in virtual reality. As
for virtual unreality, the use of alcohol and drugs will be prohibited, although
how strictly remains to be seen.

"It sounds like they're putting on Las Vegas in upstate New York, for those who
can afford it," said Todd Gitlin, author of "The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of
Rage."

"It's unlikely that anyone will get pregnant as a result," he said, "or look
back 20 years from now with gooey nostalgia for the glory days when they felt
the full flush of their youth and tasted the infinite possibilities of being."

And don't expect to see Richie Havens there either. Mr. Havens, the folk
guitarist whose song "Freedom" mesmerized the first Woodstock, intends to be
performing 50 miles away at the original site, Max Yasgur's farm in Bethel,
where a more modest gathering is planned.

"I have to be where the field is," said Mr. Havens, now 53. "What I went to back
then has nothing to do with what Michael Lang" -- one of the original organizers
-- "is putting together now."

For the record, Mr. Lang and the concert's other promoters say they are not
trying to recreate history on Aug. 13 and 14. And if their production sounds
slick, they add, that is the reality of staging a festival in 1994 for a
projected audience of 250,000 young people.

The organizers contend that the current crop of teen-agers and 20-somethings are
hungry for a shared experience that could do for them what Woodstock did for
many of their parents. And the organizers should know; they have market research
gleaned from focus groups.

Why, the promoters reason, can't AIDS, homelessness and the environment
galvanize this generation the way theirs was stirred by the Vietnam War, the
civil rights movement and a desire to tweak authority? And what better place for
this to happen than at a musical extravaganza set against the rural backdrop of
upstate New York?

"This generation has to focus on these concerns," said Mr. Lang, who is 49 but
retains a youthful thatch of curly brown hair. "To use this opportunity as a
vehicle to re-energize the spirit of Woodstock is, I think, what we're all
trying to do."

Implicit in Mr. Lang's comments, however, is that he is 25 years older this time
around, planning a concert not for his peers but for people young enough to be
his children. What remains to be seen, since tickets have yet to go sale, is
whether they will hand over $135 each to spend the weekend with him.

Yasgur's Farm Stand-In

To be sure, there will be similarities between the two festivals. Crosby, Stills
and Nash have agreed to be among the 30 or so acts that will play at this
Woodstock, just as they did 25 years ago. And Wavy Gravy -- a founder of the Hog
Farm Commune who helped soothe people at Woodstock who "freaked out" on LSD --
will be back too, this time making offbeat announcements over the public address
system.

The promoters were unable to reach agreement with Bethel officials to return to
Yasgur's Farm. But they feel they have found a comparable substitute in
Saugerties: an 840-acre dairy farm dotted with shagbark hickory trees just off
the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, about 100 miles north of New York City. (In
1994, as in 1969, the town of Woodstock itself has lent its name but little
else.)

Like its predecessor, the new field is in the shadow of the Catskills. And this
time, as last, concertgoers will be encouraged to sleep under the stars.

The presence of David Crosby notwithstanding, however, this Woodstock will have
a decidedly different sound. Although the complete musical lineup is a closely
guarded secret, few of the surviving original acts have been invited back, said
industry executives who insisted on anonymity.

Instead, the executives said, the concert will be headlined by an eclectic
collection of bands that came of age after Woodstock, including Aerosmith, the
powerhouse of 1970's rock that remains popular today; the Spin Doctors and Red
Hot Chili Peppers, relative newcomers that combine funk and rock; Peter Gabriel,
the longtime British solo artist, and Cypress Hill, a rap group. Jettisoned,
apparently, are such Woodstock fixtures as Sha Na Na, Country Joe and the Fish,
and Sly and the Family Stone.

Lost in the lore surrounding the first Woodstock is the fact that it was
intended to be a money-making venture, a $3 million production that was to cost
each concertgoer $18 for three days. But the organizers were so unprepared for
the crowd that showed up -- estimates ranged from 400,000 to 600,000 -- that
almost all were admitted free.

Licensed T-Shirts

Steeped in debt, the festival did not turn a profit for its organizers until
about 15 years later, Mr. Lang said. To make sure that does not happen again,
the original promoters, known collectively as Woodstock Ventures, have allied
with the entertainment company Polygram, which is providing an estimated $19.5
million in backing for a concert that will cost about $30 million to stage.

The promoters hope to recoup those costs through ticket sales (250,000 will be
sold, all in advance, by Ticketmaster), pay-per-view (a price of about $50 per
home for the weekend) and, in another sign of the times, licensed Woodstock
T-shirts. Like last time, a concert movie and album are planned.

Unlike its predecessor -- which was plagued by 20-mile traffic jams,
insufficient parking and shortages of food and water -- this Woodstock is being
planned with the precision of a military assault. Even the farm's mosquito
population is being measured to determine if pre-emptive pesticide sprays are
needed.

Those who abandoned their cars in the road and walked miles to the last
Woodstock, take note: your successors will travel to Woodstock '94 in relative
luxury, on 800 shuttle buses leaving from 17 parking lots throughout the Hudson
Valley. Once they get to Saugerties, concertgoers will be shepherded by a detail
of 900 to 1,300 security guards.

The makeshift food service at the last Woodstock was so overwhelmed by the crowd
that some hungry concertgoers plucked vegetables from neighboring farms. Not
this time, the promoters say. Hamburgers and hot dogs, as well as vegetarian
fare, will be sold through a stadium vendor, Fine Host, at six festival
marketplaces.

Minds Made Up

Will such elaborate planning be rewarded? The promoters will have a better idea
when tickets go on sale later this month.

But Daniel Eisenberg, 24, a fan of many of the bands that will be playing at
this Woodstock, said he and his friends have already made up their minds. They
don't plan to attend, largely because of the $135 ticket price.

"To couch a two-day rock festival in some sort of ambitious political terms is
either naive or just marketing," said Mr. Eisenberg, a fact checker at Vanity
Fair magazine in Manhattan. "I don't feel like I'm going to miss out on some
seminal moment for my generation."

"I'm more apt to go down to CBGB on the Bowery to hear some music than to trek
up to upstate New York," he added.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "THE CHANGE: Woodstock Then and Now" shows facts and comparisons
for the 1969 and 1994 Woodstock events.

Map of New York showing locations of Bethel and Saugerties.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Lying Machine

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


Henry Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, has taken exception to a recent
column of mine. It noted that 20,492 Americans died in Vietnam while he and
Richard Nixon made policy on the war, in the years 1969-72. It quoted H. R.
Haldeman's diaries as saying that on Dec. 15, 1970, Mr. Kissinger objected to an
early peace initiative because there might be bad results before the 1972
election.

In a letter to the editor of The New York Times, Mr. Kissinger said the column
had pounced "on a single entry in 600 pages" of the diaries to show that
"President Nixon's Vietnam policy was driven by electoral politics."

A single entry? A few pages later in the diaries there is another.

On Dec. 21, 1970, Mr. Haldeman recorded Mr. Kissinger opposing an early
commitment to withdraw all U.S. combat troops "because he feels that if we pull
them out by the end of '71, trouble can start mounting in '72 that we won't be
able to deal with and which we'll have to answer for at the elections. He
prefers, instead, a commitment to have them all out by the end of '72 so that we
won't have to deliver finally until after the elections and therefore can keep
our flanks protected."

And another. On Jan. 26, 1971, Mr. Kissinger discussed plans for "a major
assault on Laos," which he thought would devastate North Vietnam's military
capability. (The Laos operation turned out to be a costly failure.) "This new
action in Laos now," Mr. Haldeman wrote, "would set us up so we wouldn't have to
worry about problems in '72, and that of course is the most important."

Of course. The overpowering reality in the Nixon White House, as so meticulously
recorded by Mr. Haldeman, was that what mattered about any proposed policy was
its likely political effect. (Mr. Kissinger was opposed to publication of "The
Haldeman Diaries," and it is easy to see why.)

On Vietnam, the public wanted withdrawal of American soldiers from a war it
increasingly hated. But Mr. Nixon had repeatedly said he would not be "the first
American President to lose a war."

The political solution was to withdraw gradually, leaving South Vietnamese
forces to carry on the war. No one could seriously expect them to withstand for
long an army that had fought 500,000 Americans to a standstill. But the
inevitable might be delayed, and a formula agreed with North Vietnam to let the
United States claim "peace with honor."

Mr. Kissinger complained, in his letter, about the statement in my column that
the United States could have got out of the war in 1969, before those 20,492
American deaths, in the same way it finally did in 1973: on terms that led
before long to a North Vietnamese victory.

Until the end, Mr. Kissinger wrote, the North Vietnamese insisted that a peace
agreement remove the Nguyen Van Thieu regime in South Vietnam. It was only at
the negotiating session of Oct. 8, 1972, that they dropped that point -- and
agreement followed.

True. But it is a half-truth, leaving out the crucial fact. North Vietnam
dropped the idea of a change of government in Saigon only when Mr. Kissinger
acquiesced in its key demand: that its forces be allowed to remain permanently
in the south.

President Thieu saw that concession as a death sentence for his Government, and
he strongly opposed the peace agreement. He was bitter at Mr. Kissinger for
concealing the terms from him until after they were agreed, indeed deceiving him
about the possibility of serious new U.S. negotiating positions.

Who knows what might have happened if the Nixon Administration had made that
crucial change in U.S. policy in 1969, conceding the right of Hanoi's forces to
stay in the south? Hanoi might well have abandoned, as unnecessary, the demand
for political change in Saigon. In any event, the end result would have been the
same after 1969 as after 1972: a North Vietnamese victory.

President Nixon said in his memoirs that Mr. Kissinger had told him the 1972
peace agreement "amounted to a complete capitulation by the enemy; they were
accepting a settlement on our terms." Two years later North Vietnamese forces
marched into Saigon.

A fair test of Mr. Kissinger's claim would be to put it to the families and
friends of the 20,492 Americans who died in Vietnam during his years as
policy-maker. Would they think it was worth four more years of war?

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 7, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Police Chief in Newburgh in Trouble Again

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1115 words

DATELINE: NEWBURGH, N.Y.


Skull shaved bare and armed with a badge, Christopher P. Gershel is a dead
ringer for Kojak.

And like the detective in the 1970's television series, Mr. Gershel, Newburgh's
Police Chief, has a knack for flamboyance and speaking his mind.

Chief Gershel, 51, once displayed a tiny electric-chair paperweight on his desk,
called Newburgh a "mean, sick, nasty, fetid little city" and was sued on charges
of ramming a woman's car with a limousine.

Now, the Chief, a colonel in the Army Reserve and a former Vietnam combat
helicopter pilot, is engaged in a political war with City Hall that could cost
him the job he has had for 14 years.

Charges and Countercharges

On May 9, City Manager Harold J. Porr 3d suspended the Chief for 30 days without
pay, on 13 misconduct and incompetence charges. A civil service hearing,
required by state law, is scheduled for Tuesday, after which he could be
dismissed as head of the city's 75-member Police Department.

Mr. Porr contends that Chief Gershel used his office phone and cellular car
phone to make nearly $1,400 worth of private business and personal calls at city
expense over two and a half years.

Chief Gershel claims he is being punished because he began a criminal
investigation against Mr. Porr and three other city officials in regards to a
sewer renovation contract.

As Police Chief, Mr. Gershel has earned a reputation for being outspoken and at
times insensitive, but certainly colorful.

"He's Newburgh's Ollie North," said a former City Councilman, Peter Kulkin.
"He's got the uniform. He's got the charisma. He's got the persona. Underneath
it all, he's kind of nutty and ideological."

Chief Gershel responds: "There's a lot of things Ollie North and I have in
common. But I certainly haven't lied."

In Need of a Prayer

Chief Gershel has been in trouble before in Newburgh, once a thriving economic
hub of the Hudson Valley, but now a city of potholes, burned-out buildings and
street thugs that is struggling to improve its image and rebuild its economy.

Four years ago, he faced the threat of dismissal after his "fetid little city"
remark. He also enraged the black community when he accused a popular black
minister of making a living by fostering racism. He later apologized to the
minister and promised to tone down his remarks, ending disciplinary charges
against him.

"Communication is perhaps the Police Chief's greatest jailer," said the
minister, the Rev. Saul S. Williams. "The Quakers used to have a prayer. 'Lord,
help me to shut my mouth.' The Police Chief hasn't learned that prayer."

In the late 1980's, the Chief grabbed headlines again when he was accused of
ramming a woman's car with his limousine; he said he was trying to block her
from leaving the scene of an accident. The city settled her lawsuit last year,
with the woman receiving $35,000 from insurance companies for the city and for
Chief Gershel.

"It's been said he's his own worst enemy," said Councilwoman Regina Angelo. "He
just seems to get himself into trouble."

A Military Background

Chief Gershel said he would fight for his $59,704-a-year job.

"When you've given your whole life to serving your country, it's a pretty bitter
pill to be called a petty thief," Chief Gershel said. "I'm not a thief."

Chief Gershel said his parents sent him to military school after he was kicked
out of a Manhattan private school for drinking Scotch.

In 1965, his first assignment as a second lieutenant in the Army National Guard
took him to the streets of Los Angeles during the Watts riots. Later, he went to
Vietnam, surviving a year of combat and a helicopter crash in the trees of
Southeast Asia.

Before he took the police chief's job in Newburgh in 1980, he was deputy provost
marshal at the United States Military Academy at West Point. He said he saw
Newburgh as a challenge.

The Police Department was still recovering from a scandal when he arrived. In
1972, a former police chief and 16 officers were indicted on corruption charges,
ranging from planting narcotics on suspects to looting businesses that had been
burglarized.

Douglas Rasmussen, a veteran city detective, credits the Chief with smoothing
over relations between rank-and-file officers and city management. He said Chief
Gershel brought military-style discipline to the department, although it was not
always appreciated.

Questions of Dedication

Over time, some police officers and city officials questioned whether he was
still dedicated to police work.  The Chief and his wife, Rose, 36, run two
profitable businesses: a limousine service and a small trucking operation.

"How can you be out selling watches, selling gold, playing golf and running a
limousine business and still be running the city's police department?" asked
Thomas J. Wohlrab, the former head of the department, who was demoted when Chief
Gershel was hired and whom Chief Gershel dismissed in 1982 for insubordination.

Mr. Gershel's lawyer, Michael H. Sussman, maintains that the latest charges are
part of "a series of personal vicious attacks" by City Manager Porr, who came to
Newburgh in 1992. He said he intended to show that his client was being punished
for uncovering governmental wrongdoing. "He's blown the whistle on potential
municipal corruption and double-dealing in Newburgh," he said.

In April, the Chief's charged that Mr. Porr, Councilmen Stephen J. Rockafellow
and John N. Giudice, and the city's consulting engineer, William Hauser,
conspired to award a $1.3 million sewer renovation project to Jett Industries,
even though another company had made a lower bid.

The city officials deny that any conspiracy took place, and a State Supreme
Court upheld the contract award.

The City Manager refused to discuss the specific charges against Chief Gershel
but said he did not have a personal vendetta against him. The chief concedes
that he made some personal calls to his home, particularly when his wife was
suffering from cancer.

The Chief has the backing of Mayor Audrey L. Carey, the lone Democrat on the
five-member City Council. She said the charges were part of a "planned pattern
to get him."

After the civil service hearing, Mr. Porr can reprimand, fine or dismiss Chief
Gershel. If he is dimissed, Mr. Sussman, the Chief's lawyer, said the case was
likely to go to Federal court. If the Chief stays, in six years he could retire
with a pension worth $35,000 a year.

Whatever happens, Chief Gershel said Newburgh had not heard the last of him --
he's writing a book about the city and past political shenanigans.

"I plan to be here to finish out my 20 years," he said. "I don't think Harry
Porr will be here that long."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "When you've given your whole life to serving your country, it's
a pretty bitter pill to be called a petty thief," said Christopher P. Gershel,
Police Chief in Newburgh, N.Y., who was suspended for 30 days without pay on 13
misconduct and incompetence charges. "I'm not a thief," he said. (Chris Maynard
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 7, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE D-DAY TOUR: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
Commander in Chief In the Role of Protege

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: COLLEVILLE-SUR-MER, France, June 6


The week was not about Bill Clinton, the President's aides insisted. It was
about the veterans.

But it was very much about Bill Clinton, of course. The President was seeking
redemption this week on the issue of military service. He deftly used his
speeches to reposition himself in a more flattering light and to court the
military with lavish praise and promises that the downsizing of the armed forces
would soon be over. And he relished his favorite role of President-as-pupil.

Other Presidents have bridled at being treated as tyros. John F. Kennedy was
said to have been ashen-faced after a meeting in Vienna in which Nikita S.
Khrushchev wagged his finger at the young, untested President; by contrast, when
Francois Mitterrand sternly lectured Bill Clinton at a lunch in Washington last
year about sanctions on various countries, Mr. Clinton nodded obligingly.

The President who loves to be a protege treated the D-Day ceremonial week as
though it were his junior year abroad, a tutorial on the military that would
help him grow into his job as Commander in Chief.

Other Presidents might take offense if veterans talked about how they hoped the
ceremonies would be a "maturing" experience for the leader of the Free World;
Mr. Clinton seemed flattered. Again and again, he was pictured with chin tucked
in and head bowed, nodding respectfully as his elders talked of their war
experiences, and sometimes lending the aging heroes his arm.

"It's been a very positive trip for him," said David Gergen, the Presidential
counselor. "It's a sobering experience to think about the responsibilities of
being Commander in Chief, to know how many lives can be lost in a military
action."

Mr. Gergen said that the President and his staff had used their overnight stay
Sunday on the aircraft carrier George Washington to sit with young Navy pilots
and soak up their knowledge. "One pilot said he had lost seven people in his
unit in six months, and it's not even wartime," Mr. Gergen said. "It's dangerous
for them out there."

George Stephanopoulous, the Clinton adviser, said today that President Clinton
had found the pilots enlightening. "What was most overwhelming was the sense of
duty they had," the 33-year-old adviser said. "They were eager and proud to show
the Clintons their stuff."

In his speeches, Mr. Clinton stressed the image of himself as too young to know
about the rigors of war. He compared himself to a child who finds a picture in
the attic of his father in uniform. He told the veterans, "We are the sons and
daughters you saved from tyranny's reach."

The White House reinforced this generational imagery by having the President
appear today with Ken Bargmann, an Army ranger who scaled Pointe du Hoc, his son
and his grandson. Mr. Clinton ruffled the child's hair in solidarity and told
the Pointe du Hoc audience: "Here are the son and grandson of Corporal Bargmann.
Here are the faces for whom you risked your lives. Here are the generations for
whom you won a war. We are the children of your sacrifice."

Praise and Criticism

The President's efforts to woo the troops he leads met with a mixed reception
among the veterans.

Some were happy to embrace Mr. Clinton: Martin Waarvick of Yakima, Wash., one of
the infantryman aboard a landing craft on D-Day, was at the sunrise ceremony on
the George Washington flight deck, clutching a scrapbook he had made for the
President. It was addressed "to my skipper, President Bill Clinton," and
featured grainy pictures of the D-Day landing taken with a $2 box camera the day
he landed at Omaha.

Floyd Mitchell, a highly decorated veteran of Omaha Beach from Columbus, Ga.,
was at the Colleville-sur-Mer cemetery today with his wife, Carolyn. He praised
Mr. Clinton's speech, but when he was asked if Mr. Clinton was moving beyond his
draft record, Mr. Mitchell looked down and said, softly: "I didn't say that
there was no problem."

Others were more blunt. "He can never be our Commander in Chief," said John
McConas, a 76-year-old Omaha Beach veteran from Glen Burnie, Md. "He's a draft
dodger."

The worst moment for Mr. Clinton came before his Utah Beach speech, when he got
some scattered boos after he arrived 25 minutes late. Bob Dole, also on stage,
was the home-team favorite, surrounded by fellow veterans eager to shake his
hand. There were even a few calls of "Dole for '96."

"They're just biased," Mr. Dole said drily afterwards.

Celebrity Press Secretary

The sailors stationed on the George Washington gave the President a warm
reception when he spent the night Sunday. But they gave a far warmer one to Dee
Dee Myers, the President's press secretary.

As Mr. Gergen and Mr. Stephanopoulous stood by, completely ignored, the pilots
and seamen swamped Ms. Myers, asking for her autograph on D-Day posters and
T-shirts, and lining up for pictures.

How did the 32-year-old blond press secretary become the "Reality Bites"
generation's answer to Betty Grable?

Partly it is because the sailors stuck for months at a time on the carrier are
avid watchers of Ms. Myers's daily White House briefing, which they see on
closed-circuit TV. And partly it is because she is a Navy brat, the daughter of
a pilot from California who did two tours in Vietnam.

Since she has been known to complain that her demanding job crimps her social
life, Ms. Myers was asked if she got any dates out of her star turn on the
carrier.

"Not a single one," she said with a shrug.

No Noonan

A rumor swept the foreign press corps today that President Clinton had brought
in Peggy Noonan, who wrote President Reagan's poetic "boys of Pointe du Hoc"
speech for the 40th anniversary of D-Day here, to help with his speeches for the
Normandy trip.

Actually, all those Noonanesque cadences -- "knights borne on wings," and "the
flame of your youth became freedom's lamp" and "they were the fathers we never
knew, the uncles we never met, the friends who never returned, the heroes we can
never repay" -- were written by the new chief speechwriter, Don Baer, a former
reporter at U.S. News and World Report, with assists from Jeremy Rosner and Eric
Liu, National Security Council staffers.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton with veterans yesterday at Utah Beach
ceremony. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 7, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


When FREDERICK E. HART, the sculptor, worked as a volunteer in Jimmy Carter's
1976 campaign, he could not have known that he would someday contribute
something more permanent to the 39th President's legacy. But this morning, his
newest work, the James Earl Carter Presidential Statue, is to be unveiled on the
grounds of the Georgia State Capitol in Atlanta.

Mr. Hart, who also created the "Three Servicemen" sculpture at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington, rendered the former President's torso from
photographs but asked him to sit at the Carter Center in Atlanta while he worked
on the head. "It is a large statue, so I designed the head so it could be
removed," Mr. Hart said the other day.

"President Carter is one of the most consistently deep politicians we've ever
had, and I wanted to convey his depth and essential generosity of spirit," Mr.
Hart said. "So he doesn't have the big Jimmy Carter grin, which obliterates his
depth. Instead, he is smiling mildly."
   NADINE BROZAN

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 7, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Wars and Generations

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 651 words


The occasion was electric with memory and feeling, and freighted with the
ambiguity that surrounds this Commander in Chief's relationship with the
military. With three generations watching, President Clinton kept his footing in
his difficult address yesterday at the U.S. cemetery on the bluffs above Omaha
Beach. Of the Americans who fell there 50 years ago, Mr. Clinton's best phrase
said it all: "They were the fathers we never knew, the uncles we never met . . .
the heroes we can never repay. They gave us our world."

Mr. Clinton was right to opt for homage and humility rather than the soaring
martial rhetoric used in the same place 10 years ago by another noncombatant
chief commander, Ronald Reagan. The words touched the right chord not just for
Americans, but for the British, the French, the Canadians and eight other
nationalities in the extended Allied family.

The first American President born after World War II brought generations
together in a memorial rite that was as much visual as verbal. As the clouds
lifted on these bluffs, Mr. Clinton called on the surviving D-Day veterans
present to stand "if they can." Their lined faces fused with images of gleaming
white crosses in a ceremony televised live to much of the world.

Still, this was a fraught passage for Mr. Clinton, who did what he could to
avoid military service during the Vietnam War. Wisely, he neither sought to
defend nor to explain his own past in his Normandy address; there he spoke as
leader of a nation and as Commander in Chief of all U.S. forces. But in press
interviews, the President did deal with his own past, sometimes with equal
eloquence.

"I don't regret the fact that I opposed the conflict in Vietnam and our policy
there," he told NBC's Tom Brokaw, "and I did what I could honorably to bring it
to an end."

That affirmed the reality that Mr. Clinton and millions of his generation were
fundamentally right about the Vietnam War and worked hard to end the carnage
triggered by a wrongheaded President. But in an interview on CBS, Mr. Clinton's
revisionist side took over. In an aside to Harry Smith, he showed that
pernicious desire to edit his own history to suit every constituency: "I had
very mixed feelings about it. I tried to get myself even back into the draft
because I was so confused about it." The evidence is strong that Mr. Clinton
gave up his deferment after it became likely that reduced draft calls would keep
him out of the Army.

How refreshing if Mr. Clinton would say instead that it was right for his
father's generation to fight in World War II and right for his to oppose a war
that deeply damaged America as well as Vietnam.

At the military cemetery at Colleville, whose more than 9,000 white headstones
distill the sorrows of war, Mr. Clinton spoke movingly for his own generation:
"We are the children of your sacrifice.  We are the sons and daughters that you
saved from tyranny." A precious part of the legacy of liberty is the right to
conscientiously oppose what that son or daughter may view as their own
Government's abuse of power. It would be right, on another occasion, for Mr.
Clinton to make that point, in measured words rather than a television
interview.

Still, he deserves credit for not trying to upstage with his own political
psychodrama the truly important events commemorated at Normandy. In war and
peace, the President has a role to play that goes beyond the details of an
individual life. He is the vessel and embodiment of a nation's travails and
triumphs. The century has known few moments that more clearly defined America's
role in and value to the world than the D-Day invasion. It was a joint effort by
the Allies, but it would not have succeeded without the materiel of American
industry and the brains and sacrifice of American troops in the field.

In Normandy yesterday, those facts were ably stated and properly honored.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton in Normandy: Hands Across a Generation

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1389 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 7


It was the soldiers whom people will long remember. Mostly brittle old men now,
no longer the lusty youngsters who "saved the world," they were touching in
their simple eloquence, heartbreaking in their heartache for their lost
comrades.

Like the old men of the Grand Army of the Republic, veterans of Bull Run and
Vicksburg and Antietam who lived through the direst days of their century, the
survivors of the first momentous hours on the Calvados coast half a century ago
have become icons for today, the symbols of courage and conviction that
democracies crave.

Lincoln at Gettysburg said the world would "little note nor long remember" what
he said there, dedicating a cemetery for the fallen in the most awful battle in
America's most awful war. What he meant was that no words, not even his, had
power adequate to the task of memorializing the deeds of those whose graves lay
around him.

President Clinton succeeded in his D-Day speeches not because he made speeches
worthy of comparison with Lincoln's or perhaps even with Ronald Reagan's "These
are the boys of Pointe du Hoc . . ." of 10 years ago. He succeeded because with
the help of many others he managed to keep attention focused on the veterans,
not on himself and his problems.

A Plea to the Young

Fully aware that their hour on the world's stage is nearing its end, many of
them appealed earnestly to those they will leave behind, denizens of a world
that sometimes has a lot of trouble telling right from wrong, to remember the
values that inspired the heroism of their international band of brothers in
Operation Overlord.

Amid the barbed wire and the artillery craters of Pointe du Hoc, a former
Ranger, Richard Hathaway, said on Monday:

"Nations can and should unite to form the strongest possible bonds, devoted to
all mankind so that they may enjoy freedom from oppression, freedom from fear,
freedom from want, freedom of expression and freedom of religion. We leave this
to you, for only by this can you and your descendants enjoy a free society of
all mankind, devoid of such destructive forces as were exhibited here."

Many of the veterans fear that the young, President Clinton perhaps included,
are all too prone to turn away from trouble abroad. So they were pleased with
the repect that he bestowed on them and their ideas, not only by coming but also
by urging members of his generation to learn the lessons of their struggle and
sacrifice.

"It's an honor," Mr. Clinton said to almost every one of the hundreds of World
War II veterans he met during his European tour.

Evocative Ceremonies

For one aging onlooker at least, the ceremonies were most evocative. The old
planes, the parachutes descending again near Ste.-Mere-Eglise, on whose church
steeple Pvt. John Steele dangled for hours before being cut down, the
coffin-shaped boats back at Omaha Beach, the stories the veterans told -- all
rekindled the emotions stirred by the broadcasts of George Hicks, the radio
networks' pool man on a ship out in the English Channel on June 6, 1944.

With very nearly every American household tuned in, with the big naval guns
drumming behind him, Hicks reported the thrilling news: "The landing craft have
been disembarked from their mother ships and are moving in irregular lines
toward the horizon of France. All over the surface of the sea they can be seen
cutting and zigzagging and heading toward the ribbon of land that's the coast of
Normandy."

Fifty years later, the politicians did their part, secular priests in a secular
age, in the solemn rites commemorating the D-Day landings. President Clinton
found a few eloquent phrases for the preliminary ceremonies, then produced a gem
of a speech late in the day for the main event at the American cemetery above
Omaha Beach.

It would have been unseemly for anything to outshine the ordinary men who
discovered such extraordinary things within themselves in the storms of fire
they found on Normandy's cliffs and beaches.

"For a few days," said Lane Kirkland, the head of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., who was a
merchant seaman in World War II, "the spirit of World War II lived again. I
tried to give a tip to a cabdriver in London, and he refused to take it. 'No,'
he told me, 'You saved us.' "

'Didn't Disgrace Himself'

Called upon by the workings of the calendar to lead what will probably be the
last ceremonies on such a vast scale, the President began with three strikes
against him, but he refused to accept that he was already out. He is the first
President since the World War II to have played no military role. He avoided the
draft in Vietnam.  He had a tough act to follow in Mr. Reagan, one of the great
orchestrators of national emotion, a master of nostalgia and the
might-have-been.

"He didn't disgrace himself, and that's what counts," said a senior American
official in Europe. "If he had seemed callow, or ill informed, or lacking in
respect, if he had grandstanded, that would have been terrible for him and the
country.

"As it was, he gained some respect from the older generation, I think, by
showing them the deference they deserve and insisting everywhere that their
experience shows us where we ought to go. I doubt that that struck much of a
chord with the younger generations, but that's not his doing."

Mr. Clinton will return to the United States after meetings and speeches in
Paris today and a return to Oxford on Wednesday that is sure to revive talk of
his antiwar sentiments during his days as a student there. It seems likely that
in domestic terms he has been neither strengthened nor weakened by this second
European tour of his 16-month-old Administration.

Clinton's Burdens

No one can convincingly suggest any longer that the big ceremonial moments are
beyond Mr. Clinton. He demonstrated that he can put aside his compulsively,
sometimes exuberantly informal style for occasions requiring dignity and
restraint. If his youth and inexperience sometimes deny his words the weight he
would like them to carry, if the imagery he and his aides choose often seems
forced or corny, he has shown himself capable of addressing complex issues
involving many countries with varied interests and histories.

But health care is still in trouble, the more so with the indictment of
Representative Dan Rostenkowski; the Democrats are still back on their heels in
electoral politics, having lost almost every election before the off-year
balloting in November, and the civil lawsuit brought against Mr. Clinton by
Paula Corbin Jones still throws a long, foreboding shadow.

If he passed the test in the ceremonies in Britain and France, the President
came a cropper, to a degree, in Italy. He felt that he had to honor the veterans
of the "forgotten campaign" to liberate Rome as well as those who served in
northern Europe, his aides reported, but in Italy itself and much of the rest of
Europe he was seen as simultaneously celebrating the defeat of Fascism and
condoning the entry of its offspring, the neo-Fascist National Alliance, into
the new Italian Government.

On the Agenda

What the Europeans wonder about is his strategic sense. It was clear, a top
French politician said today, that Mr. Clinton was having more trouble than he
should in balancing economic and political considerations, as on China, and in
deciding where and in what kinds of situations American strength and prestige
should be committed.

The President will be back on the Continent this month for the annual meeting of
the seven biggest industrial powers, a meeting, this time in Naples, that will
focus more than ever before on question of trade, now seen as the key to the
domestic economic problems of the big nations.

After that, Mr. Clinton is to meet with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia,
also in Italy, and then will spend about 36 hours in Bonn and Berlin. In Berlin,
he will hold a meeting in the Reichstag, walk through the Brandenburg Gate and
ceremonially disband the Berlin Brigade -- powerful symbols of the end of
Berlin's time as a ward of the West and its central new role in a unified
Germany.

Those will be important days for Mr. Clinton and for his country, for it is
trade, not war, and Germany and Russia, not so much Britain and France, that
hold the key to future relations between the United States and Europe.


LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Legacy of '93 Flood: Sand, Sand and More Sand

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: HARTSBURG, Mo., June 3


First came the flood, which tore nearly 500 holes in the farm levees along the
Missouri River last year and drowned $150 million in crops.

Now the water is gone, but the rampaging river left even greater trouble:
millions of tons of sand that have transformed miles of fertile bottom land into
a desert landscape of blowing grit and shifting dunes, in some places five feet
deep.

Nowhere in the Midwest was the agricultural damage from the 1993 flood as
extensive as it was here in Hartsburg and the other farm villages that hug the
Missouri River. The Soil Conservation Service, a unit of the Federal Department
of Agriculture, estimates that of the 945,000 acres on the Missouri River flood
plain, 455,000 were damaged by sand scoured from the bottom of the river and
erosion.

Reclaiming the flood plain, for generations Missouri's most productive farmland,
could cost $500 million, the Soil Conservation Service said. Perhaps 200,000
acres have been permanently ruined by sand.

"It's an awful mess," said Orion Beckmeyer, who before the flood last summer
grew corn and soybeans with his brother, Glen, on their 900-acre farm here on
the Hartsburg bottom along the Missouri River.

The brothers estimate that perhaps 100 acres are beyond help, and as Orion
Beckmeyer climbs into the cab of his four-wheel-drive tractor, he scowls at a
landscape of water, sky and sand so foreign it could pass for the New Jersey
shore.

"The good thing is that the flood brought this community together," he said.
"The bad thing is that we got years of work putting this place back together. No
matter what we do, the land will never be as good as it was."

While luckier neighbors nurse along the corn and soybeans they planted on
undamaged land, this will be the second successive year that the Beckmeyers will
not harvest a crop. Nor are they alone. Along the 498 miles of the Missouri
River that runs through this state, hundreds of farmers are trying to reclaim
sand-covered land by turning over their fields with immense plows. They hope to
mix the sand on top with more fertile dirt that lies beneath it, giving their
ground enough organic matter to support a crop next year.

But when the sand is more than two feet deep, plowing is useless, said Russell
C. Mills, the director of the Soil Conservation Service in Missouri. "In a lot
of places out there we have sand five feet deep," Mr. Mills said. "The river
turned the best farmland in the world into a giant sandbox."

The extent of the damage surprised farmers in the flood plain. But the
possibility of such devastation had been anticipated for decades by Government
hydrologists and engineers, Mr. Mills said.

The Missouri River, called "The Big Muddy" by people around here, naturally
carries five times the amount of sediment as the Mississippi River above Cairo,
Ill. The Missouri River also falls swiftly, twice as fast as the Mississippi.

Hemming in such a river with dikes and levees, as most hydrologists are quick to
point out, invites trouble during flooding. The high walls increase the depth of
the water, concentrate the river's energy, and accelerate the current. In a
river like the Missouri, fast water scours the bottom, digging beneath the rich
layer of dirt that usually lies there and churning up sand instead. Anywhere
along the way that is flat will cause the river to slow down and the sand will
drop out.

In 1944, as the United States began to invest heavily in flood-control
structures on the Missouri, Congress anticipated problems. In the plan that they
approved that year, the lawmakers proposed to build Federal levees 1,500 to
2,500 feet back from both banks of the Missouri.

The idea was to give the river up to a mile of open space in high water, thereby
dispersing the energy of floods across a larger area, particularly around river
bends where the damage is generally most severe. By designing a system of farm
levees that gave the river room, Congress sought to reduce the velocity of the
water and limit the amount of sand that would be scoured from the bottom and
deposited on farm fields.

But the proposal was rejected by farmers, many of whom had already built their
own levees right on the Missouri's banks, and were loath to move them. Over the
years, those levees were built higher and stronger by farmers and the United
States Army Corps of Engineers. By 1993, the Missouri River was essentially a
huge, man-made channel.

Last summer during the flood, the Missouri ripped the levee system apart with a
vengeance that still leaves farmers and agricultural officials awestruck.

Wrath of the River

What occurred here on the Hartsburg bottom was typical. The river blasted
several openings in the levee and at each one poured through with the same
violence as if a dam had collapsed. At the biggest break, the gushing water
scoured a gaping hole in Mr. Beckmeyer's field that was 70 feet deep across 40
acres. Vietnam veterans here say bombs from B-52's did not cause such large
craters.

As the water poured onto the bottomland, it swirled around three of Mr.
Beckmeyer's metal grain bins, causing a whirlpool that dug a 12-foot hole into
which the bins fell. They lie now in a toppled heap, as though they were pins
hit by a giant bowling ball.

It wasn't until the flood waters had spread well onto the Hartsburg bottom that
the current slowed, depositing sand from the holes and the river on Mr.
Beckmeyer's fields.

In all, the flood punched 465 holes in the Missouri River's levees, according to
an estimate by the University of Missouri's Food and Agriculture Policy Research
Institute. The research institute said that 546 million cubic yards of sand
ended up on farmers' fields -- enough to create a pile in Central Park 406 feet
high, as high as some 30-story buildings.

Last month, in a draft report, a committee of Federal experts convened by the
White House discussed at length the damage along the Missouri River. The
committee recommended that the Government seriously consider reviving the
50-year-old Congressional plan for giving the Missouri River more space. "The
flood of 1993 demonstrated the need for some form of floodway to provide greater
capacity to convey flood flows," the committee said.

Environmentalists in Missouri and in Washington support such a change in policy
because it would reduce economic losses in floods and restore some of the
river's natural systems.

But the recommendation has produced nothing but catcalls from farmers and has
all but been ignored by the Clinton Administration. Last year, the White House
and Congress approved legislation that provided over $300 million to repair
levees across the Upper Mississippi River basin. Although work along the
Missouri has proceeded at a slower pace than along the Mississippi River, the
Army Corps of Engineers and other Federal agencies overseeing the repairs say
they have no plans to halt contracts or move levees back.

The reason is the same in 1994 as it was in 1944. Farmers, who hold considerable
political power in Missouri, want to protect their land from any flooding, and
levees built directly on the banks, they say, are the best way to do it. Never
before, they added, had the river done as much damage as it did in 1993 and they
are willing to take the chance that a comparable flood will not occur for
decades.

This week, after months of delay, the Army Corps of Engineers approved the final
contract to repair the Hartsburg levee surrounding the Beckmeyers' farm. "I'd
heard that because of this new report, maybe the Government was having second
thoughts about fixing the levee," Orion Beckmeyer said. "It's taken a long time
to get the work finished. But when they let that contract, we all felt a little
better."


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Frank Gordon of the Soil Conservation Service examining grain
bins on Orion Beckmeyer's farm near Hartsburg, Mo. They were left in a crater of
sand made by a whirlpool last year in the Missouri River flood. (pg. A1); Sand
left after the flood of 1993 has inundated the fields on Orion Beckmeyer's farm
near Hartsburg, Mo. With no hopes for a crop this year, he has resorted to
plowing to try to bring some topsoil back to the surface. (Ted Reisinger for The
New York Times) (pg. B12)

Map: "THE DAMAGE: Farmland, Buried or Lost"

Flooding along the Missouri River last summer eroded farmland and deposited tons
of sand on fertile bottom land. Near Hartsburg, Mo., the damage was extensive.
Map shows amount of sand deposited in the Hartsburg area. (pg. B12)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Largest Drug-Law Takeover, U.S. Seizes New York City Hotel

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words


Federal authorities seized a filthy, dilapidated residential hotel near Gramercy
Park yesterday, saying that drug dealers used it to operate "a virtual
supermarket for crack cocaine." The owner, prosecutors said, did nothing about
it.

Roving bands of drug dealers and addicts took over whole floors at the Kenmore
Hotel, the largest single-room occupancy hotel in New York City, regularly
robbing and sometimes killing elderly residents for a few dollars, prosecutors
said. With unlighted stairwells, broken toilets in common bathrooms and
prostitutes plying their trade in the hallways, the hotel "was permeated with
violence," said the United States Attorney, Mary Jo White.

In a late-morning raid, Federal agents and the New York City police arrested 18
people and took control of the 22-story red-brick building at 145 East 23d
Street, where the writers Nathanael West and Dashiell Hammett once lived. A
private company will manage the hotel until a court rules on the seizure.

Federal prosecutors said their takeover of the hotel represented the largest
seizure ever made under a little-used 1984 law that allows the authorities to
take a building being used in the sale of narcotics. The law, different from one
commonly used to seize the possessions of drug dealers, allows the authorities
to take someone's property if they can show there was a pattern of drug offenses
at the site and repeated arrests failed to stop the trafficking.

The hotel's owner, Tran Dinh Truong, was not charged with any crime. Yesterday's
action was the first step in a civil suit, but prosecutors said that he was well
aware of the crimes taking place on the premises and failed to respond to
repeated warnings from New York City building and law-enforcement authorities
over the last two years.

Mr. Tran has bought at least five New York City hotels since he immigrated in
1975 from Vietnam where, as a shipowner, he is said to have earned millions of
dollars hauling cargo for the United States military. Prosecutors said they did
not know the hotels' annual profit. But they said Mr. Tran received $2 million
each year solely from tenants on public assistance in the Kenmore, about 20
percent of the tenants in the hotel, which has 621 rooms.

"The guy had a cash cow," said Christopher Marzuk, an assistant district
attorney from the New York City Special Narcotics Prosecutor's office. "Money
was pouring in through the front door, but he didn't give a damn about anyone
who lived inside."

In an interview in February, Mr. Tran said he was losing $50,000 a month at the
Kenmore and could not afford the property taxes. He said 125 of 370 long-term
tenants were not paying rent, and he had 16 eviction suits pending.

Mr. Tran's lawyer, Alan Lichtenberg, did not respond to repeated messages
yesterday, and Mr. Tran could not be reached for comment.

Neighborhood residents have protested the hotel's deterioration for years,
expressing impatience with the legal system for taking so long. In 1993, the
Kenmore was cited for 362 violations by the New York City Buildings Department,
the Department of Housing Preservation and Development and the Department of
Health.

The Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, said that Bac Tran,
apparently a relative of Mr. Tran, was convicted of bribing a New York City
building inspector in 1992 in the Hotel Carter, on West 43d Street, which Mr.
Tran also owns. The conviction was overturned on appeal.

Mr. Morgenthau said his office turned its investigation of the Kenmore over to
Federal authorities because state forfeiture laws are relatively weak.

In a court complaint, Ms. White, the United States Attorney, argued for seizure
by saying that although the police had made 122 drug-related arrests in the
hotel since 1991, dealers were easily replaced and drug trafficking continued.

"Many of the individuals arrested for selling narcotics worked as security
guards at the Kenmore Hotel," Ms. White said in court papers. The guards, hired
by Mr. Tran and his employees, often charged drug customers $1 to $20 to enter
the building.

As recently as June 4, a security guard told a police informant that he had
collected $ 200 that day from people who wanted to enter the hotel. But that was
minor, compared with other crimes: an 86-year-old woman was robbed, strangled
and her body left in a bathtub, last month, the police said.

Officer Scott Kimmins, who has patrolled the area for eight years, said
yesterday that he typically entered the hotel twice a day and was continually
stunned at what he called horrendous living conditions.

"A lot of elderly people live here, but you rarely see them because they're so
terrified," he said. "They live in tiny rooms, like living in their own prisons.
Today's a great day. The Marines came in."

Prosecutors said in court papers that Officer Kimmins received death threats
from drug dealers. They sometimes tried to figure out his schedule to avoid him,
prosecutors said, and discussed making an anonymous complaint on him to the
Police Department's Internal Affairs Division in the hope of removing him.

Mr. Tran and his staff deliberately left some rooms unlocked so that crack
dealers could work there, prosecutors said. One room cited in court papers was
"the pigeon room," named because a broken window allowed birds to nest and live
there.

"Embedded in the pigeon excrement on the floor are dozens of crack vials,"
prosecutors wrote.

A Federal Bureau of Investigation agent, Kenneth R. Weiss, said in court papers,
"The Kenmore Hotel, the largest commercial single-room occupancy hotel in New
York City, is a virtual supermarket for crack cocaine, where crack is sold
freely in various brands.".

A Check by Officers

Late yesterday morning, police officers and Federal agents brought suspects out
in pairs and trios, asking each group to look across the street, so undercover
officers in a car could say whether they were among those observed in drug
sales.

The 15 men and 3 women arrested yesterday will all be charged in Manhattan
Supreme Court. Fourteen face drug charges, and four also have to answer bench
warrants for previous arrests.

Prosecutors noted that Mr. Tran had filed more than 500 eviction notices against
tenants for failure to pay rent since he took over in 1985, but none based on
narcotics activity.

Authorities could not identify the building's value. Mr. Tran took out a $2.5
million mortgage when he bought it in 1985, and although the overall condition
has deteriorated badly, improvements have been made by some tenants who rent
storefronts along 23d Street.

Melvin Buffill, 55, who has lived in the Kenmore for four years, said that more
than one neighbor was killed at the hotel.

Mr. Buffill, who said he is disabled by bronchitis, arthritis, high blood
pressure and diabetes, said he gets $54 a month in disability checks, $ 498 a
month from Social Security and $112 a month in food stamps. He rents his room on
the ninth floor for $360, doing what he can to insure his safety.

"I put my bed up against the wall at night," he said. "I have a knife, I have a
big pipe and I have some Mace."

Les Vanderfecht, director of the Community Lounge for Senior Citizens on 22d
Street at Gustavus Adolphus Lutheran Church, said the elderly people his program
serves have complained for years of conditions in the hotel and even those who
do not live there have been intimidated and victimized by the element it has
attracted.

"It has been a real threat. This is a target population for thugs," he said.

A commercial tenant, Allan Menkin, who runs Bazaar East in a storefront on the
hotel's ground floor, said Mr. Tran rarely performed even basic repairs and
maintenance.

"We've had flooding in my store from broken pipes 32 times since Jan. 1," said
Mr. Menkin, who posted a sign in his front window thanking the authorities for
their action. "I only wanted to know what took so long."

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Roving bands of drug dealers that made the Kenmore Hotel "a
virtual supermarket for crack cocaine" and life for its residents terror filled
were stopped yesterday with the seizure of the hotel by Federal authorities. The
front desk was being run by United States marshals. (Michelle V. Agins/The New
York Times) (pg. B3)

Table: "POLICE BLOTTER: A Month at the Kenmore Hotel"

There were 189 drug related activities and arrests at the Kenmore Hotel from
January 1991 to May 1994. Chart shows the record of individual cases from the
U.S. Attorney's Ofice for May 1994. (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Oxford Journal;
Whereas, He Is an Old Boy, If a Young Chief, Honor Him

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1527 words

DATELINE: OXFORD, England, June 8


President Clinton returned today for a sentimental journey to the university
where he didn't inhale, didn't get drafted and didn't get a degree.

The last got rectified by Oxford University in a ceremony conducted by men in
black gowns speaking in Latin in a 325-year-old stone building designed by
Christopher Wren. Mr. Clinton, who studied politics at University College as a
Rhodes Scholar from the fall of 1968 to the spring of 1970, was awarded an
honorary doctorate in civil law.

At the gilded Sheldonian Theater, the university Chancellor, Lord Jenkins of
Hillhead, read the text of the degree in Latin, featuring eight clauses
beginning with "Whereas," one with "Therefore" and one with "Witness Whereof."
Lord Jenkins said Mr. Clinton was honored for being "a doughty and tireless
champion of the cause of world peace," for having "a powerful collaborator in
his wife," and for winning "general applause for his achievement of resolving
the gridlock which prevented an agreed budget."

Wearing a red gown, beneath a high ceiling painted with cavorting cherubs, Mr.
Clinton recalled for the audience at the Sheldonian how he had felt, as a young
man fresh from Arkansas, a sense of nagging inadequacy at Oxford, the oldest
university in the English-speaking world, a place of musty glamour once
described by Henry James as "a kind of dim and sacred ideal of the Western
intellect."

Looking at the British dons, men in flowing robes and mortarboards, some
carrying gold-headed scepters, the President said: "I always felt a mixture of
elation and wariness, bordering on intimidation, in your presence. I thought if
there was one place in the world I could come and give a speech in the proper
language, it was here, and then I heard the degree ceremony. And sure enough,
once again at Oxford I was another Yank a half-step behind."

Mr. Clinton said he was honored by the degree and the honorary fellowship,
adding wryly: "I must say that, as my wife pointed out, I could have gotten
neither one of these things on my own. I had to be elected President to do it."

The mood at the ceremony, on the last day of the President's weeklong European
tour, was good-natured. And even the sounds drifting in from the chanting
students outside, protesting increases in housing and food fees, were the cause
of an amused comment by the President, who was once an anti-establishment
demonstrator himself, on the Vietnam War.

"Just listen outside here," Mr. Clinton said, remarking, "Everything from
disputes over the nature of the Italian Government to the character of the word
'skinhead' is being debated even as we are here."

At a lunch before the ceremony, Mr. Clinton saw the men who were his tutor and
his porter, and his master read some confidential information from first-year
progress reports from his tutor. The tutor had said Mr. Clinton was a
"satisfactory" student who was "doing well," and added a note of confidence that
"we'll see even more improvement in his writing."

Hillary Rodham Clinton was given a claret jug with a Latin inscription hailing
her as "the Lady in charge of Universal Health."

Browsing at the Book Store

Later, at a reception with American students at the Rhodes House, Mr. Clinton
was blunt. Jennifer Bradley, a student from Austin, Tex., said the President had
warned against Generation X cynicism, telling her, she said, that "the whole
Generation X thing was bull." (One of Mr. Clinton's foreign-policy speech
writers on the trip, Eric Liu, 25, was on the cover of Newsweek last week on a
report about Generation X because he has written a book on the subject.)

The President also tried to tell the students not to be cynical. "I feel more
idealistic today than I did as a student," Mr. Clinton told them privately,
according to George Stephanopoulous, a 33-year-old Presidential aide who was
also a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford. Mr. Stephanopoulous said that many of the
students handed letters to the President and the First Lady, which they kept to
read on the flight home. In addition to the letters, the President was quoted as
saying, "I got the business cards" from the job-hunters in the group.

After leaving Rhodes House, the President walked to Blackwell's book store. On
the way, some students unfurled a sign reading, "Inhale Next Time, Bill."

During the campaign, Mr. Clinton confessed that he had tried marijuana here, but
quickly insisted, "I didn't inhale," explaining that he did not like the taste.

In the elegant bookstore, he and Mrs. Clinton browsed for more than half an
hour. Mrs. Clinton did not buy anything but the President purchased "Principle
of Duty" by David Selbourne; "Behind the Battle: Intelligence in the War With
Germany, 1939-45," by Ralph Burnett; "Global Ecology," an anthology edited by
Wolfgang Sachs, and "The World in 2020," by Hamish McRae.

The University issued a list of books drawn by Mr. Clinton from the University
College library during his student days. Showing an early taste for the weighty
nitty-gritty of government, he signed out "Presidential Leadership, the
Political Relations of Congress and the Chief Executive."

Mr. Clinton walked around the grounds and reminisced with his old Oxford
roommate, Robert Reich, the Secretary of Labor. And he visited his old dormitory
room in Helen's Court at University College, now occupied by Emma Caldwell, a
first-year law student from Northern Ireland who said she had no idea she was
sleeping where the President once slept.

"Nothing was said when I first moved in and there are no signs that it was his,"
she said. "He didn't carve his name in the furniture."

The Art of Debating

Showing he had learned the art of dogged debating at Oxford, Mr. Clinton wrote a
rebuttal this afternoon on a poster on the door of another student who lived in
his old dormitory. The poster was protesting the "cultural imperialism" of those
Americans who had wanted to intervene to prevent the caning of a young American
in Singapore.

The President wrote an explanation of his stance against the caning, saying
"that's not the issue," that opposing the caning was not about imposing American
values, but about whether the punishment was out of proportion to the crime and
whether the young man was really guilty.

The President had originally planned to visit Oxford before the commemoration of
the 50th anniversary of D-Day in Normandy. But the White House changed the stop
to the end of the President's European trip, presumably to avoid having
embarrassing stories about Mr. Clinton's activities as a Vietnam protester crop
up on the eve of the D-Day anniversary. Mr. Clinton arrived in England in 1968
as a 22-year-old Rhodes Scholar, just out of Georgetown University in
Washington, at the height of the Vietnam War.

By his own admission, it was here that Mr. Clinton rode out part of the war, and
it was here he wrote the now infamous letter to the commander of the Reserve
Officer Training Corps back home in Arkansas -- "Thank you for saving me from
the draft" -- for helping extend his deferment. He said he hoped to maintain his
"political viability."

The young Oxford student said in that letter, "I am writing too in the hope that
my telling this one story will help you to understand more clearly how so many
fine people have come to find themselves still loving their country but loathing
the military."

In interviews in Europe this week with American networks, he has reflected on
his opposition to the war. He told Tom Brokaw of NBC News that he did not regret
his position then. He seemed to show a bit of revisionism, perhaps not recalling
the "loathing" line or how many in the 1960's disdained authority and those in
uniform. "I think all the people who grew up in my generation were hurt maybe
worse than any other generation could have been by their ambivalence over
Vietnam because we all loved the military so much."

After all, Mr. Clinton said, "I grew up on the war movies -- you know, on John
Wayne and John Hodiak and Robert Mitchum and all those war movies."

Left to Go to Yale

Mr. Stephanopoulous said Mr. Clinton did not get his degree because he switched
from one program to another, ultimately pursuing a B.Phil. in Politics, and had
a year left to go to get a graduate degree when the opportunity came to go to
Yale Law School.

A Rhodes scholarship provides for two years of study at Oxford University, with
a third year granted by application. Most Rhodes Scholars earn degrees at
Oxford, and all are expected to remain full-time students until they complete
their programs, but Mr. Clinton is not the only one to have left after two years
without having done so.

In interviews in British newspapers and on television shows in recent days,
former professors and colleagues remembered the young Bill Clinton as an earnest
innocent.

He received middling reviews from several English students at Oxford, where they
are well tutored in the essential British arts of irony and faint praise. "It
was absolutely appropriate to the occasion," said Adam Shapiro, a 20-year-old
wearing the traditional black robe and white tie. "It was completely anodyne."


LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton led a procession from University College at
Oxford to receive his honorary doctorate. (Associated Press) (pg. A1); The
President, degree in hand, and Lord Jenkins, Oxford's Chancellor. (Reuters) (pg.
A8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

N.B.A. FINALS;
C.B.A. Alumni Reach the Pinnacle

BYLINE: By WILLIAM C. RHODEN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, June 8


For two days, every player and coach involved in the National Basketball
Association championship series has talked about being fortunate to make it this
far. But for seven of the players, the feeling of good fortune runs deeper than
usual because they have come so far to get here.

The seven -- Scott Brooks, Earl Cureton, Mario Elie and Chris Jent of Houston,
and John Starks, Anthony Mason and Corey Gaines of New York -- are alumni of the
Continental Basketball Association.

This is the first time in six years that more than one former C.B.A. player has
participated in an N.B.A. championship series. There have never been more than
five.

Among the C.B.A. alumni, Starks scored 11 points in Game 1 while Mason had 5.
Elie had 2 points for Houston and Jent saw action but did not score.

No player represents the leap from the lower level to the top of the game more
than Jent. Two months ago he was playing for the Columbus Horizon and waiting
for his next paycheck. Now he shares a locker room with some of the greatest
players in the world and he regularly rubs shoulders with Hakeem Olajuwon, whom
many consider the world's greatest player.

Looking for the Opportunity

"This has been incredible; it's an indescribable feeling," said Jent, a former
Ohio State Buckeye and teammate of Jim Jackson, now with the Dallas Mavericks.
"I always said to my friends and family I just wanted an opportunity to prove I
can play at this level. I've been given the opportunity."

And to think that only four months ago Jent, who grew up in Sparta, N.J., was
close to quitting basketball.

He went to the Rapid City Thrillers of the C.B.A. right out of college to regain
the shooting touch and confidence he lost in an offense that was geared for
Jackson. As a rookie during the 1992-93 season, Jent played well enough to make
the C.B.A. all-rookie team. This season, as a member of the Horizons, Jent made
the C.B.A. all-star team. But while his basketball resume was growing, his bank
account was not.

"At that point I hadn't been paid for six weeks," Jent said. "Nine checks I'd
been written bounced. Things were looking very dismal and I didn't see any light
at the end of the tunnel."

Just in a nick of time, Jent received The Call: Houston was making its now
famous "phantom trade" with Detroit, sending Robert Horry and Matt Bullard to
the Pistons. The Rockets would get Sean Elliott and planned to call Jent up from
Columbus to take Bullard's place.

But Elliott failed the Rockets' physical, setting off a series of about-faces.
Jent wound up back in Columbus, more disheartened than before.

But in April he received another call form Houston. This time it was the real
thing. Bullard was hurt and the Rockets needed a body.

Jent, at 6 feet 7 inches, fit the bill. Now, two months later, he experiencing
something as an N.B.A. rookie that many players won't experience in a career:
the N.B.A. finals.

Life in the Slow Lane

But the most difficult adjustment has been off the court.

"I'm just trying not to get caught up in the life style these people are
living," Jent said, referring to his teammates. "Their standard of living is
much higher than mine. I'm not used to having money. It's easy for me to get
caught up in it because we're in the world championship and all that. But I
don't know where I'm going to be next year. I'm hoping I'm going to stick but
there's no guarantee. Until there's a guarantee, I can't get caught up in the
life style."

A unique bond exists between C.B.A. veterans, a bond that frequently goes beyond
team affiliation in the N.B.A. They root for their respective teams but they
pull for each other.

Rooting to Stay Put

"We all know that it's very tough to play in this league, and we respect the
people that have made it to where they are," Jent said. "The easy part is to get
called up; the hard part is to stay."

The bond also comes from the fact that the C.B.A. is an unforgettable situation.

"We call it Vietnam," Jent said. "It's more than basketball. It's a mindset.
I've seen players who love basketball who could have had a bright future give up
the game because they can't take the life style. It's challenging physically and
mentally to stay in that league and keep your dream alive."

'C.B.A. Attitude'

From John Starks to Mario Elie to Chris Jent, the desperation to escape, coupled
with the fear of going back, has created a signature style of play.

"We call it playing with a 'C.B.A. Attitude,' " Jent said.

"Playing in the C.B.A. gives you a constant hunger," he said. "You realize how
fortunate you are to be in the N.B.A. A lot of the players who have always been
up here don't appreciate it because they never had to relate to it. Our attitude
is that 'I've been there. I never want to go back.' "

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hakeem Olajuwon blocking Anthony Mason in the first quarter. (F.
Carter Smith for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Commencements;
Gore, Class of '69, Warns Harvard '94 Against Cynicism

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 419 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 9


Twenty-five years after members of Al Gore's graduating class took over the
Harvard dean's office, the Vice President returned to his alma mater today as
its commencement speaker and warned the class of 1994 againstcynicism.

After an article in this morning's Harvard Crimson wondered which side of Mr.
Gore would be shown today -- "Boring or Charismatic" -- the Vice President
opened with a battery of jokes about himself, like: "How do you tell Al Gore
from a roomful of Secret Service agents? He's the stiff one."

But when he dug into his topic in earnest, he told the graduates that cynicism
"drains us of the will to improve; it diminishes our public spirit; it saps our
inventiveness; it withers our souls."

At Harvard's 343d Commencement, degrees were conferred upon 5,927 candidates.

"Unlike many other things in this world," said Harvard's president, Neil L.
Rudenstine, "this is actually one event that has improved with time."

Not a Protester

Mr. Gore was in the class that disrupted the campus in April 1969, protesting
the Vietnam War. Mr. Gore told The Crimson that he had not taken part in that
protest at the dean's office.

Mr. Gore told this year's graduates that much of the country's cynicism had
resulted from the years his class attended college, years in which the country
was riven by race riots, political assassinations and the Vietnam War. "I left
Harvard in 1969 disillusioned by what I saw happening in our country," he said,
"and certain of only one thing about my future: I would never, ever go into
politics."

But Mr. Gore added that things were changing for the better. "I believe that
sympathy and compassion are revolutionary forces in the world and that they are
working now," he said.

"For my part, in the 25 years since my Harvard graduation, I have come to
believe in hope over despair, striving over resignation, faith over cynicism,"
Mr. Gore said.

Honorary degrees were awarded to Mr. Gore; Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is
stepping down this year from the United States Supreme Court; Benny Carter, the
jazz musician, composer and arranger; William H. Gray 3d, the president of the
United Negro College Fund and President Clinton's special adviser on Haiti;
Mason Hammond, a retired Latin professor at Harvard; Richard Levin, the new
president of Yale University; Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees; Maxine Singer, the president of the Carnegie Institution, and
James Q. Wilson, a political scientist and author.


LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vice President Al Gore at Harvard University's commencement
yesterday. Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who is retiring from the United States
Supreme Court, sat beside him. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              271 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Facing Up to the Legacy Of an Unresolved War

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: PARIS


In public last week, President Clinton commemorated the 50th anniversary of the
D-Day landings, one of the boldest and most decisive military strokes of the
20th century. The heroes of 1944 should prompt Americans of today, he said, to
make "common cause" with other countries once again; he asked members of his own
generation "not only to praise their deeds but to pursue their dreams."

In private he and his aides wrestled with a foreign-policy crisis whose
solution, again against daunting odds, will require all the conviction and all
the commonality of cause that the United States and its allies can muster: the
possession or potential possession of nuclear bombs by a unpredictable,
egomaniacal ruler in North Korea.

Unlike World War II, which ended in the unconditional surrender that the allies
had sought from the start, the conflict in Korea in the 1950's was far more
ambiguous. Described in classic double-talk as a "police action" and not a war,
it ended in armistice.

It is America's unresolved war, seldom discussed or analyzed, but still there,
ticking lethally away. Only the occasional news photo of American troops peering
through binoculars across the Demilitarized Zone or television film of American
Presidents visiting them serve to jog dormant memories.

Now the danger is that like World War I, also halted by an armistice that left
one party full of grievances, it will prove not to have ended at all. The
geopolitical situation all around him has been utterly transformed in the last
two decades, but Kim Il Sung retains the same goal, dominance in the Korean
peninsula, and the same willingness to take big risks.

He is waging a campaign of terror, evident first in the bombings in Burma, in
Seoul and on a South Korean airliner orchestrated by Pyongyang. His scientists
appear to have been working on nuclear weapons. As with Stalin and his
successors, the world fears that an isolated, power-mad, ideologically obsessed
leader will hold it to nuclear ransom or through miscalculation blow his corner
of it to smithereens -- which is the fundamental fear of the post-war era.

In the United States and Europe, so far, it has been a matter for specialists.
However enormous the stakes for Japan and South Korea, and thus for the world's
economy, however awful the implications for nuclear nonproliferation and hence
world peace, there is an undeniable complacency, not only on the streets of
London and Chicago, but even in the chanceries where the crucial decisions are
made.

Why? Why, especially in the United States, has no more been done to make the
stakes clear to the public? Why have we heard not even the rudiments of a debate
over whether Korea, unlike Bosnia, is a place where this country would be
willing to use force?

Surely one reason, on this matter as on so many others in the post-cold war
world, is that the proper course of action is hard to discern.

Many experts thought for a long time that if only the right package of economic
or other incentives could be established, including a reduction in the level or
visibility of American military action in South Korea, a deal could be arranged.
Give them the means to prop up their failing economy and to preserve their
authoritarian rule, it was said, and Kim Il Sung and his heir-apparent son, Kim
Jong Il, will give up nuclear projects. If not, economic sanctions, whether
voted by the United Nations or not, would do the trick. But last week's promise
by Pyongyang that sanctions would produce reprisals against Japan and the
devastation of South Korea has given pause to Western policy makers.

Mr. Clinton would rather not spend a lot of time this summer on Korea. His big
goal in the weeks ahead, apart from the successful completion of a second
European trip, is the passage of health care reform; to that end, he would
prefer to keep foreign crises and their inevitable divisiveness as far from
center stage as possible.

Fuzzy Goals

But that will only serve to prolong the public complacency about Korea, and to
further defer any meaningful discussion about where and under what circumstances
certain things are worth fighting for. In his inaugural and again in Normandy,
the President spoke of his generation's need to emulate their forebears in
sacrificing for the common good, but he has left it all pretty fuzzy.

He said last week that he wanted no "saber-rattling." He and Secretary of State
Warren Christopher have drawn tight lines of restraint around the use of
American force abroad, allowing only the most symbolic gestures in Bosnia,
pulling sharply back at the first signs of trouble in Haiti and Somalia,
abstaining in Rwanda. They may well have acted exactly as most of the American
people wish, but their policies entail major costs.

So has Mr. Clinton's scattershot method of making policy, the vagueness and
seeming contradictions in his message du jour. Socratic dialogues are not the
best means of enunciating national goals.

One cost is the loss of confidence of allies. Only the United States is in a
position in the current crisis to put some steel into the spines of Japan and
South Korea, both fearful that terrorism would result or that their successful
economies would be disrupted.

Last week the Japanese were reported to have refused even to contemplate cutting
off the flow of hundreds of millions of dollars a year from North Koreans
working abroad in Japan to families at home. Such remittances are Pyongyang's
largest source by far of hard currency.

In this and other matters, the Europeans are still waiting, as a foreign
minister said last week, for the moment "when Mr. Clinton thumps the table, a la
Margaret Thatcher, and says, 'This is where we're making our stand, with you or
without you.' "

A second cost is making adversaries bolder. That seems to have happened with the
Bosnian Serbs; it certainly happened in 1950 when Dean Acheson seemed to suggest
in a National Press Club speech, whether he intended to or not, that the United
States would not defend South Korea. The repeated changes in policy on Haiti and
Bosnia, the sense that the Administration is engaged in on-the-job training,
cannot have sent a message of stern resolve to North Korea.

Bill Clinton, the political child of the Vietnam war, had as his first mentor
one of the most eloquent of that war's foes, J. William Fulbright, but he
sometimes seems to have learned only half of the lesson the former Senator tried
so hard to teach his country.

The Fulbright doctrine held that attempting to project power into areas of
secondary interest, where the chances of achieving the desired effect were
small, only diminished that power. Such was the case in Vietnam, he said, and
Mr. Clinton and his team of advisers, many of them old Vietnam hands, think
often about the war.

But Mr. Fulbright wanted to maintain American power, wanted to avoid diminishing
it, so that it could be used at the right moment. Failing to do so, failing to
check the ambitions of a Hitler or a Stalin (or a Kim Il Sung) is as bad as
fighting the wrong battles, if not considerably worse.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton met troops at the "Bridge of No Return" in the
Demilitarized Zone between North and South Korea last July. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BACKTALK;
Knicks' Style Is Simply Shocking. Culture Shocking.

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


The buzz is back, that hot current of sportschat that crackles like a live wire.
But unless the Knicks win, it will fade quickly and we will never know if the
buzz could have reached the glad roar of 24 years ago, when the city seemed to
think that a No. 1 team meant hope for all.

Nothing in recent memory has matched those electric days and nights of the 1969
and 1970 sports seasons. Broadway Joe Namath's guaranteed Jets victory in the
Super Bowl was a prelude to the Mets' 1969 World Series victory before the
Knicks won Game 7 in Madison Square Garden.

The city quivered with possibility despite the shredding of its social fabric.
The escalating war in Vietnam was further separating classes and races. Poverty
deepened. There were increasing bomb threats in the city and attacks on police
officers.

But how about those teams, racially integrated, brash yet responsive to
authority, hard-working yet merry, aggressive yet clean-cut, the ideal of the
best in us. If they could make it, so could New York. So we said.

Twenty-four years later, that hope has been replaced by a harsher reality. Life
may simply not get any better; the task is to make sure it doesn't get worse.
There may be no rainbow's end. We have to learn to hang tough as we slog on.
Standing in line waiting our turn may not work anymore. The Rangers, mucking and
grinding and sometimes slashing, and the Knicks, butting and pounding and
sometimes complaining, may be who we think we need to be now.

In sentimental retrospect, it seems impossible to imagine moody John Starks on
that '69-70 Knicks team; not because he wouldn't be good enough but because of
the moral peer pressure. But we forget how moody Walt Frazier could be, how hot
and cold ran the 33-year-old workhorse guard, Dick Barnett, how sharp were Bill
Bradley's elbows.

The moral and physical force of that team was Willis Reed, a small but powerful
center whose greatest symbolic moment came in the seventh game against the
Lakers, when he lurched out on a Carbocained leg to face Wilt Chamberlain. He
reminded Murray Kempton of El Cid, strapped dead to his horse to lead his men to
victory against the Moors. Who plays so hurt now?

There were no native New Yorkers starting on that team, but they were the
gorgeous mosaic of their time: Bradley, the Missouri banker's son; Reed, the
Louisiana farm boy; Dave DeBusschere, the salt-of-the earth, beer-guzzling
Detroit ethnic; the private, sardonic Barnett, a future Ph.D., and the
garrulous, future Phil Rizzuto, that dude from Atlanta, Clyde.

Three blacks, two whites, and Red Holzman, an old Jewish coach who had played
for City College where he apparently learned to speak so sparingly ("I am an
ordinary man") that he seemed like a genius. Dustin Hoffman, Robert Redford,
Elliott Gould and Donald Sutherland were there, keeping seats warm for their
replacements, Woody Allen and Spike Lee.

Does anyone want New York to become a reflection of the current Knicks team? But
it may already have, and it may be just fine. Rap replaces classic rock. The
melody and the harmony are gone, but maybe rhythm is enough these days. And the
words are smarter.

Maybe the tightening relationship between rap and sports is a portend. Just last
week, the violent love affair between TLC's Lisa (Left Eye) Lopes and Atlanta
wide receiver Andre Rison consumed the football player's home; Lopes was charged
with arson. And Shaquille O'Neal continues to merge hoops and hip-hop on the
highest level.

Loving Patrick Ewing may be hard because he acts as though he doesn't care; at
Georgetown, Coach John Thompson probably taught him to thine ownself be enough.
And Derek Harper, Charles Oakley, Anthony Mason and Charles Smith are simply
smaller than life. The brawling game they play not only defines them but because
it smothers style and finesse, it becomes the game that everyone must play, just
as violence in the street becomes a standard.

Richard Lapchick, a longtime observer of racialism in sports, senses racism in
this attitude. He writes: "Does the intense fighting in the stretch fit the
typical white stereotype of blacks being more prone to violence than whites?
Everything is certainly (if not clearly) being viewed through a white prism."

But the Berkeley sociologist Harry Edwards, a consistently perceptive
commentator on sports, has long predicted that the street culture of the
so-called underclass would eventually transform sports. As more and more
athletes from poor neighborhoods are shuttled through high schools and colleges
into the pros to become society's gladiators, it seems logical to assume that
the survival ethos of their slums would be translated into fighting for the
ball. And that the game would resonate with street words like "dominate" and
"respect" and be signified by street gestures. And that "winning ugly" would
become a meaningless phrase when winning by any means necessary became the norm.

The Knicks grew up scrabbling. Now they are teaching their style to a new
generation of white, black, male, female, rich, poor basketball players.

Is this a virus or a gift?

We may not get that answer in the next few days, but some of the future will
begin to reveal itself. If the Rangers win and the Knicks win, we must then
prepare for the Yankees' victory.

Can we ever learn to love George, Buck, Paul O'Neill while we wait for that
ultimate symbol of the neurotic 90's in sport, Iron Mike Tyson, to storm out of
the slammer and crank up the buzz.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Willis Reed snaring a rebound against Lakers' Wilt Chamberlain
in the Knicks' first championship season. (Larry Morris/The New York Times,
1970)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CHINATOWN;
Latest Wave of Immigrants Is Splitting Chinatown

BYLINE: By JANE H. LII

SECTION: Section 14;  Page 6;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


For more than 100 years, Chinatown has absorbed the different waves of Chinese
immigrants, from the Taishanese earlier this century to the ethnic Chinese from
Vietnam in the 1980's. But now, there are growing strains between the
established Cantonese community and the latest group of immigrants, the
Fujianese, who have poured in from mainland China in the last four years.

Many businessmen and longtime residents are expressing resentment of the new
Fujianese, saying they are overwhelming Chinatown, causing an increase in crime
and a major unemployment problem. Non-Fujianese workers complain that the sheer
number of these immigrants, many of whom have been smuggled in, creates unfair
competition by flooding the market and driving down wages. There is also concern
over image.

"It's an embarrassment to us," said a Cantonese businessman, who insisted on
anonymity. "When people come to Chinatown and see this mess, they think all
Chinese are bad. Why should everyone take the blame for one group?"

But the Fujianese say the problems created by their arrival are being
exaggerated, pointing out that earlier waves of immigrants faced the same
predicament. They also say the established immigrants are overly concerned about
their image being tarnished because of the publicity surrounding the grounding
last year of the Golden Venture, a ship carrying 300 illegal Fujianese
immigrants, and the prosecution of the Fuk Ching, a notorious Fujianese gang.

"Every immigrant group faces hardships when they first arrive, even the
Pilgrims," said Steven Wong, a journalist of Fujianese descent. "Why make the
Fujianese the scapegoat? These people are the backbone of the economy. That's
why prices in Chinatown are so cheap. They have to work under harsh conditions
because they don't speak English and the mainstream world would not give them
jobs."

The tension stems partly from political divisions. The more established
Cantonese immigrants, many of whom are loyal to the Taiwanese Government, are
suspicious that the immigrants from Fujian, a province on the mainland, are
sympathetic to the Communist Government.

Whatever the reason for the strain, people familiar with Chinatown say, it may
be adding to the difficulties of assimilation. Because of their numbers, their
inability to speak the Cantonese dialect and the illegal status that often makes
employment difficult, many Fujianese have been left desperately poor and huddled
in crowded apartments in the perimeter of Chinatown, between Eldridge and
Jefferson Streets and as far north as Houston Street. The Fujianese claim that
the Cantonese businessmen won't give them jobs, even as they they use the
existence of the illegal immigrants to drive down wages. Some have resorted to
extortion and robberies.

The tension has kept the institutions of Chinatown -- the family, the village
and business associations -- from reaching out beyond their own groups to help
the new immigrants, something that would be unusual but would be especially
helpful under current conditions. Adding to the problem is that the Fujianese
immigrants are often too ashamed to seek help. Both groups say the American
Government has been inconsistent, encouraging the Fujianese to come, through
President Bush's 1990 Presidential order, then failing to provide any help.

Many Cantonese complain that established Fujianese, who began entering the
country in small numbers in the 1960's, are not helping out their own. In
interviews, three wealthy Fujianese said that the sheer number of immigrants
made it impossible to make a difference. But one, a prominent Fujianese
businessman, said people also feared that by helping the new wave they would
antagonize their Cantonese business associates as well as Fujianese businessmen
who have been harassed by some new immigrants.

"I want to show my support, but that would alienate my friends who have been
harassed by them," he said.   JANE H. LII

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Immigrants lining up outside an employment agency in Chinatown,
where long-time residents say the newcomers are overwhelming the neighborhood.
(Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Patton Family: An Intimate Portrait

BYLINE: By ANDI RIERDEN

SECTION: Section 14CN;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1688 words


ROBERT H. PATTON writes of the day in 1970 that he and his family sat
inconspicuously inside a Times Square movie theater to view the Academy
Award-winning film about his grandfather, Gen. George S. Patton.

To the 12-year-old, the moment marked the first time his grandfather emerged as
more than just a maze of snapshots, stories and facsimiles of medals won in
battle. Even at such a young age, Mr. Patton writes, he felt ambivalent about
being a descendent of one of the the century's greatest military figures,
particularly at a time when the antiwar movement had captured much of the
nation's sentiment.

But during the film's climatic depiction of the relief of Bastogne by the Third
Army during the Battle of the Bulge, the young Patton noticed his father -- a
two-star general who had served three tours of duty in Vietnam -- had tears
welling in his eyes. The boy realized that through his father he was clearly
connected to this General Patton character, and that, writes Mr. Patton, "led me
to consider for the first time in my life that my grandfather was somebody
real."

Three Years for a Book

Three years ago, with the help of an aunt, Mr. Patton set out to unravel the
myth of his grandfather and also shed light on an exuberant line of other Patton
ancestors who served in the United States military.

His book, "The Pattons: A Personal History of an American Family" (Crown, 1994),
was published this spring, comes nearly 50 years after his grandfather smashed
through the German defenses in the battle for France following the June 6 Allied
invasion of Normandy. Orchestrated with irresistable force, General Patton's
series of victories became pivotal in securing the beginning of the end of World
War II.

Spanning seven generations, "The Pattons" opens with the men of the family who
fought in the Indian wars, takes the readers through the Revolutionary and Civil
wars, then ends following his grandfather's death shortly after World War II.
Written in a tightly woven narrative that reads like a historical novel, "The
Pattons," includes family dramas, such as the aborted love affair between Nita
Patton, the General's sister, and John Pershing, the World War I general; and
also explores the family's faith in the paranormal.

But the centerpiece of the book is the life of General Patton, an engaging yet
hard-driving and difficult man whose philosophy demanded that he always lived
life on the edge. His maniacal attraction to the "exhilarating horror" of war,
according to his grandson, made the peaceful lull between the two world wars
nearly unbearable for his family and brought the General to the brink of a
nervous breakdown.

Mr. Patton, who lives with his wife and four sons in Darien, said in an
interview at his home that his research entailed interviews with Patton
relatives and volumes of letters and papers left by his ancestors from as far
back as the Revolutionary War -- a volume of materials to which only he had
access. All of the quotes in the book are extracted from the letters, he said.

Sitting late at night sifting through century-old love letters and diaries with
their antiquated scents and textures, he said, instilled in him a sense of the
timelessness of kinship. "The letters have this physical quality," said Mr.
Patton, 37 years old. "And as I read them I was conscience of how full of marvel
time is. To hear these voices leap out gave me a very deep attachment to the
past."

In the Beginning . . .

"The Pattons" begins with his early American ancestors, like Hugh Mercer, a
Scottish rebel who fought with Bonnie Prince Charlie and later fled to the
Colonies where he became a general in George Washington's Continental Army. In
the ensuing years, many of the Patton men -- the Patton alias was adopted by
Hugh's son-in-law, who also called himself Robert to hide a criminal past in
Scotland -- carved out careers in the military.

In the mid-1770's the family settled in Virginia and prospered, at least until
the Civil War. A John Patton served under Stonewall Jackson, and his brother,
George Smith Patton, a Confederate colonel, was killed by a Yankee cannonball.
The family lost most of its fortune and moved to California, a popular
destination for ex-Confederates.

There, in 1885, George Smith Patton Jr., grandson of the Confederate colonel,
was born in a citrus grove near San Gabriel. Pampered by his father, George S.
II, the young Patton evolved into a single-minded and egocentric soul.

A late reader and life-long poor speller who historians have speculated had
learning disabilities, the young Patton was schooled at home by his aunt Nannie,
who was drawn to mysticism and eastern religion. He grew up able to recite
passages from the Bhagavad-Gita, the Koran and the Iliad and was convinced that
in a past life, in the 15th century, he had witnessed wars.

A Man Divided

The boy's love of war and its potential glories was propelled by his father who
kept alive the family lore and legend of civil and revolutionary war patriots.

Yet as he grew into a young man, Georgie, as he was called, agonized over his
difficulties with schoolwork and harbored a deep feelings of inferiority that he
would never grow out of. After spending time at a boys' school in Pasadena, he
wrote home, "I am stupid there is no use talking I am stupid."

Nevertheless, he graduated from West Point in 1909, and saw tank service in
France in World War I. Between wars, without the prospect of something to give
meaning and shape to his life, he swung between extreme highs and lows.

Like the Greek warrior Achilles, Patton recorded, he "would be willing to live
in torture, die tomorrow if one day I could be really great," and he preferred
death to a "long, uneventful life."

His wife, Beatrice, a novelist, and their three children suffered greatly,
according to the author, as Georgie went through periodic drinking bouts and
began an affair with his wife's step-niece that, it was thought, lasted for
years.

After he received his general's star in 1940, he wrote to a colleague, "All that
is needed is a nice juicy war." He got it. By 1942 he was playing a major part
in the invasion of North Africa and a year later he was in on the capture of
Sicily. His career climaxed in 1944 and 1945 when, after the Allies Normandy
Invasion, Patton's Third Army swept across France and into Germany. After
capturing Saint-Lo in the west, his forces raced to Coutances 10 miles to the
south, seized Avranches, and ground up a German counterattack in the so-called
Falaise Gap.

With the support of British and Canadian forces, all France was cleared of the
enemy by mid-September 1944, enabling the Allies to invade Germany.

One of the war's ablest tank commanders, he played a pivotal role in helping to
halt the German counterattack in the Battle of the Bulge. Relentlessly
combative, Old Blood and Guts Patton almost had his career cut short for
behavior like slapping two combat-exhausted and hospitalized soldiers. (He later
apologized publicly for the incident.)

Mr. Patton said he considered the final chapter, which leads to the general's
death in Germany from injuries suffered in a car accident shortly after the end
of the war, the most difficult to write. Appropriately titled "An Ironical
Thing," the chapter discusses General Patton's anti-Semitism, a quality Mr.
Patton called "unforgiving, and part of the deep insecurity my grandfather felt
throughout his life."

Hate-Filled, Lonely and Bitter

In a reaction to Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower's proposal to dismantle the Nazi
bureaucracy, General Patton had publicly voiced his concerns that such a move
would weaken Germany and make it vulnerable to a possible Soviet invasion.
Referring to some Jews as "sub-human" and "lower than animals," he subsequently
wrote in his diary that they were spreading "a virus . . . of a Semitic revenge
against all Germans."

Also in the same chapter, Mr. Patton discusses the loneliness and bitterness his
grandfather felt at the end of the war and how he eventually became a caricature
of the image he had fostered of himself since boyhood. "At the end of his life,"
said Mr. Patton, a soft-spoken man whose stature and profile resembles his
grandfather's, "He became the mask, the machismo, the swagger."

The torch of military valor was passed down to Mr. Patton's father, Gen. George
S. Patton IV, who twice earned the Distinguished Service Cross and a Purple
Heart for his service in Vietnam, but there it ended. George S. Patton V, the
author's oldest sibling, was born mentally retarded and lives on his parents'
farm in Green Meadows, Mass. He competes in the Special Olympics and like his
grandfather, is a competent horseman, Mr. Patton said, adding, "He has many of
my grandfather's traits but will not be passing them on. In a sense the line has
come to an end with him."

Mr. Patton has worked primarily as a journalist and fiction writer, and his
other siblings, one of whom is a pacifist and Roman Catholic nun, have never
been inclined to pursue the profession of arms.

"I'm certain my father, who never pressured me, would have loved for me to go
into the service," said Mr. Patton, who grew up on Army bases in Europe and the
United States. "But it just wasn't something I wanted."

His greatest link to his grandfather was Ruth Ellen Patton Totten, the general's
daughter, who Mr. Patton described fondly as "a very earthy and boisterous
woman, who kept 10 dogs and would wear overalls, L. L. Bean shoes with $100,000
worth of jewelry." As the family genealogist, she had collected and preserved
the family's letters and papers. She died last Thanksgiving Day at the age of 78
in Green Meadows, a few months before her nephew's manuscript was published.

Though when he first began the project in 1991 he had mixed emotions about
impinging on his aunt's territory, he said, in the end she gave him her
blessing. "She was happy that I could help my cousins and siblings understand
the myth of the family better," he said. "She said to me, 'You have kept alive
voices that otherwise would have been lost.' "

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Patton with a portrait of his grandfather, Gen. George
S. Patton, and, above, General Patton in the field during World War II. (Pg. 1);
Robert H. Patton, author of a book about his family of soldiers, holds an 1860
model Colt carried by George Smith Patton, a Confederate colonel killed in the
Civil War. (Pg. 5) (Robin Fellows for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Broadway Reaches Across the Hudson To Give a Tony to the McCarter Theater

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 14NJ;  Page 1;  Column 3;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words


YOU don't have to be theater-wise to know that the Tony Awards, the stage
counterpart of the screen's Critic's
Notebook Oscars, reflect the exclusivity of Broadway, not the wholeness of
theater.

According to the eligibility rules for the accolades that will be bestowed
tonight at the Gershwin Theater on Broadway and broadcast live at 9 o'clock on
CBS, theater is defined by 19 blocks in midtown Manhattan.

And, for tonight, by Princeton, N.J.

The Tony Award to the McCarter Theater -- outstanding regional theater is the
designation -- attests to an awareness by the awards administration committee,
upon recommendation by the American Theater Critics Association, that theater is
farther reaching than the streets where Broadway shows live.

As a first-time honor to a professional theater in New Jersey, the McCarter's
Tony signals the long overdue impact of a theater in the state on the artistic
consciousness of the nation. The regional theater prize was established in 1977,
30 years after the Tonys were founded.

For all artistic intents and practical purposes, the McCarter's Tony, many
theatergoers feel, might as well be dubbed the Mann award. It wasn't until the
1990-91 season, the first under the artistic direction of Emily Mann, that a
consistent sense of occasion marked productions in the McCarter's theater
series.

To many, the arrival of Ms. Mann was tantamount to a wake-up call for a theater
that had lapsed into complacency. To others with a wait-and-see attitude, Ms.
Mann had to prove she had the goods to hold on to a tried -- or perhaps tired --
and true audience and to attract a new one. In just four seasons, she proved it.

Listen to Ms. Mann talk about her vision of theater and she will use such
phrases as changing audience perception, breaking down barriers, feeling
electricity in the air and involving audiences in non-passive theater. Energy,
emotion and event are recurring words. "The work speaks for itself" sums up her
credo.

In a conversation about theater, Ms. Mann instinctively refers to the political
scene in South Africa, which is "all for real." "He is euphoric," she said of
the South African playright Athol Fugard.

Of Nelson Mandela, she said, "He pulled a miracle." Ms. Mann has been working on
a screenplay about Winnie Mandela ("You Strike a Woman, You Strike a Rock"),
which she is turning into a stage play. Another a play in progress is "The
Greensboro Massacre," which confronts anti-Semitism and white supremacy.

Ms. Mann came to the McCarter as an accomplished director and playwright with an
intense social and political sensibility, notably as an innovator and specialist
in documentary theater. Some of this comes no doubt from her father, the late
Arthur Mann, a historian, whom she recalls "wrote of multiculturalism and
ethnicity before they became fashionable."

Consider Ms. Mann's plays, none of which have been produced at the McCarter:
"Annulla: A Survivor," one elderly woman's recollection of Kristallnacht, with
the text drawn entirely from tape recordings of the survivor; "Still Life,"
which is about a Vietnam veteran -- she also worked from tapes with the man, his
wife and his girlfriend. And "Execution of Justice," an epic docudrama -- 23
characters played 44 roles in the 1986 Broadway production --incorporating
material culled from court transcripts. The play involved the slaying of Mayor
George Moscone of San Francisco and Harvey Milk, a public official and
homosexual activist, by Dan White, another city official. The verdict sparked
off San Francisco riots in 1978.

It is no wonder that Ms. Mann and Anna Deavere Smith struck up an instant
camaraderie when they met at a women's theater conference in the 1970's. Ms.
Smith's acclaimed theater works, "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn
and Other Identities" and "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992" took current events
theater into yet another realm, establishing a genre that shapes oral history
into theatrical monodrama.

And it is no wonder that Ms. Smith chose Ms. Mann to direct the second work in
its world premiere at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles and then at the
McCarter last season. Ms. Smith's performances at the McCarter resulted in a
falling out between the two women -- and a singular stormy episode in Ms. Mann's
McCarter experience.

The journey of "Twilight" from Princeton to Off Broadway was less than happy or
direct, with Ms. Smith choosing another director, George C. Wolfe, for a new
production. "Twilight" gives no program acknowledgement to the McCarter, where
it was considered a work in progress oddly enough after a critically lauded Los
Angeles run. Since the show moved to Broadway, Ms. Smith is up for two Tony
awards tonight -- in the categories of Best Play and Best Performance by a
leading actress in a play.

Not Just Topical Plays

For all Ms. Mann's fervor about the theater of issues, it should not be assumed
that the McCarter repertory depends on topicality alone. Note two plays by
Tennessee Williams: "The Glass Menagerie," the first production of the Mann era,
and "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof," both staged by Ms. Mann, who is the director of two
shows out of five every season.

Hits, to use the commercial coinage, have outnumbered misses. A smoldering
production of "Miss Julie" by Strindberg provided a fresh take on classical
theater. Ms. Mann's staging of Chekov's "Three Sisters" with a starry cast
established a 10-year McCarter box office record. And Ms. Mann invited Michael
Kahn, a former McCarter artistic director, to stage "Much Ado About Nothing"
with felicitous results.

Most influentially, a shimmering production of "The Triumph of Love" by Pierre
Carlet de Marivaux, adapted and directed by Stephen Wadsworth, set off what has
been termed a "Mari-vogue," a spate of regional productions of the 18th-century
playwright's works. This season's final production, "Changes of Heart" -- same
playwright, same director -- created the same stir, possibly grander.

An alliance with Mr. Fugard says much about the possibility success creates.
After Mr. Fugard's early play, "Hello and Goodbye" was praised at the McCarter
last season, the playwright, who, in the past, has chosen the Yale Repertory in
New Haven for the American premieres of his plays, is to present his newest work
to the McCarter in May. And Ms. Mann is to make her McCarter mainstage play
writing debut with "Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years," an
adaptation of the memoirs by two daughters, centenarians both, of slaves set
free. Also scheduled for Ms. Mann's fifth season, starting in September, are
"The Matchmaker" by Thornton Wilder, "Rough Crossing" by Tom Stoppard and
"Mirandolina," an 18th-century comedy by Carlo Goldoni, with Mr. Wadsworth to
return as adapter and director.

'Turned the Theater Around'

"Emily has turned the theater around," said Liz Fillo, the president of the
McCarter's board, who recalled the yearlong search for an artistic director to
succeed Nagle Jackson, who has the position for more than a decade. "It was
soul-searching too," Ms. Fillo said. "And I went to other regional theaters in
the country, asking what people thought about the McCarter. The most telling
response was 'I don't think about the McCarter,' which meant it was nice, good,
safe, steady, old, established in a university town and nothing to get excited
about. No one knew we were special. And we knew we should be and wanted to be.
Emily was for us the ticket to that, to shaking things up, and it was a risk,
but we said, 'Let's change.' "

But change was not on the agenda of all McCarter subscribers, who dwindled "from
six or seven thousand to below 5,000," by Ms. Fillo's estimation. She said that
the roster is now more than 10,000. "We're a hot ticket," she said. The Tony for
the McCarter, which is scheduled for approximately 10:20 during tonight's
ceremonies, is to be presented by Jane Alexander to Ms. Mann, Ms. Fillo and
Jeffrey Woodward, the theater's managing director. A $25,000 grant from the
Clairol Corporation comes with the award. It is to be used for new play
development, Ms. Mann said.

The McCarter, built in 1929, served as a tryout house under Princeton
University's domain for the next 30 years. It became self-producing in 1960 and
self-sustaining in 1973 when the McCarter Theater Company became incorporated as
a center for the performing arts. The nonprofit theater part is known as the
"Theater Series"; on its dark nights or weeks, eclectic programs are booked.
These include dance recitals, one-person shows and music concerts.

In what must have been an act of confidence and sagacity, if not clairvoyance,
the McCarter board renewed Ms. Mann's three-year contract after the completion
of her second year. The new contract has a year to go, Ms. Fillo said. "And no
one has an interest in letting Emily go anywhere but right here."

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Emily Mann, artistic director of the McCarter Theater. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times) (Pg. 1); Katherine Borowitz and Robin Chadwick in
"The Triumph of Love," a recent production at the McCarter Theater. (T. Charles
Erickson) (Pg. 13)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 889 words



International A3-11

EUROPE VOTE AIDS KOHL

Residents throughout Europe voted for the European Parliament, with the votes
testing the popularity of each Government, and in Germany, Chancellor Helmut
Kohl's party got surprisingly strong support.  A1


MEXICO REBELS REJECT PACT

Peasant rebels rejected the settlement offered by the Mexican Government three
months ago and said they want to reopen negotiations, ending hopes for a
peaceful end to their uprising. A1

NEW CHERNOBYL CONCERNS

Ukraine has not kept its promise to finish closing down the nuclear plant at
Chernobyl, site of the world's worst nuclear accident, and American officials
are divided over how to approach the issue.  A1

U.S. GETS SUPPORT ON HAITI

Most nations of the Western hemisphere have quietly told the United States that
they would support military intervention in Haiti if all else fails to restore
the exiled President to power.  A10

The Haitian leader declared a state of emergency.  A10

TROUBLE IN ESTONIA

The Baltic nation of Estonia was heralded as an economic success after the
breakup of the Soviet Union, but now it is facing a political crisis with the
Government torn by dissension and hints of corruption.  A8

CHINA WARNS ON NORTH KOREA

Chinese officials, in a discussion with Japanese officials, warned against using
violence to try to force North Korea to accept nuclear inspections and said it
believes sanctions would be ineffective.  A5

A two-day-old cease-fire in Bosnia was largely holding.  A3

Rwandan leaders have left a stronghold, and fighting continued.  A6

Lillehammer Journal: As applause fades, Olympian task remains.  A4

National A12-13, B6-8

THE SURVIVORS OF '94

The graduating class at Paul Robeson High School on Chicago's South Side has
lost 350 students of the 500 it began with four years ago, before teen-age
motherhood, crack and shootings took their toll.  A1

MAGIC MAKES A COMEBACK

The resurgence of Americans' interest in things magical may be a response to
feelings of powerlessness and insecurity and the need for simple belief systems.
A1

A WELFARE QUESTION RESOLVED

President Clinton has decided to allow welfare recipients placed in government
work programs to remain there indefinitely, officials said, putting his welfare
proposal at odds with Congressional bills.  A12

N.A.A.C.P. CONFERENCE BEGINS

Security was tight as prominent blacks gathered for a three-day N.A.A.C.P.
conference, with debate focusing on an invitation to Louis Farrakhan, the
minister of the Nation of Islam.  A12

SEEKING A LIFE WITHOUT THE PAIN

A Florida teen-ager has refused to take medicine needed for his transplanted
liver, saying he would rather die than endure the drug's side effects.  A12

ECONOMY OFFERS NO COATTAILS

The economy, the issue that defined Clinton's 1992 campaign, is showing signs of
improvement, but this has so far done little to improve the President's approval
ratings.  A13

VALDEZ CAPTAIN CHANGES ACCOUNT

A Federal jury hearing a $16.5 billion lawsuit against Exxon is weighing
evidence, much of it never before disclosed, on whether the disaster was a
result of reckless behavior or was simply an accident.  B8

Metro Digest B1

RABBI SCHNEERSON IS DEAD

Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, who built the Lubavitch Hasidic movement into
an enormously powerful and sometimes divisive force among the world's Jews, died
in Manhattan.  A1

SPORTS EMPIRE ON THE BLOCK

Viacom has stepped up efforts to sell the New York Rangers and the New York
Knicks even as the teams press on for championships. Data about the company's
sports empire were mailed to potential bidders.  A1

Sports C1-9

Baseball: Yanks fall to Blue Jays.  C7

Mets edge Expos.  C7

Basketball: Rockets beat Knicks to regain edge.  C1

Columns: Anderson on Keenan's future.  C2

Vecsey on Knicks and Rangers.  C4

Lipsyte in Trump's seat at Garden.  C3

On baseball.  C8

Golf: Janzen wins Buick Classic.  C8

Hockey: Final showdown approaches for Rangers.  C1

Team needs more from Graves.  C2

Canucks arriving positively giddy.  C3

Horse Racing: Lakeway captures Mother Goose.  C4

Soccer: Nigeria a long way from Lagos.  C5

Sports People C5

Obituaries D10

Edward Kienholz, sculptor.

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-15

Theater: The Tony Awards.  C11

A pair of swashbucklers at Stratford, Ontario.  C11

Music: Pink Floyd at Yankee Stadium.  C11

"Orpheus Descending" at Chicago Lyric Opera.  C14

Mandy Patinkin.  C12

Biohazard at Roseland.  C12

Dance: Complexions at Symphony Space.  C12

Books: "Achilles in Vietnam." C15

Television: Public executions?  C15

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Mr. Moynihan's gambit.

A muddled policy on food vendors.

David C. Unger: Human rights.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: On Korea, resolve.

William Safire: If I forget thee, O Jerusalem.

Donald Kennedy: What grade inflation?

Ruth R. Wisse: Arafat's secret weapon.

Ernest F. Hollings: Digital technology, rotary laws.

Bridge C13

Chronicle B8

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Vietnam War as Link To Battles of Antiquity

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 917 words


Achilles in Vietnam
Combat Trauma and the Undoing of Character
By Jonathan Shay
246 pages. Atheneum. $20.

"Achilles in Vietnam" appears more than three thousand years after the Achaeans'
spears have rusted and two decades after the mortars of Vietnam have fallen
silent. The author, Dr. Jonathan Shay, begins by noting, "I am the psychiatrist
for a group of American combat veterans of the Vietnam War who have severe,
chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)." If this remarkable book covered
only that little-understood ailment, it would still be a vital contribution to
our knowledge about the most divisive foreign war in American history.

But Dr. Shay's story is also something else: a transcendent literary adventure.
In a leap of the imagination, he links the foot soldiers and heroes of Homer's
"Iliad" to the grunts and their leaders who fought in Vietnam, only to fight the
war and themselves all over again at home.  Even where allowances must be made
to take into account the differences between chariots and B-52 bombers, the
reader follows the parallels between the Greek classic and the Vietnam veterans'
recollections with admiration for what Dr. Shay has achieved.

"A number of years ago I was struck by the similarity of their war experiences
to Homer's account of Achilles in the 'Iliad,' " he writes. But it's not
essential to read or reread the "Iliad" to follow the reasoning behind "Achilles
in Vietnam." Achilles remains the central figure, a warrior whose only
fulfillment comes on the battlefield. While the action turns on his wrath in the
Trojan War, there's much more than arms and the passions of tragic men and women
in the epic poem.

In "Achilles in Vietnam," echoes of that ancient war reverberate in the lives of
the troubled survivors of warfare in Vietnam. The opening book of the "Iliad" is
titled "The Rage of Achilles," which exactly describes the feelings of many of
the Vietnam veterans who suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder. After years
of silence, Dr. Shay finds, their rage lingers. If ever a definition is needed
for the meaning of the phrase "walking wounded," it can be found in these case
histories.

Dr. Shay, a member of the faculty at Tufts Medical School and a psychiatrist
with the Boston Department of Veterans Affairs Outpatient Clinic, gained the
confidence of a number of troubled veterans. They were able to speak to him even
when they could not explain their buried feelings to their families or
themselves. Their symptoms include chronic health problems caused by
"mobilizing" the body for danger, an inability to trust others -- "persistent
expectation of betrayal and exploitation" -- and anger at military and
governmental authorities. As a result, the most troubled veterans suffer from
despair and isolation that lead to alcoholism, drug abuse and sometimes suicide.

The veterans remain traumatized by what they saw and did a quarter of a century
and more ago. They speak of a hundred unreported horrors in jungle villages
involving the slaughter of civilians, which were sent as heroic body counts to
higher headquarters; of the napalm that harms friends as well as the enemy; of
watching the man alongside blown apart by a mine. In the worst cases, the
broken-minded veterans wake up screaming and reaching for weapons.

"Such unhealed PTSD can devastate life and incapacitate its victims from
participation in the domestic, economic and political life of the nation," Dr.
Shay writes. "The painful paradox is that fighting for one's country can render
one unfit to be its citizen."

Dr. Shay hears accounts of "friendly fire" -- accidental deaths caused by
misdirected weapons -- and "fragging," or deliberately killing a hated military
superior on the battlefield.  Then he gives an example of a "friendly fire"
episode in the "Iliad":

Three great cries

[Achilles] gave above the moat.  Three times they shuddered,

whirling backward, Trojans and allies,

and 12 good men took mortal hurt

from cars and weapons in the rank behind.

Dr. Shay notes that the "Iliad" also includes an interrupted "fragging." When
Agamemnon orders that Achilles' prize of honor be seized in compensation for the
captive woman he has given up to stop the plague, Achilles has his sword halfway
out of its sheath before the goddess Athena intervenes:

It was to check this killing rage I came

from heaven. . . .

Enough: break off this combat, stay your hand

upon the sword hilt. Let him have a lashing

with words, instead. . . .

The "fragging" incidents in Vietnam cause the author to wonder, "How many combat
veterans daydreamed of executing General Westmoreland, or the whole U. S.
Congress, or Secretary of Defense McNamara, or Presidents Johnson and Nixon for
the deaths and suffering of their friends?"

After the carnage, the strongest war stories, classic or modern, perforce become
antiwar stories. As Bernard Knox notes in his introduction to the Penguin
Classics edition of the "Iliad," Socrates invoked the name of Achilles at his
trial, but in the end the warrior and the philosopher lived and died in the same
heroic, and tragic, pattern.

Dr. Shay's "Achilles in Vietnam" leaves a similar message of heroism and tragedy
about the veterans in his book: "Learn the psychological damage that war does,
and work to prevent war. There is no contradiction between hating war and
honoring the soldier." His compassionate book deserves a place in the lasting
literature of the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jonathan Shay (Jerry Bauer/Atheneum)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Col. Charlie Beckwith, 65, Dies; Led Failed Rescue Effort in Iran

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 20;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., June 13


Col. Charlie A. Beckwith, who led the ill-fated mission to rescue 52 American
hostages in Iran in 1980, died today. He was 65.

His wife, Katherine, called the police after finding him dead in his bedroom in
the morning. Police officials said he had apparently died of natural causes.

Colonel Beckwith's 30-year military career included commanding daring missions
in Vietnam and training the Army's antiterrorist Delta Team, also known as
"Charlie's Angels."

Much of the work Colonel Beckwith did with the antiterrorist team is secret, but
in 1980, President Jimmy Carter turned to the team to try to rescue American
hostages from the United States Embassy in Teheran, Iran.

Riddled With Problems

But the mission was plagued by equipment problems, with three of the eight
helicopters failing. It was aborted on April 24, 1980, after eight American
servicemen died in a predawn collision of a Marine helicopter and C-130 airplane
at the staging area for the mission in the Iranian desert about 200 miles
southwest of Teheran. Their bodies of the men were left behind as the remaining
aircraft tried to escape the threat of Iranian soldiers who could have seen the
explosion.

Investigators concluded that the Army, Air Force and Marine personnel had not
trained together before being selected for the mission and that the operation
lacked a clear chain of command. Members of the mission later said a huge dust
storm might have caused the technical problems and perhaps the crash.

Colonel Beckwith said afterward that the mission was doomed by too much internal
bickering among bureaucrats who did not have enough experience with high-risk
missions.

"It was the biggest failure of my life," he said in 1981. "I cried for the eight
men we lost. I'll carry that load on my shoulders for the rest of my life."

Charlie Alvin Beckwith was born in 1929 and grew up in Atlanta. He graduated
from the University of Georgia, where he was a football player talented enough
to drafted by the Green Bay Packers in 1952, but decided instead to take an
R.O.T.C. commission in the Army.

An early volunteer for the Army Special Forces, or Green Berets, he was assigned
to Vietnam in the mid-1960's and by 1965 was in command of the Delta Project.

The project involved a small unit of several hundred Indochinese mercenaries
paid with C.I.A. money. It gained fame when 250 of Major Beckwith's men rescued
a small force of Green Berets trapped by thousands of Viet Cong troops at Plei
Me. In 1966, he was nearly killed while directing a rescue operation near Bong
Son, taking a Viet Cong bullet in his stomach.

After his recovery, the major was promoted to lieutenant colonel and returned to
Vietnam as a battalion commander in the 101st Airborne Division.

During his time in Vietnam, he impressed his colleagues with his aggressiveness,
single-mindedness and his greater interest in duty than in obtaining promotion.
They nicknamed him "Chargin' Charlie."

"A lot of guys went to Vietnam just to get their ticket punched, but I only knew
10 or 12 who were 'certified' -- who were really going after it," Lieut. Gen.
Henry Emerson told The Washington Post in 1980. "Charlie was one of them. He was
always willing to take risks."

Later assigned to the Special Warfare School at Fort Bragg, N.C., Colonel
Beckwith was directed in late 1970's to help train and lead the antiterrorist
force. The mission to Teheran was the first time the unit had actually put its
exhaustive training to use.

Colonel Beckwith retired from the military in 1981 after the raid failed and ran
a private security company in Austin, serving as a consultant. He later was a
co-author of a book on his antiterrorist unit, "Delta Force: The Army's Elite
Counterterrorist Unit" (Dell, 1985). His name was connected with another
international event in 1987 when it was reported that he had been approached
about a plot to assassinate the President of Honduras in 1984 and tipped off the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

In addition to his wife, he is survived by three daughters.

NAME: Col. Charlie A. Beckwith

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Col. Charlie A. Beckwith (The New York Times, 1981)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Wild Cards Making Virginia Senate Race Even More Unruly

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., June 13


The Virginia Senate race was already an explosive contest with Oliver L. North
as the Republican candidate and Senator Charles S. Robb favored to win the
Democratic primary on Tuesday. But with two more candidates jumping in this
week, the political season has earned a special place in state history and makes
predicting a winner in November virtually impossible.

The vulnerability of Mr. North for his role in the Iran-contra affair has left
the door open for a former Republican state attorney general, J. Marshall
Coleman, who today filed a petition in Richmond to run as an independent, backed
by supporters of Ross Perot.

Because of Mr. Robb's problems, which include his admissions of marital
indiscretions, the state's former Democratic Governor, L. Douglas Wilder, is
expected to file as an independent on Tuesday.

"Without a doubt, this is the strangest political race the state has ever seen,"
said Mark J. Rozell, a professor of political science at Mary Washington College
in Fredericksburg. "It shows the weakness of the two major political parties and
makes it possible for independents to enter the race and be regarded well enough
that it's difficult to handicap them. There are scenarios in which any of the
four could win."

In Virginia, a simple plurality determines the winner, so only 26 percent of the
vote could win a four-way race.

An independent poll released last week by Mason-Dixon Political/Media Research
of Columbia, Md., showed that only seven percentage points separated the four
candidates, led by Mr. Robb with 28 percent. But with a sampling error of plus
or minus three and a half percentage points, the results were, statistically,
nearly a tie.

Despite a wide array of issues and differences among the candidates on many of
them, the focus of the campaign is almost certain to be the backgrounds of Mr.
North and Mr. Robb, assuming that Mr. Robb brushes off his two major challengers
in the primary, Virgil H. Goode Jr., a state Senator for 20 years, and Sylvia L.
Clute, a lawyer in her first run for office. The poll, in which 824 voters were
surveyed on June 5 and 6, showed that Mr. Robb held a 2-to-1 lead over Mr.
Goode.

Warner Helps North Rival

While Mr. North has emerged as a hero of the conservative right for his strong
advocacy of traditional family values and less government, more moderate
Republicans, including Senator John W. Warner, have attacked him as someone of
suspect credibility who is incapable of defeating any Democrat. Mr. Warner,
whose disdain for Mr. North has angered state party leaders, helped Mr. Coleman
gain access to Mr. Perot's supporters in Virginia, and some of these supporters
today declared themselves members of a Virginia Independent Party and named Mr.
Coleman their nominee. They said the party would operate separately from Mr.
Perot's political group, United We Stand America.

The Perot supporters, who accounted for 14 percent of the vote in the 1992
Presidential election, provide Mr. Coleman a grass-roots organization and bring
him the same kind of voters disenchanted with government who might support Mr.
North, were it not for his role in the arms-for-hostages scandal during the
Reagan Administration. Mr. North, a former Marine lieutenant colonel and White
House aide, admitted lying to Congress about the affair and was convicted on
three felony counts, although they were overturned when a court ruled that the
verdicts had been tainted by his Congressional testimony, which was given under
a grant of immunity.

Before he gets a clear shot at Mr. North, Mr. Robb has to survive a primary in
which rivals have strongly assailed his character. The son-in-law of President
Lyndon B. Johnson, a Vietnam veteran and a politician once regarded as
Presidential timber, Mr. Robb issued a statement early in the campaign in which
he admitted acts of infidelity and denied accusations that he had attended
parties with known drug users.

Mr. Goode has kept up the attack. But Mr. Robb appears to retains the strong
support of traditional Democratic interests.

A more difficult challenge for Mr. Robb might come from his arch-rival, Mr.
Wilder, the nation's first elected black governor, whose four-year stewardship
was fiscally conservative but socially progressive. He retains strong support
from labor groups, black voters, who account for 17 percent of the electorate,
and more centrist Democrats and Republicans who like his pro-business positions.

He also has the sympathy of voters who think that he was treated badly when some
of Mr. Robb's aides tapped his telephone several years ago.

"He's one of, if not the smartest, most skillful politicians in the race,"
Robert D. Holsworth, a political science professor at Virginia Commonwealth
University in Richmond, said of Mr. Wilder. "He's a master counterpuncher and an
excellent strategist who relishes the theater and drama of a campaign as much as
Ollie North does. This is his kind of race."

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi to Raise New-Car Duty

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: HANOI, June 13


Vietnam has decided to raise the import duty on new cars to 200 percent from 150
percent, local car makers said today as the French manufacturer Renault
announced a deal to assemble its cars locally.

A senior executive of the Vietnam Motors Corporation, which will assemble
Renaults, said his staff had received confirmation of the tax increase effective
on July 1. "We hope it will be very good news for us because imported cars will
be very expensive," the company's general manager, Joaquin Roa, said.

Most of the estimated 5,000 cars a year imported into Vietnam, whose cities are
rapidly developing but remain dominated by motor bikes and bicycles, are from
Japan.

News of the tax increase, which could not be directly confirmed, should increase
demand for cars assembled from imported kits by Vietnam Motors and the only
other local car maker, the Mekong Corporation.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hillary Clinton Says She Once Tried to Be Marine

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 727 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


The First Lady has offered a kaleidoscope of images to the public, but today she
added the most curious one yet: Private Hillary.

Speaking at a lunch on Capitol Hill honoring military women, Hillary Rodham
Clinton said that she once visited a recruiting office in Arkansas to inquire
about joining the Marines.

She told the group gathered for lunch in the Dirksen Office Building, according
to The Associated Press, that she became interested in the military in 1975, the
year she married Bill Clinton and the year she was teaching at the University of
Arkansas law school in Fayetteville.

She was 27 then, she said, and the Marine recruiter was about 21. She was
interested in joining either the active forces or the reserves, she recalled,
but was swiftly rebuffed by the recruiter, who took a dim view of her age and
her thick glasses.

'Not Very Encouraging'

"You're too old, you can't see and you're a woman," Mrs. Clinton said she was
told, adding that the recruiter dismissed her by suggesting she try the Army.
"Maybe the dogs would take you," she recalled the recruiter saying.

"It was not a very encouraging conversation," she said. "I decided maybe I'll
look for another way to serve my country."

Mrs. Clinton offered the story to illustrate how far women had come. She said
that "it was not an isolated situation" for women to be turned away by military
recruiters. And she lauded efforts to bring women into more aspects of military
service.

The First Lady's cascading, contradictory images have been the subject of much
commentary. This month's Mirabella magazine runs a dizzying array of different
looking Hillary Rodham Clintons, to match her blur of different roles, with a
story that frets: "We sense that we aren't seeing the 'real' Hillary, and this
makes us very nervous."

But, even given the fact that the nation has become accustomed to Mrs. Clinton's
intriguing shape-shifting -- from liberal do-gooder to high-risk commodities
trader, from power lawyer to cookie baker, from health care czar to housewife
supervising the menu for the state dinner for the Emperor and Empress of Japan
-- the latest one is still jarring.

Macho Contrast to Clinton

First, it presented a macho contrast to a President who had just visited
England, where news reports recalled the letter he wrote from there to a
representative of the Reserve Officers Training Corps at the University of
Arkansas, explaining why many members of his generation loved their country but
still found themselves "loathing" the military.

And it did not seem to fit in with the First Lady's own persona. After all,
Hillary Rodham was an up-and-coming legal star involved with an up-and-coming
political star. She had made a celebrated appearance in Life magazine as an
anti-establishment commencement speaker at Wellesley College, where, as
president of the student government, she had organized teach-ins on her
opposition to the Vietnam War.

She was a Yale law school graduate who had worked on the anti-war Presidential
campaigns of Eugene J. McCarthy and George McGovern.

Mrs. Clinton told friends that she had moved to Arkansas for only one reason: to
be with Bill Clinton. Years later, she would tell Vanity Fair that she had
stayed because "I didn't see anything out there that I thought was more exciting
or challenging than what I had in front of me."

She and Mr. Clinton married on Oct. 11, 1975 in Fayetteville.

So, if she was talking to a Marine recruiter in 1975 before the marriage, was
she briefly considering joining the few, the proud and the brave of the corps as
an alternative to life with Mr. Clinton, who was already being widely touted as
a sure thing for Arkansas Attorney General?

Neal Lattimore, Mrs. Clinton's spokesman, said her visit to the recruiter had to
be seen in the context of her dedication to public service.

"I'm never surprised when Mrs. Clinton is doing something service oriented," he
said. "She was just taking in all her options, saying 'This is where I am in my
life, this is what fits into my life right now.' "

But she had moved to Arkansas to be with Mr. Clinton, so why was she thinking
about joining the Marines?

"Maybe she was thinking about the J.A.G. Corps," he said, referring to the legal
branch of the service. "She was exploring all her options, the National Guard,
everything."

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hillary Rodham Clinton listening as the president of the League
of Women Voters, Becky Cain, spoke yesterday in Washington. (Stephen Crowley/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
A Sainted Journalist, Blushing In the Grave

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


Agreeable though it always is to be reminded of Edward R. Murrow, tonight's
edition of "CBS Reports" leaves one wondering how that serious-minded journalist
might have felt about the iconizing he has been subject to since his death in
1965. In particular, the conferring of sainthood by an industry that rarely met
his standards and by a network that in effect buried his career (while publicly
praising it) might have awakened his cynical side.

"When America Trembled: Murrow/McCarthy," at 10 P.M. (on Channel 2 in New York),
focuses on the famous 1954 "See It Now" program that helped do in Senator Joseph
R. McCarthy. It's a white hat-black hat story that has been told many times but
bears retelling.

Evidently in an effort to punch up the daring of Murrow's decision to take on
the nation's pre-eminent hounder of Communists and their relatives, defenders
and facsimiles, tonight's account sets an overly dire scene of an America in the
grip of political hysteria. It adds little to the main facts of what is known as
the McCarthy era (which was more a blink than an era) and nothing that runs
counter to the conventional history; but Murrow's colleagues provide glimpses
from the inside, and the material is professionally packaged.

Old news clips catch the personalities of the bullying Senator and his tough
nemesis. As Dan Rather points out in his narration, it was not the Murrow
program but the televised Army-McCarthy hearings a few weeks later that toppled
McCarthy. Still, Murrow had greased the skids.

"When America Trembled" touches on journalistic issues that troubled Murrow and
are worth more attention than they receive tonight. One has to do with the right
of a popular journalist to use his power and his medium's power to go after a
public figure. Murrow's discomfort over his own exercise of such power gave way
to his outrage over the damage McCarthy was doing to individuals and to the
country, but it was not an automatic decision for him.

Since his time, producers, anchors, reporters and commentators have taken
liberties that would probably have caused Murrow sleepless nights. The 30-minute
"See It Now" report consisted mainly of newsreel clips of McCarthy telling lies
followed by Murrow's corrections. Although the pictures of McCarthy were not
chosen for their flattering quality, little use was made of the visual effects
commonly employed nowadays against the targets of television exposes. And nobody
seems to be losing sleep over sinister close-ups, dire music and the rest.

And then there is Murrow's up-and-down relationship with CBS, the network where
he spent almost his entire journalistic career. It was on CBS Radio that he made
his mark as a foreign correspondent in World War II and on CBS Television that
he made his fortune as host of "Person to Person," a popular celebrity-interview
show about which he was sensibly embarrassed. But "See It Now," the series
celebrated tonight, brought little joy to Murrow's network masters. It pleased
liberal reviewers more than it pleased local stations and advertisers, and
signaled the end of Murrow's television career.

Since Murrow's time, the line between reporting and advocacy has been
increasingly blurred on the screen, sometimes with worthy results, sometimes in
a worrisome way. It can be a close call. And even as so-so news magazines
proliferate, good documentaries on urgent matters are left largely to public
television.

Tonight's exercise in recycling is the fifth in the current "CBS Reports"
series, reincarnated last year. All have been respectable retrospectives: on
D-Day, Vietnam, the assassination of John F. Kennedy and the noisy year of 1968.
They made economical use of old clips that featured CBS News stars and gave no
headaches to network executives. A safe way to call up a faded glory.

Speaking of news magazines, at 9 P.M. tonight, "America Tonight," the latest CBS
clone, tells about an automobile insurance scam and about the American head of
an Indian village in the Amazon rain forest who is trying to fight off oil
drilling. The subjects are not uninteresting by news magazine standards but will
win no awards for innovation. As the man said, if you've seen one report on a
rain forest (with slow-motion episodes) or on an insurance scam (through an
undercover camera), you may not have to see another for a while.

At 10 P.M., ABC's "Turning Point" puts the blame on the Exxon Corporation for
the devastating 1989 Alaskan oil spill and warns of similar catastrophes to
come. It's a timely report: on Monday, in the first phase of a
multi-billion-dollar suit, a Federal jury decided that Exxon and Capt. Joseph J.
Hazelwood, the captain of the Exxon Valdez, acted recklessly in events leading
to the spill. The program offers some new evidence and pertinent details on the
workings and misworkings of the oil-tanker industry. It is well documented, and
opposing views are registered. All in all, the sort of job "CBS Reports" might
have done in other years.


LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

GOING HOME WITH: Germaine Loc Swanson;
A Voyage So Bitter, So Sweet

BYLINE: By MARIAN BURROS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Home Desk

LENGTH: 1841 words


ON a cool, gray afternoon this spring, Germaine Loc Swanson stepped down from
the van that had carried her from the airport to the Thu Do Hotel in Hanoi,
Vietnam. Her aunt, Vu Thi Nga, 72, who had cared for her as a child, had been
sitting in the hotel lobby since early morning. She didn't want to miss this
meeting.

As the women wrapped their arms around each other, the older woman rubbed Mrs.
Swanson's cheek and cried. They had not seen each other in 40 years. Tears
welled up in Mrs. Swanson's eyes but few escaped. She does not cry easily.

Her steely will and her ability to keep her emotions in check are part of Mrs.
Swanson's survival technique, honed over 30 years of wars and revolutions that
included threats to her life, loss of her homeland and a sad love story.

This trip was a homecoming, the first time Mrs. Swanson, 58, had seen her aunt
since 1954. Mrs. Swanson's immediate family fled Hanoi when the Communists took
over North Vietnam. From a life of privilege in the north, her family was
suddenly plunged into a life of deprivation in the south, experiencing nothing
but hard times until they escaped to the United States just after the fall of
Saigon in 1975.

"Do you remember me?" Ms. Swanson asked her aunt in Vietnamese as they embraced.

"You haven't changed at all," Mrs. Nga replied. "I would recognize you if you
were walking on the street. You have your grandmother's walk and body. You have
the same face. How can I not recognize you?"

"I thought we would never, never find each other again," Mrs. Nga continued.
"But I think your grandmother looks after us and found a way to put us back
together. I dream about her all the time and she still comes home and tells me
what I should do."

Mrs. Nga, who lives with her husband, a retired Vietcong official, raises tea on
four acres, taking care of the crops with the help of her six children. Mrs.
Swanson said her family was never quite sure what her aunt's husband did because
"she wanted to hide it from us."

Mrs. Swanson hoped this pilgrimage would help her come to terms with her past.
Her acquaintances in the United States know her as the owner, with her husband,
Dick Swanson, of Germaine's Restaurant in Washington, where she serves
imaginative Vietnamese and other Southeast Asian foods. Her patrons include the
newsmakers who frequent the Sunday morning talk shows as well as the journalists
who question them.

Mrs. Swanson's friends know her as a street-smart survivor who has scrambled all
her life to make things work out. But they have not known much about her early
life. Her story unfolded for her traveling companions, four female friends, as
she journeyed through Vietnam.

Mrs. Swanson's life as a young girl was privileged. Her father had two wives:
Germaine's mother, who was Vietnamese, and her stepmother, a French-Vietnamese
woman. "Many wealthy Buddhist men in Hanoi had 4 to 10 wives as well as
girlfriends," Mrs. Swanson said. "Everyone knew we had two mothers; they got
along very well."

The brothers and sisters and stepbrothers and stepsisters -- 14 in all -- and
both mothers lived together in a very large house with as many as 13 servants.
Mrs. Swanson, the eldest child, went to French schools.

Her father, Philippe Ngo Thanh, owned furniture factories before World War II
and owned several other businesses from 1945 until 1954, when he was also the
police commissioner in Hanoi for the French colonial government.

"I left Hanoi expecting to come back," Mrs. Swanson said, "and I never did and
it was very important for me. I felt homesick and I wanted to find my roots. I
still can see the Japanese walking down the street during the war and the
bombing -- the good times and the bad times. I remember my father more in Hanoi
than in the south. He was a macho businessman. In the south, he was depressed,
jobless and helpless."

Mrs. Swanson's father died in 1970; her mother, Dang Thi Tuyet, lives with Mrs.
Swanson's brother Bernard in Fairfax, Va.

"The main thing," she said, "is I wanted to see my aunt, whom I owe a lot to,
and to visit my grandmother's grave."

But the trip to her grandmother's grave proved to be too far, so Mrs. Swanson
plans to see it on another trip. "It's important to Vietnamese to find their
ancestors' graves and restore them," she said. "Then your soul feels more
peaceful."

Mrs. Swanson and her aunt spent the day after her arrival together, walking arm
in arm, exchanging confidences, soaking up each another's presence. The younger
woman wore a hot pink and turquoise warm-up jacket and pants and running shoes,
the older woman black pants, a black knitted sweater and a rust knit scarf wound
around her neck and head.

They went to a cousin's house, once owned by Mrs. Swanson's father. Mrs. Swanson
noticed part of an altar that had belonged to her grandmother Vu Thi Thuoc. She
said her grandmother "did everything she could to make money, from selling opium
to furniture." And she indulged her grandchildren at every opportunity. They
spent weekends and summers at her home in the country. "My grandmother would
give us anything we wanted," she said.

Mrs. Swanson also visited the village of Gia Quat, where her grandmother had a
pagoda built. After years of neglect, the bell tower was rebuilt in 1993; the
yellow and brown pagoda with its open-air altar was restored. Most of the houses
in the village today are of concrete; those made of bamboo were destroyed during
the war.

As the van drew closer to the village and Mrs. Swanson began to recognize the
surroundings, her excitement was palpable. There was the jackfruit tree she used
to climb and the bell in the pagoda tower she used to ring.

"Now I am getting goose bumps," she said. "Now I remember a lot of stories. I
remember when I was a year old and my brother was 3 months old and we were very
sick so my grandmother put us in two baskets and took us to the pagoda and
prayed for us for three days."

"This is my place," she said, after she had prayed at the pagoda. "I found
something that I lost. It's good for me to see this now because in two or three
years everything will be changed." The Government plans to build a hotel across
the road.

The next day, a visit to the last house the family lived in before they left
Hanoi was not so joyful. Once a single-family dwelling, the house now has a
different family in each room; all of the people are related to Mrs. Swanson's
grandmother. The ghost of its 19th-century grandeur was visible in the high
ceilings, the banister, the walls that surrounded the property.

As she went from room to room, Mrs. Swanson described what each had been: "This
was our maid's quarters; there's our back entrance; this was our kitchen." Then
she slid down the banister from the third floor, just as she had done 50 years
before, giggling all the way.

Some of her father's French books are still on the shelves in the library, which
is now hung with a clothesline. The holes in the ceiling and the crumbling
plaster changed her mood. "It makes me sad," she said. "No one wants to maintain
the whole house when all they own is their own room. I have no more good
memories of how it looked. I shouldn't have come back to see the way it is now.
I thought it would be the same."

This is the house Mrs. Swanson's family left behind when Dien Bien Phu fell to
the Vietminh in 1954. Her father was certain they would be back in six months.
They never returned.

Fleeing was nothing new to them. They had gone to the countryside in 1944, when
the Japanese occupied Vietnam. And then again in 1945, when a former employee,
who was also a Vietminh guerrilla, went to their house with a squad of soldiers
and a machine gun and ordered the family into the backyard, prepared to kill all
of them. Only the pleading of Mrs. Swanson's mother saved them. The former
employee sent the soldiers away, told the family to stand at one end of a trench
that had been dug there during World War II, and threw a grenade into the other
end. When he left, the family again escaped.

In 1953, a year before the French occupation ended, Mrs. Swanson, who was 16,
moved to Saigon, lied about her age and became an army nurse. When 15 members of
her family fled Hanoi a year later, she became their main support.

"That was the time of my life when I was supposed to be enjoying myself," she
said, without any bitterness. "I had to suppress everything."

Mrs. Swanson made at least 100 jumps as a paratrooper nurse before resigning
from the army in 1962, when she was pregnant with her first child. She then
became a freelance reporter for Reuters, Time-Life, NBC and CBS during the
Vietnam War. In 1969 she married Dick Swanson, an American photographer who was
covering the war for Life magazine. In 1972, she and her husband moved to
Bethesda, Md., with their 6-month-old son, Justin, and her son, Philip, 10, the
child of another American.

Four days before Saigon fell in 1975, Mr. Swanson returned to Saigon and managed
to help 12 members of his wife's family flee the country, getting them on one of
the last flights out of Tan Son Nhut airfield.

As the tour moved south along the coast, there were more relatives to visit and
places to see -- places that Mrs. Swanson had visited as a reporter during the
Vietnam War: Da Nang, Nha Trang, Cam Ranh Bay. What surprised her was not the
damage done by the war, but how shabby the country looks.

"All the American military bases are gone and the land is empty," she said. "The
country is rundown and I am disappointed by the lack of cleanliness. It was so
beautiful."

It was on the road to Saigon that Mrs. Swanson, for the first time, talked about
her oldest son's father, an American helicopter pilot who was already married.
All of the control that she had exercised for years was released, and she cried.
"I've had a hard life," she said, "but I'm luckier than many Vietnamese women. I
ended up married to Dick and I have kids that are fine and I have love."

She would have returned sooner, she said, but she was afraid. "I didn't think it
was safe for me because my father was police commissioner, I had French
citizenship and the Vietminh tried to kill us. But after the embargo was lifted
I heard from people that it was safe to go back and I would be free to go
anywhere.

"I'm happy because I've seen my family. I see the country is blooming and
becoming richer and people are more independent."

But she was disappointed, too. "The biggest surprise was to see how Hanoi has
changed," she said. "The people used to be so sweet and invite you to their
house to have tea. It didn't matter who you were. They don't do it anymore.
After so many years of war, the North Vietnamese culture is gone. Now it is more
like the south: more selfish, commercialized and ignorant, not warm and
welcome."

Now that she has seen Vietnam, Mrs. Swanson has no desire to live there again.
She maintains contact with her Vietnamese friends, many of whom are scattered
around the world. But, she said, "I'm considered an American now."

NAME: Germaine Loc Swanson

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Germaine Loc Swanson, right, with her aunt, Vu Thi Nga. (Lois
Raimondo for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Germaine Loc Swanson at 15 at her
home in Hanoi in 1952. (Dick Swanson Collection); Mrs. Swanson visited the bell
tower of her family's pagoda. (Lois Raimondo for The New York Times) (pg. C9)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Recounting the Story Of an Accidental Career

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 5;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 690 words


"My Life's in Turnaround," a scrappy low-budget comedy with lots of insouciant
charm, is the semi-autobiographical story of its two film makers, Eric Schaeffer
and Donal Lardner Ward. Calling themselves Splick Featherstone and Jason Little,
they play friends who simply fell into this line of work after other pursuits
proved to be less than promising.  They also present themselves as lacking
ambition and talent. That's definitely a little white lie.

Grainy enough to look at times as if it's been shot through a tea bag, "My
Life's in Turnaround" has to get by on wit alone. The two hapless stars present
themselves as an overstressed cabbie (Mr. Schaeffer) and an alcohol-avoiding
bartender (Mr. Ward). (Does Jason go to A.A. meetings "because that's where all
the big deals are getting made?" a girlfriend asks him. "No, 'cause I'm a
drunk," he answers.) So they are eager for a change of pace, once a friend (Lisa
Gerstein) with a talent agency steers them toward the movie world. "Get us
meetings," Jason tells her. "Yeah, we're film makers now," Splick says.

The only trouble is the lack of a game plan. That's a slight problem for "My
Life's in Turnaround," too.  Beyond re-creating some of the more amusing
accidents that led them to make this film, Mr. Schaeffer and Mr. Ward haven't
much to fall back on beyond assorted self-deprecating gags and some contrivances
about their troubles in finding girlfriends.  To their credit, only in the
latter scenes does this film seem ordinary or strained.

There are several cameo appearances in "My Life's in Turnaround," some of them
from people these two really encountered on their climb up the slippery slope.
Casey Siemaszko, playing actor turned producer, asks the two wannabes to adapt a
screenplay so fat that it makes a nice footstool. Whether it would make a nice
movie is unclear, since it's in Polish and they can't read it. "Oh, don't worry
about the text," Mr. Siemaszko says confidently.

Also on hand are Martha Plimpton and Phoebe Cates, both of whom did actually run
into Mr. Schaeffer while he drove his cab. Neither actress has much luck
recapturing the spontaneity of that first encounter, but their scenes do have a
genial home-movie feel (even Ms. Plimpton's, an attempt to re-create an intense
scatological discussion she had with the auteurs).

John Sayles has a funnier scene as a producer who's briefly interested in these
aspiring talents until he realizes they don't want to make a "When Harry Met
Sally" knockoff, a Vietnam picture or either of the other ideas he mentions.
"Those are all the stories!" he insists indignantly.

The two stars' easy on-camera rapport contributes greatly to making such
episodes work. Mr. Ward is presented as the glamorous type, surrounded by a bevy
of teen-age models who lean on him so adoringly that one falls over when he
leaves his seat. Mr. Schaeffer comes across as more comically high-strung. Alone
together, they abandon all pretense of cool, often bursting into little songs
("We're making movies now!" "We have girlfriends now!") to celebrate their good
fortune.

"My Life's in Turnaround" is so small in scale that even though it tacks on
outtakes during the closing credits, the running time is only 84 minutes.
Doesn't matter: what's important is that the film makers mention Matty Rich
("Straight Out of Brooklyn") and Nick Gomez ("Laws of Gravity") among those who
made worthy, attention-getting films on the strength of perseverance and sheer
drive. And that they can now add their own names to that list.

My Life's in Turnaround

Written and directed by Eric Schaeffer and Donal Lardner Ward; director of
photography, Peter Hawkins; edited by Susan Graef; music by Reed Hays; produced
by Daniel Einfeld; released by Arrow Releasing. Running time: 84 minutes. This
film has no rating.

Splick Featherstone . . . Eric Schaeffer
Jason Little . . . Donal Lardner Ward
Sarah Hershfeld . . . Lisa Gerstein
Rachael . . . Dana Wheeler Nicholson
Amanda . . . Debra Clein
Beverly Spannenbaum . . . Sheila Jaffe
WITH: Casey Siemaszko, Martha Plimpton, Phoebe Cates and John Sayles

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eric Schaeffer, left, and Donal Lardner Ward. (Arrow Releasing)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Who's in Charge Here?

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 31;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


If there was one thing we expected from Bill Clinton's Presidency, it was a
common-sense respect for civil liberties. No longer, we thought, would
Government lawyers automatically try to assert their power over individuals when
there was no real Government interest at stake.

That expectation has been dashed. Or so we have to conclude from two current
cases of Government overreaching: outrageous cases.

Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer, a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War, was
dismissed from the service two years ago. She wept on that day. So did her
commanding officer, Maj. Gen. Gregory P. Barlow.

Colonel Cammermeyer was discharged because, in 1989, she was being considered
for the Army War College and an interviewer asked her about her sexual
orientation. She answered that she was gay.

Two weeks ago in Seattle, Federal District Judge Thomas S. Zilly held Colonel
Cammermeyer's discharge unconstitutional. He ordered her restored to her job as
chief nurse of the Washington State National Guard.

This week the Justice Department asked Judge Zilly to stay his order -- hold it
up -- while a Government appeal from his decision was taken. In support of its
motion, the department advanced a parade of horribles.

Restoring Colonel Cammermeyer to her position, a brief said, "is likely to have
adverse effects on the ability of the military to maintain morale, efficiency
and mission focus." It would "have adverse effects" on "unit cohesion and
readiness."

Moreover, the department warned, Judge Zilly's order forbade the military to
punish Colonel Cammermeyer for stating "her homosexual orientation." That meant
she could disregard military policy, the brief said, which "will undermine
respect for military authority throughout the armed forces."

To the brief was appended an equally amazing affidavit by Edwin Dorn, Under
Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness. He said that Colonel
Cammermeyer's "open disobedience of the policy on homosexual conduct" might
encourage members of the armed forces to violate any policy "they do not believe
should apply to them."

The argument comes to this: A woman who never did or said anything against
policy, except answer an official question truthfully, will destroy the armed
forces if she is reinstated while the Court of Appeals considers the case. She
actually served for three years after the 1989 interview while her superiors
tried to stop her discharge, and the military suffered no harm then.

Attorney General Janet Reno has spoken of her admiration for Attorney General
Robert Kennedy. I knew Robert Kennedy, and I know what he would have done if he
had seen such a document in draft. To put it politely, the motion would not have
been filed.

Ten years ago, by a vote of 5 to 4, the Supreme Court upheld a Reagan
Administration order designed to keep Americans from going to Cuba. The order
was a Treasury regulation forbidding Americans to spend money on travel to Cuba.

The decision was criticized as an example of the Court's growing tendency to
exalt Presidential power. It did so by a strained interpretation of
Congressional statutes.

Since then Congress has in various ways promoted the freedom to travel. Just
last month it passed a joint resolution expressing the sense of Congress that
"the President should not restrict travel or exchanges for informational,
educational, religious, cultural or humanitarian purposes . . . between the
United States and any other country."

A group of 200 Americans is planning to go to Cuba next Thursday for a week's
visit. The trip has been planned by an organization called the Freedom to Travel
Campaign.

But this week the Treasury Department blocked the group's $43,000 bank account.
An official sent a letter to the bank warning it against grave violations: a
letter from the same Government that says it is trying to advance democracy and
human rights in the world.

Is our faith in our system really so fragile that we fear our citizens visiting
Cuba? Or perhaps the question is: Do the people at the top of our Government
know the folly that is being committed in their name?

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hospital Aide Held in Ruse That Helped Killers Escape

BYLINE: By MATTHEW PURDY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: GOSHEN, N.Y., June 17


Last month, with a loaded gun at his head and two convicted killers leading the
way, Robert Kamrowski seemed the very picture of a hostage as the two men
escaped from the Mid-Hudson Psychiatric Center, touching off a weeklong manhunt.

But today, the Orange County District Attorney's office charged that Mr.
Kamrowski's role was a ruse. Mr. Kamrowski, 46, a former State Police lieutenant
who was working as a hospital aide, was arrested and indicted on eight counts,
including providing the gun to the killers.

Prosecutors also said he helped the two men plot the escape and evade the
police, hoping for substantial payment in exchange. Court papers describe Mr.
Kamrowski as being involved in the smallest details, from instructing one man to
wear a long coat so he could hide a weapon to telling him exactly what to say to
hospital guards during the escape.

Mr. Kamrowski, who pleaded not guilty, has been in trouble before.

In 1988, he resigned from the State Police while being investigated for taking
credit cards held as evidence, his lawyer said. With no charges filed, he was
able to be hired as a treatment and security aide at the state hospital, in New
Hampton, 55 miles from New York City. Despite its population of criminally
insane patients, the hospital did not regularly search its employees until after
the escape. Mr. Kamrowski is charged with smuggling into the hospital a State
Police gun that had been reported missing seven years earlier. Prosecutors say
he gave the men the pistol loaded with six rounds, and supplied 38 additional
bullets.

Frank D. Phillips, the Orange County District Attorney, said Mr. Kamrowski was
motivated by "the promise of a substantial amount of cash" from the two men,
Herbert Arnold, 50, of Brooklyn, and John Casablanca, 51, of the Bronx. A week
following their escape on May 28, the fugitives were arrested after Mr.
Casablanca, incoherent and covered with ticks, wandered out of a wooded area of
Brooklyn where he had been hiding and turned himself in to a pair of police
officers. Mr. Arnold was discovered three hours later in the neighborhood, East
New York.

In the sequence of events sketched by the authorities, Mr. Kamrowski tied his
fate to two dangerous and unstable criminals.

Mr. Casablanca is described as a former Mafia enforcer given to depression who
in 1981, while on parole for one killing, was charged with killing a Manhattan
bartender and then, a few days later, a friend who criticized him for that
slaying. He was found not guilty by reasons of insanity.

Mr. Arnold, who has been found mentally incompetant to stand trial on murder and
other charges, is awaiting trial on charges of abducting and raping a teen-age
girl.

The police said that one of the first clues that Mr. Kamrowski might have been
an accomplice was that he turned up alive.

"To tell you the truth, we didn't expect to see him alive again," said Capt.
Arthur J. Hawker of the State Police. "When you're captured by two guys with
eight murders between them, you expect to find him shot by the side of the
road."

Had Planned a Cruise

Investigators became more suspicious when Mr. Kamrowski told them that he had
driven more than 10 miles from where the men had fled their car before he called
the hospital. Also, he had planned a 14-day cruise to the Bahamas for the day
after the escape. Investigators tracked his movements during the trip, Mr.
Phillips said.

Today's charges do not explain either why Mr. Kamrowski trusted the men or why
he believed Mr. Arnold would deliver an undisclosed amount of money as payoff.
Mr. Arnold apparently told people at the hospital that he owned a car
dealership. "He told a lot of people he had a lot of money," the officials said.
"Only one person bid on it."

The Smith & Wesson .357 Magnum that Mr. Kamrowski is charged with providing the
two patients was reported missing from a State Police barracks in 1987. Mr.
Kamrowski, then with the State Police, was investigating the disappearance of
the pistol, which was marked "N.Y.S.P." to indicate it was State Police
property.

To avoid police barracades, prosecutors said, Mr. Kamrowski used his knowledge
of police tactics in plotting a route from Orange County, where the hospital is
situated, to New York City. He then lied about the men's whereabouts, the police
say, telling them that they had fled his car near Yankee Stadium in the Bronx
when he had dropped them off in Brooklyn.

The indictment charges that Mr. Kamrowski obtained a hospital radio that allowed
him and the escapees to listen to staff communications concerning their flight
as they wended their way through New York State, New Jersey, Queens, the Bronx
and Brooklyn.

Mr. Kamrowski was arrested at 7:30 A.M. today at his house on a rural road near
Goshen and taken in handcuffs to the State Police barracks in Middletown, where
he once worked as a sergeant. About two hours later, Mr. Kamrowski, wearing a
polo shirt and black jeans, was put in the back seat of a police cruiser to be
taken to court for his arraignment, where bail was set at $20,000.

"Seven years ago everybody looked up to him as a supervisor," said James
McDowell, a State Police lieutenant who was a trooper when Mr. Kamrowski was an
officer in Middletown. "It shows how quickly you can go downhill."

Mr. Kamrowski, who was born and raised in Orange County, is a Vietnam veteran
awarded a Purple Heart after being hit by shrapnel. He is divorced, his lawyer
said, and has two grown children.

Lawyer Says Client Is Victim

Peter X. Neuman, his lawyer, said his client is a victim. "He was taken hostage
at gunpoint," he said, adding he was suspected in the investigation because of
his resignation from the police force. "There were some credit cards missing
from an evidence locker and there was an allegation that he took them. He
resigned as a result of that incident."

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Kamrowski yesterday before arraignment in Goshen, N.Y.
(Susan Harris for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              288 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

JAZZ VIEW;
Why the Jazz Festival Is Taking On a European Face

BYLINE: By Peter Watrous

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 956 words


OVER THE PAST SEVERAL years, the JVC Jazz Festival has been anything but
festive. Instead, it has mostly been a series of high-priced concerts, featuring
the last of a dwindling stock of big-name jazz musicians, in New York's most
formal concert halls. It has been desultory, and every year the musicians save
it, pulling out great performances from the mouth of a tired lion.

True, the festival has come a long way since its inception, as the Newport Jazz
Festival, in 1954. The 1959 documentary "Jazz on a Summer's Day" captures the
essence of the event's early years. The film celebrates a pre-Vietnam optimism
and beat-generation cool with a sparkling, and now depressing, veracity. With
its gorgeous scenery and sense of idyll, the documentary shows a world that
shares nothing with New York, the festival's home since 1972.

But for this year's event, which opens on Friday, George Wein has done something
special, challenging both the lethargy of his own festival and the reputation of
the city.  Mr. Wein, who started the Newport concerts and who runs the JVC Jazz
Festival, is presenting much of the festival this year at free outdoor concerts.
Those shows, at Lincoln Center and at Bryant Park, will feature the best music
as well. In one sense, he's returning the event to its origins.

It's a smart and brave thing to do, because by offering public events in a city
where velvet ropes, high ticket prices and gentrified neighborhoods all conspire
to keep out "undesirables," he is bucking every conventional notion about New
York.

Where the previous festivals in New York have been resolutely undemocratic, the
best parts of this one will do the unimaginable: give anyone who has the money
for a subway token access to the shows. And the addition of a series of
inexpensive late-night jam sessions at the downtown club S.O.B.'s, showcasing
younger musicians who are rarely heard at the festival, will open up the city to
further celebration, with sessions running until 4 A.M.

All these changes are extremely important for jazz and for the city. It's
remarkable that in New York, the jazz capital of the world, the music has such a
low public profile, compared with other arts. There's a Shakespeare festival in
Central Park. Summerstage presents music from around the world in the park. The
Metropolitan Opera holds a free concert series, now in its 28th year, held in
locations throughout the city. But in jazz, until now, there has been nothing
substantive either outdoors or free.

Such concerts could be a financial boon for the city and demonstrate a public
commitment to what's taken for granted here. Never underestimate the power of a
broad public gesture; imagine how these free concerts could boost jazz's
audience, especially since they would introduce some of the better, younger
musicians.

In some ways, Mr. Wein has followed not the example set by the original event in
Newport but that of the many European jazz festivals. The Umbria Jazz Festival,
held each July in Perugia, Italy, is a model of what such an event can be.

FOR SEVERAL WEEKS, THAT lovely medieval hilltop town turns itself over to jazz,
and a concertgoer can pay to hear music in an opera house or in the ruins of a
church, which has been set up as a concert space. One can hear music in the town
square, for free, or go to after-hours clubs, where the musicians can hang out
and younger musicians can challenge older ones in jam sessions. The atmosphere
is congenial and experimental, and the festival opens up the jazz world to the
audience, making the music and musicians accessible.

In an odd way, Mr. Wein may have been forced to take a new approach this time
around. In the last 10 years, since Count Basie's death in 1984, many of jazz's
leading lights and biggest concert draws have died. In addition to Count Basie,
the list includes Sarah Vaughan, Dexter Gordon, Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie,
Stan Getz, Art Blakey and Benny Goodman. Ella Fitzgerald isn't performing, and
Sonny Rollins no longer plays in the festival.

Clearly, the current crop of headliners can't fill Carnegie Hall and Avery
Fisher Hall. Of the 12 concerts in those rooms, Mr. Wein has booked seven shows
that are only tangentially related to jazz, from Brazilian music to Ray Charles.

To a certain extent, the predicament in which Mr. Wein finds himself is one of
his own making. Over the last decade, as the jazz renaissance gathered momentum
and older musicians vanished from the scene, Mr. Wein has maintained the
festival with virtually the same old lineup, rather than building a cadre of
younger stars. Paradoxically, audiences can now reap the benefits of his
inaction.

The outdoor shows in the current festival are packed with a fairly adventurous
mix of styles and ages; none of the musicians on the bills, individually, would
make a dent in any of the city's larger halls.

The July 1 show at Bryant Park is a case in point. It will begin in the
afternoon with a performance by the George Gruntz Concert Jazz Band, a European
orchestra, followed by Julius Hemphill, one of jazz's pre-eminent arrangers and
composers, and his saxophone sextet. Next up will be the Duke's Men, the deeply
swinging group consisting of several alumni of Duke Ellington's band, led by the
trombonist Art Baron. Capping off the evening will be Wallace Roney, the burning
young trumpeter, and his quintet, followed by the saxophonist Tom Chapin, a
virtuoso improviser.

These outdoor shows will make the city become, in a visible way, a public place
for jazz. Instead of safely sequestering the music in clubs and concert halls,
they take it to a larger public. This year's festival preaches a gospel that
still needs to be heard, even in New York.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A concert during the Umbria Jazz Festival in Perugia, Italy --
This year's JVC Festival is following the example of its European counterparts.
(Angelo R. Turetta/Contrasto)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              289 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reform vs. Reform;
The Hidden Antagonist Of Clinton's Health Plan

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1057 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EVEN more than the insurance industry, or the doctor industry, or the
Republicans, good government may be the most formidable enemy of the troubled
health care legislation President Clinton and leading Democrats are pushing.

Perhaps good government is saving the nation from higher taxes and bad medicine,
as the President's enemies say. Or perhaps it is costing many Americans their
best chance in years to safeguard their health, as his allies say.

But love health insurance legislation or loathe it, the fact is that, because of
things done in the name of good government, it is much harder than it used to be
to muscle things through Congress. Before there was a Common Cause, before
log-rolling and offering or withholding favors became incorrect (or even
illegal), politicians regarded them as serious work tools for the business of
passing legislation. For better or worse -- worse for Mr. Clinton -- those days
are long past.

Consider David Boren, the Oklahoma Democrat who is retiring to head the
University of Oklahoma. Before he goes, Senator Boren is hamstringing the
Finance Committee, effectively giving the panel's Republicans a veto over health
care legislation by saying he will oppose any measure that Republicans will not
support.

'Could You Use More?'

Now imagine Mr. Boren in the 1960's, called down to the White House for a little
attitude adjustment by, say, Lyndon Johnson. This is how it might have gone:
"Now David, the Education Department tells me that the university you are going
to run gets somewhere near $51.4 million a year from the Federal Government.
Could you use more? Could you make do with less? And how do you feel about my
health bill now?" Senator Boren said last week he could imagine that happening,
but if it had, he would have exploded at the President.

Or think of Representatives Jim Slattery and Jim Cooper, two Democratic holdouts
on the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Mr. Slattery is running for governor
in Kansas and Mr. Cooper for the Senate in Tennessee. Once upon a time, before
campaign contributions were disclosed and candidates created their own
fund-raising operations, Presidents and political parties could funnel campaign
money, or cut it off. In those days, Mr. Slattery and Mr. Cooper might well have
been persuaded to see more merit in the President's legislation than they do
today.

Of course, threats like that didn't always work. Johnson once urged Senator
Frank Church, praised by Walter Lippmann for opposing the Vietnam War, to go ask
the columnist for a dam in Idaho. Mr. Church did without his dam and stuck with
his opposition.

The most obvious example of how things have changed is that in the old days,
Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois would not have been indicted, and
the House Ways and Means Committee would not have a new acting chairman in his
place, feeling his way along warily at such a crucial time. Before Watergate,
attorneys-general were more political, and the prosecution might have been
quashed, or not even started. Indeed, some of what he is charged with in
misusing office accounts might not even have been illegal then.

But the important changes are not all in the dilution of raw Presidential power
which, even if it remained, might not have been used effectively by President
Clinton. Another obstacle to moving health care along is purely institutional.
The Congressional Budget Office was created in 1974 to give Congress the sort of
information that might enable it to stand up to the supposed experts in the
executive branch. The budget office has been a major source of delay in the
health care process, and it is hard to imagine the Senate legislating on
amendments -- whose cost must be announced, under the same act that created the
budget office -- while waiting for the budget office to count.

Milton S. Gwirtzman, a former Congressional aide who headed the National
Commission on Social Security from 1979 to 1981, said: "In the old days, the
idea that a Democratic Congress would not only not accept the figures of a
Democratic White House but not even accept help from a Democratic White House in
analyzing the figures is incredible to any of us who watched Congress accept
administration figures."

"Figures were pulled out of the air," he said admiringly, "and they were not
disputed." Moreover, the budget office's independent calculations have sometimes
exposed flaws in the Clinton plan.

Another admirer of the efficiency -- if not the abuses -- of the bad old days,
Thomas Mann of the Brookings Institution, said, "If your object was moving a
bill along and getting it enacted, it was a hell of a lot easier before these
good government reforms."

And not every reform has proved an obstacle. Sunshine rules that require open
meetings are often criticized for impeding negotiation, but in health care they
have been easily evaded. The House Ways and Means Committee does most of its
work in its Democratic caucus, since the Republicans vote against everything
anyway. And the Senate Finance Committee is laboring away at what its chairman,
Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, calls "tentative markups," not real
committee meetings. He says real meetings will come for ratification, once a
deal has been struck in private.

And some of the changes that have made it harder to pass laws have nothing to do
with good government. Filibusters, for instance, were once reserved for great
state issues like civil rights or war and peace. Now they are a routine
Republican delaying tactic, imposed against motions to take up nominations. The
tactic has slowed health care by making Democrats feel they must have Republican
votes if they are to avoid endless debate.

Other changes in American politics have their effect, too. The original
advocates of national health insurance were labor unions. Today they are weaker,
less concerned about big advances than about protecting what they have.

Of course, critics of the Clinton plan argue the slow pace makes for careful
work. Senator David Durenberger, a Minnesota Republican, warns, "The cost of not
doing it right is greater than the cost of not getting it done."

Still, Mr. Mann, director of governmental studies at Brookings, says that on
this issue and others Congress needs "a little more grease and a willingness to
use it."

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In 1957, before power politics lost its good name, Lyndon B.
Johnson got Senator Theodore F. Green to see things his way. (George Tames/The
New York Times) (pg. 3)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              290 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 677 words



International 3-14

TWO KOREAS AGREE TO MEET
The Presidents of North and South Korea agreed to meet for the first time since
the peninsula was divided, under a proposal delivered by former President Jimmy
Carter.  1

The division of the Korean peninsula was an American design.  12


MISERY SPREADING IN AFRICA
The failing economies of African countries have undercut democracy and increased
ethnic fighting, but the biggest impact has been to lower living standards.  1

A UKRAINE DEAL GONE WRONG
A venture by an American company to sell seeds, herbicides and farm equipment to
Ukraine has become an embarrassing instance in which Americans have taken
advantage of a country in turmoil.1

DISPUTE OVER CANADIAN VETERANS
Canadians who served in the U.S. military during the Vietnam War want a war
memorial, but Canada has refused them the land.  8

CRIME VS. RIGHTS IN RUSSIA
Russians were delighted when President Boris N. Yeltsin said he would tackle
Russia's powerful mobsters, but the proposal he made to fight crime by
suspending basic civil liberties has caused outrage.  14

Gunmen killed six people in a Northern Ireland pub, the police said.  5

France will move ahead with its Rwanda force.  11

Religious tension may help decide Colombia's presidential election.  9

The Western cold war forces paraded in Berlin in farewell.  12

Turkey's hopes of new influence in the region are being frustrated.  4

Yasir Arafat's coming move is causing fear of Israeli protest.  3

National 16-22

SUICIDE WATCH AT JAIL
O. J. Simpson, the football player for whom nothing seemed impossible, was
locked in a jail cell with a deputy checking every few minute to make sure he
did not kill himself.  1

POLICE FACE CRITICISM, AGAIN
Just a few days after being criticized as too aggressive in their investigation
of the double murders for which O. J. Simpson has been arrested, they are now
being castigated for letting him escape.  21

A COMMON SCENARIO?
Experts on domestic violence say the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson may fit an
all-too-common scenario in domestic disputes.  21

FACING THE UNTHINKABLE
One of the most powerful pressures on Congress is a possibility that was simply
unthinkable until the last few weeks: there might not be a major health care
bill this year.  18

LOCAL BATTLE GOES TO CONGRESS
A dispute over a theme park that the Walt Disney Company plans to build near
important Civil War battlegrounds has made its way from Virginia to Congress.
16

LOBBYISTS SEEK DELAYS
An effort to tighten fiscal controls of Federal student aid programs approaches
a critical July 1 deadline and could face the same delays that hampered earlier
efforts.  16

UPDATING IMAGE OF FATHER
The idea of the new American father, that tender diaper-changer of the 90's, is
under political attack by those who want to return to the old image with a
modern twist.  22

Metro 23-30

RAIL AGREEMENT REACHED
The Long Island Rail Road reached a contract agreement with its largest union,
capitulating on work rule issues, after officials concluded that Congress would
not soon intervene to stop the strike.  1

LOW CONFIDENCE IN POLICE
New Yorkers express anxiety about the Police Department's ability to protect
them, and many say there is widespread corruption in the force, according to a
New York Times/ WCBS-TV News Poll.  1

TRUANCY IS ON THE RISE
Despite the focus on special programs and smaller schools, truancy has kept on
growing as the most troubled students have become concentrated in the most
troubled high schools.  23

GAY GAMES OFFICIALLY OPEN
The Gay Games officially began as thousands of participants and spectators
gathered in Manhattan for a gala opening ceremony. It was the start of seven
days of Olympic-style athletic competition that its organizers and participants
say will be more than swimming and marathons: It will be a celebration of gay
life.  23

Obituaries 32

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              291 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Canada Rebuffs Veterans of U.S. Forces in Vietnam

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, June 16


During the Vietnam War, as thousands of young Americans sought refuge in Canada
to avoid the conflict, thousands of young Canadians were recruited by the United
States to fight in that same war.

Some 20,000 American draft dodgers and 12,000 deserters are estimated to have
fled to Canada, while 40,000 Canadians, the majority of them volunteers, served
in the American armed forces, and at least 12,000 fought in Southeast Asia.

Most went for adventure. Many from Quebec and French-speaking parts of New
Brunswick say they signed up chiefly to learn English. Some were drafted, young
men who happened to be living and working in the United States and as residents
were subject to conscription.

Some call these Canadians the unknown warriors, men who for years have not
called attention to themselves because of the war's unpopularity. Now they are
seeking some national recognition, in the form of a memorial to their dead on a
few square feet of federal land in Ottawa. But the Canadian Government will not
give them the land.

"We're not trying to say the war was right or wrong," said Lee Hitchins,
president of the Canadian Vietnam Veterans Coalition. "We just want to put up
something for the people who gave their lives."

Canada Wasn't in the War

The Government's reason for saying "no" is that Canada did not officially take
part in the war, and does not memorialize people who fought in wars in which it
was not a participant.

"The people who chose to participate did so on their own," said Marie Christine
Lilkoff, spokeswoman for Prime Minister Jean Chretien.

But that may not be the end of the story. Early this month, Canada's Senate
authorized a memorial and called on the House of Commons to unite with it and
urge the Government to provide the federal land.

"It's time to accept that Canadian Vietnam War veterans are a part of our
history," said Senator Jack Marshall, a Conservative from western Newfoundland.
"They cannot and should not be ignored or forgotten any longer."

Senator Marshall, a World War II veteran, was the prime mover behind the
resolution, which was supported by many veterans groups here.

'Wanted to See the World'

Mr. Hitchins, a 49-year-old mobile home industry official, joined the United
States Navy in 1963 at age 18. He enlisted with two buddies in Buffalo -- "we
were young and wanted to see the world" -- and ended up as an electrician on the
destroyer Charles S. Sperry in the South China Sea and the Gulf of Tonkin.

He estimates that about 40 percent of the Canadian veterans were draftees.
American draft laws at the time applied to Canadians and other aliens, who
between the ages of 18 and 26 had to register within six months of their entry
into the United States.

Fred Gaffen, senior historian at the Canadian War Museum, said a "couple of
thousand" young men returned to Canada to avoid being called up. But he noted
that "most who were drafted served."

Mr. Gaffen, author of a book about the Canadian Vietnam experience called
"Unknown Warriors" (Dundern Press), said many Canadians, especially those who
fled Hungary and other Soviet satellites, were motivated by a desire to fight
Communism.

"You have to see it as a product of the times," he observed.

The Canadian Government did nothing to stem the flow, even though a law on the
books since the Spanish Civil War, the Foreign Enlistment Act, specifically
banned enlistments in foreign armies.

Billions Sold to Pentagon

"The Government made a political decision to turn a blind eye to that law," said
Mr. Gaffen, pointing to Canada's heavy economic involvement in the war. Canadian
companies sold the Pentagon $2.5 billion of war materiel, including ammunition,
napalm, aircraft engines and explosives.

About $10 billion more was exported in food, beverages, berets and boots for the
troops, as well as nickel, copper, lead, brass and oil for shell casings,
wiring, plate armor and military transport, according to an entry in the
Canadian Encyclopedia. During the war period, Canada's unemployment rate fell to
a record low of 3.9 percent.

The Canadian veterans are eligible for most of the United States benefits
available to American veterans, including treatment for exposure to Agent
Orange, the chemical defoliant thought to be responsible for cancerous tumors
and other severe medical complications experienced by some who served in
Vietnam. Every Remembrance Day, comparable to Veterans Day in the United States,
the men of the Ottawa chapter of the Vietnam Veterans Coalition hold a service
for Gordon P. Eadie, a draftee from their area killed in action and buried in
the small town of Carp, 10 miles west of Ottawa. He had lived in Detroit, where
his father worked.

The 58,132 names engraved in the black granite of the Vietnam Memorial in
Washington include Canadians, but just how many is still open to question. Many
Canadians were identified from towns in the United States where they enlisted or
were drafted. Gordon Eadie is listed from Detroit on the Vietnam memorial.

At Least 113 Killed

The current official count is 113 Canadians killed, including 7 missing in
action who are presumed dead. The Vietnam veterans group, which is now going
through a painstaking check of all the names on the memorial in Washington,
believes that it will find as many as 400 born in Canada. There is no accurate
count of the number of wounded, but estimates range up to 1,000.

The veterans coalition, composed of 5,000 members in 14 chapters across the
country, already has its memorial, an 11-foot-high structure, also of black
granite, which will list the names of the Canadian dead and where they fell in
Vietnam -- with room to add more names as they are confirmed.

The monument, built at a cost of $100,000, was donated by members of the
Michigan Association of Concerned Veterans as a tribute to Canadian comrades.

With their memorial already in hand, the Canadian veterans expected that the
Government would readily agree to a site. "We just wanted to bring our brothers
home to a respected place in Ottawa," said Mike Ruggiero, who was with the First
Marine Air Wing in Danang and Chulai in 1963 and is now director of the Toronto
chapter of the coalition.

The veterans point out that Canada has dedicated a memorial at Arlington
National Cemetery across the Potomac from the White House to the thousands of
Americans who volunteered to fight with Canada and the other Allies in World War
I and World War II, before the United States joined the conflicts.

'To Respect Canadian Ways'

But in early May the Chretien Government turned down the request for a site on
federal land. Questioned about the rejection in the House of Commons, Michel
Dupuy, the Minister of Canadian Heritage, said, "We are going to respect
Canadian ways."

Quebec has now gone its separate way. For five years it has had its own
memorial, a slab of granite flanked by two blocks of marble, honoring its
soldiers in Vietnam, many of them Mohawk Indians who volunteered. Moved once,
the memorial is now in a park near the St. Lawrence Seaway in the town of
Melocheville, about 20 miles west of Montreal.

Jacques Gendron, who served in the 330 Transportation Unit outside Saigon in
1964 and 1965 and is now president of the Quebec chapter of the coalition, said
there was no controversy in Quebec.

"We decided to do it, and it was done," he said.


LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              292 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Our Vietnam Blunder

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 92 words


To the Editor:

Congratulations and gratitude to Frank Rich for his brilliant and courageous
"Clinton's War Story" (column, June 5). By now, it is historically and
universally acknowledged that our action in Vietnam was a self-indulgent and
irresponsible (50,000 Americans killed) piece of macho nonsense. The sooner and
more widely publicized we can make this, the better we will be. President
Clinton should be proud of his disassociation from it; and his efforts to
prevent it, and to end it.

TERRY SOUTHERN
East Canaan, Conn., June 7, 1994

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              293 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Dow Jones in Vietnam

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 6;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 75 words


Dow Jones Telerate Inc. has announced that it will introduce its financial
information services in Vietnam. The service monitors prices from world
financial markets, financial news and market analysis. The introduction of
Telerate's products will be sponsored by the Vietnamese Government. Terms were
not disclosed. Dow Jones Telerate is a unit of the New York-based Dow Jones &
Company, which publishes The Wall Street Journal and Barron's.


LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              294 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Aspiring Immigrants Misled On Chances in Visa Lottery

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1900 words


A man wearing headphones passed out pink fliers last week in front of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service headquarters in lower Manhattan, mumbling
"Green card, green card" in accented English. When a passer-by expressed
interest, he escorted her across Broadway and into a seventh floor office with a
brass nameplate that said, "Ola Mata-Mazel, Diplomat."

Inside the scruffy office, Ms. Mata-Mazel promised help for anyone interested in
getting a green card through a State Department visa lottery that began June 1
and ends June 30. For $100, she said, she would make sure an applicant had the
best possible chance of winning. But until the fee was paid, she said, she would
not reveal "the secret."

"I cannot give away my secrets," she later explained by telephone. "I have to
pay the rent."

Ms. Mata-Mazel is one among many immigration consultants, lawyers and
fly-by-night operators selling their services to those seeking a chance at legal
residency through the special lottery. But the lottery is simple to enter, and
winners are chosen at random. No expert can increase an applicant's odds of
being selected by computer for a chance at one of 55,000 green cards. There are
no secrets.

Still, every immigration program spawns an opportunistic service industry, and
this one is no different. This lottery is opened to illegal immigrants and
aspiring immigrants still abroad. Winners, if they met eligibility requirements,
get a visa to enter the country as a legal immigrant, then receive a green card,
or legal permanent residency, after arriving.

In immigrant havens across the country and in the neighborhoods of consular
offices abroad, consultants and lawyers are charging from $10 to $800 to perform
a straightforward task: write an immigrant's name, birthday and place of birth
on a plain sheet of paper, then enclose it in an envelope with a return address.

"It's truly disgusting what they're doing, essentially charging people to do
something that was designed to be done by a lay person," said Alfred E. Cerullo
3d, the Consumer Affairs Commissioner of New York City. "You have boiler room
operations and phone banks and lawyers that are preying on people's
vulnerability and anxiety and trust at a time when their lives are at issue."

It is not illegal to charge people for unnecessary services. About all the
authorities can do is fine people who make fraudulent claims.

In Los Angeles, David L. Amkraut, a lawyer who calls himself "one of the largest
lottery practitioners in the country," promises clients a special edge if they
pay him $50 to $75. In Pompano Beach, Fla., the American Immigration Council
collects $95 and tells applicants they have "a really good chance this year."

In New York City, a pink handbill distributed on the streets solicits would-be
legal immigrants to call one of four telephone numbers. Applicants are then
directed to send a $100 money order to the Immigration and Naturalization
Service Assistance Center at 28 Vesey Street, Suite 229. The "Assistance Center"
is unrelated to the Federal immigration agency; the "Suite" is a postal box.

Congress established the visa lottery as part of the Immigration Act of 1990 to
create greater diversity among immigrants. For the first three years, the State
Department accepted applications for the lottery from 36 countries, mostly in
Europe, that were considered underrepresented in the immigrant population in the
prior 25 years. Forty percent of the visas were set aside for the Irish.

Pool Is Expanded

Starting this year, the pool of applicants for the annual lottery was expanded
to include everyone except those from the 11 countries that sent the most
immigrants to the United States in the previous year. In order to get a green
card, the winners must have a high school diploma or at least two years of work
experience in a field that requires two years of training.

By last week, the State Department had received three million applications at
its visa center on the former Pease Air Force Base in Portsmouth, N.H. As they
arrive, the letters are sorted by world region, the names entered in a data base
and the letters held in bags at a giant warehouse. The warehouse, a stripped
commissary, is surrounded by guards.

There is no form and no fee to apply. Counselors at Federal and local Government
telephone lines are available to explain the details of the process. Some
immigration lawyers say that even the simple instructions can be daunting,
especially for those who do not speak English. Still, the American Immigration
Lawyers Association recommends that its members help applicants without charge,
with an eye toward developing them as future clients.

And Hal Lieberman, the chief counsel for a New York State legal disciplinary
committee, said, "An honest lawyer would say to a person, 'Look, I can do the
application for you for $85, but you don't need me.' "

Some Have Difficulty

Many illegal immigrants here and aspiring immigrants abroad simply cannot fathom
that their chances will not improve by paying a supposed expert, authorities
say. Some do not know how to take part, or how to perform the most basic tasks
related to the application.

Emilio Soto, a recent immigrant from Ecuador, did not know where to buy a stamp
or mail a letter.

On a recent morning, Mr. Soto, who lives in Queens and works as a dishwasher at
a Korean restaurant, stood before a hand-lettered sign in the window of Pronto
Fingerprinting on Broadway. The sign, in Spanish, promised lottery information
inside.

"My neighbor told me that the United States is giving away green cards, which,
you know, is like giving away gold," Mr. Soto said. "But I had no idea how to
apply. I heard it was through the lottery, so I bought some lottery tickets. But
my neighbor said they were just tickets to win money."

At Pronto Fingerprinting, he bought a makeshift visa lottery form and an
addressed envelope for $5. For a $30 fee, he could have had the clerk fill out
the form, but he did not.

"I don't have that kind of cash," he said.

Wary of operators exploiting the lottery, the Consumer Affairs Department of New
York City is distributing a consumer guide, "Protecting Yourself From Immigrant
Visa Lottery Scams," through the city's Immigration Hotline at (718) 899-4000,
and through community groups and City Council members' offices. The Department
is also monitoring 20 ethnic weeklies for misleading advertising; two lawyers
have been fined. And the vigilance has apparently made operators more careful
about flagrantly false promises than in the last three years, said Margie
McHugh, executive director of the New York Immigration Coalition.

The Consumer Affairs Department can impose a $350 fine on people who
misrepresent, in advertisements or in person, the random nature of the lottery.
The authorities cannot stop anyone from collecting money to complete peoples'
applications.

And so immigration lawyers and people who call themselves immigration experts
have used fliers, signs in storefront windows, advertisements in ethnic
newspapers and direct mail solicitations to lure clients.

Mr. Amkraut, the lawyer in Los Angeles, advertises in ethnic newspapers here and
newspapers abroad. He maintains a toll-free number. And he has thousands of
lottery clients, he said. He has even reserved a bank of hotel rooms in
Portsmouth, N.H., so that he and his assistants can hand deliver applications
for "procrastinators" on June 30. And he guarantees a better chance of winning.

"Without going into the details of our tricks, I have studied the law very
closely and there is some flexibility in it," Mr. Amkraut said. "We have been
able to have a higher winning percentage, 13 1/2 percent."

Authorities say that is impossible.

Looking for Clients

Few immigrant lawyers make promises as blatant as Mr. Amkraut's. Instead, they
use the program to expand their client base.

Dennis Gayle, a lawyer in Brooklyn, was fined $350 by the Consumer Affairs
Department for misleading advertising in The Carib News that said, "Green Cards
Issued Immediately, if Selected." Actually, after being selected in the lottery,
winners must then complete the normal application process for a permanent
resident visa. So it could take a year for them to get their green cards. Mr.
Gayle corrected his ads.

Mr. Gayle, however, does not promise any inside track to his clients. Like other
immigration lawyers, he said he decided to help people with their applications
after hearing that a large percentage of previous applicants had been
disqualified. (About 19 percent were disqualified last year, most for sending
more than one application, some for not including their return address, said
Nita Budig, a State Department spokeswoman.)

Mr. Gayle charges $35 to $50 and includes a consultation on an applicant's other
options for pursuing a green card, he said.

"It's a total disservice to the work of immigration lawyers when people are told
they don't need lawyers and lawyers are ripping them off," Mr. Gayle said. "I
also resent people overcharging, but $35 is a reasonable fee for the service
provided."



A GUIDE TO THE LOTTERY

WHAT IT IS

Congress established the visa lottery as part of the Immigration Act of 1990 to
create greater diversity among immigrants. It is open to illegal immigrants and
aspiring immigrants still abroad. Winners, if they met eligibility requirements,
get a visa to enter the country as a legal immigrant, then a green card, or
legal permanent residency, after arriving.

WHO IS ELIGIBLE

Anyone in this country or abroad, except natives of Britain, Canada, China, the
Dominican Republic, El Salvador, India, Jamaica, Mexico, the Philippines, South
Korea and Vietnam.

Natives of Hong Kong and Northern Ireland are eligible.

Applicants must have at least a high school education -- not a
graduate-equivalency diploma -- or two years of recent work experience in a
field that requires at least two years of training or experience.

DEADLINE

Applications must arrive by June 30.

HOW TO APPLY

Applicants can submit only one application.

There is no form. A plain sheet of paper should be used, and include, in
English: The applicant's full name, with last name underlined. Birth date. Place
of birth. Mailing address.

The same information should be included, if applicable, for a spouse and
children.

Applications should be sent in a regular letter or business envelope by regular
mail.

A return address should be on the envelope, beginning with the applicant's
native country, followed by name, address and country of residence.

WHERE TO APPLY

Envelopes should be sent to DV-1 Program, National Visa Center, Portsmouth,
N.H., with the Zip code depending on the region of applicant's native country.

Asia: 00210

South America: 00211

Europe: 00212

Africa: 00213

Oceania: 00214

North America: 00215

INFORMATION

There is a State Department hotline (202-663-1600) and a New York Immigration
Hotline (718-899-4000; outside New York, 800-232-0212).

 Because of an editing error, the article omitted her response. Ms. Mata-Mazel
said in an interview that she called herself a diplomat because of her
affiliation with a Moscow-based foundation. She said her lottery "secrets" were
products of careful research into Government procedures governing the form and
submission of lottery entries.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

(June 21, 1994, Tuesday) A front-page article yesterday about consultants who
advise immigrants hoping to win a special visa lottery described the services of
Ola Mata-Mazel, whose office nameplate describes her as a diplomat. Because the
lottery winners will be selected at random, the article raised questions about
whether services like hers were necessary and challenged her contention of
having "secrets" that would improve an immigrant's chances of selection.

A picture caption on Monday about the immigrant lottery for visas misidentified
the location of the application storage site shown. It was Portsmouth, N.H., not
Boston.


GRAPHIC: Photos: In immigrant havens across the country, consultants and lawyers
are charging immigrants to write their name, birthday and place of birth on a
piece of paper to send in for the lottery for visas. In a visa center in Boston,
Rick Frost, left, and Will Odell sorted some of the applications. (Evan Richman
for The New York Times)(pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              295 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Laotians' Arrest in Killing Bares a Generation Gap

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: BANNING, Calif.


Klaus and Gisela Pfleger, a retired German couple on vacation, were
photographing spring flowers on a scenic hillside in May when three young men
walked up to them, shot them in the head and drove away with Mrs. Pfleger's
purse.

The attack, which killed Mrs. Pfleger and left her husband seriously injured,
was the sort of gratuitous brutality that has become frighteningly common in
Southern California among gangs, carjackers and thrill killers. But in this
case, the police arrested three teen-agers whose backgrounds bewildered them.

They were Laotian refugees from America's "secret war" in Indochina during the
Vietnam War, when the Central Intelligence Agency enlisted thousands of hill
tribesmen to try to block the Ho Chi Minh supply trail into South Vietnam, an
effort that proved to be futile.

Although the three teen-agers had grown up as Southern California boys who wore
baggy hip-hop clothes and spoke the American slang of their generation, they
were born in Laos, and two were members of the Hmong (pronounced "mung"), a
clan-based people whose culture had no written language until recent times and
centered on slash-and-burn farming.

Children Forsake Old WaysGeneration Gap

The shootings, on May 16, bewildered members of the Hmong community here as
well, including the families of the arrested teen-agers. Some 1,500 Hmong have
followed their clan leaders to this city of 23,000 people in the smoggy Inland
Empire, an area 50 miles east of Los Angeles.

Nu Yeng Yang, a toughened Hmong veteran of the war in Laos who came to the
United States in 1980, maintained an awkward smile the other day as he talked of
his alienation from his adopted country and his Americanized 19-year-old son,
Xou Yang, who is being held pending his arraignment in the killing.

"Back in our country, you never saw things like this happen," Mr. Nu Yeng said.
"There are no thieves, although our houses are not as nice as here. Nothing
would come into your house except for the animals you own."

Like many Hmong parents -- and like many other immigrant parents through the
decades -- he said there was little he could say to his son, Mr. Xou, to guide
him in this strange new world, and that, in any case, his son had stopped
listening to him.

'He Will Not Listen'

"We have lost all control," Mr. Nu Yeng said. "Our children do not respect us.
One of the hardest things for me is when I tell my children things and they say,
'I already know that.' When my wife and I try to tell my son about Hmong
culture, he tells me people here are different, and he will not listen to me."

Mr. Nu Yeng's son is being held in the killing with a second 19-year-old,
Khamchan Ketsouvannasane, and with a 17-year-old Hmong whose name has not been
released because of his age.

Deputy District Attorney Richard Bentley, who is prosecuting the case, said the
17-year-old had fired the shots, accompanied by Mr. Khamchan, and that Mr. Xou
had waited in their car. But he said he could not say whether they were members
of a gang, as the police had initially suggested, or what might have led them to
this sudden, brutal act.

Since the United States began accepting Hmong as refugees in 1980, more than
100,000 have come to the United States, clustering in places like Montana,
Wisconsin, Virginia and central California. Some settled at the invitation of
church or community groups, while some looked for small farm plots. Many
followed a guerrilla leader, Vang Pao, to California.

In the first years after their arrival, the Hmong's culture brought them into
conflict with American law because some engaged in the medicinal use of opium,
the kidnapping of brides or the ritual slaughter of animals. A few have leaped
the cultural divide, but most remain poor.

Most of the Hmong in Banning are from the Yang clan. By one account, they were
drawn here when a contractor offered a few of them jobs building mobile homes.
Others say it was simply cheap housing that attracted them.

Most Hmong on Welfare

Some have found work in small factories or restaurants, but, because of cultural
barriers and a lack of marketable skills, most Hmong, here and elsewhere, are on
welfare. One of those on welfare is Mr. Xou's father, who has never held a
civilian job. Mr. Nu Yeng, like many Hmong, is not sure how old he is. But he
said that at about the age of 13, he had become a soldier and had fought on the
American side until the fall of Laos to the communists in 1976. Before the fall,
he rose to the rank of lieutenant and was in command of 100 men, he said.

Here in Banning, with his wife and his three school-aged children, he has little
to do. He said he would like to return to Laos if the communist government
changes.

For Mr. Nu Yeng, as for many other Hmong, the generation gap is one of the most
disturbing signs of his alienation from his adopted country.

Pao Yang, who is earning a master's degree in sociology, noted that the very
concept of teen-aged years is alien to the Hmong, who traditionally began
working as farmers, or as soldiers during the war, when they were 13 or 14 years
old.

"The Hmong go from childhood to adulthood; here, you have teen-agers or
adolescents," he said. "We never had to raise our own children in that way, so
it's very hard for people who have children who grow up here."

When Mr. Xou was a child, his father said, he was obedient, running errands and
translating for his parents and helping his younger brother and sister with
their schoolwork.

But as Mr. Xou grew older, things changed. "He would say to me, why are you
still telling me all these things?" his father said. "I don't have to listen to
you."

Mr. Xou dropped out of Banning High School after ninth grade. He held odd jobs,
traveled out of state, was employed, and then unemployed.  His parents lost
track of what he was doing, until the police knocked on their door last month,
saying he was wanted in connection with a shooting.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Xou Yang, left, is one of three teen-age suspects in the
shooting death of a German tourist and the wounding of her husband in May in
Southern California. (Associated Press); To his father, Nu Yeng Yang, the
accusation against his son is just one more inexplicable turn of events in his
new land. (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              296 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Majority of Vietnam Vets Enlisted

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


To the Editor:

As a Vietnam veteran I read "Clinton's War Story" by Frank Rich (column, June 5)
with interest, especially where he writes of the "dirty little secret," that the
Vietnam War was "America's most blatant class war since the Civil War."

A recently published study indicates that affluent United States communities had
only marginally lower casualty rates than the country as a whole. Poor
communities had only marginally higher rates. The authors conclude that "Such
outcomes call into question a widespread belief that continues to influence
United States policy discussions, namely, that American war deaths of Vietnam
were overwhelmingly concentrated among poor and working class."

Implicit in this belief is the popular mythology that the United States force
that served in Vietnam consisted primarily of unwilling draftees.

A study conducted by the Harris Organization for the Veterans Administration and
released in 1980, an ABC-Washington Post poll released in 1985 and the National
Vietnam Veterans Readjustment Study of the Research Triangle Institute agree
that the majority of Vietnam veterans entered the military by enlistment. The
readjustment study found that approximately 70 percent of Vietnam veterans
enlisted, only 11 percent of whom reported they did so to "avoid the draft."

Vietnam veterans are still at war, with media figures who deny our patriotism
and disparage our service by characterizing us as dummies too maladroit to have
wrangled deferments. When questioned if they would serve again if asked, the
majority of Vietnam veterans replied they would.

We Vietnam veterans are a group about whom a tremendous amount of nonsense has
been said and written, and we must be on our guard against members of the media
who need to validate their conduct during the war by casting discredit upon
those who served.

BERNARD A. HEENEY
Bayonne, N.J., June 13, 1994

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              297 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

50 Years Later, the Value of the G.I. Bill Is Questioned

BYLINE: By WILLIAM CELIS 3d,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 1360 words

DATELINE: SAN ANTONIO


Returning home from World War II service as a gunner on an Army Air Forces
bomber, Mike M. Machado went to St. Mary's University here with all expenses
paid.

"My rich uncle sent me to college -- Uncle Sam," said Mr. Machado, now 70 years
old, who went on to earn a law degree and become a state judge. Under the G.I.
Bill, he received full tuition of $85 a semester and a monthly stipend of $250
that covered the living expenses of his family of four.

Almost 50 years later, Jacqueline Williams got out of the Air Force and entered
a two-year college, but the $4,800 a year she receives under the G.I. bill did
not begin to cover her tuition. It will cover even less when Ms. Williams begins
a nursing program this fall at Incarnate Word College here, where the tuition is
$13,500. She draws from Federal student loans and holds two jobs to pay her
expenses.

A half century after Congress passed the G.I. Bill, a debate over the
legislation's relative worth is growing. The bill, formally titled the American
Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, is credited with elevating a generation
of working-class veterans to the middle class. It opened higher education to the
masses, fueled a housing boom and turned renters into homeowners through
low-interest, no-money-down mortgages.

Bill's Economic Value Erodes

But today the legislation has lost much of its economic impact and, as a result,
much of its appeal to veterans.

After World War II, the bill's benefits stretched over 48 months, compared with
36 months now. The $50 monthly benefit for a single veteran in the 1940's has
increased in the last 50 years, to $400, but the increase has not made up for
the rapid rise in inflation. Mr. Machado's $250 a month after the war is now
equivalent to $2,107, according to the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor
Statistics.

"The G.I. Bill's purchasing power has just evaporated," said Phil Boudon, a
spokesman for the American Legion, which was instrumental in pushing President
Franklin D. Roosevelt to support the bill.

Representative G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery, the Mississippi Democrat who is
chairman of the House Veterans Affairs Committee and is a World War II veteran
himself, said, "It doesn't really get the job done."

It rankles veterans, too, that the G.I. Bill has evolved to resemble life
insurance. First-year servicemen and women need to invest $100 a month for 12
months to be eligible for education benefits, which they can take advantage of
while in the service or up to 10 years after discharge.

But the program has built up a surplus in the Treasury. Only 35.2 percent of the
eligible participants -- those on active duty and veterans -- used their
benefits last year, according to the Department of Veterans Affairs.

Since 1985, when the current legislation was passed, about half of all eligible
veterans have used their educational benefits. They have been awarded $1.6
billion in educational benefits from 1985 through January, but $1.9 billion more
sits unused in the Treasury.

Legion Would Double Benefits

The rising complaints by veterans about the erosion in benefits have prompted
the 3.1-million member American Legion to lobby Congress to revise the bill
again. It proposes doubling the benefit, either by extending the stipend period
to 72 months, or by raising it to $800 a month.

The Department of Veterans Affairs said it was aware that the G.I. Bill does not
pay for all education costs, but it declined to comment on the American Legion's
proposal.

For a wide swath of American society in the years immediately after World War
II, the legislation was Government at its best.

For the nation's colleges and universities, it provided a long and profitable
boom. In 1940, only 4.6 percent of the population had attended college for four
years or more, according to the Education Department, compared with 23.2 percent
of the population in March 1991, the most recent period for which statistics are
available.

Institutions like Marlboro College in Marlboro, Vt., were founded to accommodate
the new demand for higher education after World War II.

"Without the G.I. bill, Marlboro would have never been started," said Roderick
Gander, its president. From 55 veterans in 1947, who attended classes in cow
barns, the college, a private liberal arts institution, has grown to 250
students, he said.

Boom in College Building

The G.I. bill also caused enrollments at existing institutions to swell.  At the
University of Miami, enrollment jumped to 7,000 in 1946 from 1,900 in 1945. At
the time, the university, which is private and nonsectarian, was just 18 years
old. The boom in enrollment stuffed its limited classrooms, but tuition payments
from the G.I. Bill, along with additional assistance from the Federal
Government, helped finance the building of many campus structures that are still
in use.

The G.I. Bill provided the biggest boon, though, to two-year colleges. By 1947,
there were 328 community colleges in the nation, up from just 58 three years
earlier; enrollment in these institutions -- which provided the bulk of
job-training opportunities for returning veterans -- ballooned to 500,000 in
1947 from 251,290 in 1944, according to the American Association of Community
Colleges.

In San Antonio, the G.I. Bill contributed significantly to the city's seven
colleges and universities. It is the only city in the nation with five military
bases -- Fort Sam Houston, Randolph Air Force Base, Lackland Air Force Base,
Kelly Air Force Base and Brooks Air Force Base -- and its 1.3 million residents
include 74,000 active and retired military personnel. Here, the G.I. bill's
decline is sharply felt.

"The benefits are not enough for one person," said Ms. Williams, the former Air
Force accounting specialist from San Antonio. Ms. Williams, 29, is a single
mother who works two jobs -- as a clerk during the day at Randolph Air Force
Base and a grocery bagger in a supermarket at night .

Facing Loss of Benefits

After attending St. Philip's College, a two-year public institution in San
Antonio, Ms. Williams will begin attending the nursing program at Incarnate Word
College, a private and more expensive Roman Catholic institution. Her G.I. Bill
benefits will run out in eight months, a year before she gets her nursing
degree.

"I don't know how I'm going to do it," Ms. Williams said. "But somehow I'll
manage."

Another current G.I. Bill beneficiary, Chad W. Zuliani, manages to get by with
the support of periodic loans from an older brother. He also supplemented his
G.I. Bill benefits by working last semester as an assistant at Fort Sam Houston
National Cemetery in San Antonio.

"The bottom line is that I couldn't do this on my own," said Mr. Zuliani, 27,
who left the Air Force two years ago after serving four years as an
ophthalmologist's assistant. Hoping to become an athletic coach at the college
level, he, like Ms. Williams, worries about stretching his benefits to finish
college.

Veterans in College Decline

Not surprisingly, colleges and universities can no longer rely on the G.I. Bill
to help increase enrollment. At St. Philip's College here, the percentage of
students who are veterans was down to 14 percent in the current academic year,
from a high of 85 percent after the Vietnam War.

Alfonso T. Carmona, who now heads the veterans affairs department at St.
Philip's, spoke about what the G.I. Bill had meant to him. A retired Air Force
captain, he grew up in Galveston, Tex., as one of eight children in a poor
family.

Mr. Carmona used the G.I. Bill to attend college while he was still in the Air
Force. After earning his bachelor's degree in Spanish and social science at
William Carey College in Mississippi, he became a commissioned officer.

"My salary doubled and our quality of life improved," Mr. Carmona said.

Mr. Machado, the Texas judge who grew up poor in San Antonio, said: "If it
hadn't been for the G.I. Bill, a lot us would not be lawyers, doctors or
engineers." Without it, he said, the best he could have hoped for was a good
blue-collar job.

"The G.I. Bill," he said, "changed my life."

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fifty years ago, the G.I. Bill paid for the college education
of Mike M. Machado, left, now a judge in Texas, and living expenses for his
family of four. Today, the bill will pay for less than half of Jacqueline
Williams's tuition in a nursing program, so she works two jobs to support her
family of three. (Photographs by Craig Stafford for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              298 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans Changed Colleges' Attitudes

BYLINE: By WILLIAM CELIS 3d

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 2;  National Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 490 words


The G.I. Bill went well beyond enrolling millions of Americans in higher
education; it forever altered teaching styles and attitudes about older students
in colleges and universities.

"For the first time, you had people in classes who had had real life experiences
and had much to share," said Connie Odems, senior vice president of the American
Association of Community Colleges, a group of 1,200 two-year colleges. "It was
not all textbook learning anymore."

If the G.I. Bill helped change the way courses were taught, it also introduced
the concept of continuing education. At colleges and universities, the push to
accommodate these older students resulted in a much broader and more
sophisticated menu of vocational job-training courses.

This was particularly true at community colleges, which grew tremendously in the
years immediately after World War II and well into the 1970's, to accommodate
veterans of the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

And the veterans generally enjoyed academic success, dispelling the fears voiced
when the G.I. Bill was debated 50 years ago. Leading academicians had criticized
Federal efforts to open colleges and universities to classes of people who,
under the circumstances of the time, would not have pursued college educations.

"The first thing it did was indicate to college administrations and faculty that
these people could learn, even though they didn't come from the best high
schools or from the top of their graduating classes," said Henry Spille, the
vice president and director of the Center for Adult Learning at the American
Council of Education, an association of 1,700 colleges and universities. "The
maturity and persistence that they brought turned around the thinking of many
people on the ability of older persons to learn at the college level."

As more veterans entered colleges and universities, the institutions scrambled
to find new ways to assess the academic potential of their students. As a
result, standardized testing, which had been used on a limited basis, saw
unparalleled growth.

"It created a whole new industry in education," said Mr. Spille, acknowledging
that standardized testing today is widely criticized as being less-than-accurate
barometers of an individual's potential. "Standardized testing served its
purpose then, however, because institutions needed the information to make a lot
of judgments."

The G.I. Bill's most lasting gift to higher education, however, may have been as
a forerunner to Federal student loan programs. Never before had the Federal
Government been involved to such a degree in financing college educations for
students, a role that continues 50 years after the G.I. Bill became law.

Last year, 4.4 million college students, most of them from families with incomes
of less than $25,000 a year, received college grants of up to $2,500 a year
under the Federal Government's largest college loan program, the Pell grant.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              299 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
With Reality Reeling, Pity the Poor Realist

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1436 words


"The American writer in the middle of the 20th century has his hands full in
trying to understand, describe and then make credible much of American reality,"
wrote Philip Roth in an essay in Commentary magazine. "It stupefies, it sickens,
it infuriates and finally it is even a kind of embarassment to one's own meager
imagination. The actuality is continually outdoing our talents, and the culture
tosses up figures almost daily that are the envy of any novelist."

Philip Roth made these observation back in 1961 -- before the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy, before the assassinations of Robert F. Kennedy and
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., before the social upheavals of the late
60's, before Vietnam and Watergate and Iran-contra.

Since then, of course, daily life -- or at least our apprehension of it, thanks
to 24-hour television news and the proliferation of tabloid coverage -- seems to
have grown curiouser still. In recent months, Tonya and Nancy, Amy and Joey, the
Menendez brothers and the Bobbitts have become fixtures in the national
consciousness, and now, for a few days, the sad, surreal saga of O. J. Simpson
has bound the country together in a weird act of communal fascination that has
led one observer after another to sigh, "Truth is stranger than fiction."

Indeed, the ability of reality to equal, even surpass, our most fevered
imaginings has been repeatedly brought home to us in recent years. H. R.
Haldeman's recently published diaries create a truly Strangelovian portrait of
the Nixon White House, while Donald Regan's memoirs purvey a picture of the
Reagan White House (in which the President's schedule was cross-referenced with
readings from Nancy Reagan's favorite astrologer) as strange as anything in
"Being There," Jerzy Kosinski's dark political satire.

Tom Wolfe's 1987 novel "The Bonfire of the Vanities" -- which featured a Harlem
minister who uses his gifts of spin-control to help orchestrate racial outrage,
and which appeared months before events involving Tawana Brawley and the Rev. Al
Sharpton broke in the press -- has proved prophetic, just as the cannibalistic
indulgences of Hannibal Lecter in the 1991 film "Silence of the Lambs" seemed to
presage the grisly discovery of Jeffrey Dahmer's victims.

Taken simply as a narrative, the Simpson case was riveting, in part because it
combined elements of high tragedy (the fall of a powerful man, a sudden reversal
of fortune) with elements of your run-of-the-mill action-adventure movie (a
dramatic chase).  Besides, it was all happening to a real person in real time,
something that novels and plays -- from "Robinson Crusoe," which masqueraded as
the memoirs of a shipwrecked sailor to " 'Night, Mother," which portrayed the
last 90 minutes in the life of a suicide -- can only try to simulate.

In fact, the extraordinary public fascination with the Simpson story helps
underscore two pressing matters facing the writer of imaginative fiction today:
the growing marginalization of the written word in an increasingly electronic
culture; and the difficulty of depicting a reality that often feels, in Tom
Wolfe's words, "chaotic, fragmented, random, discontinuous; in a word, absurd."

The 60's, the critic Benjamin DeMott has observed, "brought the realization that
the old, primary, literary role of witness" had been stolen by television. Since
then, functions of the novel have been usurped by television as well, at least
usurped in the eyes of people who do not value the nuances and ambiguities of
literary prose.

Stendhal once described the novel as "a mirror that strolls along a highway: now
it reflects the blue of the skies, now the mud puddles underfoot." Television
may not show us "the way we live now," in Trollope's words, with the subtlety or
insight of the chronicles of Barsetshire, but it offers a cheap substitute,
giving audiences tantalizing, if shallow, glimpses of other people's life
styles. In the past, novels alone seemed capable of giving us intimate knowledge
of strangers's lives; today that role tends to be filled, however deceptively,
by confessional talk shows and autobiographies.

As we are exposed to more and more bizarre stories in the news (a woman cutting
off her husband's penis, a president accused of asking a woman to perform oral
sex), as the old rules of civility break down, it also becomes increasingly
difficult for the imaginative writer to satirize or even convincingly dramatize
social conflicts. What was once regarded as parody is now often a story in the
morning news.

Jonathan Swift's "Modest Proposal" (1729) -- a satirical pamphlet that mockingly
provided recipes for the eating of children -- has given way to real-life news
stories about Mr. Dahmer eating his victims. The comical excesses of the
obnoxious Widmerpool in Anthony Powell's "Dance to the Music of Time"
(1951-1975) have given way to Howard Stern's daily rants on the radio. And Amy
Fisher has become our modern-day Lolita.

In a recent essay, the writer Joe Queenan observed that his satiric articles
about such invented absurdities as "the lateness-rights movement" and "the Home
Mutual Fund Shopping Network" have actually elicited credulous responses. "No
matter how ridiculous your story is," he writes, "some people -- and even a lot
of people -- will not get the joke." Satire and parody, after all, depend on a
sense of boundaries that can be violated, taboos that can be sent up, and when
reality itself possesses a quality of anything goes, it becomes harder and
harder to use exaggeration and hyperbole as tools to mock.

Throughout history, in fact, strict social mores and a seemingly regimented set
of possibilities have helped to generate both parody and serious art. The novels
of Edith Wharton and Henry James, for instance, pivot on their characters'
collision with rigid codes of behavior. And much of the suggestive humor in
screwball comedies of the 30's and 40's springs from their creators' efforts to
deal with restrictions of the infamous Production Code.

Today, there are few palpable obstacles -- in a novel or film or real life --
for a couple getting together. As a result, the central dilemma of so many
earlier stories -- whether, for instance, a married man or woman should commit
adultery -- simply becomes a starting point for a movie like "Fatal Attraction,"
which swiftly escalates from the question of infidelity to the question of
murder.

As social codes weaken and sensationalistic news coverage proliferates, the
public's shock threshold rapidly rises, resulting in an increasingly cynical and
jaded audience and a general coarsening of standards. At the same time,
novelists find themselves feeling increasingly ineffectual: hard-pressed to
delineate the chaotic tapestry of modern American life, hard-pressed even to
capture their audience's attention.

Tom Wolfe's advice for novelists -- taken by himself in "Bonfire" and by writers
like Richard Price in "Clockers" -- is to "head out into this wild, bizarre,
unpredictable, Hog-stomping Baroque country of ours and reclaim it as literary
property." "The answer," he wrote in a much-discussed article in Harper's
Magazine, "is not to leave the rude beast, the material, also known as the life
around us, to the journalists, but to do what journalists do, or are supposed to
do, which is to wrestle the beast and bring it to terms." This is what Zola did
a century ago, and what Norman Mailer did in his "true-life novel," "The
Executioner's Song."

Other writers have taken a different tack. In "American Psycho" (1991), Bret
Easton Ellis tried to push the shock envelope to its limits, producing a
willfully repellent book that starred a psychopathic hero who mutilates women. A
similar impulse (to take an already bizarre reality and explore its outer
limits) animates Joe Eszterhas's farcical new screenplay about a President who
makes love to a cow and who is forgiven by the voters for his acts of
bestiality.

While novelists like Philip Roth and Harold Brodkey have reacted to the
weirdness of contemporary reality by focusing on the private realm of the self,
others like Salman Rushdie have responded by embracing the fantastical
techniques of magical realism. In 1989, however, when Mr. Rushdie's novel "The
Satanic Verses" led to his being placed under a death sentence by the Ayatollah
Khomeini, he, too, discovered that real life has a way of surpassing even the
most surreal imaginings of a novelist.

As Mark Twain once remarked, "Truth is stranger than fiction, but it is because
Fiction is obliged to stick to possiblities; Truth isn't."

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              300 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Sarah Lyall

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 5;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words



Good Bets

Publishing books by politicians can be risky for several reasons. For one thing,
the lag between a politician's moment in history and the subsequent book is
often ample for the public to forget the person or lose interest. For another,
publishers are so susceptible to famous people -- even if the people are famous
simply because they did some relatively minor thing during some administration
or other -- that they often pay too high an advance, print too many copies and
end up with too many unsold books. "It is indeed a tough judgment call, and
we've all made mistakes," said Caroline K. Reidy, president and publisher of
Simon & Schuster's adult trade division.

But this month, publishers who bet lots of money on books by politicians have
good reason to be pleased with themselves. In a curious confluence of events,
three political books are enjoying long runs on the nonfiction best-seller
lists. These are "Standing Firm" (HarperCollins/Zondervan), by Dan Quayle;
"Beyond Peace" (Random House), by Richard Nixon, and "The Haldeman Diaries"
(Putnam), by H. R. Haldeman. "All these books are selling much better than we
expected," said Susie Russenberger, director of trade books at Ingram, a book
wholesaler. The company, she said, has sold 21,000 copies of Mr. Quayle's book,
22,000 of Mr. Nixon's, and 11,000 of Mr. Haldeman's.

Other companies are reporting high sales, too, but that doesn't necessarily mean
that readers have suddenly turned into a bunch of policy-loving nerds. "These
books are selling for the same reason that celebrity books sell," a top
Manhattan editor said, and each does have some celebrity-style reason for its
success. Richard Nixon died, guaranteeing enhanced sales and also helping Mr.
Haldeman's book, which was published not long after his own death and has racy
new details about old events. Mr. Quayle's book is getting a lift from his
decision to tell tales out of school about his fellow Republicans; he has also
achieved a neat crossover with the substantial Christian market.

Sales of these books have been dwarfed in the past couple of weeks by sales of
"The Agenda," Bob Woodward's look at the Clinton Administration as a work in
progress. Simon & Schuster thought it was going to be big, hoped it was going to
be big, and printed 350,000 copies. That turned out to be too few: 717,000 are
now in print, Ms. Reidy said.

Does this mean that everyone in the Clinton Administration should rush out and
sign a book deal now? No. Even Robert B. Barnett, the Williams & Connolly lawyer
who represents Mr. Quayle and James Carville and Mary Matalin, among others,
cautioned that it was impossible to generalize about political books. Some hit
the big time; others just don't work, he said. "I've had to turn down half a
dozen to a dozen books on that basis," he said. "It's not that what they have to
say isn't very interesting, but that I just don't know that a sufficient number
of people will plunk down $20 to read it."

Old and New

Authors, agents and even readers often complain that unless books continually
sell at a certain level, they can slip quietly out of print, never to be heard
of again. That's why Kodansha Globe's efforts to practice what it calls
"literary archeology," by seeking out and reintroducing out-of-print books from
other publishers, are so unusual.

"Lots of great books get published, but the result of the cascade of new books
is that worthy books for which there are still substantial audiences get
buried," said Philip Turner, editor in chief of Kodansha Globe, the new trade
paperback division of Kodansha America. "We're trying to dig them up and dust
them off and say, 'Look, there's great old literature around that's still worth
reading.' "

If Kodansha America, a subsidiary of Kodansha World, an enormous Japanese
publishing conglomerate, is known here at all, it's known for commissioning the
homespun best seller "Having Our Say: The Delany Sisters' First 100 Years" last
year. Globe, which published its first books this spring, also intends to
publish original books as well as paperback reprints of recently issued hard
covers. But 30 to 40 percent of its list of two dozen books a year will be
revivals of old books, Mr. Turner said.

On its spring list these include Helen Tworkov's "Zen in America," which fell
out of circulation when its publisher, North Point Press, died in 1989; Ivan
Morris's "World of the Shining Prince: Court Life in Ancient Japan," published
by Penguin; and Georges Condominas's "We Have Eaten the Forest: The Story of a
Montagnard Village in the Central Highlands of Vietnam," published by Hill &
Wang.

For the fall and winter, reissued books include Konrad Z. Lorenz's "Man Meets
Dog," a definitive work on canine psychology published most recently by Penguin;
Roger Shattuck's "Forbidden Experiment: The Story of the Wild Boy of Aveyron,"
published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux and Washington Square Press but out of
print for a decade; and Leon Harris's "Merchant Princes: An Intimate History of
Jewish Families who Built Great Department Stores," last published more than 10
years ago by Harper & Row and Berkley. Mr. Turner used to work at his family's
bookstore in Cleveland, and some of the revived books are titles that sold
particularly well for him. Other ideas came from booksellers that Globe
consulted in groups last fall. "In the beginning, our inquiries excite concern
on the part of the publisher," he said. "But then they recognize that we have an
integrated program to do this, and that it would be hard to just re-issue one
title." It's then, he said, that Kodansha can get hold of the rights to the
titles it wants.

Rumors Outnumber Books

With Richard E. Snyder out the door in a hurry and rumors circulating about
Viacom Inc.'s long-term intentions for Simon & Schuster, its publishing
property, it's no wonder that publishing employees are nervous about the future.
Yesterday's worry du jour was an article in The New York Post saying that Simon
& Schuster was for sale, for $3 billion. But Viacom officials asserted that the
story was false, as did Simon & Schuster officials.

"I had a meeting with the guys at Viacom today, and they gave me the same
assurances, which I continue to believe," said Jonathan Newcomb, who replaced
Mr. Snyder last week as Simon & Schuster's chief executive officer.

And Mr. Newcomb, who has moved into Mr. Snyder's spacious and fancy office at
Simon & Schuster, sent a "Dear Colleague" letter yesterday to his 9,500
employees, saying once more that the future was secure. "Despite speculation you
might hear, either in the press or in the industry, we have the unqualified
support of our parent company," the letter said. "Simon & Schuster is not for
sale."

Another Simon & Schuster official, Jack Romanos, president of the company's
consumer group, yesterday sought to dispel another prevalent rumor: that Mr.
Snyder's departure put two editors, Alice Mayhew and Michael Korda, in
precarious positions. "The fact of the matter is that they're committed to
staying," he said, "and we're equally committed to keeping them."

Endnote

*"The Alienist" (Random House), Caleb Carr's unexpectedly resilient best seller
starring Theodore Roosevelt as New York City's Police Commissioner at the turn
of the century, just fetched a tidy sum in paperback rights. Wanda Chappell, the
publisher's director of subsidiary rights, who negotiated the sale, said Bantam
won the paperback auction for $1,001,000. It's particularly nice for Mr. Carr,
who is to receive a large chunk of the money; his original advance from Random
House was just $60,000.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              301 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The G.I. Bill, 50 Years On

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


Not all the great victories in World War II took place on the battlefield. What
proved a landmark triumph for America and its fighting forces had its start in
the White House 50 years ago today when President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed
the G.I. Bill of Rights. Few laws have done so much for so many, yet the
anniversary of this political and social counterpart of D-Day has been all but
forgotten.

Formally known as the Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944, this innovative
bill was ambitious in design and laudable in purpose: to help 10 million
veterans, and their country, adapt to peacetime. The measure offered guaranteed
loans to buy a home, farm or business; 52 weeks of unemployment insurance at $20
per week, plus job placement services; and most enduringly important, up to four
years of Federal aid for learning or training at any level, from grade to
graduate school.

And so Americans who never dared dream of attending college joined a flood that
crested in 1946-1947, when 2.5 million veterans qualified for $500 or more in
annual tuition, plus monthly allowances of $65 for single students, $90 for
married. Almost overnight on U.S. campuses, Quonset huts and prefab houses
bloomed to accommodate this influx. In a stroke, the legislation kept a
demobilizing army from engulfing the labor force, threw open cloistered academic
doors and offered energizing plasma to schools of every kind, public or private.

The special genius of the law was that it bypassed old arguments over states'
rights and tax aid to religious institutions by extending its benefits to
individual citizens, who had wide freedom of choice. This notable home-front
victory was chiefly the work of President Roosevelt. As early as November 1942,
he had asked a panel of educators to design a comprehensive program for
ex-servicemen and -women. In summer 1943, in a message to Congress and in a
radio fireside chat he urged approval of the panel's core recommendations, and
got vital support from the otherwise staunchly conservative American Legion.

Even so, the school provisions were assailed by John Rankin, the race-baiting
Mississippi Democrat who headed the House Veterans Committee; he protested that
blacks were incapable of benefiting from college. Less predictably, President
Robert Maynard Hutchins of the University of Chicago gloomily warned that
"colleges and universities will find themselves converted into intellectual hobo
jungles. And veterans unable to get work and equally unable to resist putting
pressures on colleges and universities will find themselves educational hoboes."

Such prophecies were wildly off the mark. So popular and successful was the law
that many of its benefits were extended to Korea and Vietnam veterans, and are
now available to those who serve in peacetime. As a Federal stimulus to learning
and opportunity, the G.I. Bill ranks with the Land Grant College Act of 1862,
which promoted the growth of the state universities.

It is useful to be reminded periodically that Federal spending is not always
wasteful, and that taxes, to paraphrase Mr. Justice Holmes, can be the agent of
civilization.


LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              302 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words


International A3-10

FRENCH TROOPS TO AID RWANDA
France said it would move troops into Rwanda today to protect civilians against
further killings there. Some 2,500 marines and Foreign Legion soldiers using
helicopter gunships and vehicles will be involved in the operation, which will
be launched from neighboring Zaire.  A1



The U.N. approved France's mission, over rebels' protests.  A8

U.S. ASSENTS TO KOREAN TALKS
Saying he was now satisfied that North Korea was willing to freeze its nuclear
program temporarily, President Clinton agreed to the opening of comprehensive
talks early next month in Geneva.  A1

For now, former President Jimmy Carter has been vindicated.  A6

DOLLAR STEADIES VS. YEN
The dollar rebounded slightly from record lows against the Japanese yen without
the Federal Reserve intervening. Many market analysts were baffled by the
Administration's low-key tactics.  A1

A CRAVING FOR A FIERY MANDELA
Just six weeks into Mr. Mandela's presidential term, some admirers are muttering
that he is too nice, and that he is demanding too little from the white
minority.  A11

MOSCOW SIGNS ACCORD WITH NATO
Russia and its former enemy NATO signed an agreement to forge closer military
ties. Russia is the 21st country to join the so-called Partnership for Peace, in
which non-NATO countries -- many of them former members of the Soviet bloc --
hold military exercises and exchange information with NATO nations.  A3

RUSSIA IS SAID TO HIDE ARMS PLAN
Clinton Administration officials say that Russia is concealing efforts to
develop advanced chemical weapons, although it has pledged to disclose details
of a poison gas program to the United States.  A3

THE PRESS TREMBLES IN INDONESIA
An era of relative political openness and press freedom in Indonesia appeared to
end this week as the Government shut down three influential magazines. It warned
other publications that they could soon share a similar fate.  A5

DRUG TAPE NAMES BOGOTA VICTOR
Recordings made public in Colombia show that a drug-cartel leader agreed to
donate $3.75 million to Ernesto Samper Pizano's presidential campaign in the
hope of buying leniency. Mr. Samper, who won the election, denied the charges.
A9

NEW SPECIES SURFACES IN VIETNAM
Two years of searching in Vietnam have led to the capture of a Vu Quang ox, a
species that had been known to exist only from skulls and pelts. Such a find is
very rare.  A7

Germany's Social Democrats picked their candidate for Chancellor.  A10

An assassination jolts the Kashmiri independence movement.  A6
Jerusalem Journal: A battle of slogans to sway Israelis on peace.  A4

National A12-20, B7

SHORT LINE TO SUCCEED MITCHELL
Four months after George Mitchell said he would retire as Senate majority
leader, only two Democrats have offered to take his job.  A1

A VICTIM REMEMBERED
Nicole Brown Simpson, O. J. Simpson's girlfriend, wife, then ex-wife, had in her
last days been struggling to be Nicole Brown.  A1

A transcript of a 911 call by Nicole Brown Simpson.  A20

A grand jury continued to hear evidence against O. J. Simpson.  A20

HEALTH CARE DEADLOCK LOOSENS
Centrist Democrats and Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee neared
agreement on a plan that would require people to buy health insurance for
themselves.  A1

MOST RAPE VICTIMS ARE GIRLS
The victims in more than half of all rapes reported to the police are girls
under the age of 18, according to a Justice Department report.  A12

A COLLEGE FIGHTS THE MARKET
Bennington College is mounting a corporate-style restructuring campaign in an
effort to close a deficit and increase enrollment.  A12

ADOPTION STUDY YIELDS SURPRISES
A study of adopted adolescents and their families found that adopted teen-agers
were no more likely than other adolescents to suffer from mental or identity
problems.  A14

F.D.A. HEARS AIDS TESTIMONY
More people need to be tested for the virus that causes AIDS, even if it means
using unconventional approaches, former Surgeon General C. Everett Koop
testified.  A18

The teen-ager who was caned in Singapore returned home.  A12

Governors want states reimbursed for services to illegal aliens.  B7

Metro Digest B1

STONEWALL REMEMBERED
The Stonewall uprising is widely regarded as the turning point in the gay-rights
movement. But through the eyes of five people who were there that night, the
uprising itself was not glamorous. The fact that it has become an icon amazes
them still.A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-10

The unknown (for now) designer: John Hutton.  C1

Finding forgotten roses.  C1
At home with E. Annie Proulx.  C1

Secondhand silver.  C2

Estate stars as Spanish palace.  C4

How the world was built, in just 928 pages.  C8

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Battling over a film.  C11

Theater: Lisa Kron tells "101 Humiliating Stories." C11

Film: "Alma's Rainbow." C15

Music: "Falstaff" in St. Louis.  C11

Dance: "Midsummer Night." C15

Books: "Thank You for Smoking," by Christopher Buckley.  C15

Television: "To Your Health" leaves questions unanswered.  C16

Sports B9-18

Baseball: Yanks beat Twins.  B11

Basketball: Rockets are champions.  B9

Column: Vecsey on N.B.A. final.  B9

Soccer: Americans upset Colombians.  B9

Swiss get respect.  B14

Tennis: Stich is beaten.  B16

Obituaries B8

Archer Cole, New Jersey leader for organized labor.

Einar Ingvald Haugen, expert on Scandinavian culture.

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Retiring Haiti's junta.

Surrender at City Hall.

New Democrats, old cynicism.

Letters

William Safire: See-nothing Congress.

Frank Rich: Addicted to O. J.

Andranik Migranyan: Unequal partnership.

John C. Jeffries Jr.: A change of mind that came too late.

Bridge

C16 Chronicle B4

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              303 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Leadership Race in the Senate Attracting Mainly Spectators

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1554 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


A struggle is raging across Capitol Hill this summer for one of the most eminent
and visible posts in politics. Not that anyone can tell, though.

The fight is to succeed George J. Mitchell as majority leader of the United
States Senate. Four months after Mr. Mitchell disclosed plans to retire at the
end of 1994, only two of the Senate's 55 other Democrats -- Tom Daschle of South
Dakota and Jim Sasser of Tennessee -- have offered themselves as a replacement.
Neither is a household name, and their efforts to win support from fellow
Democrats, while vigorous, are all but subterranean.

It seems an odd way to contest a job that, amid the Republic's single most
concentrated collection of egos, is the Orient Express of ego trips.

As majority leader, Mr. Mitchell enjoys a coveted office just off the Senate
floor, instant entree to the White House, limitless exposure on network
television and excellent prospects of soon becoming a highly paid commissioner
of baseball.

Past leaders have become President (Lyndon B. Johnson), Vice President (Alben W.
Barkley) and Presidential hopeful (Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas).
Democratic luminaries, the statesmen and television celebrities of the chamber,
should be falling over themselves to seize the opportunity.

Instead, they flee from it. "I was afraid that if I ran, I might have won," one
much-touted noncandidate, Senator John B. Breaux of Louisiana, said not long ago
on the Senate subway during a ride to his office.

Therein lies the ugly truth: public glories aside, a majority leader's job is
anything but pleasant. The chamber's 99 other senators, any of whom can bring
lawmaking to a halt, demand constant kowtowing to accommodate political and
personal needs. Evenings are a treadmill of receptions and fund-raising events.
The leader's personal political agenda must usually march in lock step with the
party line, however ill-plotted and tortuous it may be.

"I really don't want to be the leader," said Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming,
No. 2 in the Republican hierarchy behind Mr. Dole. "I am wholly impatient with
standing there to wet-nurse 99 other politicians."

In truth, majority leaders have no real powers beyond the force of persuasion.
The job is a tradition, not a post written into law; the Senate's rules give it
no explicit authority. In fact, the Senate had no one called a leader until
1920.

When political parties were stronger, leaders like Lyndon Johnson could crack
the whip and bully senators onto the party line. But today's senators mostly
raise their own money and run independent of their party or President, or even
away from them.

The truth is that running the Senate has become the equivalent of tending the
Augean stables. The few senators who aspire to it either burn to be Hercules or
regard daily encounters with the back ends of livestock as high public service.

Of the two candidates, perhaps Mr. Daschle best fits the Hercules mold. A
genetic politician, he told The New Republic last month that he had aimed for
the Senate since high school. He won his first elective office, a House seat, at
the age of 31, in 1978, and moved to the Senate in 1987.

Now 46 and barely into his second term, Mr. Daschle lacks a statesman's patina
(he heads no committees, although he is co-chairman of the Democratic Policy
Committee, a legislative research unit). But so did Johnson, who won the
leadership in his second term.

What Mr. Daschle does have, most everyone agrees, is a deft intellect and
feverish ambition. "He wants it, and it's very obvious to people," said Senator
Jay Rockefeller, Democrat of West Virginia. "And I think he'll win it relatively
easily, because of his hard work, his intensity."

Certainly the job has been in the back of Mr. Daschle's mind. "I didn't expect
I'd be doing it this soon," he said in an interview last month, "but I did
think, when the opportunity presented itself, that I'd attempt to determine how
viable my candidacy was. And once I came to that conclusion, I made the
decision."

Mr. Daschle has quickly risen where it counts -- in internal Democratic politics
-- by bonding with leaders like Mr. Mitchell and his predecessor as majority
leader, Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia. The two men have rewarded him,
first with a seat on the Finance Committee -- easily the chamber's most powerful
panel -- and then with the co-chairmanship of the policy committee, a symbol of
his stature.

He has been on the front lines in support of President Clinton's health care
package, and he won legislation in 1991 compensating Vietnam veterans for
exposure to the defoliant Agent Orange.

But the bulk of Mr. Daschle's legislative record is more parochial: he fights
for farm subsidies and tends to the needs of his state's sizable -- about 1 in
14 South Dakotans -- American Indian population. On most issues, he swims in the
middle of his party's liberal mainstream.

So does his competitor, Mr. Sasser. But if Mr. Daschle views the leadership as a
chance to do both good and well, Mr. Sasser seems more inclined to a view of the
leader as noble stablehand, pitchfork at the ready. Mr. Daschle was organizing
his campaign within days of Mr. Mitchell's announcement; Mr. Sasser had to be
prodded by friends and did not even declare himself a candidate until some six
weeks later.

"I've devoted my career to public service," Mr. Sasser said in a recent
interview, and "the zenith of public service" is the Senate leadership. "I
wanted to help my country. That sounds kind of corny, but more of us over here
think that and feel that way than we get credit for."

Mr. Daschle is said to have won over many younger, reform-minded Democrats who
believe he will push more vigorously to increase the paint-drying pace of Senate
deliberations. Mr. Sasser professes the same goal, but at the age of 57 he has
won early backing from older senators who prefer his experience or, they may
hope, his caution.

Dense Financial Problems

Mr. Sasser's 18-year Senate career is a study in low-key reluctance. He was
drafted into Tennessee politics by friends, and languished in relative anonymity
on the Senate Budget Committee until its chairman retired and two other senior
Democrats rejected the job.

"I didn't really want it," he told The New York Times in 1990, and for good
reason: the Federal budget is numbingly dense, and its deficit is politically
and fiscally intractable.

But ever the good soldier, Mr. Sasser took the chairmanship, and promptly helped
maneuver President George Bush into a 1990 deficit-cutting accord -- including
an income-tax increase -- that proved damaging to Mr. Bush's re-election chances
two years later. Last year, he played a central role in enacting Mr. Clinton's
even more contentious package of spending cuts and tax increases.

This is draft-horse work, not show-horse work, Mr. Sasser said, but he seems to
prefer working that way. Indeed, he is known for proposing and supporting the
same moderately populist ideas that more driven politicians employ to propel
themselves onto the nightly news -- urging restrictions on senatorial freebies
like gifts and airport parking, opposing Congressional pay raises, crusading
against fiscal waste. Mr. Sasser is undoubtedly driven, but he takes a
distinctly different road.

The two candidates differ personally. Mr. Daschle is articulate and aggressively
likable; Mr. Sasser is more old-shoe, prone to Tennessee farm-boy metaphors and
sly humor. But on issues concerning running the Senate, there often seems less
than a nickel's worth of difference.

Both men have mastered television, the prerequisite for a modern leader. Both
profess a desire to speed Senate procedures, limit filibusters, get senators
home earlier than the 9 or 10 P.M. finish that is routine.

Soothing Other Egos

The only real question is why either wants the job. If the job is demanding, the
campaign for it can be demeaning. Candidates often stage fund-raisers for fellow
senators -- "I must do 15 or 20" every couple of years, Mr. Daschle said -- and
try to collect on that goodwill.

Bands of supportive senators help plan strategy, take head counts and act as
cheerleaders. The vote for majority leader, set for next January, is a pitiless
and public judgment of each candidate's worth by his peers.

While Mr. Rockefeller says his man's prospects look exceptionally bright, Mr.
Sasser's backers say slow and steady will win the race.

Maybe, and maybe not, says Mr. Simpson, who points to at least two flies in the
Democrats' ointment.

The first is that neither candidate can become majority leader without a
majority, something that remains uncertain until after voters choose winners in
34 contested Senate races this November. (They could run for minority leader.)
The second is that leadership races are conducted by secret ballot.

"I remember when Jim McClure ran for leader," Mr. Simpson said, referring to the
former Republican Senator from Idaho, who sought the post in 1985, "and I said,
'How many votes you got, Jim?' And he said, 'I have 22 solid votes.'

"Well, when they counted them, he had 12, 9, something like that. He was
stunned."

"People tell you they're going to vote for you, and they don't," Mr. Simpson
said. "They're not lying; they just don't want to hurt you."

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senators Jim Sasser of Tennessee, left, and Tom Daschle of
South Dakota, rivals for the Senate majority leadership, on Capitol Hill
yesterday. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. B7)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              304 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Finds First Live Example of Rare Ox

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 545 words


Two years of searching in Vietnam have led to the capture of a Vu Quang ox, a
species that had been known only from skulls and pelts, the World Wildlife
Federation announced yesterday. The federation said a calf caught by local
hunters was grazing safely in a Vietnamese preserve.

The rarity of such a find can be judged from the fact that only seven species of
large land mammals, including this one, have been discovered since 1900.

Vietnamese scientists discovered the species in May 1992 when visiting tribal
hunters in the 150,000-acre Vu Quang Nature Reserve, a largely trackless rain
forest in northwestern Vietnam near Laos. Skulls, horns and pelts of the animal,
known as a sa lao, were identified as those of an animal previously unknown to
science.

Based on the animal's physical features and its DNA, scientists concluded that
the Vu Quang ox, as the deer-like mammal was named, was indeed a new species; it
was given the formal Latin designation Pseudoryx nghentinhensis.

Hunters in and around the Vu Quang forest occasionally trapped sa lao, and the
animals were invariably killed and eaten, despite attempts by the local
authorities to stop the hunting of a nearly vanished species.

A spokeswoman for the World Wildlife Fund, Yael Bradbury, quoted Vietnamese
scientists as saying that the calf has distinctive white markings on its face
and hoofs, large eyes, a short, fluffy tail and a thin, dark brown stripe
running down its back. The calf is about two feet high at the shoulders and
about three and a half feet long, and weighs 40 pounds. Its horns, which will
develop into long, straight spikes, are stubs at present.

Do Tuoc, a scientist with the Vietnamese Forest Inventory and Planning
Institute, reported that the calf, a female between four and five months old,
was caught in the Khe Tre Watershed Forest, just outside the game preserve, and
was then confiscated by officials. The calf is now in an eight-acre forested
botanical garden under close supervision.

Hunting or trapping the Vu Quang ox is illegal in Vietnam but the ban has been
difficult to enforce. Ms. Bradbury said the World Wildlife Federation had
proposed to monitors of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species that the ox be listed as a highly endangered species that cannot be
trapped, killed or traded.

Since the Vu Quang ox was discovered, the partial remains of another previously
unknown animal have been found in the reserve. Last March, Vietnamese and
foreign scientists found remains of a new genus, a giant muntjak deer. The
muntjak, which weighs about 100 pounds, is also known from a live specimen,
which was captured in Laos under the auspices of the Wildlife Conservation
Society.

Biologists believe that many species may remain to be discovered in the deep
forests of the region but that many may be verging on extinction because of
encroachments on their habitat.

One creature scientists are looking for is a snake tentatively named the
burrowing Vietnamese sharp-nosed snake. United States naval officers
photographed the snake and collected specimens during the Vietnam war, but the
specimens were lost. Two biologists at Northeastern University, in Boston, have
tentatively named the snake Cryptophidion annamense.


LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              305 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Back to the days of expensive oil? Don't top off your tank yet.

BYLINE: By Peter Passell

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 791 words


OIL for $20 a barrel? Is OPEC on the march again?

It would be precipitous to rush to the corner gas station to top off the tank.
The surge that has raised crude oil prices by one-sixth in two weeks is largely
being written off as a speculative bubble, another symptom of Wall Street's
current inclination to discover inflation lurking under every bed.

But the oil boomlet is a reminder that the cheap fuel enjoyed by consumers over
the last decade is not guaranteed by the laws of economics or nature. Indeed,
some experts are convinced that the long-term trend is toward higher prices.
"We've turned the corner in the cycle," said Daniel Yergin, the president of
Cambridge Energy research Associates.

One recent projection, offered by the business-oriented World Energy Council in
London, suggests that oil consumption will press against available supply by
early in the next century. And last week the Economist magazine published a
lengthy jeremiad explaining why "world energy markets will soon be roiled by
surging demand."

Those inclined to such pessimism focus on projected demand from the developing
countries. According to the International Energy Agency in Paris, urbanization
alone sharply increases consumption, as people abandon animal power for the
internal combustion engine and discover the joys of central heating. The I.E.A.
believes industrializing countries will increase their energy consumption by 4
percent annually through the year 2010, compared with about 1 percent in the
rest of the world.

China, the world's sixth-largest oil producer, has just become a net oil
importer. Over all, Cambridge Energy Research Associates predicts, Asia will
increase consumption by some eight million barrels by the year 2005 -- as much
oil as is currently produced by Saudi Arabia.

There is certainly plenty of fossil fuel left below ground to meet rising
demand. A good proportion of it, however, is coal, which emits roughly twice as
much greenhouse-inducing carbon dioxide per unit of heat as oil or natural gas.
Renewable forms of energy, like hydropower, could yield a lot more power, but at
high cost. Likewise nuclear energy, whose future would be bleak even if
Chernobyl was still just another anonymous provincial city in the former Soviet
Union.

There is also plenty of oil and gas left, much of it extractable at low cost.
The catch is that the cheap stuff is almost all in the Persian Gulf, where
development and production are largely determined by geopolitics and maneuvering
within the OPEC cartel. Figuring how much oil Iran, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia will
sell is thus as much "a problem in game theory," as it is a question of supply
and demand, notes Dale Jorgenson, an economist at Harvard.

Convinced now that prices are headed up? Morris Adelman, an economist of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, begs to differ. "It's an old story," he
says; "industry opinion just doesn't take account of basic economics."

For starters, he is skeptical of the assumption that rapid economic growth in
China, India and Latin America will sharply accelerate world demand for oil. As
these regulation-hobbled economies modernize, he argues, they are likely to
allow energy prices to rise to free market levels, which in turn, will induce
conservation of energy. "The more the third world develops," he said, "the less
it acts like the third world."

Then there is the question of energy supply from outside the Mideast. Lots of
oil remains to be found and extracted in Russia, China, Colombia, Mexico,
Vietnam and even Australia. And while capital for investing in these new areas
is not plentiful at the moment, Mr. Adelman is confident that countries yearning
for oil royalties are growing more realistic about sharing the risks of
development with the international oil companies.

Despite differences in opinion about the future of the oil market, it is
possible to find some common ground. Almost no one is predicting a rerun of the
1970's oil shocks anytime in the foreseeable future. By the same token, almost
everyone agrees with William Hogan, an economist at the Kennedy School at
Harvard, "that the combination of low prices and rising demand can only be
sustained over the next few decades with the cooperation of the Persian Gulf
producers."

In essence, then, the key difference between the optimists and the pessimists is
how they expect the low-cost producers in general and Saudi Arabia in particular
to behave. Mr. Adelman doubts that the Saudis have the will or the way to follow
a high-price strategy. Mr. Hogan doubts that Mr. Adelman or anyone else can
predict the oil producers' response to current events. "With cartels," he said,
"we just don't know what we're talking about."

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              306 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Emperor Visits Site Near Pearl Harbor

BYLINE: By CATHERINE MANEGOLD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 940 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, June 24


In a ceremony of silence broken only by the sound of birds and the barking of
cannons and rifles fired in three successive 21-gun salutes, the Emperor of
Japan today laid a wreath at a monument for war dead at the National Memorial
Cemetery of the Pacific.

The somber and sparsely attended gesture of sorrow for the losses incurred in
war was an oblique gesture to the 2,395 servicemen killed the day Japanese
warplanes attacked Pearl Harbor just after dawn on Dec. 7, 1941. Of the 21 ships
sunk or damaged in the attack, the worst losses occurred on the battleship
Arizona, which lost 1,177 men, most of whom were buried alive in the ship's
sunken hull.

Initial plans for Emperor Akihito's two-week tour of the United States had
included a stop at the Arizona memorial, an arching white structure built atop
the ship's remains that seems to float above the harbor itself. But objections
from Japan's nationalist right wing, which has long argued that the attack was a
justifiable response to an American war embargo, made the government shy away
from that hugely symbolic site.

Instead, Emperor Akihito and his wife, Empress Michiko, accompanied by the
former Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, the Japanese Ambassador to Washington and
a handful of other prominent Japanese political figures visited the volcanic
crater known here as the "Punch Bowl" because of its geological shape.

Heavy Price of War

The Punch Bowl Cemetery, just a few miles away from Pearl Harbor, commemorates
38,000 war dead from World War II, Korea and Vietnam. It includes the names of
18,093 soldiers who were missing in action or lost at sea during the protracted
fighting of World War II. Japanese officials have been saying for weeks that the
site better represents the total cost of the World War II and the price of war
in general. They have tried to depict the Emperor's visit to the cemetery as a
broad gesture of shared sadness over that conflict.

But at several stops throughout the Emperor's 16-day tour of 11 American cities,
groups of protesters have demanded a formal statement of apology from the
Emperor for atrocities committed by Japanese troops in World War II. Several
hundred protesters met the Emperor's motorcade in Washington. And at other
stops, including Atlanta, New York City and San Francisco, well-organized groups
of Chinese-Americans have met the Imperial entourage calling for formal
apologies for World War II and shouting reminders about atrocities in China.

No such protests marred the quiet homage to war dead this morning. After radio
stations spent days warning Hawaiians that the site would be difficult to enter
and allowed for only minimal parking, only about 100 people showed up to observe
the Emperor and Empress as they walked along a red carpet toward a stone
memorial inscribed, "In these graves are recorded the names of Americans who
gave their lives in the service of their country and whose earthly resting place
is known only to God."

The Emperor approached the memorial with Gene E. Castagnetti, a former marine
wearing a crew-cut who now runs the memorial. As a member of the color guard
followed bearing the Japanese flag, Emperor Akihito bent to place a white and
yellow wreath at the base of the granite monument. Then, he bowed for nearly a
minute as the group observed a moment of silence. As he slowly regained his
normal posture, buglers played echo taps. One bugler standing atop a tall
memorial to the north began to play. Another on a similar memorial etched with
names to the south followed beats behind.

The ceremony closed as the Fleet Marine Force Pacific Band from the Kaneohe
Marine Corps base played the haunting Japanese melody "Sakura, Sakura," a song
about cherry blossoms. Then, as their majesties returned to their limousine,
just 20 minutes after their arrival, four cannons at the western end of the
cemetery sounded a final 21-gun salute, filling the air with smoke and sulfur.

Francis Damon, an 83-year-old Army veteran who was a civilian at the time of the
attack but later joined the Marines, joined about 50 people clustered beneath a
banyon tree to one side. Wearing his old military uniform and watching every
detail from afar, he said he still remembers the attack vividly and that he
attended the brief ceremony partly for his Japanese wife who is hospitalized.

Mr. Damon, like many others at the Punchbowl, said he believed the Emperor
should have gone to Pearl Harbor as a gesture of reconciliation and peace. "It
would have been a good idea," he said. "He's promoting peace."

Younger Americans seemed befuddled by the dispute. One member of the Marine
Corps band said he had heard nothing of the dispute and had no opinion about it.
But Lance Corp. Bradley Niblock, a trombone player, said he agreed with the
Japanese Government. "This is where the people from Pearl Harbor were buried,"
he said. "So it is really as important as Pearl Harbor."

Several families brought several generations to the quiet commemoration.
Shigeyki Shinsato, a 63-year-old Hawaiian of Japanese descent stood watching
with his 17-year-old daughter.

Mr. Shinsato said the war would never be put behind for those who served in it
but that Emperor Akihito should not have to carry either the blame or
responsibility for it. "He had nothing to do with Pearl Harbor," he said. His
daughter, Emily, said she had come because she simply wanted to see the Emperor.
The two countries, she said, should just forget about apologies and keep their
thoughts on the broader tragedies of war. "We did some tragic things, too, with
dropping the atomic bomb on Hiroshima," she said.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              307 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Japanese Graduates Finding Few Jobs

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 39;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 24


Ayae Hazama, who will graduate next March from a junior college, has already
written to 180 companies seeking a job. She has approached some companies three
times to impress them with her zeal. Most days she misses classes because she
has heard that if she is not home when a company calls, she will not get a
second chance.

But so far, the 20-year-old Miss Hazama has been granted only one interview, and
no job offers. "I'll take anything," she said.

These are trying times for Japanese students. Only a few years ago students
could look forward to a plethora of job offers promising steady pay increases
and, often, lifetime security.

But as Japan's economic slump continues, new graduates are finding that they
are, in effect, the victims of the country's lifetime employment system. Needing
to reduce their work forces but unable to discharge employees, Japanese
companies are cutting back sharply on hiring.

The Government's Management and Coordination Agency estimated that 150,000
students who graduated in March had not found jobs by graduation time, becoming
what are known here as "ronin," a term once used to describe samurai warriors
without a master. They accounted for 12.1 percent of all job-seeking graduates,
the highest percentage since the Government began keeping track in 1984.

This year, various surveys indicate, hiring will drop further.

The Toyota Motor Corpation will hire 1,120 graduates this year, down 40 percent
from last year and only one-quarter of the peak of 4,460 in 1991. The Matsushita
Electric Industrial Company is cutting hiring by 40 percent, to 500 people, the
lowest level since 1979. The Mazda Motor Corporation plans no new hires.

The problem is particularly acute for women, who have long been largely confined
to clerical jobs and are usually the first people discharged when times turn
tough. Some major companies, notably the Mitsubishi Corporation and Nippon Life
Insurance, have said they will hire no women for clerical positions this year.

The influx into the work force of jobless graduates could lead to a swelling of
Japan's unemployment rate, which is now only 2.8 percent. But many ronin do not
show up in the unemployment figures because they do not declare that they are
seeking jobs, preferring instead to travel or go to graduate school.

Because companies like to hire only new graduates, some students who have not
found a job as graduation approaches opt to stay in school another year.

"If you have already graduated, you do not belong to the new graduate category,
and they will not offer you the kind of job they offer to new graduates," said a
student who is deliberately spending a fifth year at Meiji University.

But the tight job market could help companies that have traditionally found it
tough to recruit here.

Silver Lining for Small Companies

In a nation where personal status is linked to one's company, students have
flocked to the largest Japanese companies, which offer the highest pay, the most
prestige and lifetime employment. This tradition is one reason Japan has not
developed the entrepreneurial culture found in the United States.

But now, smaller Japanese companies are getting many good applicants. Foreign
companies with offices in Japan, which are less prestigious for Japanese and do
not offer lifetime employment, are also benefiting. "We've been able to raise
the caliber of people we've been able to bring in," said Brian T. Taylor,
chairman of the employment practices committee of the American Chamber of
Commerce in Japan.

Because a graduate tends to join one company for his or her entire career, a lot
rides on the hiring process here. And recruiting is much more regimented than in
the United States, culminating on April 1 each year, when companies hold
welcoming ceremonies for their new crop.

For engineering and science graduates, who are in highest demand, job hunting is
the easiest. Japan's major companies inform each of the major universities how
many students they want. Professors then decide which students to recommend to
which companies. Sometimes, the students also have some say in their future.

Graduates in liberal arts fields seek general white-collar jobs and are more on
their own.

More than 300 of the largest companies subscribe to a "gentlemen's agreement" in
which they promise to delay contact with students until July 1 of their senior
year and not to offer jobs until October. This is meant to allow seniors to
attend classes. But with each company afraid of lagging behind the others, the
agreement is barely observed.

Wearing the 'Recruit Suit'

Job hunters can be spotted easily because almost all wear the same "recruit
suit" -- for women, a white blouse, navy blue jacket and skirt and plain black
shoes; for men, a navy blue suit, white shirt and diagonally striped tie. The
idea is not to show one's individuality, but rather one's ability to conform to
the group, a trait that is valued in Japan.

"My teacher said you can wear anything that fits, but I feel secure in wearing
what everyone else is wearing," said Kaori Isozaki, a student.

Most companies pay scant attention to academic records or a student's
experience, preferring to train new recruits themselves. Often, students sign on
with a company without knowing what their jobs will be.

Postcards Are Clipped

Students usually start their job hunts in December of their junior year by
clipping postcards in recruiting magazines and sending them to companies to
obtain employment information. This year, Hitachi Ltd., one of the most popular
employers, received 65,000 postcards for only 100 administrative positions.

Receiving the company information is vital because it is often accompanied by
invitations to company seminars, which serve initially to screen job seekers.

Another route into the company is through contact with what the Japanese call
O.B.'s, or "old boys," who are alumni of one's college. Employers send the
O.B.'s to their former universities to maintain relationships with professors,
scout for students and screen applicants. Hitachi annually dispatches 400 to 500
such employees for campus visits.

A job hunter might have to get past several O.B.'s, starting with the youngest
and working up, before winning a coveted interview with the personnel
department.

The recruiting system can be difficult for women and other outsiders, especially
when jobs are scarce. The Labor Ministry found that only 75 percent of women
graduating from college last March had found jobs, compared with 92 percent of
men.

Most companies have been reluctant to hire women for career track positions,
fearing they will quit when they marry or have a baby. Rather, women are hired
as clerical "office ladies" and expected to quit after marriage. Some companies
will not hire single young women unless they live with their parents.

Foreign Applicants' Troubles

Foreign applicants can also have trouble. Huy Doan, an engineering student who
was born in Vietnam but attended college in Japan, said he had approached 80
companies unsuccessfully. "We try to be good Japanese," he said, "but however
hard we try, they still don't accept us."

During the boom years of the late 1980's, Japanese companies hired with abandon,
often trying to lock students into jobs while they were still college juniors.
The practice became known as "aotagai," or harvesting the rice while it is still
green. But now companies are heavily over-staffed, especially with general
white-collar workers.

Some economists say the current problems are temporary because the economy is
improving, and the number of people entering the work force is declining as a
result of Japan's low birth rate. Many companies expect an eventual shortage of
workers. But a new Labor Ministry report by an advisory group projects that a
surplus could persist through the decade.

The recruiting system is gradually changing in Japan, along with the lifetime
employment and seniority systems to which it is closely tied. There is more
job-hopping. There are more part-time workers. Some supermarket chains have
recently said they will hire twice a year instead of once, to be more flexible.

But change will be slow. Kotaro Muneoka, a personnel manager at Hitachi, said,
"As long as we can get good applicants, we have no intention of rejecting the
current system."

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ayae Hazama pouring over company records at the Tokyo Student
Employment Center, which the Japanese Government runs to help students find
jobs. Miss Hazama has written 180 companies, unsuccessfully so far. (Andrew
Pollack/The New York Times)(pg. 39)

Graph: "For Graduates, a Drop in Hiring" shows number of Japanese college
graduate recruits for selected businesses in Japan from 1991 to 1995. (Source:
Company reports)(pg. 41)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              308 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Stonewall Liberation: Who and How

BYLINE: By BEN BRANTLEY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


In the immortal words of carnival hucksters throughout the decades, they're all
here, they're all alive. Men in dresses! Women in neckties! Hustlers! Hippies!
Homosexuals!

In the wonderfully heady prologue to the En Garde Arts production of "Stonewall:
Night Variations," the play's director and author, Tina Landau, and its
designer, James Schuette, turn Pier 25 in lower Manhattan into a boisterous
freak show for the audience to wander through. It speaks volumes about the
perception of gay men and lesbians in the late 1960's. The setting is Gay World,
a retrospective theme park that recalls the days when Greenwich Village was a
mecca for misfits, a place for tourists to gawk at girlish boys, boyish girls
and other exotic species in their natural habitat.

The proceedings are overseen by a bald-headed barker in a wedding dress (Joseph
Mahan), an aggressively epicene fantasy out of Genet, who tells us we have
arrived at "the edge of the city, the place where queers are kept." Beyond him,
Pier 25 is a hallucinogenic swirl of sideshow attractions.

These include a black drag queen selling more than kisses; a James Dean-like
female boxer angrily swatting a punching bag; a professorial-looking man,
surrounded by pictures of Judy Garland, cowering anxiously in a chair. They are
all, in a sense, imprisoned, confined to platforms, booths, cramped wooden boxes
and white-picket-fence or wire cages.


Such is the ingeniously metaphoric preface to a play about liberation. What
follows, on a vast open-air stage that stretches into the Hudson, tells the
story of how each of the characters introduced in the carnival is sprung from
social captivity in June of 1969 by the fabled Stonewall uprising.

Alas, sideshow spiels traditionally promise more than they can deliver, and
"Stonewall" only confirms that rule. Ms. Landau's sprawling, unwieldy play has
isolated moments of theatrical magic, and it's often gorgeous to look at. But it
seldom reaches the exhilarating heights of its curtain raiser.

It's certainly not for a lack of ingredients. "Stonewall" features roughly 60
performers (including a choir of androgynous angels), original anthemlike songs
by Ricky Ian Gordon, moody film by Jennie Livingston (the director of "Paris Is
Burning") and an oceanic, sand-floored set by Mr. Schuette that makes ingenious
use of such site-specific leftovers as the steel scaffolding from a golf driving
range.

Ms. Landau correctly takes a democratic view of the epochal uprising, which was
started by a police raid on the Stonewall Inn, presenting it as a multiplicity
of tales of the oppressed. The question of which of the characters, loosely
inspired by people associated with Stonewall, actually started the melee is left
unanswered.


It could have been Angelina (Sharon Scruggs), a cross-dressing lesbian who is
humiliatingly frisked by cops; Wanda (Tyrone Mitchell Henderson), an Amazonian
drag queen; Francis (Michael Malone), a world-weary hustler having an affair
with a policeman; Trish (Theresa McCarthy), a closeted, left-wing photographer;
Eliot (Bruce Katzman), a buttoned-down, middle-aged man who had undergone
aversion therapy, or Matt (Steven Skybell) and Howie (Barney O'Hanlon), a
Vietnam veteran and callow small-town escapee, who take strength from their
new-found love.

It doesn't matter, of course. The Stonewall legacy, as one character points out,
is not "in the facts but the mythology." The problem is Ms. Landau simply has
far too much of everything: too many stories; too many themes, from the problems
gay men have committing to one partner to the changing nature of political
activism in America, and too many oracular commentators.

The fact that the characters are necessarily shaped by a generic sociological
shorthand is less troubling than the haziness of focus. So much is happening on
every part of the immense set that when the actual rebellion occurs, its impact
is oddly diffused. The director may be operating from W. H. Auden's premise that
great events tend to occur "anyhow in a corner," but it's not a point of view
that fosters dramatic momentum.


Ms. Landau's text and lyrics -- which borrow from the works of Jean Genet, Walt
Whitman, Langston Hughes, Andy Warhol and others -- and Mr. Gordon's
other-worldly music are sometimes stirring, but too often gushingly
inspirational. In the final ensemble number, members of the cast step forward to
speak the names of famous gay men and lesbians, glowing with a fervid pride.

That glow is what the evening is all about. And if Ms. Landau cheats her actors
of rich characterizations, many of them are still able to create movingly heroic
cameos. Mr. Henderson, Mr. Katzman, Mr. Skybell and, particularly, Ms. Scruggs
(whose bluesy love song is the play's musical high point) are all memorable.

So is some of Ms. Landau's choreography, which at its best suggests an electric
blend of Devo and "West Side Story." The night I saw the show there was a
sunset-lighted moment during the opening dance number when the sky behind the
stage was the color of a bruised peach and the show's epic cast of characters
fell into a perfectly synchronized harmony that also acknowledged the tensions
among them.

The Greenwich Village of 1969 seemed to come to life, in all its motley variety,
in some surreal, trans-historical heaven. "We are living art in the making,"
says one character in "Stonewall." For that moment, the line rang true.



Stonewall, Night Variations

Written and directed by Tina Landau; original music by Ricky Ian Gordon; film
segments by Jennie Livingston; set by James Schuette; costumes by Elizabeth
Fried; lighting by Brian Aldous; sound by John Gromada and Chris Todd;
production stage manager, Stacey-Jo Marine; production manager, Michael
Casselli. Executive producer, Anne Hamburger; managing director and associate
producer, Karen Dalzell. Presented by En Garde Arts. At Pier 25 on West Street,
near Laight Street.

Carnival Barker . . . Joseph Mahan
Francis Sinclair . . . Michael Malone
Angel Leader . . . Jim Mahady
Wanda N. Price . . . Tyrone Mitchell Henderson
Geneva . . . Camilia Sanes
Angelina (Chuck) Romano . . . Sharon Scruggs
Matt Branfield . . . Steven Skybell
Howie Raskin . . . Barney O'Hanlon
Trish Phillips . . . Theresa McCarthy
Eliot Shomberg . . . Bruce Katzman
Splits . . . Will Warren
Andy Warhol . . . Andrea Darriau
Ultra Violet . . . Stefanie Zadravec
Josie . . . Rita Menu
Queen of Queens . . . Michael St. Clair

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruce Katzman, in a suit, plays a man who has had aversion
therapy, and Jim Mahady, right, leads a choir. (Tom Brazil)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              309 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sins of the Fathers

BYLINE: By Serge Schmemann;   Serge Schmemann has been the bureau chief of The
New York Times in Bonn and in Moscow. He is currently on leave, working on a
book about Russia.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2222 words



THE WAGES OF GUILT
Memories of War in Germany and Japan.
By Ian Buruma.
330 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.

"THERE are no dangerous peoples; there are only dangerous situations, which are
the result, not of laws of nature or history, or of national character, but of
political arrangements," Ian Buruma writes toward the end of "The Wages of
Guilt," his searching voyage through the war memories in Germany and Japan. His
conclusion seems disarmingly reasonable and calm after the stormy debates and
intense questions Mr. Buruma has guided us through: "Was genocide a product of
some ghastly flaw in German culture, the key to which might be found in the
sentimental proverbs, the cruel fairy tales, the tight leather shorts?" "Could
one trust a nation [Japan] whose official spokesmen still refused to admit that
their country had been responsible for starting a war?"

With Mr. Buruma we visit the ovens of Auschwitz and the Peace Park at Hiroshima;
we are plunged into the brutal debates between German conservatives who yearn
for "normality" and liberals who seek expiation; we follow the single-minded
legal battle of the frail Japanese historian Ienaga Saburo against a Government
intent on sanitizing his candid versions of the war. It is an extraordinary and
sometimes painful journey. In the end there are bound to be those who disagree
with Mr. Buruma's identification of flawed "political arrangements" as the prime
culprit in the great atrocities of our century, if only because passions are
still too high for so starkly simple an explanation. But it will not be because
of any shortfall or evasion in his work.

A prominent contributor to publications like The Times Literary Supplement and
The New York Review of Books, Mr. Buruma is a journalist who reports all sides:
those of the survivors, the veterans, the politicians, the left-wing pacifists
and right-wing nationalists, the judges and the judged. "The Wages of Guilt" is
subtitled "Memories of War in Germany and Japan." But it is really far more, an
exploration of the many and varied ways in which cataclysm has shaped national
identity in our century.

I remember well how forcefully the legacy of the past hung over all stages of
German reunification in those dramatic days when the Berlin wall came down:
Could Germany be trusted to be whole again? Was it fated by debilitating guilt
to remain an economic giant but a political midget? And as Mr. Buruma contends
in his introduction, the "traumas and memories" of the last world war endure to
a remarkable degree. Only recently, shamed by the eruptions of neo-fascism in
eastern Germany, the German Government proposed a law that would make it a crime
to deny the Holocaust. And in Japan, a 71-year-old justice minister was
politically savaged in May for saying that the Nanjing Massacre of 1937, the
prime symbol of Japanese savagery during the war in Asia, was a "fiction."

The import of Mr. Buruma's work is not limited to the losers of World War II.
The very idea that a nation can and should be held accountable for its history,
that a people can collectively experience remorse, guilt or atonement, is one of
our age. We may question whether the psychological processes of an individual
can be applied to a group, but the atrocities committed in this century in the
name of a nation simply cannot be explained or expiated through the
identification and punishment of specific culprits. The Holocaust set a new
standard of evil, "crime against humanity," requiring not only the punishment of
those who actively perpetrated it and the chastening of those who silently
condoned it, but also the atonement of an entire people.

There are those, Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn most recently, who argue that Russia
and the other nations emerging from Communism cannot become whole without
atonement, that seven decades of terror and lies cannot be forgotten, even in
the name of national peace. "National reconciliation is a great thing and much
needed," Mr. Solzhenitsyn argued on his return to Russia in May, "but there
cannot be national reconciliation without spiritual cleansing." Closer to home,
our own soul-searching over Vietnam suggests that national trauma is not the
exclusive province of former dictatorships.

BUT it is not Mr. Buruma's purpose to psychoanalyze or philosophize, nor to
equate the burdens of Germany and Japan; on the contrary, he underscores his
belief that the atrocities committed by the Japanese Army are not comparable to
the premeditated, systematic killing of Jews in Germany. What he does with each
country is to trace through concrete examples and facts how the trauma of a lost
war and the legacy of savagery have determined not only the postwar politics of
Germany and Japan -- the governing structures imposed on them by the victors --
but also their identities, their attitudes, their behavior as nations.

Blending essay and reportage and drawing on an impressive familiarity with the
cultures of Germany and Japan (where, he tells us, he spent much of the 1970's
and 80's), Mr. Buruma follows his investigation wherever it leads him -- to the
actual sites of massacres, atrocities and trials, to the homes of politicians,
campaigners and intellectuals, to schools and parliaments, seeking everywhere to
peel away the accumulated layers of myth and forgetfulness. He questions even
his own reactions at Auschwitz: "To visit the site of suffering, any description
of which cannot adequately express the horror, is upsetting, not because one
gets closer to knowing what it was actually like to be a victim, but because
such visits stir up emotions one cannot trust. . . . And yet the imagination is
the only way to identify with the past."

IN Japan, he resents the transformation of Hiroshima into a mecca of "Japanese
victimhood," at which professions of a special dedication to peace become mute
indictments of Japan's wartime enemies. "No Japanese will be so crass as to come
up to you and say: 'You did this, you are guilty of mass murder.' But when
schoolchildren approach you, prompted by their teachers, to ask what you think
of peace, you feel that some gesture of atonement, or at least a word of regret,
is demanded."

His quest takes Mr. Buruma to the site of the Warsaw ghetto, to Nanjing in
China, to the tiny island of Okunojima, where the Japanese manufactured toxic
gas, to the Wannsee Villa in Berlin, where the "final solution" was initiated,
to eastern Germany, where he describes "the peculiar state of innocence" created
by more than 40 years of propaganda that depicted all East Germans as heroic
resisters against Nazism, and only the West Germans as perpetrators.

Mr. Buruma depicts those who became entangled, deliberately or by accident, in
the elaborate web of taboos, conventions and neuroses created by the past. There
is Nozue Kenji, a former part-time worker who has made it his life's goal,
despite 30 years of threats and harassment, to piece together the Hanaoka
Incident of July 30, 1945, when hundreds of Chinese slave workers in the town of
Hanaoka tried to escape and were rounded up, tortured and often beaten to death.
There is Philipp Jenninger, the president of the West German Parliament, whose
clumsy but well-meaning speech on the 50th anniversary of Kristallnacht
attempted to re-create the mind-set of the Germans at the time of the 1938
pogrom, touching off a political storm in which he was forced to resign.
"Jenninger, in his stumbling, mumbling way, had walked straight into this
postwar German battle zone," writes Mr. Buruma. "Entrenched on one side were
those who wanted Germany to be normal, graced by late birth, not guilty; and on
the other were those who had made Auschwitz part of their identity. In the
event, Jenninger was shot down by both sides, for talking about too much guilt
and not appearing guilty enough."

Mr. Buruma explores the literature and art; the dilemma of a society that
believes with Theodor Adorno that "it is barbarous to write a poem after
Auschwitz," and yet knows it must. It was finally the American television
mini-series "Holocaust," first shown in Germany in January 1979, that, Mr.
Buruma writes, broke the taboo against depicting Auschwitz, affecting millions
of West Germans in a way nothing they had produced had ever done.

He can be ruthless with kitsch or historical amnesia, but he is equally ruthless
in rejecting the postwar stereotypes -- the comic-book German with a monocle who
always said, "Ve have vays of making you talk," or a Japan conditioned by what
some anthropologists have called a "shame culture" and therefore incapable of
feeling guilt. Mr. Buruma's is not the morality of the victor. He acknowledges
from the outset that he is unsure how he himself might have behaved in the
extreme circumstances of war, desperation and repression. "I read piles of books
about Dutch Maquis and silk-scarfed R.A.F. pilots," he tells us of his youth in
postwar Holland. "And yet the frightened man who betrayed to save his life, who
looked the other way, who grasped the wrong horn of a hideous moral dilemma,
interested me more than the hero. This is no doubt partly because I fear I would
be much like that frightened man myself. And partly because, to me, failure is
more typical of the human condition than heroism."

It is from this vantage point, of a person who will never know whether he would
have been a collaborator, victim or hero had he been born a few years earlier
and a few miles to the east, that Mr. Buruma draws his calm, finely crafted
conclusions. He finds an "irritating infantilism" throughout postwar Japanese
culture: "the ubiquitous chirping voices of women pretending to be girls; the
Disneylandish architecture of Japanese main streets." Yet he is not prepared to
reduce Japan to General MacArthur's image of "a nation of 12-year-olds." He
writes: "I do not believe that the Japanese are congenitally a childish people,
any more than I believe they are an intrinsically dangerous people."

Nor can he condemn the Germans as somehow intrinsically defective and dangerous.
Yes, he declares, the Holocaust was a German crime. But it
was a different Germany. "To assume that Auschwitz was caused by some awful flaw
in the German identity, just as a streak of collective German genius produced
Goethe and Brahms, is to perpetuate a kind of neurotic narcissism: at best a
constant worry that the Germans are a dangerous people, at worst a perverse
pride in an almost tribal capacity for sublime music and unspeakable crimes."

Germany is no longer the Germany of Hitler's hysterical rallies, and Japan no
longer worships a divine emperor, he writes. "Human nature has not changed, but
politics have. In both countries, the rascals can be voted out. Those who choose
to ignore that, and look instead for national marks of Cain, have learned
nothing from the past." What Mr. Buruma offers is not an absolution, but a faith
that there is no fatally or permanently flawed nation, that societies can be
restored to health through openness and time. "A 'normal' society, a society not
haunted by ghosts, cannot be achieved by 'normalizing' history, or by waving
cross and garlic," Mr. Buruma says. "More the other way around: when society has
become sufficiently open and free to look back, from the point of view neither
of the victim nor of the criminal, but of the critic, only then will the ghosts
be laid to rest."



REDUCED TO SILENCE

Though Ian Buruma grew up in the Netherlands as part of Europe's first postwar
generation, it was during his travels to Japan that the idea began to take shape
for "The Wages of Guilt," his account of the attitudes of contemporary Germans
and Japanese toward World War II. "I had for many years wanted to write a book
on how the Japanese saw their recent history," recalled Mr. Buruma, who lived in
Japan for six years during the 1970's and returns there two or three times a
year with his wife, who is Japanese. "Then I began to find out that an awful lot
of Japanese nationalism and militarism in prewar Japan had come from Germany. So
I was interested in going back to the source and seeing how in Germany people
thought about similar things and how they thought about Japan.

"The other, more personal angle," Mr. Buru ma said in a telephone interview from
his home in London, "was to come to terms with the ideas one grew up with:
having an enemy on one's borders, of a people's being singled out as being
particularly bad or prone to do bad things."

In exploring the differences between Japanese and German memories, Mr. Buruma,
who is 43, discusses the German idea of betroffen, which roughly translated
means "to be reduced to silence" by "a feeling of guilt -- to be made
speechless."

"When people in Germany speak about being betroffen," said the author, who has
written several books about Asia, "they're not really talking about the invasion
of Norway -- they're talking about Auschwitz and everything that's related to
it. There isn't really an exact analogy in Japan. The Japanese can be just as
betroffen as the Germans. But you see it less because in Japan the war is
remembered much more as a misguided military conflict and not [in terms of] a
nation responsible for a huge and horrendous crime."   SCOTT VEALE

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ian Buruma. (JERRY BAUER)

Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              310 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TALKING ABOUT THE MEDIA CIRCUS

BYLINE: ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6804 words


The news bomb: in the last few years, the sheer amount of news disseminated to
the public has exploded. In 1979, C-Span began broadcasting gavel-to-gavel
proceedings in the House of Representatives. A year later, the Iran hostage
crisis prompted ABC to start its new "Nightline" news discussion program and CNN
began its startling growth into a global news service. Then the networks started
cloning their versions of "60 Minutes" and "20/20." This past television season,
there were 600 minutes of prime-time news magazine programs on the major
networks each week. And that doesn't include tabloid TV shows like "Hard Copy."

The explosive growth in news outlets has loosed an equally explosive growth in
the appetite for news, or "news" product. More than appetite; ravenous hunger.
As Nicholas von Hoffman once wrote of the press: "Butchers make sausage.
Newspapers make public affairs." Has that hunger driven the media out of
control?

In recent months, the media, including newspapers like this one, have pressed
story after story on the public's attention -- the Bobbitts, the Menendez case,
Tonya and Nancy, Whitewater -- one melodramatized event succeeding another on
the national stage. The news cycle spins faster and faster. The death of Richard
M. Nixon is followed by long, thoughtful obituaries and generous appraisal of
his character; then by instant revisionist criticism of the generosity, and
then, within three days, re-revisionist media critiques of its larger
performance. Then it's on to Paula Jones, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, D-Day and
the tragedy involving O. J. Simpson.

Does all this news, and "news," create a new kind of irresponsibility,
destructive of decent values? Or does it instead reflect the traditionally
raucous behavior of the press in a democracy, now refracted by many more media
lenses? The New York Times Magazine convened a panel of participants in the
daily media marketplace to reflect on these issues. What follows is an edited
transcript of their remarks, compressed from nearly three hours of discussion.

The moderator is Anna Quindlen, a New York Times columnist. The participants
are: Barbara Ehrenreich, an essayist for Time and the author of "The Worst Years
of Our Lives"; Jeff Greenfield, a newspaper columnist and correspondent for
"Nightline" on ABC; Michael Kinsley, co-host of "Crossfire" on CNN; Jerry
Nachman, the former editor of The New York Post; Lesley Stahl, a co-editor of
"60 Minutes" on CBS, and George Stephanopoulos, senior adviser to President
Clinton for policy and strategy.

ANNA QUINDLEN: We've been hearing a lot lately -- from commentators, in
conversation, in all kinds of public discourse -- that the press has run amok,
that the media are overly harsh, that we're in love with anything that smacks of
prurient interest. Have we changed or have the demands and standards of the
public changed? Jeff, do you want to start off?

JEFF GREENFIELD: I think that two things have happened. The first is a general
unbuttoning of American culture: every institution, from television and the
movies to the most respectable magazines and newspapers, is dealing with matters
that they never would have dealt with four or five years ago. They used to
censor movies. Every movie I went to as a kid was previewed by a licensing
board. Now everything has loosened up. You walk down the street past a newsstand
and all you have to do is look at the covers -- never mind what's inside.

The second thing is the difficulty of insulating yourself from prurience. In the
1950's, one of the most popular magazines in America was Confidential, which
routinely published articles about the sex lives of celebrities. It outed
closeted gays; it did really repugnant things, but if you were "respectable" you
didn't have to pay any attention. I think what's happened now is that a lot of
the most appalling stuff is right in your face -- as easy to reach as a flick of
the channel. You can turn off an evening news program and you're right into
"Hard Copy" or Montel or Sally Jessy.

 QUINDLEN: Are those shows setting the standard? Are Montel and Sally Jessy in
some way setting the standard for ABC News?

GREENFIELD: No. A generation ago, the three network newscasts all read the
evening news at 7 o'clock on the East and West Coasts and there was no other
alternative in most places. There were black-and-white reruns of "Hopalong
Cassidy" on the independent stations.

MICHAEL KINSLEY: Surely Sally Jessy Raphael and shows like that put a lot of
pressure on ABC News. You wouldn't deny that.

GREENFIELD: No, but I'm not sure that's a serious thing.

LESLEY STAHL: I think it's a very serious thing. One of the reasons why there's
so much "tabloid news" in the mainstream is because the public wants it. News
judgments are being made on the basis of polls. For the last 20 years, we've
been heading more and more in that direction, and not just the networks. Time,
Newsweek, the newspapers: Everybody is asking, "What does the public want?"

GEORGE STEPHANOPOULOS: I agree that the tabloids don't set the standards, but I
think they weaken the resistance of the mainstream media.  Let me give you two
examples. First, very early in the campaign, before the Gennifer Flowers story
came out, there was actually an article in The Star [a supermarket tabloid] the
week before that mentioned it. We were flying up to Boston and The Star had come
out of the fax machine.

Most of the mainstream media were still being pretty good; they knew about it,
but they weren't going to ask about it. Then we landed in Boston and we got to
the hotel and there was a Fox News camera waiting in the lobby. Fox, Rupert
Murdoch -- who's tied to all the tabloids -- and The London Sunday Times come
in. Fox asks the question and the President -- at that time, the Governor -- is
forced to answer the question and then all of a sudden it's in play. Once it's
in play, it's more or less fair game for the mainstream media to answer it one
way or the other, so that by putting accusations in play in a way that they
wouldn't otherwise be, you get a hook, whether it's the denial or the damage
control efforts to prevent the tabloids. . . .

BARBARA EHRENREICH: But why didn't that happen before? That by itself could have
happened before.

STEPHANOPOULOS: I think it goes to what Jeff was talking about before: the
proliferation of media. I don't think the attacks have necessarily changed, but
certainly the intensity and the volume of media give more outlets for more
attacks, and then you have more people buzzing about things. I can't tell you
the number of times we were forced to deal with accusations simply because
people said, "There must be something there, because everybody's talking about
it." And this is created by people. . . .

STAHL: We have the same pressure in a way that you do, because when it becomes
such a loud buzz, even though we may not want to go with it or deal with it, we
get pushed. . . .

KINSLEY: I think the standard is not what you think is politically relevant as a
journalist, but what you think your readers or your viewers would think
politically relevant. It's not up to you to say, "Oh, I can be trusted with this
information, but I don't think my audience could be trusted with this
information so therefore I'm going to deny it to them."

When I was invited to the White House for an interview, the President said that
people were attacking him in an organized way. And then he was asked what he
meant by "organized" and the conversation drifted off. George, do you and the
President and the people in the White House think that President Clinton's
problems with these Paula Jones-type stories are the result primarily of
organized political attacks on our leader?

STEPHANOPOULOS: Yes, that certainly is a factor -- and so what? Again, let
people decide if there is organized political activity here, not simply
information we happened to get from unknown sources.

QUINDLEN: Lesley said that to some extent our job is to satisfy readers' and
viewers' desires. If they want a steady diet of Joey Buttafuoco, Tonya Harding
and Lorena Bobbitt, why shouldn't we give it to them?

EHRENREICH: Well, it's very market-driven. There's a lot of market pressure. You
have to have viewers or readers, and you have to please them in some way with
what you're giving them. I think in some ways it's sort of wrong to look at news
as merely information. It's also entertainment.

JERRY NACHMAN: I think there's a solution. I'm frequently asked to be on
"Nightline" to defend so-called tabloid behavior, and invariably it's because
"Nightline" wants to do the Buttafuoco story or the Leona Helmsley story or the
Trump story, and rather than the producer saying let's do the story, they do a
story on how the tabloids do it.

STAHL: Or let's do a medical story about reattaching a penis.

GREENFIELD: It's like the old Cecil B. DeMille movies where for an hour and a
half women were raped and they had no clothes on and then in the last minutes
God came down to punish all the people doing it.

NACHMAN: It's like arresting the shark in "Jaws" for serial murder and bringing
him to fish court for arraignment and having him blame the plaintiff, saying
"They made me do it." Here's the solution: Don't do those stories. Leave them
for the popular press. You guys just cover the Bosnias and we won't have this
problem.

STAHL: I would say O.K. because I work on a [television] news magazine, but my
colleagues in prime time tell me that they have what they call minute-by-minute
tracking and if they're doing a story on a foreign leader, for instance, the
audience goes away and then they click back to see if the next story is more
interesting. On "48 Hours," one of their lowest-rated shows ever was the fall of
the Berlin wall.

NACHMAN: Well, let's talk about your prime-time colleagues. As Barbara says,
it's not just news; it's entertainment. You see the hand-held cameras skulking
up the driveway to the house where the mass killings took place. My argument is
with the hypocrisy. Why not agree that we want to cover these stories that are
compelling and stop saying "We're not the tabloids" or "The tabloids made us do
it?"

QUINDLEN: In other words, the Bobbitts don't really tell us anything about
American society, feminism, marriage or domestic violence. . . .

STEPHANOPOULOS: We're going to sit around the table and talk about the problems
and tomorrow nothing's going to change. It's part of the ritual. It puts a
little pressure on; everybody feels a little bit better. . . .

GREENFIELD: Kind of like a town meeting.

QUINDLEN: Michael, if you didn't have to worry about market standards, if you
just had to worry about journalistic standards, would you have written about the
Tonya Harding story?

KINSLEY: I don't know -- what you call market standards could be called
democracy. If you're giving the people what they want, I don't see anything
necessarily so awful about it.

GREENFIELD: What we're groping for here, I think, is that there are some sleazy
stories that are about more than sleaze and then there are others. For instance,
in the midst of the Tonya Harding insanity, which in my view was a story that
threw no light on nothing, nobody, ABC busted into its daytime programming to
carry live the press conference of the lawyer of her ex-husband. Now, you can
strain real hard and say this throws new light on the need for greater security
at ice rinks.

KINSLEY: Are you saying that this press conference was less worthy than what
goes on "Nightline?"

GREENFIELD: I'm saying that when you interrupt that kind of programming for a
press conference, it usually is about a Supreme Court nomination, something of
consequence.

QUINDLEN: Does a story have to be relevant to be a good story? Does it have to
tell us something larger? I mean, I grew up in a business that said news was a
story that made you say, "Holy Cow!"

NACHMAN: Yes, I understand that standard. Look at Tonya and Nancy. It's a great
story: an act of crazed ambition run amok. But I think you'd have a hard time
turning Tonya Harding into Lady Macbeth.

EHRENREICH: There's a new standard. It used to be, get the scoop and be first.
Now you want to be 14th or 23d: "No, I didn't do it until after NBC did it and
ABC did it." You have to be the last one to do these stories and wear the badge
of purity.

NACHMAN: When I was editing The Post, I'd get calls from colleagues at
newspapers, whose names you would instantly recognize, wondering when and if we
were going to pop the "X" story. And I would ask, "Are you going to try do it
first?" And they would say, "No, we want to go the next day." There was a race
to see who would be first to go second. We had become the crash-test dummies of
American journalism: Slam into the wall, come out undead and have everyone say,
"Oh, good, let's pile on."

QUINDLEN: In other words, now we can write it.

I want to get to Paula Jones. Has the way that we cover so-called sleaze
stories, as we put it at this table, bled into the way we cover political
stories? Did the Bobbitts beget Paula Jones?

STEPHANOPOULOS: Here's how Tonya Harding begets Paula Jones. Tonya Harding rises
up in December, January, February. We all heard she got offered around $600,000:
some say more, some say less. And Paula Jones, who's been around for an awful
long time, never said a word for years. All of a sudden, in her sister's own
words, she smells money. You know that there's a certainty that if you are a
national figure, particularly if you're accusing the President of something
unseemly, you are going to make a lot of money -- not from a court case, which
she's very intelligently disavowed, but from television and book rights. And
Tonya Harding tells Paula Jones, "You, too, can get rich if you do this."

STAHL: But when the political stories come up -- and I'll go back to Gary Hart
on this one -- when the stories about womanizing pop up, the mainstream press
hasn't wanted to touch them, does everything in its power not to. You get sucked
in, forced to live with this story. . . .

NACHMAN: Excuse me, Gary Hart was broken by The Miami Herald.
STAHL: And The Miami Herald resisted it down to the last second; they didn't
want to follow it. The Gary Hart story was broken by a woman, as I understand
it, who kept calling The Miami Herald, saying over and over, "Gary's having an
affair with a woman named Rice, and she's going to be on his plane." After three
or four or five phone calls, the reporter finally said, "O.K., I'll go follow
her" -- and then, once he'd seen it with his own eyes, he was almost compelled
to report it. Same with Troopergate. Big fight over printing that at The L.A.
Times. Everyone knows how hard The Washington Post worked not to print the Paula
Jones story. There does come a point when a story is so "out there" that a news
organization is foolish if it doesn't; it's almost irresponsible if it doesn't.

KINSLEY: I have some sympathy for this idea that a rumor can become so
widespread that it has to be reported: the rumor is the story.

NACHMAN: The decision not to run a story can be just as suspect. It was largely
believed that in 1991 and '92 there was a concordat among certain reporters that
we would leave Bill Clinton's home life alone. Then the Gennifer Flowers story
pops; you have a real person coming forth with a name and a face and a tape. And
certain newspapers made the decision to downplay it. I understand that; but how
do you decide? You've got a bona fide accuser. . . .

STEPHANOPOULOS: . . . Who was paid to make the charge in a tabloid. . . .

NACHMAN: But it was so specious that the target of accusation called the
Governor of this state to apologize for something that was heard on the tape. .
. .

STEPHANOPOULOS: shown to be doctored afterward. . . .

NACHMAN: Well, I wouldn't have apologized if it were doctored. I'm not trying to
argue the whole case over again. But there were newspapers that said even though
this happened it was barely covered. It wasn't reported because it was sleazy,
even though it may have been very relevant and germane.

GREENFIELD: If Paula Jones had gone public in October 1992, everyone would have
said, "Look at the timing, just before the election." Now it's after the
election: what are we supposed to do?

But there's a more substantial point. I want to suggest that the feminist
movement has a lot to do with what's happening. Not that I mean it pejoratively,
but there used to be a boys' club in politics. When I got on my first campaign
plane in 1968 as a 24-year-old reporter, virtually the only women who went along
were secretaries and volunteer Kennedy girls. I was told by a reporter from a
mainstream organization, "Kid, just remember that whatever happens west of the
Potomac is never talked about East of the Potomac." And there was a definite
sense on that campaign plane that this was a road trip in the "Animal House"
sense.

Now along comes the women's movement and teaches us, argues as a principle, that
the personal is political. It doesn't matter if a guy votes right. It doesn't
matter if a guy is pro-choice. If he treats women in an abusive or in a casual
fleeting way, he's no good. The press is being asked to do something it neither
wanted to do when it was an all-boys' club nor is that well-equipped to do --
namely, deal with a whole set of issues that, if you came into journalism
trained to cover the SALT treaty, you're really very uncomfortable with.

KINSLEY: George, you would argue that if the charges aren't true, then they're
not newsworthy.

STEPHANOPOULOS: I would say, "Check it out before you put it on."

KINSLEY: But if they are true, should they be published?

STEPHANOPOULOS: The way it's being done, you can never tell the difference. . .
.

EHRENREICH: In other words, because of the way things work now, we rush to
judgment with individual snippets of information where once we waited to put the
snippets together.

EHRENREICH: I think there's a political element; it's striking how much more
gently Ronald Reagan was treated by the press. It wasn't a bimbo situation, but
things like claiming no state tax liabilities one year when he was Governor. He
was regarded as untouchable by the press.

STAHL: My experience was that the press did report everything about Reagan. They
called him the Teflon President for a reason. And for some Presidents --
unfortunately Jimmy Carter was one, all thumbs out there -- it sticks and sticks
and sticks. And this President is going to have that problem on the personal
side as long as he's President.

STAHL: Do you want me to tell an oft-repeated story? It was the end of '84 and I
did a rather long, critical piece summing up Reagan's campaign, how he was
trying to create amnesia in the public about his policies. And you would see him
at one campaign event after the next. While I was saying, "This is deceptive,"
he was cutting a ribbon on the inauguration of a nursing home and I said,
"Little would you know from this picture that Reagan cut the budget for nursing
home construction."

And you know what? They loved it. A senior official called me back and said:
"Great piece. Free media. The pictures were so powerful, so emotional, so
evocative that nobody heard you. We took the piece to a focus group and
everybody thought it was an ad for 'Morning in America.' " I was blatantly
manipulated.

NACHMAN: My own feeling is that your story shows a very adept White House staff
at work.

QUINDLEN: George, how come the Clinton White House can't do that?

STEPHANOPOULOS: Partly because I think that everybody has learned a lesson from
Reagan. Now when we try to set up an event, the presumption is against covering
it. Yesterday, the President signed a big expansion to Head Start -- didn't make
any networks. Last week, he signed Goals 2000, an education bill to set
standards for schools across the country -- no coverage. Yet there's a
presumption against covering it because it's an event.

KINSLEY: It's a phony event concocted to get news coverage.

STEPHANOPOULOS: It's an accomplishment, a promise kept. It is telling people
that we did what we said we would do.

STAHL: I think what we're all dancing around is that journalism hasn't caught up
with the technology we're using. You can throw a guy on the air live. You
haven't any thought, in your own mind, about what you're going to do once he
opens his mouth. We don't check anything out until it's out there. And once it's
out there, the talk show hosts get it and the tabloids get it and then we say,
"Oh my God, we're being forced to run that."

NACHMAN: This is my constant problem. I'm as concerned with who is the filter as
with what is being filtered. When a district attorney indicts someone, there's
no test that we put him through. It's an accusation; now it's a story. That's
why we see all this linkage between Anita Hill and Paula Jones. There was no due
process for Clarence Thomas. Anita Hill was not vetted by journalists before she
was put on the air. Once you start doing that, the problem becomes: "O.K., Anita
Hill, legitimate; we'll put her on television. Paula Jones, I don't know, she's
in it for the money. . . ."

KINSLEY: What's the press supposed to do, not cover Anita Hill?

NACHMAN: I agree that if you cover Anita Hill, then Paula Jones deserves the
same airing. There has been no test; there has been no reasonable suspicion;
there has been no probable cause. Someone has come forward and said, J'accuse.
There is some basic journalistic function that says what is out there. . . .

KINSLEY: That means that henceforth you're not going to apply a filter with
anyone who comes up and makes charges. You're going to let them go right on the
air. . . .

QUINDLEN: But aren't the filters being applied less and less often? When you
watch the President and his wife the day of the inauguration, greeting people on
C-Span, you can watch for five or six solid hours. There is no filter; you take
away this scrim that we call the press and bring events directly to the people.

GREENFIELD: Exactly. And one of the groups that was most enthusiastic about this
development was the Clinton White House. Why? Because they thought here was a
way for this incredibly talented political animal to jump over vicious, crabby
people like Lesley and Michael and myself and go directly to the people. I
remember Clinton's first trip to Washington; he did a trip to a Washington
neighborhood and there were no hordes of press behind him. He was going up to
people in the street, people who ran barbershops and community action centers,
and he made the enormously cutting remark: "You know why I've been ignoring the
press? Because I've got Larry King and I can go directly to the people." The
basic message was, "Hey, if we go unfiltered, then reporters like Kinsley and
Stahl won't be able to get in the way." And my feeling is that he who liveth by
the unfiltered message, dieth by the unfiltered message.

QUINDLEN: Did reporters turn around and think, "Well, if Bill Clinton wants to
play it that way, we're going to give him a hard time?"

KINSLEY: I think in a certain sense, yes. I think the hostility of the press
toward Clinton has been astonishing -- although not far surpassing the hostility
of the Clinton people toward the press. They're both phenomena that I didn't
predict. I thought it was going to be a grotesque honeymoon, which it hasn't
been at all.

QUINDLEN: Jeff, are we being harder on Clinton?

GREENFIELD: Yes, and I think there's a whole bending-over-backward aspect to our
coverage. Generationally, Clinton is more like we are; probably 80 percent of us
voted for him. The press really got tired of Bush by the end of four years. But
I also think -- and I'm glad George is here, so we're not talking about this
behind his back -- there was a very strong sense in the press even among people
who were very impressed by Clinton, who thought he was incredibly smart and
energetic, that here was a guy who really had a hard time giving you a straight
answer. He gave you this lawyerly, "I never broke the laws of this country."
"No, we're asking you if you ever smoked grass. It's no big deal: yes or no?"
Finally, when one reporter asked him the right question, he got the answer I'm
sure you wish he hadn't given.

QUINDLEN: George, did you guys make a series of mistakes that led us to the
level of distrust or animosity that seems to prevail now in the White House?

STEPHANOPOULOS: We could have done a better job courting the press. I think
there's no question that we've made stupid mistakes. But you can't turn that
into some sort of justification for a wealth of negative coverage. Here's a
perfect anecdote to illustrate the point. It happened in March and Whitewater
had hit fever pitch. That weekend, Time and Newsweek both went crazy. Time went
nuts. They cropped a picture of me on the cover, created a false impression that
something had happened. Newsweek printed a story that she didn't put up any
money on her investment, which was just made up; they had to apologize for it.
And by the end of that weekend, before any reader had actually seen the
magazine, the story was over, because there was a backlash.

KINSLEY: But the problem is that those stories caused the backlash. . . .

QUINDLEN: First the feeding frenzy begins, and feeding frenzy part two is "Let's
debunk."

GREENFIELD: The morning after.

KINSLEY: On "Crossfire," we did the Paula Jones story for two days, then the
media angle on the Paula Jones story, and then the legal angle. What's tomorrow?
The environmental angle?

QUINDLEN: Should we be ashamed of what we do?

NACHMAN: Sometimes yes and sometimes no. I don't know if it's what we do or how
we do it. There are nights when I wonder whether "Crossfire" and "McLaughlin
Group" aren't the 90's version of "All in the Family," with Meathead and Archie
and Edith replaced by John and Pat shrieking cultural, political and ethnic
cliches at each other. There's nothing terribly new about this. In the 20's and
30's, it was Fatty Arbuckle. In the 40's and 50's, it was, My God, Ingrid
Bergman is pregnant! A page-one story!

Also, the derivative nature of the business is a real problem. We're like
baseball players; we all rotate among the same places. The most horrifying thing
I discovered in my 20 years at CBS and NBC was that generally the executive
producers of the three evening newscasts exhale in glee when everyone's in bed
with the same story every night.

QUINDLEN: Jeff, do something for me -- convince me that we're better than ever
before.

GREENFIELD: Well, O.K. Diversity: I think that if you are interested in news,
and you are a model citizen, you have a chance to sit in front of your
television set, wired to basic cable, and get better and more diverse sources of
information at whatever length you want than you ever had before. If you watched
television at 7 o'clock in 1959 and 1963, you watched a news program -- and you
watched some real dreck. Well, now if you watch prime-time television, you've
got 60 other channels at the same time.

KINSLEY: You can also read, if you really want to be informed.

EHRENREICH: You can also argue that the skepticism of the press, which we did
not have before Vietnam and which so many people want to criticize about us, has
been a very positive thing. I think we should be even tougher.

GREENFIELD: Do you know what the proof is? I believe that the American
electorate has never been as informed as it is now. In the '92 election, the
average Joe really knew what Clinton's issues were versus Bush's. I was not one
of those journalists who thought it was bad form for Clinton to be on MTV and
Larry King. I thought it was a great political move and it was also wonderful in
terms of accessibility. I have covered a lot of elections in my life. I really
felt that in '92 people knew what they were voting for and whom they were voting
for.

EHRENREICH: I'd like to make another point, and that is that the TV news
magazines everybody likes to criticize so much are actually putting on more
serious pieces every week than we've ever had before. Every news magazine has
its tabloid piece, but also has its relatively serious piece that either relates
to something people care about or goes out and does a foreign leader and watches
its ratings go down. . . .

KINSLEY: Jerry was talking earlier about the hypocrisy of the media in deciding
what's a story and what's not. What about the hypocrisy of the viewers and the
readers? They say they don't like us; they're disgusted with the press for
covering all this sleaze, and then they create a market for it. That's why it
feeds the fire.

STAHL: Let's not forget the Nixon era and what the public said about the press,
and let's not forget what the public said about the press in the Reagan era. We
are going to be loathed and despised for one reason or another no matter what we
do. That's the goal; that's our job. . . .

QUINDLEN: What would you say, George, if a 21-year-old came to you and said, "I
want to go into politics, and once I'm in, how do I handle the press?"

STEPHANOPOULOS: Two things. First, Don't lie. And second, Don't cover up.
Because whenever you cover up, you're going to create a desire to know whatever
you're covering up which far outweighs its value.

QUINDLEN: Lesley, is that advice good enough?
STAHL: I think "First, don't lie" is great advice, and so is "Don't cover up." I
had a smile on my face, George, as you were saying that. Why did you say it?

STEPHANOPOULOS: Because it's true.

STAHL: Have you learned something from what you're going through?

STEPHANOPOULOS: Of course. You always learn that the press wants what it can't
have, and the press starts out by assuming something is wrong. I don't think
there's one reporter now -- I'm not talking about columnists -- who acts out of
an ideological bias that can be detected. But once they walk in the door, they
become "reporters," and that means "what are you hiding here, what are they
trying to hide?" And I honestly feel that's good up to a point; skepticism is
good. But I think you have to be careful about what you call a cover-up. There
are times when you just say: "I can't tell you yet. You've got to wait."
GREENFIELD: I think there ought to be a political agreement. If the Arabs and
Israelis can do it, maybe the politicians and the press could make one. And the
agreement would read something like this: The political folks have got to stop
trying to spin everything for political purposes, because one of the things that
promotes skepticism is this attempt to shove through our transmittal feeds an
image that will help you, whether it's Clarence Thomas and his wife praying in
People magazine right after he was confirmed or Bill and Hillary snuggling in a
hammock around the time of the Democratic convention to better convey the image
that they are a loving couple in the presence of press photographers. When I see
that, I say, and I think even the public says, "You know, this is not a candid
snapshot of a couple that just happened to be caught in a warm, tender moment."

KINSLEY: George, did President Clinton make a mistake answering that question on
MTV about what kind of underwear he wears?

NACHMAN: Did he answer truthfully, by the way?

STEPHANOPOULOS: I'm not going to answer that. You're exactly right: I thought it
was a mistake. He thought it was a mistake. And then he said: "Well, it's not a
terrible mistake. Don't obsess over it for three or four days. It's a mistake,
but it's not the end of the world."

Let's look at the Whitewater coverage. The initial placement in this paper,
among others, of the story would suggest that it was a crime of the highest
character. And then the evidence comes out; it turns out not to be a crime. The
placement of the stories hasn't changed. People say, "It's really about Arkansas
and the culture of Arkansas." Meanwhile, it's still being treated as if it was
Watergate. You still have this full investigative journalism as if they had just
discovered. . . .

NACHMAN: . . . Because the behavior is provocative. When I was running a TV
station in Washington, Mayor Barry asked me if I thought he was a thief. I said
how would I know? But I did tell him he was behaving like every thief I'd ever
covered. . . .

QUINDLEN: Jeff, you're sitting there nodding your head. Have we overplayed
Whitewater?

GREENFIELD: I think we've overplayed Whitewater and we've overplayed all the
press response to Whitewater. But the number of false statements emanating from
the White House produced a level of doubt. I don't want to use the word lie. It
wasn't lying. It was "misstatements" that were later rendered "inoperative."
After you heard the fifth one, you wondered: Fellas, what's going on?

STAHL: I just want to make the point that we're handling Paula Jones completely
differently by really holding back and trying not to jump out of the gate before
we know and by saying in almost every story that maybe she isn't telling the
truth; let's really look at this.

QUINDLEN: Is that why we're handling the Paula Jones story differently, Jeff?

GREENFIELD: First of all, it would be good to make the point that we ought not
to talk about the media monolithically. There's an old joke where a guy says,
"Do you want a book for your birthday?" and the other guy says, "No, I already
have a book." The American Spectator is not The Washington Times and it's not
The New York Times.

KINSLEY: But The Washington Times is The American Spectator.

GREENFIELD: I think there are two things to say about Paula Jones. One of the
reasons why Whitewater was overplayed was that it broke at the same time as
Troopergate and a lot of the press looked at Troopergate and said: "Forget it, I
don't want to go near that. But now I have a nice sex-free financial scandal
with bank records and real-estate deals. This is clean." So that's the first
thing. The second thing is social bias. She doesn't have a law degree, she comes
from a lower-middle-class background -- literally trailer park. And she has a
Southern accent, which is always bad. Compare it to Anita Hill. It would have
been better if she hadn't waited 10 years, but she waited because she was afraid
of what would happen to her, that we would focus on her character and not the
basic issue.

STEPHANOPOULOS: Paula Jones figured out the hook; her lawyers figured out the
hook; her handlers figured out the hook. So what do you turn this into? Sexual
harassment. So let's build a case and let's work back from the fact that we need
a new hook to get it in the paper. You file the case; if she was really serious
about winning the case, you wouldn't draw the whole complaint up and then
release it. It is an inherently incredible story, which is why people aren't
believing it.

KINSLEY: Let me ask you about the hook, George, once again. Obviously, if a
story isn't true, it should not be publicized, and it's very hard to determine
the truth in a situation like this. Would you say a story of this sort, if it
was true, would be irrelevant to people's judgment about a President?

STEPHANOPOULOS: I think that's not a decision for me to make. I personally don't
believe that it is, but I don't think that's relevant.

STAHL: But sexual harassment is a crime. We in the feminist movement have fought
very hard to make it a crime. And that's why I feel that she has to be heard
out; the fact she's not of sterling character is not the kind of evidence we can
use to discredit her. And I think there is a snobbishness in the treatment of
this woman. So I'm saying it's a crime, and if he committed this crime, it's
relevant to his Presidency. If he's just rude to women, then you can ask that
question.

KINSLEY: Do you think the press ought to inform people -- let's leave Clinton
out of this -- if someone treats women the way Ted Kennedy was alleged to have
treated women, having a lot of casual affairs while he was married? Is that
politically relevant in your view? Because in my view it is, and the press is
perfectly right if it's got the goods. . . .

STEPHANOPOULOS: I say, Use the standard Clinton used when he spoke about
President Nixon at his funeral. Judge a person by his entire life. Judge
everything; put it all in context. Don't turn the press into a magnifying glass.


NACHMAN: I agree. When you start saying, "I'm going to report this one, but not
that one," I think you get on a very dangerous slope.

GREENFIELD: But that's what journalism is. I mean, the woman who claimed in some
tabloid that Bill Clinton had fathered her love child -- nobody picked that
story up. I do think this is once again a class issue. I got a call from a
viewer during the Gary Hart story that really changed my mind about this. We
were all saying the issue wasn't infidelity, the issue was judgment, and this
guy from Texas called me up and said, "Excuse me, but to me a man who stands in
church in front of God and lies to the woman he's going to marry about how he
will conduct his marriage, I don't want that guy in the White House." Now that
may not be my standard, but there are millions of people for whom I suspect
evidence of compulsive adultery is evidence of a character flaw so grievous that
no matter how smart or courageous or committed he is, they don't want that guy
in the White House. And I believe the press has a legitimate reason to inform
the voter about that and let the voter make his choice.

STEPHANOPOULOS: Don't release it without weighing the evidence, and don't treat
it as if it's true before you know. I have a simple standard. Print the
allegation on page A20 and print the information on the front page, rather than
printing the allegation on page 1 and the acquittal on page 20.

QUINDLEN: I want to go around the table. Jeff made the point that we talk about
the media, and in fact there really isn't a thing called the media. There are a
whole lot of reporters doing this job. What's our motto?
STAHL: As a reporter, I work for a certain kind of place with a certain kind of
motto, but the person who's working for "Hard Copy" has a different one. There
just isn't a universal reporters' code out there today. The definition of news
is changing, opening up. Women made a difference; now the baby boomers are
making a difference. They're bringing their sensibilities, their attitudes about
sex, their attitudes about morality into the newsrooms. And everything's
shifting and changing. It would be awfully hard for me to say what a general
reporter's standards would be today.

KINSLEY: Well, I think people would interpret this differently, depending on
where they work. I suppose everybody in the media wants three things. You want
it to be true; you want it to be interesting; you want it to be important. And I
suppose there are stories that are so interesting that they don't need to be
important, like Tonya Harding. I suppose there are some stories that are so
important that they don't need to be interesting.

GREENFIELD: I think our motto has to be, If we're not hypocrites and don't want
to be playing politics, that we ought to be convinced a story is about something
else before we run it. I want to cut the level of pretense down to as close to
zero as we can.

EHRENREICH: News has gotten to be more and more like entertainment. It's very
market-driven, and that has made the journalist as a professional with some
notion of ethics less and less important. But there's another truth in something
like the Kerrigan story, about the desperation of a woman who's facing a life of
waitressing if she doesn't win somehow. It's a story about class, so you try to
bring that truth out. We do have to be critical about the media, but not in a
way that prepares us to go back for the next orgy of trash journalism.

QUINDLEN: Jerry, what's your motto?

NACHMAN: Work harder at being balanced. We know that almost without exception
every story has at least two sides. I think that's the area in which we've
gotten the most flak, certainly. The most anti-Clinton story you could print
should also have George saying: "You know what? You did a fair job representing
our point of view on that." If we put that criterion in every story that we do,
I think we will be a lot healthier than we are now, a lot more balanced.

QUINDLEN: That's a wrap.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              311 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Backstage Memories

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 35;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


To the Editor:

I was pleased to read in Michael Gorra's review of "Art, Dialogue, and Outrage"
(May 15) that he considers Wole Soyinka's play "Death and the King's Horseman"
"powerful" and "Mr. Soyinka's finest." I would certainly concur.

I was in the cast of that play when it was presented at Lincoln Center in 1987,
and the poetry of the play had an intense effect upon me. Each night I deserted
the actors' greenroom to stand backstage so I could hear and rehear the long
speeches of Elesin Oba (played by Earle Hyman). The songs and dances, lovingly
staged by Mr. Soyinka himself and accompanied by the great Nigerian musicians
Yomi Obileye and Tunji Oyelana, have remained some of my most vivid theatrical
memories.

Mr. Gorra puts it neatly when he says, "Rather than depend on a proclamation of
his identity, Mr. Soyinka, in his own writings, simply takes his cultural
background for granted." This was a constant difficulty for our actors. Mr.
Soyinka, who directed the play, tried to help the young African-American actors
capture the nobility of their characters. He kept saying to them: "You are
royal; you take it for granted. It is not something that you have to prove." In
Mr. Gorra's words, the characters did not need to explain their references. It
took the cast members aback when Mr. Soyinka gently admonished them that they
were Americans and so knew little about Africa. When some of the more
impassioned Afrophiles took to calling themselves "Africans abroad," I would
sneak a look at Mr. Soyinka's usually impassive face to catch a lifted eyebrow
and a twinkling glance.

Mr. Soyinka has never been what anyone expected him to be. James Pinckney
Harrison (the author of "The Endless War," a study of Vietnam) has spoken of
Communism as "the answer for those who want simple solutions," and I think it is
asking for simple answers to expect Mr. Soyinka to take easily pigeonholed
intellectual stances. His ideas may bewilder those eager for strong, easily
defended positions; but such consistency is not to be found in Mr. Soyinka's
dense and convoluted poetry.

Wole Soyinka offers a kind of truth that dwells in the heart of paradox.

ERIKA PETERSEN
New York

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              312 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
This Team's As American As Kim Chee

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


A YEAR ago I finally got up the courage to visit the Vietnam wall in Washington,
honoring people who had been willing to give more than I would have wanted to
give, at least in that time and place.

We found the name of a man who had been a good friend of my wife's in high
school, the name of a fellow I knew in college. And I became aware of the great
number of Hispanic names on the wall -- Rodriguez and Perez, Garcia and
Hernandez, by the dozens -- who had paid the ultimate respect to this country.

("Did you see a lot of Washingtons and Jeffersons?" asked my friend George
McElroy, a veteran journalist and World War II veteran from Houston, who, you
might not tell from his name, is black. "There aren't a lot of whites named
Washington and Jefferson.")

Those names on that wall are our ultimate national unit, names that remain
fitfully on our conscience. I hope I will not offend anybody by saying there is
another American unit assembled at this moment that in a benign and tangential
way also represents the United States of America.

It is much nicer to be speaking of soccer than war. This World Cup -- currently
being held in the United States -- has been peaceful and pleasant, with none of
the dreaded hooliganism the scoffers were holding up as the only image of
soccer.

Instead, we have a gigantic surprise on our hands. A soccer team, as American as
apple pie, as American as pizza, as American as tacos, is very close to
qualifying for the second round of the most important sports tournament in the
world.

There was still a professional basketball championship going on (and on, and on)
in Houston on the night of June 22, but when the United States upset a
demoralized Colombia, 2-1, that evening, the Rockets had to share the front
pages and the network news shows.

Today the American soccer team has the stage for itself. The Yanks play Romania
at 4 P.M. Eastern time in the Rose Bowl. A victory or a tie will surely get the
Americans through, and they could advance even if they lose today. This country
has reason to be proud.

I return to the theme of war because the 22 American soccer players remind me of
the movies I used to watch, before Vietnam.

"All right, I'm rounding up an expedition," the captain would say. "I'm looking
for volunteers. You, Meola. You, Balboa. You, Harkes." And when this nation got
really with it, Jim Brown would be playing a soldier named Jones, a black
college man from U.C.L.A., or Stewart, half-Dutch, half-black American. Those
soldiers, those actors, had their imperfections, but we recognized them as still
unspoiled, still lovable, still our brothers.

(The captain was always a grizzled Irish guy. Don't ask me why. In this movie,
the coach is a Serb who speaks Spanish, French, Italian, Stengelese, before he
twits you in English.)

They are nice guys. I'm not saying Eric Wynalda isn't a bit arrogant, or Marcelo
Balboa wouldn't whack you with his elbow, or that most of them wouldn't hold out
for the best financial deal. That's how they got this far. They had the dream of
playing a sport their schoolmates, and even many ostriches in the media,
ridiculed. Sometimes romantics make the best soldiers.

At the moment, they are less cynical than the Dream Team basketball players in
the 1992 Summer Games who wrapped themselves in American flags to please their
crass sneaker sponsors. At the moment, these guys are still psychologically
amateurs, unlike baseball players who have turned into 99 percent jerks in the
last 10 years, or football players, with their overbuilt necks and underbuilt
personalities.

America had its fling with the national hockey team that upset the Soviet Union
in the semifinals and won the gold medal at Lake Placid in 1980. With no
disrespect, I note that only 15 or 20 nations play hockey while nearly 200
nations play soccer. For the United States to outplay -- yes, and outwill and
outthink -- a talented side like Colombia was a wonderful accomplishment, but
there may be no miracles in this World Cup.

There may merely be the delightful spectacle of nice, young athletes -- Our Lads
-- showing off the skills they have gone out and learned in a mean and demanding
world. There is still the chance to discover and enjoy them in these glorious
days when Americans go out on an expedition, and maybe score a goal or two, and
the nation cheers.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: It's hugs all around for the victorious U.S. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              313 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

From Right, a Rain of Anti-Clinton Salvos

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2095 words


For four successive weeks last month, viewers of the Rev. Jerry Falwell's "Old
Time Gospel Hour" on cable television were treated not to the good tidings of
Jesus but to excerpts from a videotape in which President Clinton was accused,
among other dark deeds, of arranging for the murder of an Arkansas investigator
who supposedly had proof of his trysts.

In the televised excerpts, Gary Parks, son of the investigator who was shot to
death last fall by unknown assailants, says, "I think Bill Clinton had my father
killed to save his political career." He offers no supporting evidence.

Mr. Falwell, who described Mr. Clinton as "the most radical and controversial
President in our nation's history," aggressively promoted the videotape on his
program, calling it an expose featuring "the people who know the truth." His
organization says it has sold tens of thousands of the videotapes for
"donations" of at least $40 plus $3 for shipping.

The accusation of murder may be the most startling example of the harsh attacks
being directed at Bill and Hillary Clinton. But the spreading of Clinton dirt,
and rumors of Clinton dirt, has become a virtual industry, prompting the
President, on Friday, to complain bitterly about "scurrilous and false charges"
and "violent personal attacks."

The roughest assaults are coming mainly from fundamentalist Christian leaders,
who portray the Clintons as anti-Christian, and from arch-conservative pressure
groups that raise money through direct mail. But the invective has also
reverberated on conservative radio talk shows around the country, where the
President is called a "gay-lover" or a "pot-smoking draft dodger" and callers
speculate on his wife's sexual orientation.

Pat Robertson's Christian Coalition called Mr. Clinton's inauguration a
"repudiation of our forefathers' covenant with God." On his "700 Club" cable
television show, Mr. Robertson has promoted conspiracy theories about the death
of Vincent W. Foster Jr., the White House deputy counsel and former law partner
of Mrs. Clinton's who committed suicide last July.  "Was there a murder of a
White House counsel?" he has said. "It looks more and more like that."

In a fund-raising letter to more than 100,000 donors, Floyd Brown, chairman of a
thriving nonprofit group called Citizens United, said he had proof that Mr.
Clinton was engaged "in a massive cover-up and conspiracy to obstruct justice."
Mr. Brown asked his members to fill out an "emergency survey on the impeachment"
of the President.

What these varied groups seem to share is a visceral dislike of the Clintons
themselves, along with some of their policies, like the health care plan and the
easing of restrictions on homosexuals in the military. Many of the attackers
also tend to revel in the tawdriest accusations of financial and sexual
misconduct, often mixing established fact with lurid speculation.

The President and Mrs. Clinton have condemned what they see as incessant
assaults on their character.  Clearly, they would prefer to blame right-wing
scandalmongering for their political troubles, rather than genuine concern about
their policies and the legal inquiries into their past behavior.

"I don't suppose there's any public figure that's ever been subject to any more
violent personal attacks than I have, at least in modern history, anybody who's
been President," Mr. Clinton said on Friday on a St. Louis radio program.

Harsh attacks on the occupants of the White House are not new, and neither is a
siege mentality. President Lyndon B. Johnson questioned the motives of
demonstrators who called him a killer for his Vietnam policy, and President
Richard M. Nixon, long reviled by some Americans, went so far as to compile an
enemies list.

Over the last decade, liberal groups raised money by assailing Presidents Ronald
Reagan and George Bush. But, experts on the Presidency say, they seldom voiced
as much personal venom as some groups are directing at the Clintons.

And today, allegations and rumors are spread faster, farther and louder than
ever before by computer networks, fax machines, fund-raising letters, talk-radio
and cable television.

'Very Thin-Skinned'

The attackers say the President and his wife, through their past actions and
less-than-candid explanations, have made themselves fair game. They reject the
notion that they are violating the rules of propriety. "The Clintons want to
have no scrutiny, and they're very thin-skinned," Mr. Brown said.

Mark DeMoss, a spokesman for Mr. Falwell, dismissed the suggestion sometimes
made by the White House of an anti-Clinton conspiracy. "Some people like to
think there's this sort of natural pipeline from Floyd Brown to Jerry Falwell to
the next guy, and they're all planning this strategy," Mr. DeMoss said. "Really,
it's all pretty spontaneous."

Mr. DeMoss said that he did not have sales figures for the accusatory videotape
Mr. Falwell sold on his show, but that they were in the tens of thousands. He
said the proceeds went to Mr. Falwell's Liberty Alliance, which was using them
to cover the costs of producing the videotape and the four hours of television
time on which it was promoted.

On Friday, Mr. Falwell invited the President to tape a rebuttal to the
videotape, which he said he would broadcast on his show.

White House advisers insist that the President has not been undermined by the
personal attacks, noting his legislative victories. The President said on Friday
that he would start to respond more aggressively to personal critics, but the
main White House counterstrategy has been to stress his achievements and
proposals.

"The radical right wants to make the public debate about Bill Clinton's life,
and Bill Clinton wants to make the public debate about your life," said Paul
Begala, a political adviser to the White House.

Still, the barrage of negative images may be adding to the unavoidable political
toll of the Whitewater affair, now under investigation by a special prosecutor.
"It eats up air time, and that's unfortunate," said Mandy Grunwald, a media
adviser to the White House. "A lot more people know that there's a woman named
Paula Jones than that three million new jobs were created since Clinton became
President."

Independent political experts say that Clinton-baiting has become a powerful
tool for the religious fundamentalists, in particular as they raise money and
energize followers. But over time it may pose as much a problem for mainline
Republicans as for the Democrats, for the Republicans are struggling to
accommodate the Christian right in their party without alienating moderate
Republicans and independent voters.

A point man for some of the most militant Christians is Randall Terry, founder
of Operation Rescue, the anti-abortion group. He has a new group called Loyal
Opposition that has staged noisy demonstrations against the President. "The
Bible commands us to expose the wicked," Mr. Terry said in an interview.

"Bill Clinton is a tyrant; he's a monster," he said, asserting that the
President had violated his marriage vows, promoted baby killing by his support
for abortion and sodomy by his support for homosexual rights and violated the
family with proposals to distribute condoms to teen-agers.

Goal of Destruction

Mr. Brown's Citizens United in Fairfax, Va., with 40 employees and a $3 million
annual budget, is one of several conservative groups not associated with the
religious right that have harshly attacked the President. But it may be the only
one dedicated entirely to his political destruction.

Mr. Brown assails the President on a daily radio show, and about three times a
week he faxes ClintonWatch bulletins, with his latest gleeful accusations of
Clinton malfeasance, to 1,200 journalists and talk-show hosts.

The conservative magazine The American Spectator has put itself on the map with
aggressively reported articles about the Clintons' business practices and sexual
histories. Often, the interpretation of evidence is markedly one-sided. A recent
article, for example, treated as fact lurid sexual stories not only about the
President but also about his wife and Mr. Foster, based on accounts from people
with admitted self-interest in denigrating the Clintons.

Vicious personal attacks are "partly old and partly new," said Fred Greenstein,
a historian at Princeton University who noted that such invective was common in
the 19th century. The closest parallel in recent times, he said, may be Franklin
D. Roosevelt, who inspired hatred and farfetched suspicions in some people even
as he gained deep admiration from others.

High-Tech Advances

What is new today, Dr. Greenstein noted, is "the high-tech overlay" -- the
computer communications, fax machines and blossoming of talk-radio, cable
television and direct mail.

The more intense anti-Clinton feelings do not show up in public surveys, which
in recent months have found that roughly 40 percent of the people "disapprove"
of the way Mr. Clinton is handling his job.

But the much smaller group that abhors the First Family has been well
represented in the expanding world of talk-radio. Michael Harrison, publisher of
Talkers Magazine, a trade journal, said that since he began monitoring programs
around the country in 1990, no one had been attacked on the shows more than Mr.
Clinton, with Mrs. Clinton ranking second.

"They call him a pot-smoking draft dodger and a gay-lover," Mr. Harrison said of
the radio assaults, "and the new word is that he's not a socialist, he's a
fascist." Mrs. Clinton, he said, is often called a "femi-Nazi," a term coined by
the commentator Rush Limbaugh, and "she is accused of possibly being a lesbian."

But the Clintons also have their ardent defenders on talk shows, Mr. Harrison
added, and much of the criticism reflects real philosophical differences.

"Clinton makes a fat target," Mr. Harrison said, noting that the President "was
grudgingly elected, and he does have a questionable background."

But most important, Mr. Harrison said, the Clintons stand for "statism," big
government, at a time when many radio listeners, at least, have anti-government
attitudes.

Culture War (Continued)

The deep passions may also reflect continuing social fissures. "I think the
culture war of the 60's is being carried on by other means," said William
Kristol, former chief of staff to Vice President Dan Quayle and now head of the
Project for the Republican Future.

Those who despise the Clintons, Mr. Kristol said, see in them traits they
perceived in many liberals of the 1960's: "self-indulgence and a smarmy
self-righteousness." Thus, he said, they are getting from some quarters "a more
vitriolic reception than they deserve."

Mr. Clinton provokes particular outrage from the religious right because he is
Southern Baptist.

"We find it very troubling that Mr. Clinton is trying to use his Christianity to
validate his public policies," said the Rev. Patrick Mahoney, an abortion
opponent who heads the Christian Defense Coalition. Mr. Mahoney said he created
a legal fund for Paula Jones because "sexual harassment is wrong."

Larry Sabato, a political scientist at the University of Virginia, said the
vilification of Mr. Clinton might intensify opposition to him among some people
who had not been supporters in the first place. Thus the attacks might help
conservative candidates in the coming mid-term elections, Mr. Sabato said, when
strongly motivated opponents of a sitting President are especially likely to
vote.

Evangelical Protestants, to whom leaders like Mr. Falwell and Mr. Robertson
appeal for support, make up about 25 percent of the electorate, though far fewer
have ever voted as a political bloc.

Yet extreme attacks on the President could produce a backlash of revulsion,
political experts say.

The Christian right poses a challenge to the Republican Party, already in
turmoil over the growing power of religious fundamentalists in several states.
While these groups bring voters, they also turn off others, said John C. Green,
a political scientist at the University of Akron in Ohio.

Some liberals argue that the demonizing of the Clintons may foster a long-term
splintering of society, with ever more venomous political discourse and
paralyzed government.

"People are saying a pox on all your houses," said Arthur J. Kropp, director of
People for the American Way, a liberal group. "That's what the conservatives
don't see. They think they'll get rid of Clinton and take over, but they'll have
to deal with the aftermath."

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 27, 1994, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of a production error, several paragraphs were omitted in some copies
yesterday from an article about rightists' attacks on President Clinton and his
wife. The omitted section is reprinted today on page A12.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The Rev. Jerry Falwell promoting a videotape on his program
"The Old Time Gospel Hour." (pg. 1); The political right is conducting a
high-tech political attack on the Clintons that involves television, radio,
publications and faxes. Examples, clockwise, from top left, a tape of Paula
Jones, who accused the President of sexual advances, and her husband as shown on
the Rev. Jerry Falwell's television show; the cover of June issue of The
American Spectator; a fax sent in May by the Citizens United organization. (pg.
20)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              314 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
New Neighbors: Sad Ecology of My Street

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 1;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 881 words


MY NEW neighbors began moving in, one by one, about two weeks ago, as the human
ecology of the neighborhood began to change, and after a green sidewalk
construction shed was erected along the 16th Street side of Washington Irving
High School.

People on the block refer to the four new neighbors as "the homeless," in
deference to polite discourse, although everyone gives the word a different spin
and one doorman wrinkles his nose; in the steam heat of last Saturday, he says,
their stench sent him reeling, nauseated, into his lobby; he nearly passed out.
Later that night -- and now he begins to get angry -- he saw one of the homeless
plug a TV set into an outdoor socket. He couldn't see what program the man was
watching.

The doorman thinks that some of the homeless are getting veterans benefits,
welfare payments, drug program entitlements, and that stokes his anger. One
night last winter, he said, he was changing his clothes out back before going
home to Queens when he saw a white-bearded beggar in a wheelchair counting a
roll of 20's too thick for his pocket. That rang my bell, but before I could ask
him more he had to run inside to help some people get away for the weekend.

That bearded beggar was Mike, referred to here last year as "my bum Bill." He
was a kind of secret sharer for me when I first moved to the block six years
ago. Aggressive even before he lost his leg, he forced me to confront his
intimidation and my own anger to make the concrete turf mine, too. Mike also put
a face on the homeless for me. I still find them esthetically displeasing, a
health hazard, a symptom of my city's failure. But I still haven't figured out
why they don't have a right to sleep on these streets.

Back then, I was amazed when Mike asked if I had written the column about him;
then he wanted to know if I had done it freelance or had a steady job. We talked
awhile, and I fantasized that he had a manuscript for me to read. When last
winter hit, he disappeared, along with most of the bums on our street.

I thought about Mike when the homeless men showed up, which was about the time
that the Rangers and then the Knicks were asking us to wrap our sense of civic
self around their games. When I asked my new neighbors, "Who's gonna win?" they
turned away. Didn't want to engage. Were they afraid I'd ask about the computer
on the sidewalk, the collection of brooms, the chairs and table, the green foam
mattresses?

The first of the encampments is still the best; sturdy cardboard boxes have
created a room at least 7 feet by 3 feet, and the roof is covered by a pink
blanket and a large framed poster from a PBS mystery series. This is the tenant
with the TV set, so he might have been watching Channel 13. "This Old House"?

The doorman didn't think that was funny, but one of my old neighbors did, and
she told me that the shed, which creates a dark and protected space for the
homeless, is licensed through the end of the year. It was erected to shield
passers-by during the installation of gates over the high school windows,
presumably to stop burglars from stealing more equipment than they already have.

The new neighbors appeared during the effort to clear the homeless out of Union
Square to the west, where they had gone after being cleared out of other
downtown parks.  Union Square, with its Greenmarket and benches for the
advertising and publishing workers flooding the area, is a busy space. One day
last week, a woman selling me a $3 handful of edible flowers complained at the
racket made by Carpenters Union electioneering and young Coca-Cola cuties, male
and female, who were handing out free bottles of a new lemonade called Fruitopia
from a vehicle painted to invoke Ken Kesey's 60's magic bus. Homeless wouldn't
fit into a place like that.

At the same time, the police officers who had been watching the Lubavitcher
Hasidim watch over their dying Rebbe, Menachem M. Schneerson, have now departed
from the area around the Beth Israel Medical Center just to the east. While the
police had not exactly been chasing anyone, their presence seemed to discourage
unauthorized street life, especially on weekends when methadone addicts with
three-day supplies sell some off.

While I was waiting for the doorman to finish getting the family into their
station wagon with its out-of-state plates -- I imagined them off to a rural
county whose homeless live in a cousin's barn -- the mailman, bright, bemused,
sauntered up.

"This has to be the filthiest city in the world," he said, nodding at the
homeless men. "If you could see what I see, real early, before the storekeepers
sweep the sidewalks."

"What would you do about it?" I asked.

He shrugged. "Got to live somewhere, right? They don't want to go in those
shelters. Survivors, got to hand it to them."

The doorman came back, sweating. I asked him about Mike.

"The one with all the 20's? He lost his leg in Vietnam, that's why he was
getting money from the government, plus what he panhandled."

"I knew him before he lost the leg," I said.

"Anyway, now he's dead."

I don't know why that was a shock.

"Right after the bad weather, one day he was under the awning across the street,
asleep, and he was asleep for such a long time somebody shook him and he was
dead."

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              315 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
The Face of AIDS

BYLINE: By DIANE COLE

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 3;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 362 words


In their striking collections of photographs of men, women and children affected
by AIDS, Carolyn Jones and Sal Lopes capture, with compassion and dignity, the
faith, optimism and grief prompted by illness. The images are moving and at
times anguished, but the faces depicted in both books convey hope and fortitude
far more than sadness. For LIVING PROOF: Courage in the Face of AIDS (Abbeville,
$19.95), Ms. Jones, a New York fashion photographer, asked people who are H.I.V.
positive to pose in her studio with an object or person that meant a great deal
to them. The symbolism speaks for itself -- a close-up of two hands entwined, a
mother embracing her daughter, a young man straightening his tie to prepare for
whatever comes next. Her subjects' comments focus less on the pain of loss than
on the determination, verve and spirit of renewal that they need to live. Almost
without exception, their goal is to enjoy the life that remains, and the
ultimate effect of these powerful portraits is surprisingly upbeat. In LIVING
WITH AIDS: A Photographic Journal (Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $24.95), Mr. Lopes
chronicles three related stories. First, he illustrates the emotional -- and
political -- impact of AIDS by depicting the Names Project AIDS Memorial Quilt
as it was unfurled during demonstrations in Washington in 1988 and 1992. Candid
shots show mourners touching, lying sprawled across and even wrapped around
sections of the quilt. In the next section, Mr. Lopes, the author of "The Wall:
Images and Offerings From the Vietnam Veterans Memorial," records the bonds that
develop between AIDS patients and the volunteers assigned, through a community
"buddies" program, to help them through their illness. The agonizing immediacy
of these dual portraits -- in many cases the AIDS patients are visibly close to
death -- carries a message of courage and mutual support. The final section
tells the story of John and Sharon Boyce and their daughter Brianna, adopted
when she was 3 years old and already suffering from AIDS. Brianna is
heart-wrenchingly lovely, even in her frailty; in a postscript we learn she died
last June, at the age of 7.   DIANE COLE

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George DeSipio Jr. (1956-93) with his parents in a photograph by
Carolyn Jones. (FROM "LIVING PROOF")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              316 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gay Marchers Celebrate History in 2 Parades

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words


Tens of thousands of gay men and lesbians surged through Manhattan yesterday,
celebrating a civil-rights movement that took its first steps during a police
raid on a gay bar 25 years ago and seemed in the last week to have come of age.

The participants in the commemoration of what is now known as the Stonewall
rebellion had their own reasons for being there. Some came to honor pioneers in
the gay movement, to support one another, to protest, to rejoice, to remember
the dead or to offer a beacon for the living.

Above all, they came to affirm the legacy of Stonewall: their very openness.
Among them were a Marine lance corporal in dress uniform, a former F.B.I. agent,
a New York City firefighter, a police officer and an Eskimo from Alaska wearing
a buffalo-horn choker, eagle-claw necklace and tie-dyed denim shorts.

"We will never turn back," said Franklin Fry, a march organizer. "We will never
be invisible again."

They marched in not one but two parades -- an officially sanctioned one on the
East Side of Manhattan demanding that the United Nations protect the rights of
homosexuals worldwide, and a smaller, unofficial one up Fifth Avenue from
Greenwich Village, organized by several dissenting groups that broke ranks with
the others to make the point that the most urgent problem facing gay people is
AIDS.

Yet a remarkable aspect of the day was the loose cohesion that seemed to occur,
bringing together gay Republicans and drag queens and all the diverse elements
of the gay-rights movement. That diversity, many say, is both a mark of the
movement's success and an impediment to achieving the single-minded focus needed
to force social change.

It was a less flamboyant event than a traditional gay-pride march, but more
lighthearted and festive than a political rally. There were men in gowns, and
topless women, but shorts and T-shirts predominated. And when the two parades
met at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street, the authorized marchers halted respectfully
to allow the rebel contingent to join.

They then converged in a vast river of humanity that continued to pour up the
Avenue of the Americas and into Central Park from 1:15 P.M. until 5:15 P.M. --
including a one-minute moment of silence at 3 P.M. memorializing people who have
died of AIDS, followed shortly by a "moment of rage." Once inside the park, the
marchers settled in amid the dust and crabgrass of The Great Lawn for a rally of
speeches and music, dodging dragonflies and hunting for shade against a fierce
sun before dispersing about 8 o'clock.

There was little agreement on how many people turned out. The organizers of the
authorized march estimated the total crowd at 1.1 million. The Police Department
put the figure closer to 100,000, saying The Great Lawn was known to hold
180,000 and it appeared to be half-full.

Unlike the event being commemorated, yesterday brought no clashes between
marchers and police officers, and no arrests were reported. A police spokesman,
Lawrence F. Loesch, said the 6,200 officers on duty made up the largest number
ever assigned to a single event.

The marches and rally served as a finale to the separately organized,
Olympic-style competition called the Gay Games and to a festival of gay and
lesbian culture that had taken place over the past week. It came at a time when
homosexuals have achieved unprecedented visibility in American life.

But many gay men and lesbians see a backlash occurring in the United States. In
a half-dozen states, constitutional amendments have been proposed to repeal or
prevent laws that affirm homosexual rights.

'Still a Struggle'

"Stonewall is still a struggle all over the country," said Edwin Greene, 41,
from Cincinnati, where voters last year passed an initiative that removed all
references to sexual orientation from a city human-rights law. "There are these
ballot initiatives all over the country. This is the battle we are fighting
today."

Five years in planning, the official march was led by a milelong, 30-foot-wide,
rainbow-colored flag intended to symbolize gay and lesbian unity. Hundreds of
volunteers had paid for the privilege of carrying the 7,550-pound flag. Their
donations are to go to pay for AIDS services.

Among those near the front carrying the flag were Peter King, a 23-year-old bank
employee from Sydney, who had chosen for his footwear a new pair of black
patent-leather pumps, size 12 1/2, and Lary Campbell, a 38-year-old nurse in the
AIDS unit at Roosevelt Hospital, who said he acknowledged his homosexuality to
his family at age 18 "directly as a result of Stonewall."

And there was was Rose Walton, 57, who started Long Island's first AIDS
education program for health providers in 1983. A multiple sclerosis patient,
she carried the flag in one hand, a cane in the other. Walking behind her was
Marge Sherwin, Ms. Walton's partner of 17 years, who won a bronze medal as a
10-kilometer runner at the Gay Games.

Like many who attended, the two women are seeking legal recognition for their
domestic partnership so they might share Ms. Sherwin's health benefits.

Tiaras and Gloves

Behind the flag, which billowed its way up First Avenue from the United Nations,
apparently without any significant hitch, came the parade's organizers,
including a few drag queens in glittering gowns, tiaras and satin gloves. Behind
them came the politicians, including Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, surrounded by a
tight knot of police officers and security guards.

Mr. Giuliani's presence was, for the most part, received politely. A few
onlookers booed from the sidelines, but others were pleased to see him, waving
and trying to get his attention. "He shows up," marveled Kit Stewart of Bayport,
L.I. "That's a start."

Slightly farther back came the Stonewall veterans, mostly men in their 40's and
50's, who had seen their impromptu rebellion at the Stonewall Inn in Greenwich
Village on June 27, 1969, not only transform their own lives, in some cases, but
also become a rallying cry for a worldwide movement.

"That moment changed fundamentally how I saw myself and how I saw lesbians and
gays around the world," said Jim Fouratt, who went on to help organize the first
Gay Liberation Front. "Our young people, my lesbian and gay children, need to
know what life was like only 25 years ago."

Meanwhile, the unauthorized march set off from Sheridan Square, the site of the
Stonewall Inn, led by a red Mustang convertible and a 1969 blue convertible
Cadillac that was used and impounded during the Stonewall clash. Ensconced on
the Cadillac's back seat was "Queen" Allyson Allante of Long Beach, L.I., who at
age 14 had been arrested at the Stonewall Inn.

One of the passengers in the Mustang was John Paul Ranieri of Milwaukee, who
said he was on his first return visit to New York since the Stonewall clash,
during which, he said, he was beaten two nights in a row and had to receive five
stitches after a police officer hit him with a flashlight.

"The only way I can describe this experience is that it is like a Vietnam vet
going back to Saigon for a reunion," he said. "It's not exactly a pleasant
experience." Asked how he felt to see police officers lining the route, he said,
"I still cringe. But what I find amazing is that they're protecting us today."

Visual Extremes

There were topless women and a few men running naked up Fifth Avenue. At the New
York Public Library, a man in a white chiffon skirt performed pirouettes on the
steps. "The impressive thing is the visual extremes," said Roger Pretto, a
tourist from Miami taking photographs with his wife, Judy.

The Giuliani administration had refused to issue a permit for the march up Fifth
Avenue, saying one parade should be sufficient. The route was designed to take
the participants past St. Patrick's Cathedral, where some of the marchers
increased their volume and began chanting, "Tell the Cardinal we're here."

A group of hundreds at the front of the march stopped lay down in the street for
two minutes in an organized "die-in."

At a Mass earlier, John Cardinal O'Connor of the Archdiocese of New York warned
worshipers as they prepared to leave St. Patrick's Cathedral that they might
"encounter situations today we regret in our faith," adding that his
congregation "should not condemn any human person."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Part of the mile-long, 30-foot-wide, rainbow-colored flag
symbolizing gay and lesbian unity leading the official march along First Avenue.
(Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              317 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

From the Gay World's Every Reach, A Sea of Marchers, All With Stories

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B;  Page 2;  Column 4;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 940 words


They marched for any number of reasons.

Barbara and Sal Deldeo of Wilmington, Del., joined the throngs of gay and
lesbian people in the Stonewall 25 parade for their son, Thomas Gerald, who died
in April after a 10-month battle with AIDS. Neither had ever marched before, not
against the Vietnam War, nor in marches against nuclear weapons, not even on
Memorial Day.

They carried a picture of their son -- a San Francisco actor and yoga instructor
-- on a placard, like so many others carrying photographs of the dead. Their
son, who died at age 31, looked like a perpetually young movie star: twinkling
eyes, straight teeth, strong jaw.

"You just feel like you are sharing him with so many, like his death wasn't in
vain," Mrs. Deldeo said as they turned with the march onto 57th Street and
deafening cheers rose from the predominantly gay crowd of onlookers. "You don't
get this kind of support in Wilmington."

She grew teary telling of how her son came home to die, how he finally reached
an understanding with his father, how he went peacefully one day, his clothes no
longer fitting his gaunt frame. "He was my only one," she said. "Explain that
karma."

Foreign and Fearless

From the corner of First Avenue and 42d Street, Pavel Masalsky could see the
future.

For blocks and blocks, he saw a river of singing, dancing, laughing gay people,
not just unafraid of the city around them, but defiant, joyous. One day, he
said, he believes it will be the same on his street in Moscow.

"I have never even imagined anything like this," said Mr. Masalsky, 31, who said
he was in a labor camp in northern Russia from 1984 to 1987, jailed under
Article 121, which prohibited sex between men. Other marchers, particularly
those from countries where being openly gay is either illegal, unsafe or unwise,
walked for at least a while without fear.

The marchers were people like Ming Wei of Taiwan, who said there was no problem
being gay in his country "as long as you keep it quiet," and Juan Pablo Ordonez
of Colombia, who said lower-class homosexuals in his country were treated by the
police and army as "disposable people."

Sidewalk Condemnations

Along the route there were a handful of hecklers and counter-demonstrations, but
they barely ruffled the sea of gay and lesbian marchers.

The Westboro Baptist Church of Topeka, Kan., sent 19 people to confront the
marchers as they passed the corner of 51st Street at First Avenue.  The
protesters held up signs with messages like "Sodomy Is No Human Right," "Turn or
Burn" and "Fear God, Not Fags."

The Rev. Fred Phelps, 64, called the parade "a threat to the moral fabric of our
society" and added that "the Bible clearly denounces this lifestyle."

The tiny band of counter-demonstrators was drowned out by the marchers, who
taunted them, blowing kisses and shouting, "Shame, shame, shame." One colorful
group, Pagans and Witches, danced a sexually suggestive shimmy in front of them.


A Veterans' Honor Guard

One part of the march resembled a small-town Memorial Day parade, with dozens of
veterans and a few active soldiers and sailors in uniform marching behind an
honor guard. Among them was Jose Zuniga, the former Army soldier of the year who
was discharged after making his sexual orientation public.

David Legion marched in his Navy dress whites, a uniform he has not worn since
1985, when he was disharged from the United States Navy submarine service after
his superiors discovered he was gay. On his chest was an insignia for good
conduct.

"I want to show people what the military threw away -- the best and the
brightest," said Mr. Legion, who is 37. "I've made a life for myself, but people
have a stereotype."

Another veteran, Donald MacIver of Dallas, wore the same camouflage fatigues he
wore as a Green Beret in 1969, when he ventured behind enemy lines in Vietnam, a
world away from Sheridan Square.

A bullish man with a mustache and hard eyes, he received a Bronze Star and
dozens of other commendations before retiring from the Army, he said. But he
never whispered a word about his sexuality.

"These men and women are still being kicked out for utter stupidity," said Mr.
MacIver, a former sergeant.

Protest and Politicking

Politicians love a parade, even an illegal one.

Representative Jerrold Nadler, a Manhattan Democrat, positioned himself and his
supporters somewhere near the front of the smaller, unauthorized march and began
furiously passing out literature to the crowd. A parade marshal sneered at Mr.
Nadler and shouted, "This is not a Nadler march, this is an Act Up march."

Thomas K. Duane, an openly gay City Councilman who is seeking to unseat Mr.
Nadler, made sure his campaign stickers were distributed as well. But his
volunteers jogged beside the marchers unaccosted.

Bratton Keeps Quiet Watch

He could have almost gone undetected by most people at the unauthorized march,
such was his demeanor and dress. Police Commissioner William J. Bratton,
however, was there. He was first spotted on Waverly Place in sunglasses, wearing
tan pants and a light-blue casual shirt. Standing behind him were two
bodyguards, also dressed casually in khaki and sneakers.

He said that everything was going as planned and he offered a recollection of
where he was 25 years ago during the Stonewall clash. He said he was in the Army
at a missile site.

"Twenty-five years ago, I was sitting in the Everglades, swatting at
mosquitoes," he said. Asked if back then it would have been impossible to
imagine himself standing where he was now, watching a gay march, he said, "You
could certainly say that."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tens of thousands of participants in yesterday's march through
Manhattan commemorating the Stonewall rebellion pouring into Central Park from
the entrance at Avenue of the Americas. (Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times);
Barbara and Sal Deldeo came from Wilmington, Del., to march in the parade. They
carried a picture of their son, Thomas Gerald, who died in April after a
10-month battle with AIDS. (Nancy Siesel/The New York Times); Women from Long
Beach, Calif., marching together. (Dith Pran/The New York Times); Marchers
enjoying the entertainment on the Great Lawn yesterday in Central Park. (Steve
Berman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              318 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Americans on the Golan

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


This is the time for Americans and Israelis to start talking in their own
countries about whether American troops should be stationed on the Golan
Heights.

That was the opening of this column on Nov. 30, 1993. Now the Clinton
Administration says it expects to send U.S. troops to the heights as part of an
international force if Syria and Israel come to a peace agreement. But still
there has been no debate in Congress and none scheduled.

There are two issues. The second is whether it is wise to commit U.S. troops as
peacekeepers to the heights, one of the world's more dicey pieces of strategic
real estate.

But first to be decided is whether Congress has not only the right but the
obligation to study the risks and benefits beforehand.

Israel's Labor Government wants peace with Syria quickly. Over a few years,
Israel would turn back the mountain ridge and high plateau from which Syria
fired down on Israeli villages for 20 years -- until Israel captured the Golan
in 1967.

The present Israeli Government feels that prize of peace is worth the risk.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin believes that peace with hard-line Syria could open
the way to peace with many more Muslim countries.

The Syrians stall -- unwilling to give the full diplomatic recognition Israel
demands, even for those coveted heights on the road to Damascus. But one day
President Hafez al-Assad is likely to grab the deal, a bargain.

Israel tells him that its political clock is running out. Israel will hold an
election in 1996 and campaigning will start in 1995. Many Israelis oppose giving
back the heights. The Labor Party wants to put the heights controversy behind it
by campaign time.

None of the three governments involved want a Congressional debate about U.S.
troops. Whatever President Assad knows about public discussion he detests. And,
like most American governments, the Clinton Administration prefers to present
diplomatic done deals before getting involved in Congressional headaches.

For the Israeli Government, a U.S. commitment about troops is critical to
rounding up Israeli voters. So Israeli officials and the American Israel Public
Affairs Committee argue hard against Senate legislation, expected to be
introduced this week, to order a Defense Department study before a commitment is
made.

The report would include assessments of how large the U.S. force might grow, the
risks that Iranian-paid Holy War military groups in Lebanon would target
American soldiers, possibly with secret Syrian approval, and how long the
American commitment might last.

Israeli Laborites see this movement for debate as coming from Israeli and
American opponents of the current peace negotiations. To some extent that is
true. But it also comes from U.S. friends of Israel simply concerned about the
impact on U.S.-Israeli relations if American troops take serious casualties
under a commitment made without advance Congressional backing.

I think Israel should be getting much more than handshakes and promissory notes
from Arab nations in exchange for land. But I also think that any risks Israelis
take for peace are essentially up to them.

Essentially -- but sending U.S. troops to the edgy Golan is American business.
Recent history shows that it is far better now for the U.S. and its allies if
the American public has a good idea of what it is getting into. That happened
before the Persian Gulf -- but not before Vietnam.

If I were an Israeli, I think I would oppose asking for U.S. troops. Israel's
strength as a small ally is that it has not asked that foreign lives be put at
risk for Israel.

Inevitably, the payoff for an American detachment on the heights would be loss
of Israeli freedom of action for the kind of military pre-emption that has
helped protect the country so far.

As an American friend of Israel, I am queasy about Israel becoming more
dependent on the U.S. On an issue of this importance, Congressional discussion
could clear up legitimate doubts, or confirm them.

Israel and Americans who oppose Congressional consideration will probably win --
a bad victory. Today, the movement for debate comes from American friends of
Israel. If that is blocked, some soon tomorrow the demand will come from her
enemies.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              319 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Unocal Seeks to Sell Assets To Finance Foreign Projects

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


The Unocal Corporation said yesterday that it would seek to sell its California
oil and gas assets, which date back 103 years, to free money to invest overseas.

The decision by Unocal is one of the latest by mostly domestic oil companies
like Chevron and ARCO that are making large investments in countries like Russia
and Kazakhstan in an effort to become big international companies.

Roger C. Beach, chief executive of Unocal, which is based in Los Angeles, said
selling its California assets would enable the company to "pursue large,
lifelong projects" and speed up its investment in the Gulf of Mexico and
Southeast Asia.

Several groups have expressed interest in the California holdings, Mr. Beach
said, including Torch Energy Advisers, a subsidiary of the Torchmark Corporation
of Birmingham, Ala.; the Contour Production Company, a privately held
independent company based in Houston, and Vintage Petroleum Inc. of Tulsa,
Okla., in an alliance with Venoco Inc. of Santa Barbara, Calif.

The sale discussions involve all Unocal's interests in 69 oil and gas fields,
including 10 producing platforms off the California coast in state and Federal
waters.

The sale would mean the end of Unocal as a California oil producer. It was
founded as the Union Oil Company of California in Santa Paula, Calif., in 1890.
"We have been an integral part of the history of oil in this state for more than
a century," Mr. Beach said.

Barry Lane, a spokesman for Unocal, said the company would keep its headquarters
in Los Angeles and would still own three refineries and about 1,200 service
stations in the state.

Last week, the company sold 12 smaller gas fields for about $32 million.

The sale of the other fields, which is expected to bring a much larger amount,
would help the company finance exploration in China and Vietnam and natural gas
fields in Thailand and Indonesia.

The company also said it would create the 76 Products Company, for West Coast
refining and marketing. The name refers to the trademark "76" on the signs of
the company's gasoline stations. The new company will be headed by Lawrence M.
Higby.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              320 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
A Disgruntled Soldier and the Guatemalan Rebels

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 934 words



The Fighting Man
By Gerald Seymour
400 pages. HarperCollins. $23.

Gerald Seymour, one of the few journalists who have made a successful leap into
the field of suspense fiction, uses his considerable skills as a seasoned
observer to create credible characters who find themselves in trouble in some of
the world's worst trouble spots. His independent-minded protagonists often bear
a dangerous burden: they're romantics at heart, which makes them poor life
insurance risks when they become entangled in idealistic lost causes.

In "The Fighting Man," Mr. Seymour takes his readers to a new locale, Guatemala,
but it could be any of the Latin American countries run by tinpot dictators who
are kept in power by secret police and military thugs. In previous novels,
including "Harry's Game," "The Glory Boys" and "The Journeyman Tailor," Mr.
Seymour's characters wandered around the killing grounds of Northern Ireland,
the Middle East and Afghanistan. Few thriller writers today can match the
author's knowledge of urban guerrilla warfare, sophisticated weapons, regional
terrain and the rivalry between British and American intelligence agencies.

Mr. Seymour's people are never very far from the small but continuing civil wars
that flared up after the end of the cold war. The "fighting man" of his title,
Gord Brown, is a former British special services officer who's still fighting
mad because he was ordered to abandon the Shiites of southern Iraq to Saddam
Hussein's tanks. He doesn't admire how the Americans conducted the Persian Gulf
war, leaving Mr. Hussein in power. Although Brown rescued a downed American
helicopter pilot in Iraq, instead of getting a medal he was drummed out of his
regiment for insubordination.

Disgraced and disgusted, he winds up at a fishing village in Scotland.  There,
while drowning his sorrows in ale at a local pub, he is sought out by three
Guatemalan Indians who have come to Europe to recruit a "fighting man" to train
and lead them in a rebellion against their brutal government. They need a
battle-hardened professional who understands the minds and tactics of
Guatemala's American-supported military leaders. Not essential, but if it's
someone sympathetic to their cause, so much the better.

Clearly, Brown is well equipped to handle the assignment; to become what was
once called a soldier of fortune, but for humane, not mercenary, reasons. Mr.
Seymour's protagonist soon finds himself in the line of fire in a country where
ideologies clash, where the struggle is between rich and poor, oppressors and
oppressed. We soon meet the nemesis of the peasants, the ruthless Colonel
Arturo, a torturer who pokes out the eyes of prisoners when not throwing them
out of his American-piloted helicopter.

It's never in doubt which side Mr. Seymour is on. Before the high noon shootout
that's the hallmark of a Seymour novel, the young revolutionary leader explains
Guatemala's political life:

"My country is divided in many ways, Mr. Brown. It is divided by privilege and
opportunity so that a ruling oligarchy, a tiny minority, controls the vast
majority of the wealth.  There is division in health care, division in
education, division in human rights -- and there is the division of racism. The
subjugation of an ethnic majority is at the heart of my country's nightmare. The
ethnic majority of Guatemala are the Mayan Indian people. If the majority were
to receive their share of the wealth of Guatemala, then the privilege of the
minority would be threatened."

Enter the Americans, first cousins to the naive Americans of the Vietnam War
years in Graham Greene's "Quiet American." The Guatemalan militarists are
cooperating with the Drug Enforcement Agency to prevent cocaine from passing
through their country from Colombia to the United States. Mr. Seymour doesn't
rub it in -- as always, he allows all the warring sides to rationalize their
actions -- but this time most of his American characters speak with forked
tongues. Pragmatism causes the American Embassy and intelligence officials to
look the other way when the Guatemalan colonel and his torturers do their dirty
work. The American diplomats are particularly contemptuous of Amnesty
International, Americas Watch and human rights workers.

Nor does Mr. Seymour allow his British intelligence officials to get off lightly
in the cynicism department.They cooperate with their American counterparts to
thwart and possibly kill the British soldier of fortune who is leading the
Guatemalan peasants and his small band of international volunteers on a forced
march through the jungle to Guatemala City. The top British M.I.6 official in
London is aware that Guatemala has a "disgusting regime," but that it's
necessary for British intelligence to "grovel" before the Americans. He tells a
female aide who plays a romantic role in the plot: "The 'Special Relationship'
is a notion of self-importance dreamed up by our political masters, it counts
for nothing across the water, we are not equals and we do what we are told to
do."

Mr. Seymour has a number of threads running through his story, a few too many,
and because of his overdone intercutting style, it takes some doing before all
of his characters fall into place. He also overreaches with a coincidence that
brings together the American helicopter pilot and the British soldier of
fortune, both veterans of the Persian Gulf war, in the jungles of Guatemala.
Nevertheless, "The Fighting Man" is an exciting novel that is full of inside
knowledge about the hypocrisy that reigns in another amoral corner of the world.


LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gerald Seymour. (Sally Soames/HarperCollins)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              321 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Celebrating the Real Thing in Vietnam

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Coca-Cola's new $20 million bottling plant a few miles south of
Hanoi should be producing its first Coke, Sprite and Fanta by early next year.
At a groundbreaking ceremony yesterday, a traditional Vietnamese dragon dancer
paid tribute at a commemorative monument. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              322 of 322 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

George Carver Jr. Security Expert and C.I.A. Official Is Dead at 64

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D;  Page 21;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


George Alexander Carver Jr., a national security expert who had a principal
intelligence role in the Vietnam War, died of cardiac arrest on Sunday at North
Arundel Hospital in Glen Burnie, Md. He was 64.

Dr. Carver, who lived in Great Falls, Va., was stricken on his way home from the
Baltimore-Washington Airport, where he had picked up one of his sons, his family
said.

At his death Dr. Carver was the John M. Olin Senior Fellow at the Center for
Strategic and International Studies in Washington. He also worked as a private
consultant, appeared on public affairs television programs and wrote and
lectured widely.

He was born in Louisville, Ky., and reared in China, where his father headed the
English department of the University of Shanghai. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa
from Yale University and, on a Woodrow Wilson Fellowship, received a doctorate
in philosophy from Oxford University.

Oxford Coxswain in 1951

At Yale he was a debating champion and the coxswain of the Yale crew. In 1951 he
became the first American to cox the Oxford shell for the 97th Oxford-Cambridge
race on the Thames.

Beginning in 1953, Dr. Carver spent 26 years in government service, mostly with
the Central Intelligence Agency. From 1966 to 1973, he served three Directors of
Central Intelligence -- Richard Helms, James R. Schlesinger and William E. Colby
-- as their special assistant for Vietnamese affairs.

In the mid-1970's, Dr. Carver overhauled the procedures for gathering national
intelligence. From 1976 until his retirement from the C.I.A. in 1979 he was
posted in West Germany with responsibility for Berlin. He was the senior
American intelligence officer in Germany at the time.

He then joined the Center for Strategic and International Studies. But the
shadows of the Vietnam War made Dr. Carver, like Mr. Colby and other senior
intelligence officers, a controversial figure because of his influence on
political pacification programs and United States policy making in South Vietnam
in general.

Dr. Carver also was a witness in the $120 million libel suit that Gen. William
C. Westmoreland filed in 1983 over a CBS News documentary, "The Uncounted Enemy:
A Vietnam Deception," which was broadcast the previous year. At issue were
estimates of enemy strength reported by General Westmoreland's comand in Saigon
to the Pentagon in 1967.

Defending Westmoreland

Dr. Carver and other former associates defended the general against suggestions
that his staff willfully played down enemy troop strength at his behest.

The suit ended before it reached the jury, with General Westmoreland settling
for a formal CBS acknowledgment of his "long and faithful service to his
country."

Dr. Carver is survived by his wife of 37 years, Ruth Hughes Carver; four sons,
George A. 3d, of Reston, Va., David M., of Cincinnati, Christopher S., of Miami
Beach, and Douglas H., of Great Falls; a daughter, Catherine Carver McCurrach of
Birmingham, Mich.; his parents, George A. and Saxon R. Carver of Louisville, and
three grandchildren.


NAME: George Alexander Carver Jr.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George A. Carver Jr.

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
