



Download Request: All Documents: 1-265
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:07:31 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(10/01/1994) and leq(12/31/1994)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
Antidote to Hard Times: An Artist Gets a Break

BYLINE: By Felicia R. Lee

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 27;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


IN the city of myth, everyone finds true love, starving artists are discovered
and endings are happy. In reality, the streets also smell of urine, beggars
troll the subway, denouements are not neat. Morgan Monceaux has lived both
versions of New York.

Mr. Monceaux is an artist. Less than three years ago, he was homeless and
foraged for food in Dumpsters. He is to spend today signing copies of a new book
on jazz musicians that he wrote and illustrated, "Jazz: My Music, My People"
(Alfred A. Knopf, $18). This week, some of the collagelike paintings featured in
that book of biographies and personal recollections made its debut in the
windows of the Barneys store on Madison Avenue.

Pearl Bailey wearing a medallion with a big purple ribbon and Nat (King) Cole in
a bow tie and lace cuffs are among the artists peering out from the display of
men's clothing. Other artists hanging in the window include Thelonious Monk,
Lena Horne, W. C. Handy, Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, Ma Rainey and Louis
Armstrong.

Amid the getting and spending, Madison Avenue people are stopping to enjoy Mr.
Monceaux's art. Most do not know the improbable -- but quintessentially New York
-- story of how he went from dire poverty to acclaim after being discovered by
an art gallery owner.

Mr. Monceaux, 47, is now winning favorable notices from critics. His whimsical
portraits of the first 40 American Presidents, done in folk art style, were
hailed as "a unique meditation on American history" in a 1992 New Yorker
profile.


"I'M having the time of my life," Mr. Monceaux said the other day, as he
recalled the time he lived in an abandoned South Bronx factory and two friends
were murdered in separate incidents.

"I kind of like discovered myself," he said. "I like who I am. I don't see
darkness around me anymore. It's like summer is here forever."

The Presidents were Mr. Monceaux's first attempts to be an artist, a venture
more personal than commercial. At the time, Mr. Monceaux was working as a
janitor and living in a migrant worker's shack. He needed a way to express
himself while he held body and soul together.

"Things just started coming out," he said of the Presidential series, which
began with a portrait of John Quincy Adams. "Why does a singer sing? It was my
way of singing. I was using my voice in a new way."

Like the jazz series, the Presidential portraits are animated with collage odds
and ends like buttons, lace and coins. The materials came from the Dumpsters
that Mr. Monceaux prowled for materials. The Presidents were first shown in a
Long Island art gallery, then toured Presidential libraries and museums.

Mr. Monceaux was born in Alexandria, La., in the center of the state, and wanted
to be an opera singer. After studying music and theology in college and serving
in Vietnam, he became a vagabond. He survived with a string of odd jobs that
took him to Chicago, San Francisco and San Diego, among other places.

"I was trying to find out where I fit in," Mr. Monceaux said. He is black and
grew up in segregated circles but with the pride and strength of those who
refuse to let others define them.


THE myth of New York beckoned. Mr. Monceaux arrived at the Port Authority
midtown station on a Trailways bus on an August night in 1989.

"I saw a lot of weird people," Mr. Monceaux said. "My first thought was, 'What
have I done?' I walked up Eighth Avenue, just looking."

He ran into an old buddy from Vietnam, who had a hauling business in Harlem. Six
months later, the friend was killed in a robbery as he emerged from the 125th
Street subway. Mr. Monceaux found himself jobless and homeless. He lived on the
fifth floor of the abandoned building until the night the first-floor crack
addicts came looking for him.

Mr. Monceaux fled to Long Island, where he found work as janitor in an East
Hampton, L.I., club called Diamond Lil. He lived in the shack. He began
painting.

Mr. Monceaux painted the Presidents because they had always fascinated him. He
spent hours at the New York Public Library researching information on Presidents
from George Washington to George Bush. His favorite is Richard Nixon. He was
surprised to learn that Abraham Lincoln's emancipation proclamation was a
military tactic rather than a humanitarian gesture.


JUST as in the best New York movies, Mr. Monceaux was discovered by a kindly
benefactor. He was Morgan Rank, the owner of an East Hampton art gallery that
bears his name.

The two Morgans were chatting outside Mr. Rank's gallery one day when Mr.
Monceaux invited Mr. Rank to see his paintings. Mr. Rank was impressed and
arranged to display them in his gallery. Mr. Monceaux quickly became the darling
of the Hamptons' set.

Mr. Rank said it is a kind of poetic justice that Mr. Monceaux's work is now
back on the streets of the city.

"Morgan's work should be accessible to everyone," he said. "Because he was
someone who lived on the street for such a long time in New York, it is a nice
gift back."

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 2, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 868 words



An error occurred in the processing of a table at this point in the document.
Please refer to the table in the online document.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1    6   GUMPI
          SMS:
          The
          Wit
          and
          Wisdo
          m of
          Forre
          st
          Gump,
          by
          Winst
          on
          Groom
          .
          (Pock
          et,
          $5.)
          The
          witti
          cisms
          of a
          ficti
          onal
          slow-
          witte
          d
          wande
          rer
          throu
          gh
          histo
          ry.

 2   185  THE
          SEVEN
          HABIT
          S OF
          HIGHL
          Y
          EFFEC
          TIVE
          PEOPL
          E, by
          Steph
          en R.
          Covey
          .
          (Fire
          side/
          S&S,
          $12.)
          Princ
          iples
          for
          succe
          ss.

 3    47  WHAT
          TO
          EXPEC
          T
          WHEN
          YOU'R
          E
          EXPEC
          TING,
          by
          Arlen
          e
          Eisen
          berg,
          Heidi
          E.
          Murko
          ff
          and
          Sande
          e E.
          Hatha
          way.
          (Work
          man,
          $10.9
          5.)
          Couns
          el.

 4    3   CHICK
          EN
          SOUP
          FOR
          THE
          SOUL,
          compi
          led
          by
          Jack
          Canfi
          eld
          and
          Mark
          Victo
          r
          Hanse
          n.
          (Heal
          th
          Commu
          nicat
          ions,
          $12.)
          Stori
          es
          meant
          to
          "open
          the
          heart
          and
          rekin
          dle
          the
          spiri
          t."


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 17, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically
weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk
indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book
above.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 169 words


THE TIMES MAGAZINE WELCOMES A NEW name and an old friend. Max Frankel, who
recently retired as executive editor of The Times, today begins "Word & Image,"
a weekly column of commentary on communication of every sort. Max's byline,
though mothballed during 20 years of editing, is familiar to many Times readers.
It first ran in 1951, over a description of the demolition of the Third Avenue
el. It appeared most recently in the news columns in January 1973, over an
article evaluating Lyndon Johnson's Presidency, dictated from a restaurant when
he learned of Johnson's death.

In between, readers saw some 4,000 Frankel bylines -- over descriptions of Van
Cliburn taking the Soviet music world by storm, Pulitzer Prize-winning reports
from China and milestone accounts of the White House and Vietnam. We at the
Magazine especially remember his description in these pages of returning to the
town in Germany from which he was forced to flee as a 10-year-old in 1940.

"Word & Image" appears on page 32.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Finally, Bruce Willis Gets Invited to the Ball

BYLINE: By JILL GERSTON

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1772 words


FIRST HE HAS TO RUN THE gantlet of photographers along the red carpet outside
Lincoln Center. Then it is high intensity time in the greenroom of Avery Fisher
Hall as Bruce Willis threads his way through a crush of stars and satellites --
Tom Cruise, Nicole Kidman, Jeffrey Katzenberg and assorted hangers-on -- who are
gathered for a screening of "Pulp Fiction."

A premiere gala on opening night of the New York Film Festival isn't the usual
milieu for Mr. Willis, a party animal who is more often found posing for
paparazzi at Planet Hollywood. Mr. Willis, in black tie, beams with pleasure and
his wife, Demi Moore, clings to his arm.

"It's a special time for me," he says, interrupted as the film's director,
Quentin Tarantino, bounds over to hug him. "I remember when I was just starting
out, and lived on 49th Street and 10th Avenue, I'd roller-skate past Lincoln
Center. In fact, it's 10 years to the month that I went to Hollywood and
everything started happening."

Over the course of his career, Mr. Willis has often been skewered by the press
for becoming an arrogant, egomaniacal hotshot who skyrocketed to stardom on a
string of big-budget action-adventure flicks like "Die Hard" and "The Last Boy
Scout." A sexy smirk and a smart-alecky Everyguy demeanor were more evident than
a formidable acting talent.

But the days when Newsweek could scoff "Bruce Willis in a great movie?" may be
behind him, thanks to the extraordinary reviews for "Pulp Fiction," which will
open commercially on Oct. 14. Mr. Willis plays Butch, a tightly wound,
over-the-hill boxer who double-crosses an underworld boss and goes on the lam
with a scatterbrained French girlfriend (Maria de Medeiros). Butch is a vivid,
complex character whose brutality and recklessness are offset by a lovestruck
playfulness and a surprising act of compassion. Janet Maslin, writing in The New
York Times, says that Mr. Willis in the film "displays a tough, agile energy
when placed in the most mind-boggling situation."

" 'Pulp Fiction' really gives him his chops as an actor," proclaims Quentin
Tarantino, the film's director. "His performance is undebatably wonderful."

A week before the New York Film Festival, Mr. Willis was ensconced in his
trailer between the filming of scenes for "Die Hard III" on location at Tompkins
Square Park on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Outside, a burly bodyguard
named Avi Korein and a cadre of assistants stand sentry against unseen groupies.

Folded into an easy chair and swigging a bottle of Evian, the actor looked
hunky, if somewhat menacing, in a grimy undershirt, ripped khakis and some very
realistic-looking bruises, all of which served to transform him into John
McClane, his "Die Hard" alter ego.

In two hours of conversation, Mr. Willis, 39, turned out to be more teddy bear
than grizzly. The growl has been tempered by a calm complacency and the
unmistakable delight that comes from starring in a film that just about every
actor would have sold his agent to be in.

Even such touchy topics as "Hudson Hawk," his much-publicized 1991 debacle,
don't ignite any star tantrums these days. Though cynical about being
interviewed ("Now it's the 'He's back and done something to blow our minds'
story," he says mockingly at one point), he is polite, even expansive,
especially when it comes to discussing "Pulp Fiction."

"IT IS THE RAREST THING IN THE world to get a script as well written and
interesting as 'Pulp Fiction,' " marvels Mr. Willis, who learned about the film
through Harvey Keitel. "I told Quentin I'd do anything, whatever part he wanted
me to play."

Mr. Tarantino says that he toyed with the idea of Mr. Willis playing another
lead, but that he immediately saw him as Butch. "Bruce, to me, really suggests a
50's-style actor like an Aldo Ray or a Ralph Meeker or a young Burt Lancaster,"
he says. "That was my conception of Butch, and Bruce fit it perfectly."

To get Butch's aging palooka look, Mr. Willis shaved his hair to the scalp, a la
Aldo Ray's buzz cut in the 1956 film "Nightfall." He also pumped up an already
muscular body that had been chiseled into shape for his sex scenes in "Color of
Night," the erotic murder mystery that sank this summer at the box office. Mr.
Willis says, "I wanted him to look like a big piece of meat with no feathers on
him at all."

What was it like to work with the 31-year-old Mr. Tarantino?

"He's like a big kid," Mr. Willis says warmly. "We were in sync from the first
day. It was such a creative collaboration. I'd come up with an idea and he'd
say, 'Yeah, great, but if you do that, then let's do this,' and ideas would just
springboard off each other."

Mr. Tarantino is mutually effusive: "After working with Bruce, I will never
listen to rumors about how difficult this star or that star is. You couldn't
have heard more bad things about somebody than Bruce, about how he'd tell you
what lens to put in the camera. It couldn't have been farther from the truth.
I'd work with him again in a second."

Mr. Willis, who receives at least $10 million for an action movie, waived his
usual fee in exchange for a small salary and a percent of the profits for "Pulp
Fiction," which cost $8.5 million.

"Everyone was a team player," says Lawrence Bender, who is a producer on the
film. "It was the kind of set where it would be 4 P.M. and Bruce would say, 'I'm
starved. Order pizza for everyone. It's on me.' "

Mr. Willis says the cast argued with Mr. Tarantino to stay with the original
script -- "something I haven't seen happen since I worked in New York in a Sam
Shepard play." (The reference was to the 1984 Off Broadway production of "Fool
for Love.") Nonetheless, Mr. Willis improvised one word. Instead of saying
"car," he said: "I'm sorry, baby. I had to crash that Honda." Mr. Tarantino
approved of the change.

Clever dialogue hasn't come Mr. Willis's way since he was trading snappy banter
a decade ago with Cybill Shepherd on "Moonlighting," the hit ABC series that
launched his career.

Action, rather than words, has made Mr. Willis a box-office draw. His attempts
at playing against type -- the milquetoast doctor in "Death Becomes Her," the
reclusive Vietnam veteran of "In Country," the boozy tabloid journalist in
"Bonfire of the Vanities" and the loutish husband in "Mortal Thoughts" -- have
shown an ambitious range but brought few critical valentines.

"I know when I'm good and when I could have done better, and the reviews seldom
reflect those things," he says dismissively.

Robert Zemeckis, who directed Mr. Willis in "Death Becomes Her," says the actor
can't be pigeonholed. "I can think of very few name-above-the-title stars who
will do cameos or take risky roles," he says. "Bruce will do something just
because he loves the part."

Mr. Willis says he has no idea what impact "Pulp Fiction" will have on his
career. "I already get to see just about every script that's out there," he
says. "Maybe a larger step will come from it. I'm not sure."

Mr. Tarantino predicts that "Pulp Fiction," along with Mr. Willis's performance
in the forthcoming film "Nobody's Fool," will be "like a one-two punch."

"Bruce is ripe for more of an appreciation of him as an actor," he says.

John Travolta, a "Pulp Fiction" co-star whose performance has already
jump-started a stalled career, observes: "Hopefully, 'Pulp Fiction' will have
the same effect on Bruce's career, although his is in better shape than mine was
anyway. It reinvented me, but it will just add to his credibility by showing off
his artistic ability."

Before his leap to stardom, Mr. Willis was a rambunctious, blue-collar kid from
Penns Grove, N.J., who played harmonica in a blues band and dropped out of
Montclair State College in 1977 to pursue an acting career in New York. He lived
in a $175-a-month railroad flat in Hell's Kitchen and supported himself with the
usual struggling-actor gigs -- bartender, health club attendant -- while
appearing in workshop and Off Broadway productions.

His big break came in 1984 when he auditioned, in combat fatigues and a punk
haircut, for the role of David Addison in "Moonlighting." He was selected over
3,000 other hopefuls.

"The first seven years I was in Hollywood, I worked nonstop around the
calendar," Mr. Willis recalls. "I was single. All of a sudden somebody opens a
door and says, 'You want to do an HBO music special? You want to do an album?
How about a couple of films during the show's hiatus?' " (Future historians will
take this as his mea culpa for the "Bruce Willis: The Return of Bruno" album and
such films as "Blind Date" and "Sunset.") "I can't believe I worked on all those
projects and did 65 episodes of an hour television show," he says. "Man, I was
burning the blue flame."

He says he was taken aback by the lightning transition from unknown to Hollywood
fame. "I always knew success would come, but I was very naive," he says. "I
really didn't know about all the celebrity stuff."

Predictably, the constant media scrutiny directed toward Mr. Willis after the
disastrous "Hudson Hawk" was merciless. (The movie, reviled by critics, cost
almost $60 million and grossed less than $20 million.) "Every rock that could be
thrown was thrown at me," he says, "and you know what? I came out O.K. I was
still offered great big movies with very tasty salaries. What I realized was
that it didn't matter what gets said. I no longer expect anything nice written
about me."

What is nice, Mr. Willis says, is the private life he shares with his wife and
their three daughters, Rumer, 6, Scout, 3, and Tallulah Belle, 7 months. Except
for a few "superstar friends" whom he declines to name, the actor hangs out with
a tight circle of buddies who have served as a support network "before any of
this celebrity stuff happened."

He has a home in Malibu and a New York apartment ("a mile and many million
dollars away from my first one," he says), but his favorite residence is a
rustic mountain retreat in a place he refuses to name out West, where he says he
relishes being just another dude on line at the convenience store.

Mr. Willis is evasive about his project after "Die Hard III," which he is still
negotiating. He will only describe the film as a "kind of a time-traveling
mystery with a darkly heroic antihero." (Variety reported last week that he was
about to be cast in "12 Monkeys," a film about a man sent back in time to find
the source of a virus.)

A phone rings in the trailer summoning Mr. Willis back to work.

So, last chance. Are there any misconceptions about him he would like to put to
rest?

"You don't have enough column inches," he replies.

NAME: Bruce Willis

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bruce Willis and Maria de Medeiros, above, in "Pulp Fiction,"
(Linda R. Chen/Miramax Films) and Mr. Willis in the 1991 debacle "Hudson Hawk"
-- New credibility after a string of big-budget action movies. (Steven
Vaughn/Tri-Star Pictures)(pg. 22); Bruce Willis, left, Demi Moore and their
bodyguard, Avi Korein (in bow tie), arriving at the New York Film Festival for
"Pulp Fiction"--Tne aging-palooka look. (Thomas Dallal for The New York
Times)(pg. 11)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEW YORKERS & CO.;
The King of Pushcarts

BYLINE: By CONSTANCE L. HAYS

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 4;  Column 2;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words


AMONG the hot-dog-industry types who dropped by Dan Rossi's office the other day
was Mohamed El-Sayed. Mr. El-Sayed, for those who weren't paying attention over
the summer, is the Egyptian-born hot-dog seller who gained brief fame by staging
a fast to protest the city's ticketing and towing of his cart, at 50th Street
and Avenue of the Americas. (After three days, he collapsed, and though he's
back out there now, he keeps a $65 money order in his wallet, just in case.)

Mr. Rossi feels bad for Mr. El-Sayed, he really does. But from where he sits --
a tiny aerie, warm as a roasted chestnut, above an old stable in Hell's Kitchen
-- this is much bigger than Mr. El-Sayed. It's an entire business we're talking
about here, and as Mr. Rossi sees it, that business is deeply in danger of,
pardon the expression, going the way of the pushcart.

"This industry is very fragile," he says, peering into the steam-clouded future.
"It's made up of immigrants, and they'll work until they fall down. But if they
can't work, they'll drive a cab or do something else. If the rumor is that
they're closing all the streets, no one is going to go into this business."

Mr. Rossi, truth be told, has every reason to feel aggrieved. For he is the
owner of 499 pushcart permits, a one-man hot-dog-cart cartel, the uncrowned king
of an industry that is a prime target of the Giuliani administration's "quality
of life" campaign.

After more than a decade of benign neglect, City Hall is in its sixth month of
enforcing rules that restrict food carts to certain times and places in midtown
and other congested business districts. At the same time, moves are afoot, both
in the administration and in the City Council, to break up the kind of corporate
control that allows Mr. Rossi to take in more than $1 million a year by leasing
his carts to vendors.

The Giuliani administration and Councilwoman Karen Koslowitz of Queens argue
that since city law forbids the transfer of cart permits, it should be allowed
to call an end to these leasing "monopolies," which have turned the permits into
commodities, much like taxi medallions, that can be sold for tens of thousands
of dollars.

The city "is totally revamping the way permits are issued," said Forrest R.
Taylor, a mayoral spokesman, adding that specific changes would be recommended
within a few weeks -- not only for food vendors, but for other permit holders as
well.

All of which leaves Mr. Rossi "on the short end of the stick," admits Tom
Cusick, the president of the Fifth Avenue Business Improvement District, who has
fought to restrict vendors in midtown. But, he adds, "this is not a conspiracy,
the way he seems to describe things."

Try convincing Mr. Rossi. A 44-year-old former marine who once machine-gunned
the enemy from helicopters over Vietnam, Mr. Rossi certainly considers himself
at war again. Lawyer in hand, he has day-tripped to Albany to confront
legislators about perceived hot-dog-related inequities. He's given local
business leaders and even the Mayor an earful on local radio call-in shows.
"That's so ridiculous," he says of the Mayor's plan to break up the 52
corporations that own pushcart permits. "I don't know where his logic is coming
from. How can anyone be a monopoly with 52 companies out there?"

Most of the time, though, you can still find him in his office on West 45th
Street, where a homemade sign outside (with a hot-dog cart rendered in quilted
steel and paint) advertises his cart-building company, Precision Carts Inc., and
where, surrounded by machine-made whining and hammering, Mr. Rossi will explain
himself, and the hot-dog-cart business, to you.

His business is strictly carts, not food, but he'll still offer a little
socio-culinary history, pointing out that not too many carts actually sell hot
dogs anymore. These days, the hot-dog-selling Greeks have been replaced in many
spots by Indians, Afghans and Bengalis, and coffee prevails in the city that
never sleeps. Plus whatever a vendor's cultural strong suit might be, which
accounts for the proliferation of curried-chicken biriyani carts, mostly
operated by Pakistani immigrants. "We had a couple of Jamaican kids who started
cooking roti," he recalled. "They made a fortune."

Mr. Rossi came to the business more or less by accident. A colleague in the
Nyack, N.Y., sheet-metal factory where he was working had a heart attack one day
and decided to seek a quieter life. He asked Mr. Rossi to build him a hot-dog
cart.

"But then he started feeling better, and I didn't know what to do with this
cart," Mr. Rossi said. He sold it eventually, to an admiring buyer, and decided
maybe this was his true calling. "Some people just have to do their own thing,"
he says, "and I was one of those people."

He founded his cart-building firm in 1980, and in 1985 had an opportunity to buy
two companies whose assets included 399 cart permits. Those, together with a
third company whose 100 permits he bought more recently, cost him less than $1
million, he said. (Today, each of those permits -- for which he pays the city
either $50 or $200 every two years, depending on the kind of cart -- is worth at
least $4,500 in leasing revenue for a two-year term. Since he has 499 permits,
his potential income is about $1.1 million a year).

With 16 percent of the city's 3,100 available permits in hand, he then began
building carts by the hundreds. Some of the places his carts ended up were
populated by illegal vendors, and he began reporting them to official New York.
He struck gold after a 1989 investigation broke up a counterfeiting ring that
made fake permits (they are essentially decals, stuck onto the carts). "It was a
godsend," Mr. Rossi said. People came running to lease his carts, with their
legitimate permits. ( Vendors must obtain their own Health Department licenses.)

Mr. Rossi, who grew up with four brothers in a cramped two-room apartment on
Villa Avenue in the Bronx, lives in Greenwich, Conn., these days, in a big house
that he shares with his wife and four daughters, ages 10 to 21. No carts in
Greenwich, though -- at least none that belong to him.

"New York is the pushcart capital," he says, speaking emphatically in the
present tense. "This is the only place I'll work with the carts."

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dan Rossi, the owner of 499 pushcart permits, in his shop at 603
West 45th Street. These days, he finds himself forced to defend the industry
against quality-of-life initiatives. (Jack Manning/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Jane Mendelsohn, Nicholas Davis

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47; Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 167 words


Jane Simone Mendelsohn, the daughter of Dr. Frederick S. Mendelsohn and Dr.
Leatrice G. Mendelsohn, both of New York, was married last evening to Nicholas
Peter Davis, a son of Peter Davis of Castine, Me., and the late Johanna
Mankiewicz Davis. Rabbi Mychal Springer performed the ceremony at the Hudson
Theater in New York.

The bride, 29, is a writer in New York. She graduated summa cum laude from Yale
University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. Her father is a
psychiatrist in New York. Her mother is a professor of art history at the State
University College at New Paltz, N.Y. The bride is the stepdaughter of Martha
Mendelsohn.

Mr. Davis, also 29, is a writer and a film maker. He graduated magna cum laude
from Harvard University. His father, a writer and a documentary film maker,
produced "Hearts and Minds," about the American experience in Vietnam.

The bridegroom is a stepson of Karen Zehring Davis. He is a grandson of the late
Herman Mankiewicz, the screenwriter.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Toxic Messes: Easier Made Than Undone

BYLINE: By KEITH SCHNEIDER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words


IN an age characterized by both technical innovation and war, some of the
singularly novel inventions of the 20th century have been developed by the
American military. Nothing in physics has yet surpassed the dismaying power of
the atomic bomb. Military chemists have concocted chemical agents so deadly that
a drop on the skin will kill.

But scientists haven't been nearly as enthusiastic or as successful in
dismantling the inventions they worked so hard to create. The fact is that
technology is not always up to the job of cleaning up the messes it leaves
behind.


When he was running for Vice President, Al Gore called for harnessing the
technological brain power of private industry to mend the environment. The
problem though has proved far too technically difficult for all but the largest
industrial companies. At the same time, the Government, after pouring tens of
millions of dollars into its national laboratories, has not yet succeeded in
generating the sort of scientific excitement among environmental researchers
that accompanied the Manhattan Project or the space program.

The result is that the Government's program to dismantle its nuclear and
chemical arms will take decades and is already costing a fortune. The
dismantling project, prompted both by environmental laws and international arms
control treaties, is also raising so many doubts about safety that residents in
more than 30 states have come to believe that they are the unintended targets of
weapons once aimed at enemies.

"Cleaning up the toxic and radioactive legacy of the cold war will persist far
longer and be much harder than the 50 years it took to get to where we are now,"
said Robert Schaeffer, a spokesman for the Military Production Network and the
Military Toxics Project, which monitor the cleanup. "In almost every way the
task before us is more difficult both technically and politically, and therefore
requires at least an equal level of national commitment."

Government officials who manage the cleanup say adapting old technology has been
so expensive that it has raised new political issues, such as how much the
nation is really willing to invest to rid itself of the cold war's poisons.
"There is a tremendous pressure to get results," said Thomas P. Grumbly, the
Assistant Secretary of Energy for Environmental Management, who oversees the
$6.1 billion-a-year cleanup budget for the shuttered nuclear arms industry.

The latest in a series of setbacks came last week, when the design and safety of
the Army's new $450 million nerve gas incinerator in Utah came under pointed
criticism from its former chief safety officer, threatening an expensive delay
in the multi-billion dollar program. In 1984, the Army estimated that destroying
its 70-million-pound chemical arms stockpile would cost $1.2 billion and take
until the end of 1994. Ten years later, the estimated cost of the program has
soared to nearly $10 billion, and just two of the nine incinerators the Army
says it needs for the project have been built.

Last week Steve Jones, who was in charge of safety at the Army's nerve gas
incinerator in Tooele, Utah, said he was fired after refusing to ignore a
Government report identifying more than 100 design flaws that, left unrepaired,
could cause "imminent and catastrophic failures."

Henry Silvestri, the plant's general manager, insisted that the plant was well
designed and would be ready to operate safely next year. But the Army, Congress
and the state of Utah have begun investigations in response to Mr. Jones's
criticisms.

Radioactive Leftovers

In South Carolina, the Department of Energy is trying to dispose of more than 34
million gallons of liquid radioactive wastes from the manufacture of plutonium
and other materials for nuclear bombs. In 1982, the Energy Department decided to
design and build a $1 billion processing factory that would turn the liquid
wastes into solid glass logs that would be easier to handle and safer to bury at
a permanent repository under consideration in Nevada.

The building was completed a decade later at the Savannah River nuclear weapons
plant near Aiken, S.C., at a cost twice the original estimate. The Energy
Department hopes to start processing nuclear wastes late next year but has
steadily put off filling its shiny tangle of stainless steel pipes and tanks
with the radioactive wastes. Officials say the agency is nervous about whether
the factory will work properly. If it doesn't the Energy Department will have
yet another mammoth task: cleaning up and dismantling an unused and highly
contaminated processing plant.

The Environmental Protection Agency also has run into headaches involving
thousands of barrels of dioxin-contaminated pesticide wastes stored at a
chemical plant in the center of Jacksonville, Ark.

The wastes came from the production of Agent Orange, the defoliant used to clear
the jungles in Vietnam. In the mid-1980's, after the plant was abandoned by its
owner, the Vertac Chemical Company, the E.P.A. and the state took control and
soon decided that burning the barrels was the best solution. On Friday, almost a
decade after the decision was made, the E.P.A. completed burning 25,180 barrels
of dioxin-contaminated wastes at a cost of $33 million.

Almost nobody in Jacksonville, though, is celebrating, not even the E.P.A.
Because of the technological limitations of the incinerator, for every barrel of
defoliant waste burned, the E.P.A. got back 1.5 barrels of salt and ash
contaminated with lower concentrations of dioxin.

Because of the proven ability of dioxin to cause biological havoc in laboratory
animals, and the theoretical risk low concentrations of the compound may pose to
people, the Federal hazardous waste law forbids burying the debris.

So the E.P.A. adopted another strategy. It built two $300,000 buildings at the
abandoned Agent Orange plant to store more than 38,000 barrels of the
dioxin-contaminated waste indefinitely -- 13,000 more barrels than it started
with.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: This incinerator in Arkansas, at the plant that made Agent
Orange, produces more dioxin-contaminated wastes then it burns. (Alan S. Weiner
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS;
Democrats See Only Negative Numbers

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1504 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


With little more than five weeks until Election Day, the Democratic Party seems
to be headed for one of its worst midterm drubbings since World War II, which
would present President Clinton with enormous legislative problems in the last
two years of his term.

It would also alter the shape of the 1996 Presidential campaign.

Though most professional politicians remain reluctant to make firm predictions,
a month of episodic campaigning since Labor Day has persuaded leaders in both
parties that the Republicans have a genuine chance of making the net gain of
seven seats that they would need to seize control of the Senate for the first
time since 1986.

They have led the Senate for only 10 of the 62 years since the election of
Franklin D. Roosevelt.

"It's bleak, very, very bleak," a leading Democratic campaign consultant in the
Midwest said recently, and a senior White House official commented, "We're in
the soup up to our neck, and it's hot."

Roger Stone, a Republican consultant, who was understandably much more willing
to be quoted by name than his Democratic brethren, said, "It's hard not to be
optimistic," adding, "I think we're riding a 1974-style tide, the kind the
Democrats rode after Watergate."

So ebullient are some Republicans that they dream of pulling off a startling
political hat-trick by taking control of the Senate, the House of
Representatives -- which they have not controlled for 40 years -- and the
governorships of the nation's half-dozen most populous states.

But many races are dead heats, many more remain in doubt and the lengthy session
of Congress means that many incumbents have not yet hit their stride, either on
the stump or on television. Some Democratic strategists think they can still cut
their party's losses by emphasizing Republican obstruction of President
Clinton's proposals and by ridiculing the lack of financing details in
Republican proposals put forth in a midterm platform this week.

"So far, they have made us the issue," said Robert Shrum, who is advising a
number of Democratic candidates, including Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts.  "We need to put the onus back on them -- their behavior, their
negativism. In 1946, their slogan was 'Had Enough?' and they're trying the same
thing this time. We can't let them get away with that."

But so far, all the momentum has been running one way. Democrats who were
expected to win easily are hard-pressed, and supposedly vulnerable Republicans
are doing well.

Republicans threaten the Democrats in a dozen Senate seats: open seats in
Arizona, Maine, Michigan, Ohio, Oklahoma and Tennessee; and those now held by
Senators Dianne Feinstein in California, Mr. Kennedy in Massachusetts, Frank R.
Lautenberg in New Jersey, Harris Wofford in Pennsylvania, Jim Sasser in
Tennessee, where there are two contests, and Charles S. Robb in Virginia.

It is the rule of American politics, not the exception, that the party holding
the White House loses Congressional seats in midterm elections. It has held true
in every such election since 1938 in the House and in all but three in the
Senate. But the losses have been truly punishing only when the President was
deeply unpopular with voters.

For the Democrats, the years of misery have been 1946, which produced a pair of
Republican-led houses that Harry S. Truman derided as the "good-for-nothing,
do-nothing 80th Congress," and 1966, when rising impatience with the grinding
war in Vietnam, with the economy and with Lyndon B. Johnson himself cost the
Democrats 47 seats in the House and 7 in the Senate.

There is little doubt that Mr. Clinton constitutes a major problem for the
Democrats this year, with his approval rating hovering around 40 percent in the
polls, although he has raised several million dollars for their races. Many
Republicans, like Guy Millner of Georgia, who is trying to oust Gov. Zell
Miller, seek to tie their opponents to the President; Democrats, like
Representative Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma, who wants to succeed retiring Senator
David L. Boren, also a Democrat, tend to stress their independence.

But there are other problems as well, many of them beyond Mr. Clinton's control
or only marginally affected by his Presidency:

*A nagging sense of economic discomfort, evident despite the strong business
turnaround that has marked Mr. Clinton's Presidency, is costing the Democrats
the credit they might normally expect for good times. Real family income has
been declining in the United States since 1972, according to Government
statistics, and that has engendered pervasive worry about the future.

*The rebellion against incumbency, which has been gathering speed for a decade
and helped elect Mr. Clinton in 1992, seems to be cutting more deeply into the
Democrats this year because they control the House, the Senate and the
Presidency. They are incumbent all over town.

*Many more Democratic senatorial seats are up this year, which gives the
Republicans that many more chances to score breakthroughs.

The President has had to scramble hard for most of his legislative victories in
the last two years, forming and reforming coalitions. The almost inevitable
Republican gains in the House and Senate mean that doing so will be harder
starting in January. Anything more than modest health care legislation, for
example, seems unlikely, and welfare reform will be an uphill fight.

In the House, in particular, conservatives appear sure to have a stronger voice
in 1995. Republican candidates are poised to pick up about a dozen
Democratic-held seats in the South, for example. There, though both parties are
more conservative than their counterparts elsewhere, the Republicans are clearly
the more conservative of the two.

The picture would be more sharply altered if the Republicans took voting control
of Congress.

In that event, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, a hard-nosed partisan
who has led his party's charge against Mr. Clinton, would probably be Speaker of
the House; 93-year-old Strom Thurmond of South Carolina would be in line for the
chairmanship of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Jesse Helms of North
Carolina, perhaps the most tenacious and quarrelsome conservative in the Senate,
could demand the chair of the Foreign Relations Committee if he wanted it.

Almost certainly, that would mean gridlock with a vengeance.

Some members of Mr. Clinton's circle argue that it may help him two years from
now, by giving him a stone on which to strike his flint. He could challenge the
Republicans, newly saddled with authority, to devise a legislative program,
which would give him a target for 1996. President Truman used that strategy in
1948.

Other top Democratic strategists think that the loss of either house would
cripple the President.

If the Republicans took control of the Senate, Bob Dole of Kansas would be
expected to become the majority leader. That might convince him not to run for
President; some Republicans consider it doubtful that the party caucus would let
him do both things at once if he wanted to.

A Republican Presidential primary contest without a Dole candidacy could produce
a wide-open nominating race, though if Gov. Pete Wilson of California is
re-elected, as now seems far more likely than it did a year ago, he could
quickly emerge as a strong contender.

If the Republicans take eight Senate seats now held by Democrats, which seems
quite conceivable, they could afford to lose one of the seats they now hold and
still take control.  They seem to be in the most trouble in Minnesota, where the
Democratic candidate, Ann Wynia, a former state legislator, is running a strong
campaign for the seat now held by Senator Dave Durenberger, a retiring
Republican.

The Delaware race, where a 73-year-old Republican, William V. Roth Jr., is
trying for fifth term, could produce an upset, Democrats think.

Republican House targets are concentrated in the South, but they crop up in all
parts of the country. There are a half dozen in Ohio, four in Michigan, another
half dozen in Washington State, five in California.

"There are still weeks to go," said Linda Divall, a Republican pollster.  "But
the close races tend to go to the party with the surge, and that's us, so far. I
think we're sure to go from 178 seats now to more than 200, and it could be 210
or even 215."

It takes 218 to control the House.

But it is the battle for the statehouses that most excites the Republicans, who
are thinking ahead to the 1996 general election campaign.

Traditionally, big-state governorships are considered good organizational bases,
particularly for a party that does not hold the White House.  Of the six biggest
states, the Republicans are ahead in the polls in California, slightly ahead or
dead even in New York, even in Texas (where their candidate is George W. Bush, a
son of George Bush), slightly ahead in Florida (another Bush, George W.'s
brother, Jeb, is the candidate here), slightly behind in Pennsylvania and well
ahead in Illinois.


LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee, one of several Democrats in
tough electoral races this year, with his wife, Mary, at a rally two weeks ago.
(Rollin Riggs for The New York Times) (pg. 24

Graph/Photos: "Incumbents Fighting to Hold Back the Tide" shows photos of Kianne
Feinstein, California; Edward M. Kennedy, Massachusetts; Frank R. Lautenberg,
New Jersey; Charles S. Robb, Virgina; Harris Wofford, Pennsylvania. Graph shows
midterm elections where the President's party has lost the most seats over all,
from 1946. (Source: Vital Statistics on Congess) (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Oldest Law Firm Is Courtly, Loyal and Defunct

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 33;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1935 words


Until the very end, when the doors officially closed on Friday, New York's
oldest law firm had a 19th-century whiff about it.

Yes, most of the paintings of hunting horses and tall ships, the photographs of
partners in mutton chops and Civil war uniforms, were kept to one conference
room in the blandly modern midtown offices of Lord, Day & Lord, Barrett Smith.

But the old values of being true, quiet professionals still held. Lord, Day's
lawyers served the same clients for generations. The aggressive pursuit of new
business and old bills was considered unseemly. Gentility counted for a lot --
colleagues uniformly described one another as "nice."

It was a lovely way to run a law firm. It turned out to be a terrible way to run
a business.

Lord, Day, with about 125 lawyers, is the third midsize New York firm to
dissolve this year, along with Shea & Gould and Bower & Gardner. In the last
four years, more than a dozen firms, ranging from 30 to 250 lawyers, have
folded, merged or been acquired to become the New York branches of giant firms
with home offices in other cities. Legal recruiters predict that the shakeout
will continue, as firms plot their transitions from the wild, flush 1980's to
the sober, post-recession 90's.

Law firms have undergone profound changes in the last 15 years. Partnerships are
no longer lifetime appointments; clients now regularly switch allegiances.
Midsize firms like Lord, Day became particularly vulnerable to dissolution,
caught between full-service firms and specialized "boutique" practices.

Like many firms, Lord, Day refused for so long to adapt to the new legal market
that when it did -- merging with another firm, taking on a costly lease -- it
was too late.

But Lord, Day's passing is about more than financial stratagems. It is also,
members of the legal community say, confirmation that a somewhat romanticized
way of law-firm life is over, that the profession has become a business.

"The coin of the realm ceased being loyalty, predictability and continuity,"
said Gordon J. Davis, a senior partner at Lord, Day, "and became money, money
and money."

In 1818, Daniel Lord, a solo New York practitioner, hung out his shingle and by
1848, he was joined by his son, Daniel De Forest Lord, and son-in-law, Henry
Day. The firm remained a kind of family store: successive generations of Lords
became partners, including the current distant relation, Henry De Forest
Baldwin. Lord, Day was known as a carriage trade and admiralty house -- argot
for wealthy private clients and shipping companies. In 1925 it moved to 25
Broadway, which housed offices for the Cunard shipping lines, a Lord, Day client
since just after the Civil War.

"The firm's ethos was: you're a professional man with your primary duty to your
clients," said R. Palmer Baker Jr., a retired managing partner. Bills were sent
annually. If they went unpaid, a reminder was sent the next year.

By the 1950's, the firm was virtually a synonym for stuffy, solicitous
white-shoe practice. "Clients like to look at law firms and see themselves,"
said James C. Goodale, a former Lord, Day associate now at Debevoise & Plimpton.
Slowly, the firm expanded to include corporate work for clients like the
American Stock Exchange.

Another longtime client was The New York Times. In 1971 The Times obtained a
classified Government study of the Vietnam War known as the Pentagon Papers. The
firm advised the newspaper not to publish the documents. When The Times decided
to challenge the Government's attempt to stop publication, Lord, Day withdrew
from the case. Thereafter, the firm's work for The Times was confined to
corporate matters.

By 1979, The American Lawyer, a magazine that was then the profession's brash
new trouble-shooter, sounded a warning note by including Lord, Day in a cover
story called "5 on the Way Down." As a general-interest firm, Lord, Day was
losing clout and clients, it said. Many clients were turning to in-house counsel
or specialists, while others were simply disappearing in corporate takeovers. As
the 1980's loomed, Lord, Day was not in position at the starting gate.

Rainmaker Decade: Loyalty Not Needed

The 1980's rocked law firm practice, as they did in many other fields. Mergers
and acquisitions work exploded, as did bankruptcy work. Lawyers grew envious of
money made not only by their clients, but by their colleagues; The American
Lawyer was publishing annual revenue lists that the entire legal community
gnawed over.

Many law firms were still paying their partners according to seniority --
longevity counted more than the business that one brought in. At firms like
Lord, Day, younger rainmakers -- people who attracted lucrative business -- felt
their efforts propped up the veterans, who were expected to spend their golden
years burnishing a firm's reputation by taking on community leadership roles.

Although most firms, including Lord, Day, eventually moved to a quasi-merit
system of remunerating partners, restlessness infected the legal community.
Partnerships were no longer forever.

And neither were clients. No longer could it be assumed that a client belonged
to the firm. In the new era of costly litigation, clients shopped for better
prices and the best lawyers; they bonded with individuals rather than their
firms.

And those sought-after lawyers knew it. The 1980's saw the rise of the rainmaker
barons, who presided over fiefs of junior lawyers, with specialties in areas
like intellectual property and antitrust law. When the barons felt underpaid,
they entertained a notion unthinkable just a few years earlier: they could leave
the firm.

Free-agentry hit the legal profession. As long as clients followed, another firm
would happily fling open its doors to errant rainmakers.

In 1986, Lord, Day lost a chieftain, Gordon B. Spivack, a former Yale Law School
professor who oversaw the firm's multimillion-dollar antitrust practice. Mr.
Spivack took 17 lawyers to Coudert Brothers, plus clients like the Coca-Cola
Company.

'Power Lawyers' And Their Drones

Robert W. Hillman, a law professor at the University of California at Davis who
writes about lawyer mobility, warns students about the new world order: "This is
very bad news for people who are just good lawyers," he said. "We tell them that
the future is about power lawyers with teams of drones."

Lord, Day was never able to rebuild its antitrust work. Half the firm's
real-estate practice left, as did Richard G. Cohen, its tax chief. In addition
to the loss in business, the firm lost prestige: top-flight law school graduates
became increasingly difficult to recruit.

But though firm loyalty was eroding badly, "the other side of the coin was a
democratization of the practice," said Mr. Davis, one of a handful of blacks to
become a partner at a New York law firm when he joined Lord, Day in 1983. The
clublike crust of many firms was being breached. "You no longer got clients just
because your father handled them," said Mr. Davis. Jews and women also joined
Lord, Day's ranks.

The firm still had an illustrious roster that included Chemical Bank, the Morgan
Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Lincoln Center and the Metropolitan Museum
of Art. And it continued to be viewed as a kindly place: first and second-year
associates worked directly with clients and partners, and even had lives outside
the office.

By the late 1980's, senior partners were waking up with a start. They realized
that if the firm did not expand rapidly, it would die. With scarcely 100
lawyers, it could not assign 30 or 40 bodies necessary for the complex mergers
and acquisitions that were bringing windfalls to larger firms.

Its neighbor across the street at 26 Broadway, Barrett Smith Simon & Armstrong,
founded in 1946, was having similar problems. It had lost much of its corporate
department to Chadbourne & Parke. What remained were its muscular litigation
group and airline clients like USAir.

In 1988, the new firms together became Lord, Day & Lord, Barrett Smith. On the
day of the merger, Mr. Baker, Lord, Day's managing partner and leading
dignitary, retired after 40 years.

"It had been the perfect place to be a lawyer," Mr. Baker said.

The merger made sense on paper; in reality, it was the arranged marriage from
hell.

Lord, Day old-liners compare Barrett Smith lawyers to a high-school fraternity,
hanging miniature basketball hoops in offices and venting emotion at top volume.
Barrett Smith lawyers nicknamed some of their new colleagues "the young lords,"
and found them unbearably buttoned-up.

"You could live with someone you hate as long as you're both making money," said
Michael F. Armstrong, a star Barrett Smith litigator whose clients included
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato and Michael R. Milken's brother, Lowell.

In anticipation that the new firm would grow to 250 lawyers, the newly
reconstituted Lord, Day signed a 15-year lease for eight floors at 1675
Broadway. In 1990, the firm moved uptown, just about the time the real-estate
market rushed south. The annual rent came to about $6 million.

Even though business was drying up, Lord, Day could not bring itself to market
its services aggressively. And, still believing that a general-interest lawyer
could handle all the client's needs, the firm continued to take on one-time only
projects with costly learning curves. "We had too many green cows with purple
spots as opposed to cookie-cutter transactions," said Michael A. Chapnick, a
senior partner.

Lord, Day's biggest, money-drenched cases were winding down while other clients
were declaring bankruptcy. Corporations no longer stuck by their old firms; now
they were awarding legal work piecemeal, often to firms willing to charge a
fixed fee rather than hourly rates. Lord, Day, said some partners, began
discounting bills to encourage collection. Squabbling increased in almost direct
proportion to the drop in income.

Personnel Losses And Empty Offices

The firm was struggling to manage itself. To just about no one's satisfaction,
Mr. Chapnick from the Lord, Day group, and William C. Clarke from the Barrett
Smith group became co-chairmen.

More defections ensued. The hardest blow came when Mr. Armstrong, who had
brought in as much as $6.7 million in 1989 but whose billings slid to half that
in 1993, left with his litigators in October 1993. He opened a New York branch
of Kirkpatrick & Lockhart, a firm based in Pittburgh. His departure lost more
than business and prestige for Lord, Day; 22 very expensive offices stood empty.

The firm renegotiated the lease and desperately sought a new merger; talks were
held with a series of firms. But no firm wanted all of Lord, Day.

On Aug. 31, Lord, Day's partners voted to dissolve the firm. The New York Law
Journal reported that although 1992 profits were $18 million, profits for the
year ending Friday were expected to be $14 million; privately, Lord, Day lawyers
say they think the final figure will be considerably lower.

Mr. Chapnick said that in the rebounding economy, a majority of Lord, Day's
lawyers and its support staff had secured new positions. He and 54 Lord, Day
lawyers will join the New York office of Morgan, Lewis, an international firm
based in Philadelphia with some 775 lawyers and a vigorous public relations
staff.

But even those with jobs Monday morning feel that with Lord, Day's closing,
something irreplaceable has been lost. "We came here just because it hadn't
woken up to the new world," said an associate who insisted on anonymity. "What I
liked about the firm were the very reasons it couldn't last."


LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 3, 1994, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the closing of the New
York law firm Lord Day & Lord, Barrett Smith referred incompletely to a
Philadelphia firm whose New York office is acquiring many Lord, Day lawyers. It
is Morgan, Lewis & Bockius.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Marc Weingard, left, and Peter Farrell, right, talking to
Michael Hobbie as he packed on Thursday at the law office of Lord, Day & Lord,
Barrett Smith. They were all associates at the firm, which closed on Friday.
(Sara Krulwich/The New York Times) (pg. 40)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Silly Sex, Polemics Or Sitcom?

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 548 words


ON one side listen to the environmentalists, on the other the timber industry.
What to preserve? Wildlife and redwoods? Or jobs?

Such a polarity is under observation in "Betty the Yeti," which is being put on
by Stamford Theater Works, but it's not that simple. There are compromising
positions, bureaucratic snarls and euphemistic babble about industrial decline,
Federal mismanagement and indicator species. And there is a yeti that among
other things, brings about new questions: Is one of a kind worth the upkeep? Is
uniqueness useful? Thus, the intrusion of practicality upon principles.

Among the other things, the yeti figures as a member of the play's love
quadrangle -- or is it just one of those lustful things between Russ Sawyer, a
logger, and Betty the Yeti? Not since "Futz!", a well-known play about a man's
carnal relationship with his pig, has bestiality played a significant role in
the sexual exploits of the rural hero (anti-hero?) in the contemporary American
theater.

Terra Sawyer, an environmental activist, and Russ Sawyer's estranged wife, is to
marry Trey Hugger, an uptight operator who means to be ecologically correct and
politically more so. Trey publishes a newsletter by the name of Timberwatch.
Then there's Iko, a member of the United States Forest Service.

Russ, a Vietnam veteran who finds solitude by withdrawing to a treetop, asks:
"Why aren't loggers given the same protection as fish and owls?" Terra wants to
know why he doesn't open a bed and breakfast instead of butchering the
landscape. Before long, Russ turns into a true wildlife advocate, which proves
how a man's ideology can be transformed by tenting with a yeti.

Meanwhile, Clare Kutz, Terra's mother, who is opposed to her daughter's forest
politics, sees "no point in all those trees just standing there." Clare cuts a
quick deal for a prime lumber sale -- before Trey's petition to prevent
"environmental rape" is approved.

Hanky panky with Betty aside, Jon Klein's play, which was produced at the Actors
Theater of Louisville earlier this year, is advertised as "unpolemical," though
transparently contrived might be more to the point. Clare and Iko and Terra and
Trey and Russ -- and Betty -- represent points of view activated into agendas,
and if that isn't a polemic, what is? Who said "Betty the Yeti" was just a silly
sex comedy about a man and his great big cuddly bear?

You can bet it isn't long before Betty is perusing catalogues and inventing
recipes with mesquite and dill. Can media celebrityhood be far behind?

Although the play is even-handedly staged by Steve Karp and acted with an
admirable semblance of coherence, the playwright lacks the lyricism and
lightness to evoke the wonder of nature or the inevitability of the absurd. The
playwright finally makes the point that passion for a cause is vitiated by
pressure from special interest groups. By the time Terra and Russ discover the
difference between deep conviction and faddish convenience "Betty the Yeti" has
eroded its value as comedy, as drama, even as polemic, while enhancing its
sitcom potential with a built-in warning: Watch out for Yeti II.

"Betty the Yeti," Sacred Heart Academy, 200 Strawberry Hill Avenue in Stamford.
359-4414. Performances continue through next Sunday.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 2, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Science and Secrecy

BYLINE: By Priscilla Johnson McMillan;   Priscilla Johnson McMillan, a fellow at
the Russian Research Center of Harvard University, is writing a book on the
Oppenheimer case and the development of the hydrogen bomb.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3295 words



STALIN AND THE BOMB
The Soviet Union and Atomic Energy, 1939-1956.
By David Holloway.
Illustrated. 464 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $30.

FOR decades now, a debate has been raging over who was more to blame for the
cold war, Stalin's Russia or the United States. Since the Vietnam War
especially, revisionist historians have argued that the United States monopoly
of the atomic bomb -- and the unspoken threat to use it -- played a larger role
than Americans have realized in the breakdown of the World War II alliance and
the onset of the long, untidy quasi peace.

Into this debate, and on the eve of the 50th anniversary of Hiroshima and the
Allied victory in World War II, has been dropped a new book, the long-awaited
"Stalin and the Bomb," by David Holloway, a professor of political science and
co-director of the Center for International Security and Arms Control at
Stanford University. It is a superb history, recounting the Soviet nuclear
weapons program until three years after Stalin's death, with an eye to the part
played by the atomic bomb in the outbreak of the cold war.

Using speeches and interviews given by Stalin, V. M. Molotov, Maxim Litvinov and
G. M. Malenkov, and documents that have become available in Russia over the past
seven years, Mr. Holloway presents a hardheaded view of the way the early
postwar universe looked to the men inside the Kremlin. He asks questions about
missed opportunities that have bedeviled scholars in the West, weighs the
evidence scrupulously and comes up with answers that will bring little comfort
to many liberals -- and none at all to revisionist historians. And in a
ground-breaking chapter about the hydrogen bomb, he uses interviews with Andrei
Sakharov, Yuli Khariton and other former Soviet physicists to give a clearer
picture of the way the Soviet H-bomb was built than anything we have yet been
given about the construction of the hydrogen bomb in our own country.

Mostly, however, this is the story of Stalin's race to end the American atomic
monopoly. Abetted by his chief of secret police, Lavrenti Beria, who doubled as
head of the bomb project, Stalin made liberal use of espionage from abroad, and
thereby hangs an extraordinary tale. Just as Mr. Holloway's book comes during a
debate among Western historians, so, too, it appears at the height of a
controversy in Moscow -- a controversy fueled by "Special Tasks," a book by
Pavel Sudoplatov, the former security forces general -- over who deserves credit
for the Soviet atomic bomb, Russia's scientists or its spies. Mr. Holloway
surveys the work of Igor Kurchatov, the scientific director of the Soviet
project, and his team of physicists, mathematicians and radiochemists, and
concludes that whereas the Russians tested a version of the American plutonium
bomb in 1949 with the help of espionage data from the West, without it they
would have tested an atomic bomb of their own design about 1951.

The saving of those two years was no straightforward matter. Alerted by Soviet
intelligence to the possibility that Hitler might be building an atomic bomb and
that Britain and the United States might be doing the same, Stalin decided in
1942 to launch a small-scale atomic project. First he consulted his scientists,
but he did not let them see espionage data from Britain that shed crucial light
on whether a bomb could be built at all. Not until March 1943, after Russia's
victory at Stalingrad, did Stalin allow Kurchatov to see the data. For several
days Kurchatov pored over them in the office of Foreign Minister Molotov. "How
are the materials?" Molotov finally asked. "Wonderful," Kurchatov answered,
according to Mr. Holloway. "Just what we are lacking." He was then permitted to
see the fruits of Soviet espionage, but not to show them to anyone.

Primed by secret reports from Klaus Fuchs and David Greenglass, spies who were
working on the Manhattan Project -- but not, according to Mr. Holloway and
contrary to Mr. Sudoplatov, from J. Robert Oppenheimer, Enrico Fermi or other
leaders of the Project -- Kurchatov had to suggest new research leads to his
colleagues without so much as a hint that those leads had been stolen from
abroad. (Later he was allowed, on occasion, to show foreign intelligence
materials to other Soviet scientists, but only with special permission.)
Kurchatov, not surprisingly, acquired a reputation for extraordinary intuition,
and he managed to maintain his colleagues' trust despite the deception that had
been forced upon him. But he was unhappy about the low priority accorded to his
operation and the disparity in quality between the Soviet effort and that of the
United States.

Stalin's paranoia cost the bomb project dearly. He had reliable espionage
material from abroad and, at home, magnificent, utterly loyal nuclear physicists
who had done breakthrough work even before the war -- and he did not trust
either. He and Beria knew nothing about science. How could they be sure
Kurchatov was not deceiving them? And the same was true of the intelligence
reports. Perhaps the enemy was trying to draw them into expenditures that had no
future. "If this is disinformation," Beria threatened a high-level agent who was
giving him secret data, "I'll put you all in the cellar."

This misplaced suspicion had other costs as well. In 1941 Stalin had ignored
warnings from his own intelligence, and from the intelligence services of
Britain and France, that Hitler was about to attack Russia. Similarly, in 1945,
he failed utterly to anticipate the role that nuclear weapons would soon play,
despite warnings from Fuchs that the United States would test an atomic bomb in
early July and would use it in Japan, if the test succeeded. After the bomb was
dropped, Stalin was furious. The place Russia had earned as a world power by its
victory in the war had been snatched away. "Hiroshima has shaken the whole
world," he is said to have told Kurchatov. "The balance has been destroyed."

At this point one of those "what-if" questions arises. Was there, as the great
Danish physicist Niels Bohr concluded in 1944 and as historians have wondered
since, a chance to short-circuit the cold war by openly informing our Soviet
ally about the bomb well before the end of World War II? Mr. Holloway thinks
not. He cites abundant evidence that Stalin had decided on a tough postwar
course long before Hiroshima or the atomic bomb entered his calculations. Even
if Bohr's advice had been followed and if President Harry S. Truman and his
Secretary of State, James F. Byrnes, had eschewed all thought of using the
existence of the bomb as a diplomatic weapon, Stalin still would have wanted a
bomb of his own. The only thing he disliked about the new weapon was that
Truman, "that noisy shopkeeper," had it and he did not.

Stalin now gave the bomb project the priority he had denied it before. "If a
child doesn't cry," he told Kurchatov in late summer 1945, urging haste, "the
mother doesn't know what he needs. Ask for whatever you like. You won't be
refused." Early in 1946 he summoned Kurchatov again. This time he rejected
advice he had received from the famous Russian physicist Pyotr Kapitsa that the
Soviet Union ought to follow its own, cheaper path to the bomb rather than copy
the American design. Stalin said that "it was not worth engaging in small-scale
work," Kurchatov wrote in his notes, "but necessary to conduct the work broadly,
with Russian scope. . . . It was not necessary to seek cheaper paths."

Capable as the Soviet scientists were (and this also went for the aircraft and
missile designers who were hard at work copying the American B-29 bomber and the
German V-2 rocket), their ideas did not receive full support from Stalin until
they had been validated in the West. And so Kurchatov and his top associate
Khariton had to set aside their own design for a uranium bomb and embark on an
all-out effort to reproduce the plutonium weapon the Americans had tested
successfully at Alamogordo, N.M. The irony is that while all this was going on,
Stalin was simultaneously engaged in an attempt to root out foreign influences
in Soviet life, beginning with the arts and spreading to biology. In 1948 a
campaign led by the fraudulent geneticist Trofim Lysenko destroyed Soviet
biological research for decades to come. The next year, in March 1949, a
conference was to take place in Moscow that would censure Soviet physicists for
"kowtowing and groveling before the West." At the last minute the conference was
called off and, in the Russia of those days, only one man could have done that.

According to a story related by Mr. Holloway, Beria had asked Kurchatov shortly
before the conference whether it was true that quantum mechanics and relativity
theory were idealist and antimaterialist. Kurchatov reportedly replied that if
relativity theory and quantum mechanics had to be rejected by Russian science,
the atomic bomb would have to be rejected, too. According to another story in
the book, Stalin phrased his decision to cancel this way: "Leave them [the
physicists] in peace. We can always shoot them later." He could afford a
charlatan like Lysenko in biology, but physics was another matter. Stalin relied
on his physicists for the bomb -- and for Soviet status as a superpower. When
his first atomic bomb was tested in August 1949, five months after the aborted
conference, those scientists who would have been shot in the event of failure
received the highest awards: Hero of Socialist Labor and so on, down the line.

In spite of Beria's management by terror, his "issuing threats and exuding an
air of menace" on visits to atomic plants, the scientists worked selflessly and
with enthusiasm. Some viewed it as "a splendid task in physics," while others
were anxious to prove the value of Soviet science; still others worked because
they were appalled by American use of the bomb in Japan, were aware that cracks
had appeared in the wartime alliance and, in what the author calls "in some
psychological sense a continuation of the war with Germany," considered atomic
weapons necessary for their country's defense. For these reasons there was, two
scientists wrote afterward, "in the first, most romantic years of our work . . .
a wonderful atmosphere of good will and support." Not only that, but the physics
community managed to maintain much of its old autonomy and mutual loyalty even
within the harsh system of administrative command. The Soviet atomic bomb was
the result of miraculous synergistic fusion between scientists and engineers on
the one hand, and the police state, with its awesome ability to mobilize
resources, on the other.

Well before the atomic bomb test of 1949, Sakharov and others were secretly at
work on the next megaweapon, the hydrogen bomb. Once again they worked with
enthusiasm because, as Sakharov wrote, "we . . . believed that our work was
absolutely necessary as a means of achieving a balance in the world." Their
American counterparts, too, had been working on hydrogen-bomb designs and, after
Russia acquired the atomic bomb, President Truman ordered them to build the
hydrogen bomb as rapidly as they could. Truman, however, had his dissenters. In
the fall of 1949 the Atomic Energy Commission's General Advisory Committee
recommended against an all-out thermonuclear program for reasons that have been
misunderstood to this day. One was that after seven years of research, American
scientists still thought there was only slightly better than a 50-50 chance that
the bomb could be built. Another was that the hydrogen weapon, as then
conceived, could be made infinitely large and carry unlimited destructive power.
The hydrogen bomb had nothing to do with wiping out military objectives or even
whole cities. It could wipe out the human race.

At this point in his story, Mr. Holloway asks another of the "what-if" questions
that have troubled Westerners. Suppose Truman had announced in 1949 that the
United States would refrain from an all-out effort to build the hydrogen bomb.
Could Stalin have been enticed, as Oppenheimer and others hoped, into agreement
not to develop his own bomb? Once again Mr. Holloway responds with a hardheaded
no, agreeing with Sakharov that Stalin would have regarded such an offer as the
product of either deception or foolishness -- and a misstep to be exploited.

Stalin's death in 1953 did not at once alter the Soviet scientists' enthusiasm.
The physicist Lev Landau, who said, "That's it. He's gone. I'm no longer afraid
of him, and I won't work on [nuclear weapons] any more," was very much the
exception. In the summer of 1953 they carried out test "Joe-4" (named after
Stalin by the Americans) of a modified hydrogen weapon based on Sakharov's
"layer cake" design, and in 1955 they tested a so-called "true" hydrogen bomb,
based, as the 1952 and 1954 American devices were, on the concept of radiation
implosion, and they did all of this without espionage help.

The enhanced confidence brought by their independent attainment of the hydrogen
bomb gave some of the scientists, notably Sakharov, leeway for reflection. So,
too, did the easing of repression of thought under Stalin's successors, and
spreading knowledge of the extent of Stalin's crimes. And there was the sheer
power of the hydrogen bomb itself. Kurchatov was badly shaken when he saw the
damage. "One more test like those of 1953 and 1955," he said to Sakharov, "and
I'm going to retire." He told another colleague, "That was such a terrible,
monstrous sight! That weapon must not be allowed ever to be used!"

Kurchatov evidently briefed the new Soviet leader, Nikita S. Khrushchev, who
later said: "When I was appointed First Secretary of the Central Committee and
learned all the facts about nuclear power I couldn't sleep for several days.
Then I became convinced that we could never possibly use these weapons, and when
I realized that I was able to sleep again." At the 20th Communist Party Congress
in 1956, Khrushchev broke with Stalin's theory that war was inevitable and
announced a new theory of his own. "Either peaceful coexistence or the most
destructive war in history," he declared. "There is no third way." In the Soviet
Union as in the United States, the physicists' awe at their handiwork spread to
the political leaders. When that happened, Mr. Holloway informs us, nuclear
weapons, which had hastened breakdown of the wartime alliance and heightened
tension in the early years, began to serve as a restraint.

"Stalin and the Bomb" is a prodigious book. Mr. Holloway has plowed through the
new sources available in Russia, turning up fresh insights into the cold war
and, even more, into the conditions of intellectual life in Stalin's Russia.
This study is a work on the largest scale, one that advances our understanding
and is likely to remain definitive for years to come.



RUSSIA'S MANHATTAN PROJECT

An atomic industry had to be established before the bomb could be built. This
was a formidable task for a country that had suffered so much in the war. But
Stalin wanted the bomb as soon as possible, and was prepared to disregard the
cost. The building of the atomic bomb was the kind of task for which the
Stalinist command economy was ideally suited. It resembled the huge construction
projects of the 1930's -- the steel city at Magnitogorsk, or Dneprostroi, the
great dam on the Dnieper. It was a heroic undertaking for which the resources of
the country could be mobilized, including the best scientists and industrial
managers, as well as the slave laborers of the Gulag. The project was a curious
combination of the best and the worst of Soviet society -- of enthusiastic
scientists and engineers produced by the expansion of education under Soviet
rule, and of prisoners who lived in the inhuman conditions of the labor camps.

No good figures are available for the cost of the project, or for the number of
people involved. Some indication of the project's size, however, is given by a
1950 Central Intelligence Agency report, which estimated that between 330,000
and 460,000 people were employed in it. Most of these -- 255,000 to 361,000 --
worked in mining in the Soviet Union (80,000 to 120,000) and in Eastern Europe
(175,000 to 241,000). . . . The C.I.A. estimated that about 10,000 technically
qualified people -- engineers, geologists, research scientists and laboratory
technicians -- worked in the project. Although these figures are estimates, they
appear plausible, and certainly of the right order of magnitude. Many of these
people, and in particular the miners and construction workers, were prisoners.
   From "Stalin and the Bomb."



IDEOLOGY MATTERED, BUT THE BOMB MATTERED MORE

It was during the early 1970's that David Holloway first considered writing
about the birth of the Soviet bomb program. "I'd been interested in the history
of the Manhattan Project," he recalled in a telephone interview from his office
in Palo Alto, Calif., where he is a political science professor at Stanford
University. "It was a remarkable group of people building a bomb of great
destructive power that raised all kinds of questions." He thought it would be
worthwhile to investigate the Soviet program in the same way historians had
examined the Manhattan Project.

Mr. Holloway, 51, whose first book, "The Soviet Union and the Arms Race," was
published in 1983, began working in earnest on "Stalin and the Bomb" four or
five years ago, during the collapse of Communism. His research benefited from
archival material that began to emerge and from the growing willingness of the
participants to speak openly. "There were all kinds of legends which turned out
not to be true," he said.

Mr. Holloway was surprised at how late in the game Stalin became serious about
the bomb. "The evidence is pretty strong," he observed, that while Stalin had
started the bomb program during the war, it was only "after Hiroshima that it
became a crash project." And, Mr. Holloway continued, he was struck by the fact
that some of the K.G.B. people thought the American bomb project was "just
disinformation, a kind of trap, the way that some people later portrayed Star
Wars to be a kind of trap to lure them into spending money on something that
wouldn't work."

Mr. Holloway is skeptical of several of the theories swirling around this period
of history, like the view that the West might have prevented an arms race by
sharing its bomb technology with Stalin: "A belief in the benefits of
cooperation was really not something he displayed very much."

Stalin was even deeply suspicious of the loyalty of the scientists working on
the bomb, yet he recognized the need to support their efforts. "On the one hand,
the West was the model because it was more advanced, and its technology had to
be copied," Mr. Holloway said. "On the other hand, the West was the enemy, and
Western science and ideas were hostile and had to be kept out of the country. I
think it was a contradiction he never managed to escape from. But essentially it
was that contradiction that saved physics in the Soviet Union."

By the end, the author "was very taken with this whole community of scientists,"
which "somehow preserved some degree of intellectual freedom and autonomy even
while locked up behind barbed wire in secret cities."

Mr. Holloway was able to spend time with some of the key figures in the Soviet
project, including Andrei Sakharov and the physicist Yuli Khariton. He said he
even traveled with Mr. Khariton "in his private railroad carriage, which he had
been given after the first Soviet atomic bomb test. A whole car. I sat there on
a summer evening talking, and I was kind of pinching myself, thinking 'this
can't be true.' "   SCOTT VEALE

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yuli Khariton, who headed the group that designed the Soviet
atomic bomb, in 1992 with a replica of the bomb that was detonated on Aug. 29,
1949. (FROM "STALIN AND THE BOMB"); David Holloway. (pg. 21)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Robb Beams as President Joins Him for Fund Raising

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 15;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: TYSON'S CORNER, Va., Oct. 3


Bucking a wave of Democratic candidates running away from President Clinton,
Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia appeared downright radiant tonight, as Mr.
Clinton gave him a warm and robust endorsement, imploring Virginians not to let
Oliver L. North win a Senate seat in November.

In the first of two appearances tonight for the incumbent, Mr. Clinton used a
20-minute speech to criticize Republican tactics in Congress and on the stump,
as well as to energize a campaign that has often seemed moribund against the
more dynamic style of Mr. North.

"Do not take this lying down," Mr. Clinton yelled to a crowd of about 500 Robb
supporters at a rally, the first appearance of the evening. "This is your state.
This is your country. This is your children's future. Go take it back."

Mr. Clinton's appearances with Mr. Robb, the second at a $1,000-a-plate dinner,
were expected to raise more than $500,000, money the Robb campaign desperately
needs. Mr. North has raised almost $15 million -- about five times more than Mr.
Robb -- with much of it spent on aggressive commercials that attack both Mr.
Robb and Mr. Clinton.

Before the President's first speech, Mr. Robb told the crowd that he had kidded
Mr. Clinton on the drive over from Washington, saying, "You've been in more of
Oliver North's ads than I have."

But while the President's appearances are certain to help Mr. Robb's finances,
they could pose a major political risk in a race that Mr. North leads by a slim
margin, according to the most recent polls. J. Marshall Coleman, a Republican
running as an independent, is a distant third.

Although Mr. Robb got 71 percent of the vote in his first Senate bid in 1988,
Virginians find national Democratic candidates far less appealing. The late
Lyndon B. Johnson, Mr. Robb's father-in-law, was the last Democrat to carry the
state in a Presidential election, in 1964, and President Clinton won just 41
percent in 1992, compared with 45 percent for George Bush.

A statewide poll conducted by Mason-Dixon Political/Media Research in early
September found that 64 percent of Virginians rated Mr. Clinton's job
performance fair or poor, while 36 percent said he was doing a good or excellent
job.

"It's an extraordinary gamble in a normal year in Virginia to attach yourself to
a national Democrat," said Robert D. Holsworth, a professor of political science
at Virginia Commonwealth University in Richmond. "It's even more extraordinary
this year, when 50 percent of North's commercials are attacks on Clinton,
selling the idea of a two-fer: A vote against Robb is a vote against Clinton."

Yet even with Mr. Clinton's flagging appeal, Mr. Robb has stressed his support
for many Administration policies, like the deficit reduction plan, the crime
bill and the North American Free Trade Agreement.

And so, almost gleefully, has Mr. North.

Building a strong foundation of support from Virginia's conservative right, Mr.
North often calls Mr. Clnton "the worst President we've ever had," and last week
in Lynchburg described Mr. Robb as the President's "steadfast, stalwart, lock
step ally." Mr. North routinely tells his boosters that Mr. Robb has voted with
President Clinton "95 percent of the time."

Mr. North was delighted to learn that President Clinton had agreed to campaign
with Mr. Robb, saying earnestly, "I hope he comes here often."

"This is Bill Clinton's cynical payback to his buddy Chuck Robb, his lap dog for
95 percent of the votes," Mr. North said today. "Chuck Robb isn't the Senator
for the people of Virginia. He's Bill Clinton's Senator. Bill Clinton can pick
up the phone and say, 'Chuck, jump.' and Chuck says, 'How high?' "

But, in fact, Mr. Robb has opposed Mr. Clinton on several key issues, including
the Administration's original health-care proposal, and tonight Mr. Clinton
accused Mr. North and other Republicans of deceiving voters by distorting his
and Mr. Robb's records. In taking what seemed to be direct aim at Mr. North, he
said that one rule Democrats lived by was, "Thou shall not bear false witness."

In the second speech, Mr. Clinton was even more pointed, referring to Mr.
North's criticism last week of Mr. Robb's military career, which included 13
months of combat in Vietnam. "I am proud of what he did in the Marine Corps and
in the war, and I can't believe anyone would ever question it," the President
said.

As Mr. Robb was leaving the dinner, he defended his decision to invite President
Clinton to campaign with him. "Just because his numbers are down a little," he
said, "that's no time to walk away."

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Idaho Community Raises Neighbors' Fears

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: KAMIAH, Idaho


Ever since Lewis and Clark sloshed their way through this valley 190 years ago,
some people have viewed the Pacific Northwest as a refuge for the kind of
behavior that might get a person run out of town in other parts of the country.

Communities based on free love or a pending apocalypse or on conversing with
ancient spirits have long sprouted among the hidden reaches of the American far
corner.

But now comes retired Lieut. Col. James (Bo) Gritz, a Vietnam-era Green Beret
and onetime Populist Party candidate for President, with what is likely to be
the first community ever built around fear and hatred of the Federal Government.

Mr. Gritz (rhymes with SIGHTS) and his associates say they have sold most of the
lots in a planned development on a high plateau here in the middle of Idaho,
arguably the most remote state in mainland America. They call it Almost Heaven,
but to many people who live in the Clearwater Valley, the new development is
less than celestial.

Mr. Gritz, who discovered Idaho during the Presidential campaign, says he is a
patriot who has become disgusted with the "cesspool" of public schools, the
"grip of international bankers" on the nation's currency, and "an encroaching,
ravenous, predator Government," which wants to disarm the citizenry and force
people to carry health cards.

At times, he can sound like Rush Limbaugh in a particularly sour mood, as when
Mr. Gritz singles out Hillary Rodham Clinton as the font of all Big Government
plans to control people's lives. But Mr. Gritz goes well beyond passionate
conservative thought when he urges people to arm themselves, castigates "homos
and feminists," and repeatedly states that "eight Jewish families" control the
Federal Reserve.

"We are not a bunch of skinheads and not a bunch of neo-Nazis," he said in a
telephone interview. "We are trying to live by the laws of the land according to
the Constitution."

Ever since his Presidential campaign, when he received 10,000 votes in Idaho,
Mr. Gritz has been training hundreds of people, for a fee, to live off the land
and defend themselves. In an advertisement for his paramilitary programs, he
says, "You will learn what weapon and ammunition type is best in times of grave
peril; how to carry, draw, hold and efficiently engage multiple targets."

It is that kind of language that has many people here worried that their hamlet,
now being discovered by retirees and California exiles, will become the next
Waco. And in fact the lethal standoff last year in Texas between Federal agents
and followers of David Koresh, as well as an Idaho mountaintop siege by a white
separatist, Randy Weaver, two years ago, are the main rallying cries for Mr.
Gritz and his followers.

"The tyrants who ordered the assault on the Weavers and Waco should be tried and
executed as traitors," Mr. Gritz wrote in a recent issue of his newsletter.

There are early signs that followers of Mr. Gritz will bring some extremist
attitudes to the valley, said Mitch Landmark, an insurance agent and school
board member in Kamiah, population 1,300, the nearest town to Almost Heaven. "I
went out there the other day to underwrite some insurance, and this person tried
to convince me that Abraham Lincoln hated Jews," he said.

"This area is based on the idea that you don't put up fences, you don't lock
your doors, and people are tolerant," Mr. Landmark said. "We'd like to not be
afraid that if you go down the wrong road some guy is going to stick a gun in
your face."

A Kamiah real estate agent, Cliff Engledow, said a woman, new to town, "sat here
the other day and said, 'I can show you in the Bible where it says we've got to
get rid of all the blacks.' "

While such attitudes are not unknown in Idaho, which is the longtime
headquarters of a small neo-Nazi church called the Aryan Nations, the state has
worked hard to overcome a racist image. It is on the verge of electing the
nation's first American Indian governor, Larry Echohawk, and it was the first
state to elect a Jew as governor, Moses Alexander in 1914.

"We don't want to get this label," Mr. Engledow said. "But it's already
happening. A guy just canceled a $250,000 deal to buy here after he heard about
this."

Mr. Gritz says he has been falsely labeled a bigot. Though in 1988 he was
briefly on the same Presidential ticket as David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan
leader, Mr. Gritz said he withdrew when he found out Mr. Duke's true nature. But
Mr. Gritz was seen giving what seemed to be a Nazi salute to a group of
skinheads camped outside the place in northern Idaho where Federal agents
surrounded the cabin of Mr. Weaver two years ago. Mr. Gritz said it was a
"special salute" in tribute to the skinheads' support of Mr. Weaver and not a
Hitler motion.

He said his community of followers, which probably has about 70 families, would
obey all laws "unless they go against the laws of God and common sense." He said
a council would be set up to govern the community, a place in which all
residents must sign a pledge to defend one another and abide by strict
principles of the Constitution.

When asked if allowing a community to essentially live by its own interpretation
of the law would lead to an inevitable conflict with authority, Mr. Gritz said,
"I want a community where if the F.B.I. looks at us, they'll end up saying it's
more trouble than it's worth."

He said, "I won't be a Jim Jones forcing people to drink Kool-Aid," a reference
to the mass suicide of cult members in Guyana ordered by Mr. Jones. "We don't
want any trouble, and hopefully, we won't get any."

Almost Heaven and a neighboring community run by Mr. Gritz's associates,
Shenandoah, will cover about 600 acres on a plateau where hay bales are stacked
like fresh cinnamon rolls on edge. A tight-knit Quaker community is nearby. It
is "an absolute paradise, land that time forgot," Mr. Engledow said.

Idaho County, where bulldozers are clearing land for Almost Heaven, is one of
the nation's biggest counties, 5.4 million acres, with one of the sparsest
populations, less than 15,000. Although Sheriff Gene Mei nen said "a lot of
people in the county don't care much for law enforcement," crimes are few. The
county averages about one murder a year.

But statements by Mr. Gritz and his followers make some people here worried that
the county will become polarized and full of suspicion.

"There's always been a certain hillbilly perception that the way to go here is
don't pay your taxes, cut down a tree to heat and post a deer to eat," said
Carolyn Frei, a former teacher who started a human rights group to monitor
Almost Heaven. "We relish that. But Bo Gritz is not just some simple hillbilly
character. He has an ulterior motive."

A longtime associate of Mr. Gritz, Gerald (Jack) McLamb, a former Arizona police
officer, said Mrs. Frei was part of "a homosexual group that has it in for us."

The Nez Perce Indians have lived in this valley for thousands of years, and
their reservation overlaps private land being used for Almost Heaven. Mary Tall
Bull, a Nez Perce, met with Mr. Gritz recently and voiced a number of concerns.

"He assured us that he has come here in peace and friendship and he shook my
hand," she said. It was, to some Indians, a throwback to the days when whites
would come into Indian territory, shake hands with the locals, and then steal
most of the land. Ms. Tall Bull said the Indians of this valley will not be
easily swayed.

"Our main concern are the white supremacists who follow him," Ms. Tall Bull
said. "I asked him if he would be responsible for these people and their
actions. He said he would. We'll see."


LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James (Bo) Gritz, a former Populist Party candidate for
President, is building a community in central Idaho where homeowners will be
required to protect one another. He met with residents of nearby Kamiah in May.
(Mike Venso/Lewiston Morning Tribune)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Casualties Of War

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


Two baby boys, born many miles apart. Michael was apparently healthy except for
the strange sweats that drenched his clothes and bedding. His mother thought of
him as a fussy baby because he nursed so often, slept so little, and wanted to
be held so much. He died in November, age five months. An autopsy showed a
mitral valve defect that had caused his heart to swell several times its normal
size.

Cedrick was born with spina bifida and hydrocephalus, missing an eye and an ear,
his heart on the right side of his body, his trachea and esophagus connected.
People gasped and turned away when they saw him in the cart in the supermarket.
He is 2 and has had eight operations so far.

Two baby boys. What do they have in common? Both have fathers who served in the
Persian Gulf. And therein lies a cautionary tale. It may turn out to be a story
of chemical exposure and inadequate monitoring. But at the very least it
illustrates how tenuous the credibility of the military has become on matters of
occupational health. The rallying cry of those who believe the war in the gulf
made soldiers and their dependents sick harks back to Vietnam, and the
military's last large-scale effort at medical deniability.  Over and over again
they repeat, "Not another Agent Orange."

Michael's mother, Melanie Ayers, and Cedrick's father, Stephen Miller, both
believe their sons are casualties of war. Ms. Ayers says that around Fort Bragg
she knows of many miscarriages, several stillbirths and the unusual deaths of
several babies, including a little girl born without a spleen and a baby boy
with liver cancer. Mr. Miller, a nurse at an Army hospital in San Antonio, says
he has been told that the syndrome that caused many of his son's problems is a
product of either heredity or chemical or radiation exposure.  He and his wife
underwent genetic testing. Nothing.

Thousands of gulf war veterans themselves complain of a malady with various
symptoms: persistent headaches, rashes, nausea, chronic fatigue and body aches,
as though they have the worst sort of flu. Military doctors at first said their
symptoms had nothing to do with the war.  One man was told that his rash was age
spots, his low red blood cell count a dietary deficiency, and his hacking cough
a function of pollution. Others were told they were suffering from stress.

Soldiers think the answer is less mysterious. In the gulf they were given
experimental drugs to combat nerve gas. Pesticides were applied to skin and
uniforms. An Agriculture Department scientist, Jim Moss, has been working on
research suggesting that the toxicity of the insect repellent DEET increases
dramatically when combined with the nerve gas agent. Mr. Moss says he was told
to drop the research; when he wouldn't comply, he was fired.

Kelli Albuck, whose husband is disabled with the symptoms of what is now called
gulf war syndrome, testified before the Senate Committee on Veterans Affairs
that she and other wives had developed pelvic infections and pain during sex
because of semen so toxic that it causes irritation, even blistering for both
husband and wife. "Shooting fire," the women call it. The Albucks, like the
Ayerses and the Millers, have one healthy child, born before the gulf war. Since
then, Kelli has had two miscarriages and given birth prematurely to a son with,
among other ailments, cerebral palsy and spinal meningitis.

Congress recently allocated money for research into what's happening to gulf war
soldiers. But the legislation specifies that the research must be farmed out to
independent researchers, not done by the Defense Department. The reason is
apparent: There is little confidence that the military can investigate itself,
or that its conclusions would be believed.

"WHY ARE WE SICK?" read the headline on a chilling package of stories in The Air
Force Times, which said that some soldiers were waiting to have children until
the gulf war phenomenon had been adequately explained. And the military has some
explaining to do. With warfare changing so radically, why has the Pentagon been
unable or unwilling to deal quickly and convincingly with the possible effects
of chemical contamination? Perhaps it will turn out that the war caused neither
Michael's death nor Cedrick's birth defects. But one injury is certain, and that
is the blow dealt to the military's credibility among many of its own people.

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Children of the Last P.O.W. Close a Pain-Filled Chapter

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 10;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Oct. 4


Four years to the day after his wife killed herself in despair at her inability
to determine his fate, an American pilot who was the last listed prisoner of war
from the Vietnam conflict was honored today at her grave in Arlington National
Cemetery.

The occasion was a memorial service held by the couple's family and attended by
the civilian and uniformed leaders of the Air Force. Yet afterward -- and
despite the service's decision last month to reclassify the pilot, Col. Charles
E. Shelton, from P.O.W. to killed in action -- two of the Sheltons' five
children said they were still not convinced that he was dead.

"Today I was really asking, 'Dear God, please let us know, one way or another,'
" said one of them, 38-year-old John E. Shelton of Los Angeles.  "We want to put
this behind us, but at the grave site the question still haunted me. He could
very well be alive out there."

Captain Shelton (he was promoted to colonel in the years after his capture) was
shot down over Laos during a reconnaissance mission in 1965. He parachuted
safely and radioed a message, but six days later his wife, Marian, was told that
he had been seized by Laotian rebels.

Years passed. In the early 1980's, as the military reclassified many P.O.W.'s
from the Vietnam era, Colonel Shelton's status as a prisoner remained -- a
decision of the Air Force to make him a symbol of the American commitment to
account for the servicemen still missing in Southeast Asia.

Mrs. Shelton worked tirelessly for her husband's return, traveling to Southeast
Asia and becoming active in the P.O.W.-M.I.A. movement. But rumors that he was
still alive alternately instilled hope and despair, contributing to a
progressive debilitation of the spirit that led her to kill herself.

"I'm bitter," John Shelton said today. "I think of my mom as a casualty of the
Vietnam War."

Finally, this Sept. 20, the Air Force changed Colonel Shelton's status from
P.O.W. to killed in action. The change followed a request from the Shelton
children, who had decided that after 29 years and the 1990 suicide of their
mother, the matter needed to be put to rest.

The five children were each presented an American flag at today's brief service
at their mother's grave, where in a few months the tombstone will be replaced by
one with Colonel Shelton's name as well as her own.

Lea Ann Shelton of Louisville, Ky., the older of two daughters, wept as four
F-15's from Langley Air Force Base flew a missing-man formation -- a V shape
except for a missing plane at one wing -- through a chill sky filled with wisps
of thin clouds.

Another of Colonel Shelton's children, the Rev. Charles E. Shelton Jr., a Roman
Catholic priest from Riverside, Calif., eulogized his father as "one of the most
extraordinary military officers our nation ever produced."

"History will prove his legend to be more fact than fiction," Father Shelton
said, alluding to stories, periodically drifting from Southeast Asia over the
years, about his father's courage as a captive. "He feared God, was passionately
faithful to his wife, proud of his family, enjoyed his friends, cherished his
children and fought ferociously his foes. He served his country very well --
very well, indeed."

Taps was played, and an honor guard fired off a salute. Then Air Force Secretary
Sheila Widnall and Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the service's Chief of Staff,
whispered condolences and presented the flags to the five Shelton children:
John, Lea Ann, Charles Jr., Michael J. Shelton of San Diego and Joan Marie
Shelton-May of Louisville.

The service was attended by perhaps 75 people, including Senator Robert C.
Smith, a New Hampshire Republican who sits on the Senate Armed Services
Committee and has been active on the M.I.A. issue.

The Air Force's reclassification of Colonel Shelton, who would now be 62 years
old, followed a search in Laos last March by the Joint Task Force-Full
Accounting, a Pentagon agency that seeks to account for missing American
military personnel. That search, conducted in the area where he was taken
captive, found neither his body nor any evidence that he was alive.

But Lea Ann Shelton said today that she had never been satisfied with efforts to
find her father. She said that the American investigation had been conducted
largely through the Vietnamese Government instead of the Laotian and that
because of Colonel Shelton's listing as the symbolic P.O.W., "he lost his
person."

"Today," John Shelton said, "almost helps us regain dad as a dad.  We reclaimed
him in a way."

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 6, 1994, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday about the family of the last American listed as a
prisoner of war from the Vietnam conflict carried reversed identifications of
two members, supplied by The Associated Press. John Shelton was seated on the
far right, and Michael was next to him.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Col. Charles E. Shelton, who had been the last American listed
as a prisoner of war from the Vietnam conflict, was honored in a memorial
service at Arlington National Cemetery yesterday. From left, seated, were four
of his children: Lea Ann, Joan Marie, John and Michael. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

IN THE KITCHEN WITH: Morley Safer;
Serving Up Brouhahas And Garlic

BYLINE: By BRYAN MILLERCHESTER, Conn.

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2209 words


THE ivy-draped, turn-of-the-century stone cottage with its aromatic herb
gardens, rolling lawns and granite swimming pool could easily be in the south of
France. Behind the garage there is even a wood-framed playing field for the
Provencal game of petanque, also known as boules, which is a French twist on
boccie.

Two hours from New York City and along the Connecticut River, this is the
weekend home of a resolute Francophile, Morley Safer, the correspondent for the
CBS television program "60 Minutes." Mr. Safer and his wife of 25 years, Jane,
come here to read, to garden, to paint (Mr. Safer works in watercolors and
acrylics) and, of course, to cook.

"This is Morley's kitchen," Mrs. Safer said as she gathered cotton napkins for
lunch. The couple's expansive kitchen, which opens to a sun-drenched dining
area, has a 10-foot-long wooden table, wide-plank wood floor and copper cookware
dangling overhead.

"We spend most of our time in this room," Mr. Safer said as he assembled
ingredients for a lamb marinade. "It's so comfortable here."

Mr. Safer, 62, a native of Toronto, attributed part of his love for cooking to
his mother, Anne. "She was adventuresome for the time," he said. "It was sort of
modified Jewish cooking, and lots of it." Above all, he added, his mother was a
superior baker. "Every Friday she would bake up a storm, all kinds of things,"
Mr. Safer recalled. "I used to help her roll out the dough."

From his professional travels, Mr. Safer always brings back culinary mementos:
quail eggs or foie gras from France, kippers from England, spices from Asia.

"I love Vietnamese food but it's too intricate for me to cook," he said. "The
ingredients have to be so incredibly fresh. It's interesting how important food
is in the poorest of societies. They lack in so many areas but they go the extra
mile for food."

Mr. Safer has cooked at home for years, largely because his family does not
share his tastes, his wife said. "Our daughter, Sarah, is vegetarian, and I eat
very little meat," she said. "In winter, especially, Morley makes steaks,
hamburgers, sauteed potatoes and chops. We don't have anything green around the
house unless I make it."

Earlier in the day, Mr. Safer had cruised down to the market in his 1985 Ferrari
convertible. The Ivoryton Market is a Norman Rockwell painting come to life:
neon-free, wood-trimmed and with an amiable butcher who meticulously boned and
trimmed a six-pound leg of lamb.

Mr. Safer's menu consisted of Moroccan-style tomato soup laced with cumin,
confit of onions, spicy cucumber salad, wood-grilled leg of lamb and peach and
blueberry crisp. He also served lentils, flageolets with carrots and lightly
grilled red onions.

Back at the cottage, Mr. Safer's red-wine marinade for the lamb included, among
other things, vinegar, herbs, onions and garlic. "You can never have enough
garlic," he proffered, flicking a cigarette into an ashtray. "With enough garlic
you can eat The New York Times."

The Safers, who live in Manhattan during the week, describe themselves as robust
and adventuresome eaters. Salt, however, is one ingredient they largely eschew.

"I happen to taste the natural salt in many foods, so I rarely add it to
dishes," Mr. Safer said. "Celery, for instance, has a lot of salt flavor, so you
don't really need to add salt if a dish has a lot of celery."

Mr. Safer, with a cigarette dangling from his lips, described his early days as
a journalist. After a year at the University of Western Ontario in London, he
worked at The Sentinel Review, the local newspaper in Woodstock, Ontario. In
1955, after stints at larger papers and at the Reuters News Service, he tried
his hand in the fledgling field of broadcast journalism with the Canadian
Broadcasting Corporation. He joined "60 Minutes" in 1971.

Four years ago, Mr. Safer sparked a tempest in the international wine barrel
with a report titled "The French Paradox." He reported that the incidence of
coronary heart disease in France is 40 percent lower than it is in the United
States despite a French diet high in fat and cholesterol. American and French
researchers interviewed by Mr. Safer pointed to a relationship between moderate
alcohol consumption, particularly of red wine, and a lower rate of heart
disease.

That report, which was broadcast during a glut in the international wine trade
and while the alcohol market in this country was stagnant, was seen as
potentially the biggest boon to the wine industry since the repeal of
Prohibition. For several years, Mr. Safer was besieged by both the wine industry
and neo-Prohibitionists to discuss the French paradox publicly. "I had to
withdraw from it all," Mr. Safer said. "It was starting to take over my life."

He says he has drunk red wine exclusively since he turned 40, but not for health
reasons. "Something happened and I just found white wine to be sour and acidic,"
he said.

Last fall he caused an uproar in the art world in a report in which he said some
modern art was "worthless junk" that belonged on "the trash heap of art
history."

In buttressing his point, Mr. Safer brought a group of teen-agers to an
exhibition of paintings by Jean-Michel Basquiat, a celebrated urban artist who
died in 1988. He asked the teen-agers on camera if they could do better. Most
said they could. Among the artists Mr. Safer ridiculed were Cy Twombly, Jeff
Koons, Gerhard Richter, Robert Gober, Robert Ryman and Felix Gonzalez-Torres.
The debate he instigated continues.

Mr. Safer is also the author of "Flashbacks: On Returning to Vietnam" (1991,
Random House), an account of his visit to the country where he was a war
correspondent.

Mrs. Safer is a consultant to the Ministry of Culture in Budapest, helping it
set up support organizations for the arts.

When it comes to cooking, Mr. Safer is minimalist. He likes to achieve one
dominant flavor in each dish -- often garlic -- that is supported but not muted
by more subtle flavors. His Moroccan-style tomato soup is an example. "The
flavor comes from the cumin-paprika blend," he said.

He prepared the onion confit ahead of time because it needed to sit for two to
three hours before serving. It was a simple blend of sliced onions cooked slowly
with olive oil, brown sugar and vinegar. "Ideal for lamb," he said.

Mr. Safer's culinary pride and joy is a seven-foot-high stone barbecue grill. "I
use old apple wood, usually," he said while checking the fire.

The stainless-steel grill plate is attached to a pulley so that it can be raised
or lowered. The grill was designed by Charles Eisendrath, a former journalism
professor at the University of Michigan, who sells it through a company called
the Grillworks in Ann Arbor, Mich. The V-shaped grates catch juices from the
meat and funnel them into a basin.

"This is really well thought out," Mr. Safer said as he flipped the lamb. "You
then have the juices to make a sauce or whatever."

The Safers' daughter, who is 24, joined the lunch, as did a friend of the
family, Patrick Boisjot, the chef and owner of Le Petit Cafe in Branford, Conn.
Mr. Safer poured a Chassagne-Montrachet for the white-wine drinkers and a light
and fruity Mas de Daumas Gassac from Herault in the far southwest of France -- a
real artery-flushing red. For dessert he served an old-fashioned fruit crisp,
with ripe peaches and blueberries under a sweet and nutty crust.

As the sun slipped toward the tree line, shooting sparks across the surface of
the pool, Mr. Safer pulled on his umpteenth cigarette of the day and poured the
last of the red wine.

"Tres bien fait!" Mr. Boisjot remarked.

Mr. Safer, clearly at ease and as close as he could get to his beloved France
without the hassles of an airport, just smiled and raised his glass.


Leg of Lamb For Lunch

Moroccan Tomato Soup
Total time: 20 minutes

 2 tablespoons olive oil
 5 cloves garlic, peeled and minced
 2 1/2 teaspoons sweet paprika
 1 1/2 teaspoons ground cumin
 Pinch cayenne, or to taste
 2 1/2 pounds plum tomatoes, cored and quartered
 1 teaspoon white-wine vinegar
 2 tablespoons lemon juice
 2 tablespoons water
 Kosher salt to taste
 4 stalks celery, trimmed and diced
 1/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves for garnish (optional).

1. In a saucepan over low heat, stir together the olive oil, garlic, paprika,
cumin and cayenne for about 2 minutes. Remove from heat and set aside.

2. In a food processor or food mill, puree tomatoes until coarsely textured.
Transfer to a bowl and blend in the heated spices and remaining ingredients
except cilantro. Chill, taste for seasonings and serve, garnished with cilantro
leaves if desired.

Yield: 4 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 150 calories, 8 grams fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 75 milligrams sodium (before optional salting), 4 grams
protein, 15 grams carbohydrate.

Grilled Leg of Lamb
With Mustard Seeds
Total time: 3 hours

 1 8-pound leg of lamb, boned, butterflied and trimmed of fat, inside and out
(ask butcher)
 Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/4 cup olive oil
 5 tablespoons mustard seeds
 1 teaspoon ground cumin
 1 tablespoon finely chopped garlic
 4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried
 1 teaspoon fennel seeds
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh rosemary or 1 tablespoon dried
 2 bay leaves, crumbled
 4 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
 2 tablespoons butter, melted
 4 tablespoons finely chopped parsley.

1. Lay lamb out flat, and sprinkle with salt and pepper on all sides.

2. Put oil in baking dish large enough to hold lamb. Add lamb, and sprinkle on
both sides with mustard seeds, cumin, garlic, thyme, fennel seeds, rosemary, bay
leaves and lemon juice. Turn and rub lamb so it is evenly coated with the
ingredients. Marinate in a cool place for 1 or 2 hours, or in a refrigerator up
to 6 hours. If lamb is refrigerated, let it return to room temperature before
cooking.

3. Preheat a charcoal grill or oven broiler.

4. Remove lamb from marinade and reserve marinade. If a grill is used, put lamb
flat on grill. If broiler is used, place lamb under broiler 4 to 5 inches from
heat. Cook lamb uncovered on grill or under broiler about 15 minutes. Turn and
cook 10 to 15 minutes on second side. For medium or well-done meat, cook longer.

5. Meanwhile, in a baking pan large enough to hold lamb, bring reserved marinade
to a boil, stirring.  Remove from heat and swirl in butter and parsley. Transfer
lamb to marinade pan, cover loosely with foil and keep warm. Let meat rest 10 to
15 minutes before serving. Slice thinly and serve with pan gravy.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 400 calories, 25 grams fat, 130
milligrams cholesterol, 130 milligrams sodium (before optional salting), 40
grams protein, 5 grams carbohydrate.

Onion Confit
Total time: 1 hour

 3 pounds sliced onions (about 4 medium-size onions)
 1/3 cup olive oil
 2/3 cup brown sugar
 2 tablespoons sherry vinegar.

1. Place onion slices and olive oil in a large pan. Cook over low heat,
stirring, until onions wilt slightly, about 10 minutes.

2. Sprinkle with brown sugar, and continue cooking, covered, checking every 10
minutes or so until bottom layer begins to brown. Stir and brown remaining
onions.

3. Blend in the vinegar, and cook for 30 minutes more until onions reach a thick
jamlike consistency.  Cool, and refrigerate in an airtight container. Let confit
reach room temperature before serving.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 250 calories, 10 grams fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 15 milligrams sodium, 2 grams protein, 40 grams
carbohydrate.

Spicy Cucumber Salad
Total time: 5 minutes

 4medium-sized cucumbers, peeled, halved lengthwise, seeded and thinly sliced
 1 large red onion, peeled and thinly sliced
 4 carrots, peeled and sliced into julienne strips (about 2 cups)
 1/2 cup rice vinegar
 3 tablespoons sugar
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh coriander leaves
 1 teaspoon crushed red pepper.

Combine all ingredients in a bowl.  Stir and chill before serving.

Yield: 6 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 95 calories, 0 grams fat, 0
milligrams cholesterol, 25 milligrams sodium, 3 grams protein, 20 grams
carbohydrate.


White Peach
And Blueberry Crisp
Total time: 50 minutes

 3/4 stick sweet butter plus 1 tablespoon for greasing casserole dish
 3/4 cup all-purpose flour
 1 cup sugar
 3/4 cup chopped mixed nuts, unsalted (like almonds and pecans)
 3 ripe peaches, skinned, pitted and sliced
 2 pints blueberries, stems removed and rinsed.

1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees.

2. Combine 3/4 stick of butter, flour, sugar and nuts in bowl of a food
processor. Blend to combine ingredients into a crumbly mixture.

3. Butter a rectangular 1 1/2 quart casserole or other ovenproof baking dish.
Layer fruit in casserole.

4. Crumble dough, and sprinkle over fruit to cover.

5. Bake for 30 to 40 minutes. Increase heat to 450 degrees, and cook for another
5 minutes, or until crust is nicely browned.

Yield: 4 to 6 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 545 calories, 25 grams fat, 45
milligrams cholesterol, 10 milligrams sodium, 7 grams protein, 80 grams
carbohydrate.


NAME: Morley Safer

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 12, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A recipe for grilled leg of lamb last Wednesday with an article about the "60
Minutes" correspondent Morley Safer and a lunch he prepared omitted red wine
from the marinade. Here is a corrected version:

Grilled Leg of Lamb
With Mustard Seeds
Total time: 3 hours

 1 8-pound leg of lamb, boned, butterflied and trimmed of fat, inside and out
(ask butcher)
 Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
 1/4 cup olive oil
 5 tablespoons mustard seeds
 1 teaspoon ground cumin
 1 tablespoon finely chopped garlic
 4 sprigs fresh thyme or 1 teaspoon dried
 1 teaspoon fennel seeds
 2 tablespoons chopped fresh rosemary or 1 tablespoon dried
 2 bay leaves, crumbled
 4 tablespoons fresh lemon juice
 2 cups red wine
 2 tablespoons butter, melted
 4 tablespoons finely chopped parsley.

1. Lay lamb out flat, and sprinkle with salt and pepper on all sides.

2. Put oil in baking dish large enough to hold lamb. Add lamb, and sprinkle on
both sides with mustard seeds, cumin, garlic, thyme, fennel seeds, rosemary, bay
leaves, lemon juice and red wine. Turn and rub lamb so it is evenly coated with
the ingredients. Marinate in a cool place for 1 or 2 hours, or in a refrigerator
up to 6 hours. If lamb is refrigerated, let it return to room temperature before
cooking.

3. Preheat a charcoal grill or oven broiler.

4. Remove lamb from marinade and reserve marinade. If a grill is used, put lamb
flat on grill. If broiler is used, place lamb under broiler 4 to 5 inches from
heat. Cook lamb uncovered on grill or under broiler about 15 minutes. Turn and
cook 10 to 15 minutes on second side. For medium or well-done meat, cook longer.

5. Meanwhile, in a baking pan large enough to hold lamb, bring reserved marinade
to a boil, stirring until the liquid is reduced by half.  Remove from heat, and
swirl in butter and parsley. Transfer lamb to marinade pan, cover loosely with
foil and keep warm. Let meat rest 10 to 15 minutes before serving. Slice thinly
and serve with pan gravy.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 400 calories, 25 grams fat, 130
milligrams cholesterol, 130 milligrams sodium (before optional salting), 40
grams protein, 5 grams carbohydrate.


GRAPHIC: Photos: When he is cooking, Morley Safer is a minimalist who aims for
one strong flavor. (pg. C1); Morley Safer in his Connecticut kitchen with his
daughter, Sarah. He relishes steaks and chops, but his wife, Jane, and Sarah
avoid meat. Above, his grilled lamb served with lentils, flageolets with carrots
and grilled red onions. (Richard Bowditch for the New York Times) (pg. C6)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

MISSION TO HAITI: STRATEGY
Military Analysis;
Pentagon's Haiti Policy Focuses on Casualties

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 973 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 5


The American intervention in Haiti offers a case study of an important shift in
the Pentagon's concept of military planning: a casualty-free operation.

The American military has always sought to hold down its losses, but casualties
were accepted as the price the military had to pay, and they were built into the
planning of any operation.

But with the American military fearful of losing public support for a
contentious mission, holding down casualties has become not just an integral
part of military planning. It is now a criterion for success.

Gen. John Shalikashvili, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, acknowledged
as much on Tuesday when he boasted that that the American mission was
succeeding, in part because the military had suffered minimal losses.

"We are now two weeks and one day into this operation," General Shalikashvili
told Pentagon reporters. "We have had two Americans hurt. No one killed, thank
God."

Even if the United States had invaded Haiti, keeping casualties to an minimum
would have been a political requirement. But the unopposed deployment of
American troops into what is still a volatile and potentially explosive
situation has made the Administration and the public that much less tolerant of
casualties.

The imperative to hold down casualties has occasionally taken precedence over
the calls for the American military to maintain order in Port au Prince and
protect the supporters of the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's exiled
President.

Or as Deputy Defense Secretary John Deutch bluntly put it on Sunday, "U.S.
troops are not going to get involved in civilian violence if it risks those
troops."

The Pentagon's rules of engagement for coping with the turmoil in Haiti have
raised the question of whether the American military is being too reactive in
quelling threats to civil order.

The larger question, however, is whether the Administration has encouraged
unrealistic expectations about casualties that will tie the United States' hands
in future conflicts or invite foes to target Americans in the hope that they can
spark a storm of criticism at home.

"If you communicate that you are afraid of casualties, it is almost a certain
way of inviting them," said Eliot Cohen, professor at John Hopkins School of
Advanced International Studies. "Our opponents will very quickly figure out that
is our most important vulnerable."

Charles Moskos, a military sociologist at Northwestern University, said, "The
implication is that we cannot take casualties over a score anymore without
serious question."

It was not always this way. During World World II and the Korea War, casualties
were incidental to the completion of the mission.

Vietnam changed that. Not only was the military accused of wasting lives in a
ill-advised war, but it concluded that steady American casualties would lead to
an erosion of public support.

"It is impossible to overestimate how the experience of Vietnam lodged itself in
the psyche of American military leaders," said Andrew Bacevich, director of the
Foreign Policy Institute and a retired Army colonel.

Then came the Persian Gulf war, which defied even the American military's most
optimistic hopes for holding down its losses. More than a million men squared
off in that lopsided conflict, but only 148 Americans were killed in action.

The gulf war produced new public expectations that high-tech weapons and a
well-trained volunteer military would result in low casualties in future
conflicts and helped divorce the public from the reality of war.

The assumption that losses should be minimal has also inhibited the use of
military force as an instrument of national policy.

In Somalia, Gen. Mohammed Farah Aidid sought to drag out the American engagement
and wait for public opinion to turn against military involvement. General
Aidid's strategy worked. After 18 Americans died in an Army Ranger raid, the
Americans pulled out.

Some current and former Pentagon officials say the message is not that the
American public will not tolerate high casualties, but that they will only do so
when they believe the fight is important.

According to a new Rand Corporation study on public opinion and military
intervention, when casualties first began to mount in Korea and Vietnam, much of
the American public wanted to increase military involvement rather than quit.

"When we have conflicts in which the U.S. interest is not widely accepted to be
important or vital, casualties can push us to become disengaged," said Zalmay
Khalilzad, a former head of the Pentagon's office of policy planning.

But in explaining their Haiti policy, Clinton Administration officials have done
little to instill a sense of national sacrifice. They have not stressed that
some American casualties are inevitable or argued that the price is worth paying
to remove a despotic government and send a signal of American determination
around the world.

Instead, the Administration has stressed it has a limited goal -- a "breathing
space," in the words of Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security
adviser, to help Haiti become a democracy -- that will be achieved at minimal
cost.

But the more civilian and military officials talk about the low number of
casualties, the more political impact each casualty has. That was evident Monday
when the wounding of a Special Forces soldier became a national news story.
Instead of preparing the nation against possible casualties, the Administration
seems to be holding its breath.

"If you are going to use force, you have to persuade the nation that it is
important and prepare the public for possible casualties," said Mr. Khalilzad.
"The impression they have left is the opposite: that this will be virtually
casualty free. That will make it that much harder to see the operation through."


LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

FILM FESTIVAL REVIEW;
A Report on Reporters in the World's Hot Spots

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words


Taking its perfect title from the old spiritual song, Marcel Ophuls's engrossing
new documentary "The Troubles We've Seen" calls attention to the missing phrase:
"Nobody knows." No one besides journalists operating within the cauldron of a
war zone really understands the occupational hazards of such work. But Mr.
Ophuls, the contemplative documentary film maker whose specialty is plumbing the
depths of unfathomable experience, has made it his business to try.

Working on his usual vast canvas, Mr. Ophuls constructs another brave,
enveloping inquiry into a compelling subject, reveling in the investigative
process as he presents it imaginatively on screen. The topics here range from
journalistic ethics to survival tactics to grace under pressure. And a leisurely
four-hour running time lets Mr. Ophuls explore them in rambling, frequently
surprising ways.

Basing himself in Sarajevo, Mr. Ophuls captures the full spectrum of
journalistic behavior. It ranges from the stellar French anchor who makes a
showy 24-hour visit in a flak jacket to the American newspaper reporter, in the
city's embattled marketplace, peering into an old woman's grocery bag to assess
the quality of life. Mr. Ophuls's frank partisanship only helps to enliven such
vignettes. He openly admires the newspaperman (John F. Burns of The New York
Times) and pointedly asks the television star (Patrick Poivre D'Arvor), "How
does your 24 hours here change anything?"

"The Troubles We've Seen" has great and whimsical range, incorporating
everything from old film clips to a Bosnian surgeon singing the title song. Mr.
Ophuls, never shy about injecting himself into the debate, even works in an
homage to "Annie Hall" (which itself paid homage to his "Sorrow and the Pity").
The playfulness of such touches cannot be confused with a lack of seriousness,
not even when Mr. Ophuls is seen taking a break in Vienna with a naked woman
draped across the bed in his hotel room. Outrageously or otherwise, he
appreciates the intense pressures that color life in a war zone.

The reporters' own gallows humor and cathartic bonhomie are emphasized early in
the film, with a sharp contrast between the joking that preserves their sanity
and the dedication they bring to their work. Indeed, the reporters' camaraderie
is so lively that Mr. Ophuls chastises one star, the BBC's John Simpson, for
trying to disguise it. ("You're getting awfully serious about this. You were
funnier about it when the camera wasn't on.")

"It seems so indecent to say we are having the most tremendous amount of fun in
the midst of all this misery," Mr. Burns says, capturing his compatriots'
outlook. "It's not fun, but it's an experience that I would not want to miss."

It hardly takes long for the gravity of the correspondents' situation to come
through. "Not exactly what you sign up for, is it?" says one of them, describing
the injuries of a female colleague whose jaw was blown off. The reporters are
seen as torn between terrible danger and the perils of egotism, which may lead
them to upstage their own stories.

"I think war correspondents are highly privileged and shouldn't be glorified,"
insists Martha Gellhorn, whose own adventures as a World War II correspondent
were certainly glorified in their day. Ms. Gellhorn also notes that it was easy
for her to gain access by pretending she was only interested in the woman's
angle of war coverage ("I've just come to interview the nurses").

One of many French journalists seen here describes a disparity between French
and English reportage: the British "always go for reason" while the French are
always concerned with the human aspect of the story. By that standard, Mr.
Ophuls works in a distinctly French manner, using a wealth of interviews and
anecdotes to define the issues at hand.

He sharply examines the personalities involved in glossy television news shows,
which have the same problems in France that they do here. "Courage, perhaps, is
not their greatest virtue," says the actor Philippe Noiret, who turns out to be
a trenchant social critic in discussing the stars of television news. "Not when
they're face to face with our leaders."

Mr. Ophuls also considers the different roles played by men and women in
broadcast news reporting, the wage discrepancies between workers and stars, even
the networks' refusal to protect the safety of reporters while never being short
on funds for game shows. On a deeper level, he raises many important questions
about content and reportorial technique. "Fewer people do fewer things and more
people comment on those things," Mr. Noiret points out. "In the past, it was the
opposite."

Mr. Ophuls also makes extremely deft use of film clips from works by his father,
Max Ophuls. A reporter's cruel question to a mother whose son has been blinded
prompts him to excerpt a scene from "Lola Montes," in which Lola is made the
focus of an earlier form of sensationalism.  The senior Ophuls's film "From
Mayerling to Sarajevo" is also put to ironic use, since its depiction of the
assassination that triggered World War I was filmed at the very start of World
War II. "History never ends," says the younger Mr. Ophuls. In thoughtful,
mesmerizing political documentaries like this one, he has long since proved that
point.

"The Troubles We've Seen" eventually considers the essence of a journalist's
moral responsibility in wartime, bringing up examples as disparate as Walter
Cronkite's outspokenness about Vietnam and evidence that one of Robert Capa's
most powerful Spanish Civil War photographs was faked. However stirred and
outraged they are by what they witness, all the journalists seen here must deal
with the conundrum that, as one puts it, "the more horrible the situation, the
more successful we become."

And all must recognize that they are only incidental parts of the conflicts they
describe. What does it mean when one news-addicted photographer, taking a break
from battle scenes, makes himself photograph flowers and butterflies? "I condemn
myself to peace," he ruefully says.

"The Troubles We've Seen" will be shown tonight at 6 o'clock as part of the New
York Film Festival.

THE TROUBLES WE'VE SEEN

Written and directed by Marcel Ophuls; dialogue in French, German and
Serbo-Croatian, with English subtitles; director of photography, Pierre Boffety;
edited by Sophie Brunet; sound by Michel Faure; produced by Bertrand Tavernier
and Frederic Bourboulon. At Alice Tully Hall tonight at 6 as part of the 32d New
York Film Festival. Running time: Part 1, 90 minutes; Part 2, 135 minutes. This
film is not rated.

WITH: Philippe Noiret, John F. Burns, Patrick Poivre d'Arvor, Martha Gellhorn,
Mr. Ophuls and others.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marcel Ophuls, right, interviewing a German war correspondent.
(The Film Society of Lincoln Center)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 6, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 46 words


A picture caption yesterday about the family of the last American listed as a
prisoner of war from the Vietnam conflict carried reversed identifications of
two members, supplied by The Associated Press. John Shelton was seated on the
far right, and Michael was next to him.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
A Novel With a Complex Strategy

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 31;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 826 words



In the Lake of the Woods
 By Tim O'Brien
 306 pages. Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence. $21.95.

In summary, Tim O'Brien's new novel, "In the Lake of the Woods," sounds like a
fast-paced thriller, the sort of book that might easily be made into a movie
starring, say, Harrison Ford and Michelle Pfeiffer. The story, on the surface,
is simple: John Wade, a rising political star, decides to run for the Senate; in
the course of the campaign, serious allegations are made about Wade's past, and
he loses in a landslide; several days later, he and his beautiful wife, Kathy,
take a vacation in the remote Minnesota back country; after an argument, Kathy
disappears and when an extensive search fails to turn up her body, the police
begin to focus their suspicions on Wade.

As related by Mr. O'Brien, however, there is nothing simple or straightforward
about this story. Rather, he tries to turn this thrillerlike premise into a
philosophical mystery, a Conradian journey into the heart of darkness and the
nature of evil. The results are a mixed lot. At times, "Lake of the Woods" glows
with the fierce, radiant magic of Mr. O'Brien's remarkable Vietnam fiction,
"Going After Cacciato" (1978) and "The Things They Carried" (1990); more often,
it devolves into a painful collection of portentous cliches reminiscent of his
lugubrious 1985 novel, "The Nuclear Age."

Like "The Things They Carried," "Lake of the Woods" has a willfully complicated
narrative strategy that calls into question the very process of storytelling
even as it pulls the reader into its characters' lives. In the case of "Lake of
the Woods," a not-so-omniscient narrator, who bears more than a passing
resemblance to Mr. O'Brien himself, relates the story of John and Kathy Wade,
piecing together the jigsaw puzzle of their lives as best he can. His knowledge
-- and hence, the reader's knowledge -- is highly provisional. This narrator
uses quotations culled from philosophy, psychology and literature to try to
illuminate John Wade's problems, and he also speculates freely about what may or
may not have happened in his life.

Gradually, a portrait of Wade emerges. We're told that Wade was a fat, unhappy
boy, haunted by the suicide of his alcoholic father. We're told that he became
an amateur magician, and that magic not only gave him the illusion of control
but also endowed him with a desire to manipulate reality. We're told that Wade
earned the nickname "Sorcerer" while serving in Vietnam, and that he seemed to
work magic tricks in his subsequent career as a politician, charming voters
while nimbly sidestepping questions about his past.

That past, however, is abruptly exposed by Wade's opponent in a Minnesota Senate
race, who reveals that Wade was involved in the My Lai massacre in Vietnam. It
is a revelation that destroys Wade's chances of election. It is also a
revelation that shatters Wade's carefully constructed sense of self. Having
spent years trying to erase all evidence of his complicity, having spent decades
denying his involvement in the massacre to himself, Wade is suddenly confronted
with the truth of what he did back in 1968. In doing so, he is forced to grapple
with what he is capable of and who he really is.

Kathy, too, finds the My Lai revelations devastating, for she realizes that she
does not know the man she has been married to for so many years.

As the narrator sifts through the wreckage of the Wades' lives, the reader's
perception of them slowly evolves. We learn that John has obsessively spied on
Kathy for years, that Kathy has had a furtive affair to escape his suffocating
presence, that the two of them have built their marriage upon layers and layers
of secrets.

Mr. O'Brien does an authoritative job of stripping away the illusions Kathy and
John have spun around themselves and their relationship. His descriptions of
John's actions in Vietnam and his subsequent acts of denial are equally
persuasive, immersing the reader in the horror, while at the same time making
John's need to deny that horror eerily comprehensible.

When it comes to describing John Wade's descent into actual madness, however,
Mr. O'Brien stumbles badly, making his hero utter inanities like "Kill Jesus"
over and over again. The daily texture of his life is also poorly evoked: the
reader never for a moment believes that Wade has actually participated in
politics, much less made a run for the Senate.

To make matters worse, Mr. O'Brien's narrative pyrotechnics never pay off the
way they did in "The Things They Carried." They ultimately feel gratuitous and
mannered, much like the self-important comments his narrator likes to indulge
in. "Can we believe that he was not a monster but a man," this narrator says of
John Wade at the end of the book, "That he was innocent of everything except his
life?"

Such heavy-handed passages paper over the visceral drama of Wade's story, and
they ultimately sap this novel of life.


LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tim O'Brien. (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Self-Made Man

BYLINE: By Verlyn Klinkenborg;   Verlyn Klinkenborg, who teaches creative
writing at Harvard University, is a recipient of a Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest
Writer's Award.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2188 words



IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS
By Tim O'Brien.
306 pp. Boston:
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin Company. $21.95.

"What stories can do, I guess, is make things present." That's how Tim O'Brien
put it in "The Things They Carried," which was published in 1990 and which is
one of the finest books, fact or fiction, written about the Vietnam War. I don't
remember ever hearing a novelist make a more modest claim for the power of
stories, at least not a novelist of Mr. O'Brien's stature. The statement itself
-- stories make things present -- is unassuming, and it is offered to the reader
diffidently, as if the writer were about to deny the possibility of saying
anything useful at all about stories. Perhaps it suggests the discomfort of a
storyteller who has, for the moment, slipped outside his story, except that
outside his story is where Tim O'Brien has nearly always been, taking refuge --
as he says in his striking new novel, "In the Lake of the Woods" -- "in the fine
line between biology and spirit," between some literal, if unknowable, truth and
the truth whose only evidence is the story that contains it.

These are important matters in Mr. O'Brien's previous works. In the 1978 novel
"Going After Cacciato," the reader comes to worry about the difference between a
story that is merely implausible -- a platoon of soldiers following a man on
foot from Vietnam to Paris -- and a story that is unbelievable precisely because
it is true, a story of the Vietnam War itself, a war that seemed to contain
every likelihood of improbability. In "The Things They Carried," the
storyteller's indeterminacy has grown. The narrator of those stories
distinguishes between "story-truth" and "happening-truth," and he plays one
against the other. For Mr. O'Brien, as for many other Vietnam veterans, the
"happening-truth" is a terrible thing; it is too powerful to look at, though you
are forced to witness it. And yet, in Mr. O'Brien's case, it has dwindled over
time into what he calls "faceless responsibility and faceless grief," which
story-truth has the power to help him accept and alleviate.

In his new novel, he turns these matters of truth, time and responsibility
inward, letting them weigh on an individual character in a manner he has never
done before. This is a story about a man named John Wade and his wife, Kathleen,
who disappears one day from the cottage they are renting at the Lake of the
Woods in northern Minnesota, an enormous reach of water and wilderness that
divides the United States and Canada. Wade is a Minnesota politician, and he has
just lost a primary election for his party's nomination to the United States
Senate. He lost big because his opponent uncovered the fact that Wade was
present at a massacre in the Vietnamese village of Thuan Yen, which is the local
name for a place better known to history as My Lai, where on March 16, 1968,
between 200 and 500 civilians were butchered by a company of American soldiers
commanded by Lieut. William Calley. Wade's presence there was a secret Wade had
kept from his wife, from his campaign manager and, in a sense, from himself.


AT Thuan Yen, Wade had been responsible for the deaths of one old man and an
American soldier. But in this novel, it is never clear whether culpability can
be parceled out like that, whether it belongs to the deed or the doer or merely
to what the narrator calls the poisonous sunlight of Vietnam. In the end, Wade
also disappears on that northern lake, gone in search of his wife, leaving
behind only a sympathetic narrator, an author who tries to reconstruct the tale
after it has already come to its mysterious close.

There are three kinds of story in "In the Lake of the Woods." The first is a
conventional, remote third-person account of plain facts, the events that can be
reconstructed without conjecture, more or less. The second kind of story appears
in several chapters called "Evidence": collections of quotations, excerpts from
interviews and readings that bear on the Wade case. The third kind of story
appears in chapters called "Hypothesis"; it tries to suggest what might have
happened to Kathleen Wade in the days after she disappeared. But with these
stories, Mr. O'Brien is also building a character, John Wade, whose inner
architecture is more emblematic than personal. Wade is the son of an alcoholic
father who hanged himself in the family garage. As a child, Wade consoled
himself -- isolated himself -- with magic. In Vietnam he came to be called
"Sorcerer," and one of his last acts before returning stateside was to make
himself vanish from the company rolls. To become a politician was an act of
atonement for him, but it was also the practice of magic by other means. Mr.
O'Brien quotes Dostoyevsky: "Man is bound to lie about himself." The lie John
Wade constructed, as man and boy, was intended to avert the loss of love.

At the center of Wade's character is a problem of vision. When he was young, he
practiced magic tricks in front of a mirror, perfecting illusions. When his
father died, Wade discovered that he could escape from his rage by slipping
behind a mirror in his head, making himself invisible. And that was precisely
what he did on that climactic day in Vietnam, when he found himself lying in a
muddy trench while all around him, in some too-explicable exorcism of small-arms
fire, an entire village was put to death. Mr. O'Brien has always insisted on the
spectral quality of the things that happened in Vietnam, not to deny their
reality, but to suggest that seeing was never adequate proof. You could look and
look and look, staring down a trail where a platoon member had just that moment
been killed by a mine, and yet seeing would register no reality, at least none
that could be accounted for emotionally in that instant.

Incapacity to register reality has become a principle of character in "In the
Lake of the Woods." "We are fascinated, all of us, by the implacable otherness
of others," says the narrator, who appears from time to time in footnotes. "And
we wish to penetrate by hypothesis, by daydream, by scientific investigation
those leaden walls that encase the human spirit, that define it and guard it and
hold it forever inaccessible."

I have been trying to decide where the ambition lies in this grim, telling
novel. It does not lie in reconstructing the events at My Lai, although it is
deeply unsettling for the reader to find them reconstructed from within; nor
does it lie in a particularly vivid grasp of the political impulse. Mr. O'Brien
has allowed himself only to suggest the magnitude of the story here, the nature
of its psychological and historical depths. The quotations that appear in the
chapters called "Evidence" -- quotations from the court-martial of William
Calley, from biographies of politicians, from magicians' handbooks, from the
other characters in the novel -- are like tentacles reaching into the unknown,
adumbrations of a fuller narrative.

But it may be that "In the Lake of the Woods" is the kind of novel whose
ambitions are less important than its concessions. Joan Didion has said that
narrative is sentimental, and in his own way Mr. O'Brien concurs. One of the
most powerful chapters in "The Things They Carried" is the one called "How to
Tell a True War Story," which is, in effect, an essay, with examples, on the
limits of narrative. The one question that chapter doesn't ask is: Once you've
learned to tell a true war story, how do you tell any other kind? "In the Lake
of the Woods" asks that question in a different way. It is a novel about the
moral effects of suppressing a true war story, of not even trying to make things
present, a novel about the unforgivable uses of history, about what happens when
you try to pretend that history no longer exists.

Doing the Popular Thing

Like the protagonist of his new novel, "In the Lake of the Woods," Tim O'Brien
has been driven to do what he considers terrible things because of his need for
love.

For Mr. O'Brien, the commission of sin began in earnest in 1969, when he decided
to go to Vietnam instead of to Canada after he was drafted into the Army, he
said in a recent telephone interview from his home in Cambridge, Mass. He
believed the war was wrong -- he had even protested it -- but he served anyway.
"I went to the war purely to be loved, not to be rejected by my hometown and
family and friends, not to be thought of as a coward and a sissy," he explained.

Once in Vietnam, he committed what he considers to be sins to gain the love and
respect of his comrades. "If friends are burning hooches, you don't want to be
thought of as a bad person, so you burn along," he said. "You'll do bad things
to be loved by your friends, realizing later you've made a horrible mistake."

A year after the My Lai massacre, which he recounts in "In the Lake of the
Woods," Mr. O'Brien was stationed in the village. He understands the fury felt
by the soldiers who did the killing, though he says their actions can never be
justified. "There's a fine line between rage and homicide that we didn't cross
in our unit, thank God," he said. "But there's a line in the book about the boil
in your blood that precedes butchery, and I know that feeling."

When he returned home, he said, he compounded his sins by keeping them secret,
fearing that otherwise he would lose people he loved. "The deceits I write about
in the book are magnified versions of the secrecy and deceit I practice in my
own life, and we all do. We're all embarrassed and ashamed of our evil deeds and
try to keep them inside, and when they come out, the consequences are
devastating." He added that he wanted to "write a book where craving for love
can make us do really horrid things that require lifelong acts of atonement.
That's why I write about Vietnam. It was given to me, and I'm giving it back."

Now he plans to make some changes. Writing "In the Lake of the Woods," which
took him six years, was a start. He said he decided to put a mystery at the
heart of the story and to break away from a straight narrative (though he feared
that critics would object) because that is how the novel worked naturally: "This
book is a way of helping myself to start to say, 'No, I'm not going to do things
I think are wrong and stupid so people will like me.' "

He also plans to stop writing fiction for the foreseeable future. "The object of
writing is to make a good piece of art," he said. "As you're making that art,
you're tussling with the wicked self inside. That can get depressing, when you
tussle with it for six years."

For now, he aims to stick with writing essays, working out, quitting smoking and
improving his golf game. "I feel like I've gone to the bottom of a well with
this book," he said.   JON ELSEN

Among the Missing

Over the past days, despite everything, the lost election had come to seem
almost a windfall. He felt lighter inside, nothing left to hide. Thuan Yen was
still there, of course, and always would be, but the horror was now outside him.
Ugly and pitiful and public. . . . And soon other issues would be settled.
Sanity, for instance. Courage, for another. Love, for a last. . . .

When he awoke, the hour was approaching dawn. . . . There were traces of early
light as he moved down the hallway to the kitchen. It was no great surprise to
find the boat key lying squarely at the center of the Formica table. Alongside
was an envelope. He pocketed these items, put on a pair of rubber boots, picked
up his provisions and walked down the slope to the dock. He felt no special
sentiment. A misled life, nothing else.

Kath, oh, Kath, he thought. It was impossible to conceive of her as dead. Simply
lost. Among the missing.

In the frail dark he stepped into the Chris-Craft and secured his things. A
little dazed, a little dreamy. After all the lies, a couple of minor truths had
now appeared, or whatever the certainty was that held his heart when he thought,
Kath, my Kath. He untied the mooring ropes. . . . A hundred yards out, he looked
back at the small yellow cottage on the slope above the lake.

Love, he thought. Which was one truth. You couldn't lose it even if you tried.

He took out his new compass and swung the boat north. Later, when he looked
back, the yellow cabin was gone. But even then, in his mind's eye, he could see
a man and a woman lying quietly on a porch in the dense night fog, wrapped in
blankets, holding each other, pretending things were not so bad. He could hear
their voices as they took turns thinking up names for the children they wanted
-- funny names, sometimes, so they could laugh -- and he could hear them
planning the furnishings for their new house, the fine rugs they would buy, the
antique brass lamps, the exact colors of the wallpaper, all the details.
"Verona," Kathy said, and then they talked about Verona, the things they would
see and do, and soon the fog was all around them and inside them and they were
swallowed up and gone. Not a footprint, not a single clue. All woods and water.
A place where one plus one always came to zero.

From "In the Lake of the Woods."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 9, 1994, Sunday
 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:
A review in The Times Book Re view today, about "In the Lake of the Woods," by
Tim O'Brien, misstates the command responsibility of First Lieut. William L.
Calley Jr. in the killing of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai on March 16, 1968.
He command ed a United States Army platoon, not the platoon's parent company.

A review in The Times Book Review today, about "In the Lake of the Woods," by
Tim O'Brien, misstates the command responsibility of First Lieut. William L.
Calley Jr. in the killing of Vietnamese civilians at My Lai on March 16, 1968.
He commanded a United States Army platoon, not the platoon's parent company.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tim O'Brien (Jerry Bauer)

Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Ragtag Modalities

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 22;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


Before President Clinton put military muscle behind his negotiations in Haiti,
his attempted intimidations, exhortations and dire warnings aimed at the local
junta were summed up as huffing and puffing.

"Heralded by the huffing and puffing of a spin doctorate gone wild" were the
words of one hawkish polemicist in The New York Times, while The Washington Post
headline over a Mary McGrory column was "Huffing and Puffing Over Haiti."

Puff is the older word, from Old English pyffan, of imitative origin, meaning
"to blow in short gusts" or, metaphorically, "to inflate; make proud or
conceited." Richard Brinsley Sheridan, in a 1779 play, wrote of "a practitioner
in panegyric, or, to speak more plainly, a professor of the art of puffing."
From the powder puff, a soft and fluffy pad for dispensing talc and other
cosmetics, came the puff piece, or "adoring article."

In the scruffy 60's, "Puff (the Magic Dragon)" was a children's song popularized
by Peter, Paul and Mary with what some suspected to be a subtext of smoking
dope.

Huff -- "to bluster, to emit puffs of breath in anger" -- gained a meaning in
1599 of "a short spell of anger," as in "to leave in a huff." In this century,
it was automicized as "a six-cylindered Huff."

The two verbs were combined in the nursery tale of "The Three Little Pigs," as
the wolf warned, "I'll huff and I'll puff and I'll blow your house in." (Other
versions use "blow your house down," but the 1933 Disney movie version helped
immortalize "blow your house in" as a rhyme for each pig's refusal to give
entry: "Not by the hair of my chinny-chin-chin!") Thus the combination of huff
and puff came to mean "bombastic threats" to be derided.

Another old word leaped into vogue during the huff-puff period: "The American
military will make quick work of Haiti's ragtag army," Jim Hoagland wrote in The
Washington Post. The Economist agreed: "America's 20,000 troops . . . can make
short work of the raggle-taggle Haitian forces on shore."

The expression began as tag and rag in the 16th century; the rags conjured an
image of motley, a woolen fabric of mixed colors worn by jesters; hence, ragtag
became "a motley, or variegated, crowd of misfits." By the 1820's, it evolved in
the world of politics as ragtag and bobtail, an aristocrat's contemptuous term
for "rabble." As a rhyming modifier, ragtag is being used outside of Haiti
discussions. Asked on "60 Minutes" last month about his inner-city childhood,
Kweisi Mfume, the Maryland Representative who is chairman of the Congressional
Black Caucus, said, "I was a ragtag kid in the streets."

A snippet of bureaucratese also made its way to the forefront. Asked whether
high-level emissaries were on their way to the junta, Dee Dee Myers, the White
House press secretary, noted that "the time has long passed for negotiations"
but added, "If the dictators were willing to leave, we'd be willing to discuss
the specific modalities of their departure."

Ms. Myers is not the sort to dip naturally into diplolingo; that word, a
favorite of the Kissinger era, was drilled into her by a foreign-policy wonk.
Modalities means "means," as opposed to ends; structure, not substance; the
trappings rather than the essence. It is often a sneer word, akin to "technical
details," unless you are in charge of the communications or security of a
negotiation.

"The last time modalities was on center stage," comments the lexicographer Anne
Soukhanov, "was during the 1970's when the Vietnam War peace talks were going
on." She traces the diplomatic sense of modalities back to 1957 and points out
that its use in negotiating is almost invariably as a plural. "If usage of
modalities transcends diplomacy and seeps into the general parlance, it, like
methodology, may become an abusage issue," Ms. Soukhanov adds.

"Clinton, Advisers Consider 'Endgame' Plans on Haiti," read a Washington Post
headline, based on an unattributed quote from an official talking about "endgame
planning." End game began more than a century ago as a chess term, like the
older gambit ("opening gambit" is redundant, as is "final endgame"). By 1964,
the novelist Vladimir Nabokov was using it as a single word: "We'll simply take
the endgame position at the point it was interrupted today." In diplolingo,
endgame is usually followed by exit strategy, first used in business in the late
1970's.

Foreign-policy crises can often produce new diplolingo. Just as the Cuban
missile crisis in 1962 produced hawks and doves, an early American metaphor
recoined by the columnists Charles Bartlett and Stewart Alsop, and eyeball to
eyeball, a popularization of an Army phrase by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, the
Haitian occupation produced the noun de factos, used repeatedly by Secretary of
State Warren Christopher. In a White House briefing on Sept. 18, he referred to
"factors that conjoined to convince the de factos that the time had come for
them definitely to go" and "it became apparent to the de factos that they were
going to be taken out in other ways."

This was taken from the Latin words for "in fact," often contrasted to de jure,
"in law." The two Latin phrases became familiar to most Americans in the 60's to
describe forms of segregation in education, when de jure segregation was struck
down while de facto segregation was still tolerated, not deliberately caused by
public policy. De jure can be used pejoratively, to mean "in name only": A
slashing vituperator in Washington often titled Janet Reno "Attorney General de
jure," suggesting that her then-deputy, Friend of Bill Webster Hubbell, was
Attorney General de facto.

In the Haitian case, Secretary Christopher, after a thousand mentions of the
Raoul Cedras junta as "the de facto government," began shorthanding his
reference by calling the generals "the de factos." (If you don't think shorthand
can be used as a verb, longhand me a postcard.) The columnist Richard Cohen
doesn't think the coinage will last: "Sounds too much like 'mobster Joey DiFacto
and his gang.' "

In the eyeball-to-eyeball moments of the crisis, a curious usage began to be
heard around Foggy Bottom: "We're on spilkes here." This was a mispronunciation
of the Yiddish term shpilkes, "pins," metaphorically extended to the American
dialect term "pins and needles" -- the prickly feeling accompanying nervous
apprehension -- similar to the stretched-out, vulnerable feeling of being "on
tenterhooks."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: TOURS;
Marco Polo's Itinerary

BYLINE: By TERRY TRUCCO

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


To celebrate the 700th anniversary of Marco Polo's epic voyage, Abercrombie &
Kent has organized a lavish, 24-day tour with visits to some of the sites Polo
made famous. But unlike their predecessor, 20th-century explorers will fly to
Beijing on a 60-passenger MGM Grand Air jet, travel along the Malay Peninsula on
the new Eastern & Oriental Express train -- and pay $29,500 a person for the
entire trip. The itinerary includes shopping in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam; a
visit to Buddhist pagodas in Pagan, Myanmar; a masked ball in Venice and a
"flightseeing" tour over the Himalayas. Call (800) 323-7308.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FALL AND WINTER CRUISES;
Cruise Lines Sail Through Choppy Seas

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL;   EDWIN McDOWELL covers travel and tourism for The
Times.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 11;  Column 4;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1384 words


MOST ports of call this fall and winter will be familiar to seasoned travelers,
but even they may have trouble keeping up with the industry's recent game of
musical smokestacks. In addition to changes in ownership, the industry was
further unsettled this summer when two specialty operations, American Family
Cruises and Carnival's Fiesta Marina, which was geared to Hispanic travelers,
foundered less than a year after each was launched.

The industry must also worry about possible long-term fallout from two
well-publicized health crises. The outbreak of Legionnaires' disease aboard the
Celebrity Horizon three months ago resulted in 16 confirmed cases of the illness
among passengers as of late September, including one death, according to the
Centers for Disease Control; another 34 suspected cases were still being
investigated. An intestinal bacterium last month on Royal Caribbean's Viking
Serenade sickened almost 650 passengers and crew, and possibly contributed to
the death of another passenger.

Despite those setbacks, a sampling of cruise lines and travel agents has turned
up no significant cancellations this fall, traditionally the industry's slowest
season. "Our bookings have remained strong, and the two events have had no
appreciable effect on future bookings," said Rich Steck, a spokesman for Royal
Caribbean. Arthur Sbarsky, head of marketing for Crystal Cruises, said, "We had
our heaviest bookings in the week following the Viking Serenade problem."

Some industry officials contend that cruising will continue to grow an average
of about 10 percent a year, as it has since 1970, and they still expect almost
five million passengers in 1994. But other sources say privately it may be
several months before it is possible to assess the impact.

Despite the consolidation of the cruise industry for more than a decade, the
travel industry was surprised last June by Kloster Cruise's sale of its
well-regarded Royal Viking Line, and by Carnival Corporation's purchase last
spring of a 43 percent stake in Epirotiki, the Greek-owned line that specializes
in Mediterranean cruises.

Saying it intended to focus on its Norwegian Cruise Line and Royal Cruise Line
divisions, Kloster sold the Royal Viking Line name to Cunard, along with the
740-passenger Royal Viking Sun, and transferred the 212-passenger Royal Viking
Queen to Royal Cruise. The latter ship will re-enter Caribbean service in
January, renamed the Queen Odyssey.

Name changes are a seafaring tradition.  Carnival recently swapped its Mardi
Gras to Epirotiki for part of its stake in that company, and the ship now sails
as the Star of Texas on overnight trips to nowhere from Galveston, Tex. Carnival
also transferred to Epirotiki its Carnivale, which had been renamed the Fiesta
Marina last year. After renovation it will be renamed the Olympic and will
cruise the Mediterranean. Costa Crociere (the Genoa-based parent of Costa
Cruises), the owner of American Family Cruises' lone ship, the American
Adventure, reinstated the ship's former name, Costa Riviera, and repositioned it
for year-round cruises in Europe.

What no cruise line is likely to do for the forseeable future is focus on narrow
niche markets, as did American Family Cruises (children and parents) and Fiesta
Marina (Hispanics). The failure of both initiatives, industry analysts say,
resulted from large ships trying to focus on a single segment.

Yet none of the recent changes is likely to reduce industry capacity, since four
new ships are being launched in 1994 and a total of at least 27 ships are
scheduled to be launched through 1998, adding 44,000 passenger berths, a 40
percent gain.

Carnival's 2,040-passenger Fascination went into service three months ago, and
after a series of New York-based weekend cruises to nowhere and five-day cruises
to Canada, was repositioned to Puerto Rico on Oct. 1.  Holland America's
1,266-passenger Ryndam will begin its inaugural season Oct. 20, sailing from
Fort Lauderdale to the southern Caribbean. Silver Wind, Silversea Cruises'
second new 296-passenger luxury vessel within a year, will begin sailing between
Mombasa, Kenya, and Mahe, in the Seychelles, Jan. 29 on a series of 7- and
14-day cruises along the east coast of Africa.

BECAUSE cruise ships already ply most of the world's sea lanes and backwater
ports, it is becoming harder and harder to find new destinations; the Crystal
Harmony, for example, sailed to only 20 ports in 1990, but will have called at
99 this year.  Instead, cruise lines increasingly eliminate ports of call here
and there to add calls elsewhere to keep their itineraries fresh, or sail to
ports new to that cruise line, or even base ships in unexpected places.

Thus this season Cunard ships will call at 14 ports new to Cunard, including Da
Nang, Vietnam; Muscat, Oman, and Lae, New Guinea. Celebrity Horizon's Caribbean
cruises this winter will call for the first time at the secluded island of
Mayreau in the Grenadines. Carnival's Tropicale dropped Jamaica from its
seven-day western Caribbean itinerary, which begins on Friday, and substituted
either New Orleans or Tampa.

In December, the 400-passenger Regent Spirit will inaugurate the industry's
cruises from Cozumel, Mexico, focusing on underwater exploration and expeditions
to Mayan ruins. Regency also revamped the departure schedule for its seven-day
Caribbean cruises, which now leave on Monday.  "It's more convenient for the
growing number of honeymooners who marry on Sunday," said Ann Burguieres, a
Regency Cruises spokeswoman, "and it allows better air transportation in and out
of the San Juan airport, which is congested on weekends."

A 12-night cruise on the Radisson Diamond this winter includes a visit to the
Dry Tortugas, west of the Florida Keys, and a transit of the Panama Canal, which
increasingly shows up on cruise itineraries. Princess Cruises alone has
scheduled 42 transcanal sailings aboard seven ships through late April.

Southeast Asia continues to lure passengers, despite the vast distance and fares
that start at about $4,500 a person. Pearl Cruises will again sail to Vietnam
again this year, on cruises between Hong Kong and Singapore, as well as to
China. Princess Cruises, Holland America, Regency and Cunard will also sail in
the region, while ships of Renaissance Cruises, Orient Lines, Seven Seas and
Seabourn will feature Asian cruises this fall and winter.

In other developments, Royal Caribbean, American Hawaiian and Marco Polo are
among a growing number of ships that have lowered the extra charge for single
travelers, in some cases by offering a single room at no extra charge if the
line fails to find a suitable cabin mate.

Royal Cruise Line is allowing passengers on select cruises to Europe, Asia and
Australia to upgrade to DC-8s chartered by MGM Grand Air, the luxury airline,
often for less than upgrades on other carriers. From New York to Athens, for
example, an upgrade to first class would cost $2,390 one way on a regular
airline used by Royal Cruise Line, but $1,000 to $1,060 on MGM Grand.

WHILE cruise fares will again average less than $200 a day per person, the
average on the top-of-the-line Seabourn Pride and Spirit is $831, the industry's
highest -- although the per diem drops to a mere $555 for those willing to
commit to at least 45 days of sailing over a three-year period and pay at least
$59,000 per couple.  Daily rates on the Stella Solaris range from $195 to $400,
but drop to as low as $130 on the 23-day cruise when the ship is repositioned
from Athens to Fort Lauderdale, beginning Nov. 30.

New and reconditioned vessels also charge slightly more than average.  After the
Constitution and the Independence both recently underwent $30 million
renovations, their owner, American Hawaii Cruises, raised fares about $100 for
most categories on the ships' seven-day island cruises this season. Now they
will cost from $995 to $3,000 a person.

But anyone willing and able to spend serious money might consider any of the
world cruises being offered by Holland America, Costa Cruises and Cunard. While
it is possible to book segments on all such cruises, fares for the full
85-to-109 day marathons range from a low of $21,975 on Holland America to
$547,280 for a luxury apartment on the QE2.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fountain in the reception hall of Holland America's Ryndam, a
new ship carrying 1,266 passengers. (Franco Tanel/Daylight, for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SHANNON FAULKNER

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 98 words


Shannon Faulkner is giving the Citadel more lessons in leadership than all of
its military drills combined ("Shannon Faulkner, One of the Boys," by Catherine
S. Manegold, Sept. 11).

When I was a college student, I joined others of my generation in protesting the
Vietnam War. A military career and military school hold no attraction for me.
Yet I can't remember any time when my protests, carried out with at least some
group support, were as costly as the lonely stand Faulkner is taking now -- or
demanded as much commitment. I admire her.

DIANE MCMANUS
Drexel Hill, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation: Raking Mud;
The New Press Criticism: News as the Enemy of Hope

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1603 words


CRITICISM of the press is in vogue again.

That may be due in part to what might be called the O.J. effect, the odd reality
that the same public that consumes tabloidism also loses respect for the medium
that conveys it.

But the anti-press mood may be more fully explained by what amounts to a new
critique of journalism today that is being embraced by critics from the left and
the right, from academia and from some in the working press itself.

Journalists, these critics argue, are so wedded to cynicism that they often
deliver a self-canceling message: everything -- from a celebrity murder case to
the health care debate and on to journalism itself -- is a game about nothing
more than winning or losing.

"We're now at a point of believing it's all a scam, everyone is looking out for
his own narrow interest and the job of the reporter is to reveal the scam," said
Thomas E. Mann, director of government studies at the Brookings Institution.

This notion that cynicism has replaced a necessary skepticism as the core of
American journalism may be supplanting the more traditional criticism that
coverage is warped by ideological (usually liberal) bias. Many critics now worry
about a politically neutral bias that shapes news coverage by declaring that all
public figures, indeed all people in the news, are suspect. In this version of
journalism, all politicians are manipulative, all business people are venal and
all proposals have ulterior motives.

This journalism may be undermining its own credibility.

"Journalists are now creating the coverage that is going to lead to their own
destruction," said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenberg School for
Communication at the University of Pennsylvania. "If you cover the world
cynically and assume that everybody is Machiavellian and motivated by their own
self-interest, you invite your readers and viewers to reject journalism as a
mode of communication because it must be cynical, too."

The criticism has been expressed in a remarkably consistent collection of
recently published scholarly work and popular criticism and buttressed by
several new statistical reports. Thomas E. Patterson, a professor of political
science at Syracuse University, published an analysis that argued that "the
press nearly always magnifies the bad and underplays the good" in coverage of
the White House.

Others, like Ms. Jamieson, have compiled statistics that demonstrate how
frequently the press transforms serious issues into personality contests. At the
same time, Ken Auletta of The New Yorker and other journalists argue that many
of their colleagues have changed the rules of the game to benefit themselves.

Several national polls show widespread distrust of television and newspapers.
One released last month by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press
found that 71 percent of Americans think the press "gets in the way of society
solving its problems."

Reporters establish their independence, critics like Mr. Patterson say, by
casting doubt on everything. In the absence of a new Watergate and in a post-
Vietnam War generation distrustful of authority, the critics say, journalists
substitute snideness for skepticism. Subtleties, such as the possibility that
political leaders sometimes have altruistic motives as well as selfish ones,
occasionally get lost.

Under the guise of analysis, the critique continues, journalists have begun to
supply judgments. Talking-head television gives reporters a shot at money and
fame -- and the more outrageous their opinions, the greater the potential
reward. The implication is that these clever people have the answers that are
missed by dimwitted or excessively political public figures.

Some of the new studies suggest that such coverage amplifies public frustration
because it oversimplifies problems and fails to incorporate the often complex
reasons behind policymakers' positions.

In response, news professionals are experimenting with coverage that tries to
reflect the greater complexity of public issues. Many of the journalists say
these experiments in what they call "public journalism" are needed because their
readers and viewers have turned their frustration against the messenger itself.

Lately, there has been a flurry of suggestions in publications like T.V. Guide,
The New Yorker and The Washington Post that the large fees earned for speeches
by celebrities like ABC's Sam Donaldson and Cokie Roberts compromise their
independence and display a double standard. Although ABC has recently changed
its rules to limit speeches, the controversy became shorthand for the idea that
the inside-the-beltway pundits have become so powerful they need as much
watching as the people they are supposed to be watching.

Critics of convoluted Whitewater coverage have been making the press squirm with
the assertion that Watergate-hungry journalists have lost perspective. But the
more troubling debate among some news professionals is whether the casting of
suspicion has merely become a journalistic habit.

The Health Game

"In the post-Watergate, post-everythinggate culture, no reporter wishes to
appear insufficiently prosecutorial," Gene Lyons, a columnist for The Arkansas
Democrat-Gazette, argues in an article in Harper's this month. Mr. Lyons accuses
The New York Times of distorting innocent events to create a Whitewater scandal.

Even the failure of health-care reform has brought the assertion from
health-policy analysts, elected officials and even some news professionals that
news organizations, ever fascinated with political gamesmanship, may have so
confused the public that journalists should shoulder some of the blame for the
impasse.

A study by Ms. Jamieson and a colleague, Joseph N. Cappella, found that some of
the country's most influential news organizations dedicated 54 percent of their
health-care coverage to the strategic aspects of the debate, such as which
politician was "winning" and which was "losing." Only 35 percent of news
accounts were primarily issue oriented or factual.

Even the coverage on issues increased public cynicism about the political
process, the researchers found, by assuming that Americans were already
knowledgeable instead of supplying basic information.

One of the more interesting findings comes from the Center for Media and Public
Affairs, which tracks positive and negative references from reporters and their
sources on network news broadcasts.

During the Bush Administration, the Washington-based center often reported
negative press treatment of President Bush. But because it receives much of its
financing from conservative foundations, its research was often dismissed as
partisan.

The center's latest research, however, indicates statistically what many press
critics have observed anecdotally: the putatively liberal press has been much
harder on Mr. Clinton, supposedly one of its own, than it was on Mr. Bush.
During the first 18 months of Mr. Clinton's term, network news references to him
were 62 percent negative as against 51 percent negative during the same period
for Mr. Bush.

The analysis evokes a chicken-or-egg argument: do journalists shape their
reports to fit their preconceptions or do negative reports arise from negative
events? And in a world of political spinmasters and corporate message makers,
perhaps cynicism itself has become a subject journalists need to cover. How, for
example, are they to describe the role of professional media manipulators like
Lee Atwater, the late Republican National Chairman, or David Gergen, an
image-maker for President Ronald Reagan and now for Mr. Clinton?

The answer from some journalists is they simply have to continue doing what they
have been doing: providing information and leaving to others the task of
assessing its impact. Criticism of endeavors like investigations into
Whitewater, some journalists say, suggest a naive belief that without the press
the news would somehow be better.

Richard C. Wald, ABC's senior vice president for news, said in an interview that
much of the current complaining is based on nostalgia for imagined better days.
There are cycles of press popularity, he said, and the current lows must be
viewed in that context. "There is a societal skepticism that erodes the
influence of all institutions," including the press, Mr. Wald said.

But what may be most significant about the criticism of the press is that it has
a growing number of adherents among journalists. Some reporters and editors talk
about de-emphasizing coverage that focuses on conflict. Others say they are
rethinking old aversions to positive news stories.

And it is becoming common to hear journalists wonder whether it is time to
review how they do their jobs. "Journalists owe it to the public and to
themselves to ask whether there's a problem that goes beyond the general
cynicism about all institutions," wrote Gerald F. Seib, the political editor of
The Wall Street Journal, in a recent column. "There probably is."

In an interview, Geneva Overholser, the editor of The Des Moines Register, said
her readers often suggest that the negativity and cynicism of news coverage
leaves them uncertain of whether they are getting a real picture of the world.

"The public is right to question whether newspapers are acting in the public
interest," Ms. Overholser said. "I think what readers are asking is, 'Are you
really giving us a reflection of what is happening or are you just discouraging
us?' We're so good at reporting all the negatives and all the infighting that we
give people a sense it is all hopeless."

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A photographer holds a light meter to the body of a man
discovered in the Cite Soleil section of Port-au-Prince, Haiti. (Librado
Romero/The New York Times)(pg.4)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RESULTS PLUS

SECTION: Section 8; Page 12; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 652 words



GOLF

U.S. Advances to Semifinals of Dunhill Cup
The United States, trying to defend its Dunhill Cup title, beat New Zealand by
3-0 yesterday in St. Andrews, Scotland, to advance to the semifinals. The
Americans will face England, which won all nine of its matches in the first
three rounds, in one semifinal today. The other semifinal in the $1.5 million
event will pit South Africa against Canada. Tom Kite shot a three-under 69 and
took advantage of bogeys by Grant Waite on the last two holes to win by two
shots. Curtis Strange (69) beat Frank Nobilo by one, and Fred Couples (72)
survived a bogey at No. 17 to defeat Greg Turner by two. The results left the
Americans and Irish, who beat Japan by 2-1, tied atop the Group One standing
with two victories each, but the United States advanced because it had six
victories in individual games to Ireland's five. (AP)

U.S. Is Back in Lead: Tiger Woods's five-under-par 67 boosted the United States
back into the lead of the world amateur team championships in La Boulie, France.
With three of four individual scores counting, the Americans finished the third
round with a 16-under 629 total, one better than a team of golfers from Britain
and Ireland and four better than Australia. Woods, 18, said a tip from a golf
writer -- that his hip turn was too big -- helped him shoot eight birdies and
three bogeys on his third trip over the 6,734-yard French National layout. Allen
Doyle, a veteran of amateur play, shot a 69. Todd Demsey shot 71 and John Harris
a 72 for Americans. The best round of the tournament came from 21-year-old Jason
Dawes of Australia, who shot a course-record nine-under 63. (AP)

ASIAN GAMES

China Sweeps Women's Swimming
While the Chinese completed a clean sweep of women's swimming at the Asian Games
yesterday in Hiroshima, Japan, five countries won their first golds. Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia won their goal medals in shooting, while Malaysia won in bowling,
Vietnam in taekwondo and Turkmenistan in weightlifting. China has 62 gold
medals, followed by 24 for South Korea, which won in archery, shooting and its
native taekwondo. Japan has 22 after winning in bowling and men's swimming. In
the pool, the world-record holder Le Jingyi was disqualified for a false start
in the 50-meter freestyle and Lu Bin raced to victory in 25.68 seconds for her
fourth gold. Officials announced the expulsion of Thailand's soccer captain,
Sirisak Kadalee, for testing positive for stimulants. He was the first athlete
expelled from these games for doping. The Asian Football Confederation said he
has been suspended at least until December. (AP)

VOLLEYBALL

Italy Wins Men's Volleyball Title

The defending champion, Italy, beat the Netherlands by 3-1 yesterday to win the
men's world championship in Athens. The United States beat Cuba, 3-1, to capture
third place. Italy stopped the Netherlands, 15-10, 11-15, 15-11, 15-1, and the
United States got past Cuba, 15-6, 14-16, 15-8, 15-9. Brazil beat host Greece by
3-0 for fifth and Russia defeated South Korea by 3-0 for seventh. (AP)

CROSS COUNTRY

Runner From Saratoga Springs Wins
Erin Davis of Saratoga Springs High School won the Eastern States girls
championships at the Manhattan College Inter-Scholastic Invitational yesterday
at Van Cortlandt Park. She ran the two and a half miles in 14 minutes 13.0
seconds. Shenendehowa, another upstate team, won the 300-school event with 85
points, led by fourth-place finisher Dana Ostrader (14:23.4). Saratoga Springs
was second.

STEEPLECHASE

Jockey Becomes Top Amateur
George Sloan became the winningest American amateur steeplechase jockey
yesterday when he won aboard Sagishi in the Morvan Park Maiden Hurdle in
Lessburg, Va. The 55-year-old Sloan, a corporate lawyer and businessman from
Franklin, Tenn., has 148 victories to surpass Rigan McKinney, who ended his
career in 1940.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 9, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 927 words





     Weeks

This    On

Week  List Fiction


 1     4   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.


 2     3   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's mysterious
           disappearance.


 3     3   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a troubled
           twin sister.


 4     2   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of
           their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman and for
           her first lover.


 5     3   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson. (Spectra/Bantam,
           $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.


 6    17   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A
           man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.


 7    15   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly
           tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.


 8    12   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted
           man makes his way through three decades of American history.


 9     2   HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982 novel
           about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into marriage.


 10    6   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           mysterious death.


 11*   7   GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam, $6.50.)
           The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear.


 12    8   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Anchor/Doubleday,
           $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes -- on a Mexican ranch.

 13    8   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.)
           Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a
           poem.


 14   16   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery Hudson.
           (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a surgeon's
           daughter.


 15   25   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) The
           C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan fights drug lords in Colombia.



     Weeks

This    On

Week  List NonFiction


 1     3   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
           (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.


 2     4   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of
           the radio and television personality.


 3    39   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A
           psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.


 4     1   FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99) A 1970
           book about the practice of medicine and the ways of hospitals.


 5     6   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The
           development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.


 6    570  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.


 7    20   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.


 8     2   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with
           Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them
           over 100, reflect on their lives.


 9     1   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99) The
           country singer's memoirs.


 10   39   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.


 11*  21   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.) A
           psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their
           effects.


 12*  86   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.


 13   23   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life
           in a Georgia town.


 14*   6   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six true-crime
           cases reported by a veteran policewoman.


 15    2   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.


 16*  22   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A memoir
           of a young woman's mental illness.


 17*  69   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50) Menopause
           and today's women.


 18*  12   A BOOK OF ANGELS, by Sophy Burnham. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Encounters with celestial beings as recorded by people past and
           present.



     Weeks

This    On

Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous


 1     7   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston Groom.
           (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional slow-witted
           wanderer through history.


 2     1   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.."


 3    186  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.


 4    48   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advise for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 17, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically
weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk
indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book
above.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1998

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 9, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Freddy Krueger's Creator Breaks Out of His Genre

BYLINE: By JAMES GREENBERG

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 15;  Column 3;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1813 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


THE TWO COFFEE-TABLE books on display at Wes Craven's house in the Hollywood
Hills are "The Film Encyclopedia" and "The History of God." Few moviegoers would
think of the director of the first "Nightmare on Elm Street" and "The Serpent
and the Rainbow" as either a serious film maker or a man with a spiritual bent.
But with the arrival of his latest work, "Wes Craven's New Nightmare," which
opens on Friday, and with production about to begin on "Vampire in Brooklyn,"
starring Eddie Murphy, Mr. Craven's fonts of spraying blood, oozing liquids and
spinning bodies are starting to look, well, surprisingly substantial.

"Wes is at the same stage in his career that David Cronenberg was 10 years ago,
bashing away at the barriers of the genre," says Piers Handling, director of the
Toronto International Film Festival, where "Wes Craven's New Nightmare" had its
world premiere last month. Greeted enthusiastically by reviewers, industry
executives and an unsuspecting public, "New Nightmare" emerged from a field of
hundreds of new releases as a surprise hit. "The new film is going to reorient
critics and force them to re-examine Craven's work," predicts Mr. Handling.

Mr. Craven's creations -- especially Freddy Krueger, who first appeared in "A
Nightmare on Elm Street" in 1984 as the collective bad dream of a group of
teen-agers -- are rooted in the primal human fear of things that kill and go
clomp in the night. But even Mr. Craven does not take the cult status of the
"Nightmare" films seriously, and was not very involved in the five sequels.
"They turned it into an exercise in special effects," he says.

The new film (which still cost only $11 million) could be considered a
meditation on the nature of horror films from the inside out, a multilayered
work in which executives from New Line Cinema, the company that produced the
"Nightmare" series, want to resurrect Freddy one more time.

Working in another genre, a director who consistently explores his obsessions
for 20 years is considered an auteur. But working in horror films, Mr. Craven
has been deprived of respect. He has also been deprived of the fortune he should
have earned for creating the "Nightmare" series. Eager to make the first film,
he signed away all of his rights. Since then, the six "Nightmare" films have
made some $500 million worldwide, but Mr. Craven has received a mere $400,000.

Stereotyped as the Sultan of Slash and the Guru of Gore, Mr. Craven recalls
guests leaving dinner parties upon realizing who he was. "The consistent
reaction was, 'Oh, that's a despicable film' or 'How could you?' "

But Mr. Craven has always had fans among the young directors who appreciated the
intelligence he was bringing to low-budget film making. Frank Darabont, writer
and director of "The Shawshank Redemption" and a co-writer of the forthcoming
big-budget "Mary Shelley's Frankenstein," credits Mr. Craven for taking a
psychological approach to scaring the stuffing out of people.

"The idea of a demon in a dream coming to get you had real mythological
resonance," says Mr. Darabont, who was a writer on "A Nightmare on Elm Street
III: Dream Warriors." "It was really remarkable because everyone else out there
was just worrying about how to get effects to bleed better."

Noah Cowan, a programmer at the Toronto Film Festival, hails "Wes Craven's New
Nightmare" as a serious attempt to integrate post-modernism into a genre film.
"But the nice thing about Craven's post-modernism is that it's there to tease
and tantalize, not to score intellectual points."

For those who expect a ghoulish presence, the 55-year-old director confounds all
expectations. He lives in an airy Los Angeles ranch-style house once occupied by
Steve McQueen, and he likes to keep an eye on a local herd of mule deer. Mr.
Craven has been married and divorced twice. Family photographs of his two
children, Jessica, 26, and Jonathan, 29, are displayed on a sideboard in the
dining room. A life-size toy dog greets people at the door.

Stylishly dressed with a neatly trimmed gray beard, Mr. Craven is soft-spoken,
urbane and erudite. "I always thought he looked like Don Quixote," offers Robert
Englund, the actor immortalized as the sharp-fingered Freddy Krueger in the
"Nightmare" films.

It's a comparison that would probably please the bookish Mr. Craven. Growing up
in a fundamentalist Baptist family in Cleveland, he was told that films were
tools of the Devil. So it was literature, not movies, that captured his
imagination. As a teen-ager he devoured the complete works of Dostoyevsky, Poe
and Dickens, and continued his formal education at Wheaton College, Billy
Graham's alma mater, in Wheaton, Ill., and Johns Hopkins University, where he
earned a master's degree in philosophy in 1964.

At the same time he started teaching humanities and modern drama at Clarkson
College in Potsdam, N.Y., he discovered experimental short films, cinema verite,
Fellini and Bunuel. On an impulse, Mr. Craven bought a 16-millimeter camera he
saw in a pawnshop window in New York and started making short films with his
students. Faced with the prospect of going for his doctorate, Mr. Craven
realized he would rather be a film maker. "It was a period of great terror," he
said. "I was 27, and I hadn't become a world-famous novelist. I wasn't sure if I
was doing something that made sense or I was just a total lunatic."

Abandoning academics, Mr. Craven moved to New York in the late 60's, slept on
friends' couches and took a job as a messenger for a movie post-production
company on 25th Street for $60 a week. To say that life in New York in that
period was eye-opening for a young man straight out of American Gothic is an
understatement. Drugs, radical therapy groups and "the Woodstock version of the
way things were" were rapidly re-shaping his consciousness. "A lot of really
exciting things were going on," he says, "so when I went to do a film I was
going to pull out all the stops and break all the rules."


HE FINALLY GOT HIS CHANCE in 1972 when an independent distribution company in
Boston was looking for a director to make a "scary movie." Mr. Craven took the
$90,000 and wrote and directed "Last House on the Left," a shout of rage against
the Vietnam War disguised as a story about the rape of two teen-age girls and
the revenge of their parents. This was Mr. Craven's version of Ingmar Bergman's
"Virgin Spring," transposed to another time and place. Even the director admits
that "Last House" was "more shocking than anything I've done since." Leonard
Maltin's Movie and Video Guide describes it as "repugnant" and "really sick."

Mr. Craven was at least partially vindicated 15 years later when, after a film
festival screening of "Reservoir Dogs," he met the film's director, Quentin
Tarantino, who said, "You were the one who inspired me with 'Last House on the
Left.' "

The fact that Mr. Craven's first picture was a horror film and his career took
off in that direction was, he says, completely unplanned. Obviously he had a
talent for the shocking image. But he became aware of the horror genre only
after he was already part of it.


"THE WAY I WAS RAISED, which was basically as a law-abiding, Bible-following
person, a lot of the rage and wildness is kept out from your conscious mind,"
Mr. Craven says. "Finally when I had gone through a divorce and left teaching,
abandoning everything everyone was pleased that I was doing, and somebody said
just make something wild and crazy, suddenly all this came out of me very
easily. It just gelled in a way that astonished everyone, including me."

If Mr. Craven can summon up his demons on the screen, they are not visible in
his everyday life, or even on the set. According to Mr. Englund, while people
are buried knee-deep in a pit of eels or running around with knives sticking out
of their foreheads, Mr. Craven can be heard muttering one-liners to himself or
tossing off an endless stream of puns."Here's this guy talking about
state-of-the-art special effects or this great philosophy book he is reading
making Beavis and Butt-head jokes," Mr. Englund says. "With Wes there's also
this charming, wicked little boy."

After "Last House on the Left," Mr. Craven tried to do a variety of things,
including a Vietnam script and a love story. But with his money running out, he
was forced to take an assignment to write and direct another horror film in
1977, "The Hills Have Eyes." And that, he believes, cinched it for him as a
genre director.

"I made the mistake of making more," he says. "I don't know what that was, maybe
a lack of moral courage or laziness."

Sherry Lansing, the chairman of Paramount Pictures and a longtime fan who, with
Mr. Murphy, was instrumental in hiring Mr. Craven to direct "Vampire in
Brooklyn," believes that the director deserved more attention from the studios
than he has got. "You have to be nuts not to respect the humor, visual
excitement and great scares in his work," she says. "I think he can be more than
a genre film maker."

Mr. Craven says, "I never imagined this career for myself." Nonetheless, he has
become one of the foremost defenders of the horror genre, whose practitioners
also include George Romero and John Carpenter. He argues: "You can absolutely
deal with ideas in a horror movie, but you have to deal with them as parables.
If you look at the stories that Christ told, they were very simple but contained
profound truths. It was very natural to me to go into something that on the
surface seemed like a very simple story and could be plumbed on many different
levels."

After all, who has not awaken in the middle of the night terrified by
uncontrollable demons?

"There is a chunk of life that is scary no matter what you do," says Mr. Craven.
"Fear of World War II, or the knowledge that you can be shot on any street
corner in America, or that your wife can announce that she's having an affair
and your marriage can crumble. There have to be stories that serve those
perceptions, those realities. And that's what horror movies are about."

Mr. Craven's lifelong inquiry into the mythological roots of evil and the mixing
of dream and real states reached its apotheosis in "Wes Craven's New Nightmare."
It's an occasion for the director to prove that evil never dies, to explore the
issues of violence in films and to play with Pirandellian notions of art
spilling over into life. "It's actually a very sophisticated piece of work,"
says Mr. Cowan, the Toronto programmer.

Mr. Craven is pleased with the initial reception for his "New Nightmare." After
all, it has taken him 25 years to feel that he's not the odd man out. But he
still does not trust his new legitimacy.

"Nothing very good or very bad lasts very long," he says. "I'm waiting for the
whack on the side of the head that says: 'Forget all that. He's a cheap
exploiter.' "

NAME: Wes Craven

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mr. Craven, left, director and writer of "Wes Craven's New
Nightmare"-- The Sultan of Slash goes legitimate. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times); Heather Langenkamp, top, and Miko Hughes in "Wes Craven's New
Nightmare"--Playing with Pirandellian notions. (Joseph Viles/New Line Cinema);
Robert Englund in "A Nightmare on Elm Street III: Dream Warriors"--Primal. (New
Line Cinema)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THREATS IN THE GULF: THE BUSH LEGACY
Clinton's Line in the Sand;
The President Seeks to Avoid Bush's Error Of Not Clearly Warning the Iraqis in
1990

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


With bellicose threats and a rapid mustering of military might, President
Clinton and his advisers are intent on sending Saddam Hussein the clear warning
that President Bush did not: that an Iraqi invasion of Kuwait would prompt an
overwhelming American response.

When Iraqi troops last massed on the Kuwaiti border four years ago, the signals
sent by Mr. Bush and his Ambassador, April Glaspie, were irresolute. The only
show of American force was two KC-135 refueling planes that were sent to the
United Arab Emirates. The Iraqis poured into Kuwait all but unopposed, and it
was seven months before they were dislodged in the Persian Gulf war.

In dispatching 36,000 American troops to Kuwait, Mr. Clinton is determined not
to be similarly misunderstood, senior Administration officials said.

In August 1990, Mr. Bush drew his line in the sand only after Iraqi troops
rolled through Kuwait and stood poised to continue into Saudi Arabia. Today,
with its stark threats and high-speed military buildup, the Clinton
Administration has drawn its own line in advance, seeking to avoid a war by
throwing its energy into deterrence.

If war should come again, Administration officials said today, there is growing
support within the White House for an aggressive battle plan intended to finish
off the job that Mr. Bush left undone: making sure that Iraq no longer poses a
threat to its neighbors.

As they sought to avoid a replay of what drew the United States into its biggest
conflict since the Vietnam War, Mr. Clinton's advisers were careful today not to
criticize their predecessors. They said their task in presenting a firm front
against President Hussein had been made incalculably easier by the fact -- due
in no small part to Mr. Bush -- that the Iraqi leader is now recognized even
within the Arab world as a source of peril.

But they left no doubt that their muscle-flexing strategy reflected an inherited
lesson about past American miscalculation.

"We cannot afford to assume that this is just a bluff," Defense Secretary
William J. Perry said.

That Iraqi forces remain able to menace Kuwait at all reflects another
inheritance, one left to President Clinton after Mr. Bush and his advisers
called a halt to the gulf war after 100 hours.

The abrupt end to hostilies then kept American ground troops from fulfilling
their mission of destroying Iraq's elite Republican Guard, half of which escaped
intact. Today, as the first elements of the Army's 24th Mechanized Division from
Fort Stewart, Ga., headed for Kuwait as part of a rapidly growing American force
in the region, some Administration officials observed with some bitterness that
the unit's main mission would be to forestall an advance by Iraq's Hammurabi
Division. That is the same Iraqi force the 24th Mechanized Division had been
poised to overrun and obliterate 44 months ago when Mr. Bush ordered the
cease-fire.

A refrain heard throughout the gulf war from American soldiers and commanders
alike was that their months in the desert would be worth it if only their sons
would not have to come back to deal with Saddam Hussein again.

That Americans troops are now returning so quickly provides a reminder of just
how much that war left undone, and it could taint the political prospects of
figures like Colin L. Powell, Dick Cheney and James A. Baker 3d. As Mr. Bush's
principal national security advisers, all three played central roles in the
decision to call a quick end to an American-led onslaught that was seen as a
brutal mismatch.

Administration officials refused to say whether the United States would seek to
topple Mr. Hussein or destroy his army completely in any renewed war. But they
made plain that they believed it was a mistake for Mr. Bush and his advisers not
to have done so.

"It is fair to say that it is on the minds of decision-makers that we can't be
placed in a situation where we've got to go back there every few years," a
senior Administration official said.

Today, it was Mr. Clinton who came under some criticism, as Ross Perot, the
former independent presidential candidate, accused the President of engineering
the troop buildup for political gain. In an interview on the CBS News program
"Face the Nation," Mr. Perot said of that policy, "It is rotten and it is
wrong."

But Mr. Perot was almost alone in making that case, and Republicans including
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the minority leader, expressed support for Mr.
Clinton's tough stance. With more than 60,000 Iraqi troops in striking distance
of Kuwait, Administration officials said that even while Mr. Hussein's
intentions are far from clear, the experience of August 1990 had taught that it
would be folly to risk underreaction.

"We are not going to allow the mistakes of the past to be repeated," Leon E.
Panetta, the White House chief of staff, declared in a television interview
today. While Secretary Perry was announcing that dozens of American warplanes
were heading to the region, Secretary of State Warren Christopher was warning
from Jerusalem that Iraq would be made to pay "a tremendous price" if it dared
launch another invasion.

Those statements were crafted to be as different as possible from the
conciliatory messages that Ms. Glaspie and Mr. Bush sent to Iraq in the last
days of July 1990.

It is not just hindsight that has pointed Mr. Clinton on a more antagonistic
course this weekend. With the United States and its allies still united on the
need to hold a firm line against Iraq, the President has been able to count on
strong statements even from Syria, Egypt and the Arab League, which were
reluctant in 1990 to criticize an Arab brother.

Mr. Clinton's hand has also been strengthened by the cache of military equipment
that the Bush Administration arranged to leave behind in Kuwait after the Gulf
war. Its presence has allowed him to dispatch an Army brigade that will be far
more heavily armed than the airborne forces Mr. Bush had to send to Saudi Arabia
as a first tripwire.

And while Mr. Bush did not know whether Saudi Arabia would allow American forces
on its soil until Secretary of State Cheney won permission from King Fahd, Mr.
Clinton has been able to count on the Saudi Government, which has allowed dozens
of American warplanes to remain in place at its advanced bases.

After four years in which Mr. Hussein has been subjected to much vilification,
Mr. Clinton may well be able to count on public support for his tough line. Yet
for many Americans, these first military preparations will likely bring a
disquieting reminder that the victory the United States declared in the Persian
Gulf war remains incomplete.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Press Notes

BYLINE: By William Glaberson

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


THE electronic newspaper is still in its infancy. But it is getting to be an
awfully fat baby.

Electronic experimentation by daily newspapers is now in full swing across the
country, according to a report to be released by the Newspaper Association of
America.

In 1992, when The Chicago Tribune began Chicago Online, the first electronic
newspaper on a national on-line service, there were about half a dozen
less-sophisticated independent computer services offered by newspapers. Chicago
Online is available on America Online.

Now, at least 60 dailies, including most of the country's biggest newspapers,
are offering, or will soon offer, electronic services of some sort, according to
the analysis by the association's business development department.

At least 28 dailies are working in partnership with one of five national on-line
services: America Online, Prodigy, Compuserve, Delphi Internet Services and the
Interchange Online Network. The papers include The New York Times, The
Washington Post, The Los Angeles Times, Newsday, The St. Louis Post-Dispatch and
The Orange Country Register.

More than 30 newspapers are offering or planning their own services, including
USA Today, The Kansas City Star and, in San Francisco, The Chronicle and The
Examiner. Several of the independent services, like GTOnline, the service of The
Colorado Springs Gazette Telegraph, can now be found on the Internet.

There is good evidence of reader browsing. Access Atlanta, offered by The
Atlanta Journal and Constitution, says it has more than 15,000 subscribers who
pay special fees to get access to the service. Prodigy, which carries Access
Atlanta, says the service has a bigger circulation than any of its competitors,
though that is difficult to calculate because several services count their
subscribers differently.

Despite all the activity, though, most analysts say newspapers have not yet
figured out how to make money on line. Lanny Baker, the newspaper securities
analyst at Salomon Brothers, said advertisers, for example, still prefer seeing
their messages in print. Fees from on-line subscribers do not bring anywhere
near the same profits as printed newspapers, of course, and the various on-line
systems are still experimenting with different ways of generating revenue.

"The electronic product right now doesn't have the profitability characteristics
of the printed product," Mr. Baker said.

In other words, while the electronic newspaper is maturing healthily, it is too
soon to tell whether it will grow up to be a bruiser or a wimp.

A Reporter Faces Bias

Nobody said being an investigative reporter was easy. But John Getter, a
broadcast sleuth on KHOU-TV, the CBS affiliate in Houston, found that there are
sometimes unexpected hardships.

Mr. Getter bought a new house and applied for homeowner's insurance this summer.
Unfortunately, his reputation preceded him. His insurance agent soon called him
to deliver the bad news: the application had been denied by an underwriter for
the Trinity Universal Insurance Companies in Dallas.

Why? "The guy recognized you," he remembered being told by his agent. The agent
said the underwriter knew him as "that investigative reporter" and feared that
one of Mr. Getter's disgruntled targets would "want to blow up his house."

A spokeswoman for Trinity Universal acknowledged that "unfortunately that did
happen" but said it was an error in judgment.

Hamilton Masters, a senior producer at KHOU, wrote a brief description of Mr.
Getter's experience and posted it on an Internet computer bulletin board dealing
with investigative reporting. Soon, Mr. Getter said, he heard similar accounts
from other investigative reporters at The Wall Street Journal, The Cleveland
Plain Dealer and a Dallas television station.

Mr. Getter said his problem highlighted a little-noted but serious problem for
investigative reporters. He was particularly interested in a letter from one
editor who suggested that legislation might be needed to protect journalists
from such discrimination.

But Mr. Getter also said there was a bright side to the story. His insurance
agent ended up getting him coverage from another company. And the premium was
$10 less a year.

Hanoi Recognizes a Paper

The San Jose Mercury News has become the first American newspaper in a
generation to win approval from the Government of Vietnam for a permanent bureau
in Hanoi.

The newspaper's executive editor, Robert Ingle, said the approval came in late
September after a considerable period of hemming and hawing from Hanoi. The
newspaper's executives came to believe that Vietnamese officials were debating
how open they wished to be to American reporters, Mr. Ingle said. "They were
very friendly," he said, "but they just wouldn't say no or yes."

The Associated Press reopened its Vietnam bureau last fall, 18 years after
American news agencies were expelled as part of the Communist takeover of
Saigon.

Mr. Ingle said The Mercury News had a special interest in Vietnam partly because
the San Jose area has about 90,000 people who emigrated from Vietnam. But he
said the Silicon Valley businesses served by the paper were also very interested
in the country as a potential market.

The paper's first Vietnam correspondent, Kristin Huckshorn, a 37-year old former
Washington correspondent, has filed articles about the country's business
climate as well as information for Americans traveling to Vietnam.

But, Mr. Ingle said, "a great deal of her time has been spent with the various
people in the Government trying to get the status questions resolved."

He expects that she will be producing articles more frequently (aren't all
editors the same?) now that she is finished with her negotiations.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 10, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Publishers Banking on Foreign Sales

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, Oct. 9


At last year's Frankfurt Book Fair, Random House introduced its hottest new
author, Gen. Colin L. Powell, who was paid a $6.5 million advance for his
autobiography, by displaying his oversized photograph all over its booth. The
goal was to find a publisher who would buy the overseas rights.

It didn't work.

So this year, Random House went one step further, and displayed General Powell
himself.

The stakes are high for Random House and its adult trade division, which in
agreeing to the hefty advance were banking on recouping much of it through
foreign rights sales. Random House is also hoping to sell subsidiary rights to
magazines and book clubs, but those are negotiated separately.

At the book fair, which concludes Monday, Random House's goal was to make
General Powell as exciting an international prospect as possible, so it will not
face the extraordinarily difficult task of earning back its money exclusively on
American sales. The general hopes to finish the book in the spring.

Reaction at the fair seemed positive but cautious, with publishers unwilling to
commit themselves too hastily, if at all -- particularly because they have not
seen the book.

The strategy has worked before, and with an American general, too. In 1991,
Bantam Books paid Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf a $5 million advance for his
autobiography, and was able to sell more than $2 million in domestic and foreign
subsidiary rights before the book was even written. The book quickly became a
best seller when it was published in 1992, selling more than a million
hard-cover copies in the United States. But even at that rate of sales the
publisher would not have earned back its advance without the sale of rights
overseas.

Bringing General Powell to Frankfurt was an unusual step. Publishers generally
do not invite authors, fearing they will become insecure and overwhelmed by the
sight of all the frantic deal-making that drives the fair.

But General Powell is different, and foreign publishers said they were, at the
very least, flattered by the chance to meet a distinguished four-star general in
the flesh.

On Tuesday night General Powell, looking relaxed in civilian dress, was the
guest of honor at a fancy party that drew dozens of champagne-guzzling
publishing executives eager to shake hands, pose for pictures and ask him the
same questions, over and over. General Powell then spoke about his book at a
dinner for 50, before setting up camp at the Random House booth the following
day to pitch his project to a small parade of foreign publishers.

"We wanted to give them the opportunity to meet General Powell in person because
in selling the book, he's our greatest asset," said Wanda Chappell, vice
president and director of subsidiary rights for Random House. "He's
extraordinarily personable and charismatic, and it was clear from the
publishers' response that they were very impressed."

In contrast to General Schwarzkopf, whose book arrived when memories of the
general appearing in combat fatigues on television in the Persian Gulf war were
still fresh in people's minds, General Powell has not been widely visible
overseas.

In an interview last week, General Powell said he had been reading a number of
other autobiographies, including the one by General Schwarzkopf ("Norm" to him)
as models for his work. And, he said, he was not at all daunted by his
rapid-fire meetings with so many people, despite the jitters that can shake
first-time celebrity authors when they are besieged by swarms of publishers.
"What are they going to do," he asked, "send me to Vietnam?"

Remarks like that endeared General Powell to those who met him. But whether the
personal enthusiasm of foreign publishing executives translates into actual
money remains to be seen. Ms. Chappell said that any official deal-making would
probably take place after the fair, when the executives have had a chance to
return home, calm down and talk money with their corporate bosses.

"American publishers count on getting the biggest sums from Germany, but we were
offered the rights to the book some months ago and we turned it down
immediately," said Dorothee Grisebach, editor in chief of the German publisher
Knaur Taschenbuch, which is publishing the autobiography of the CNN
correspondent Peter Arnett. "Quite frankly," she added, "there is no interest in
this man in Germany."

Other publishers said there might well be interest, particularly if Mr. Powell
decides to run for vice president or, better yet, President, in 1996 -- a move
that would be a boon for Random House, which happily drew visitors' attention to
the latest pro-Powell poll in Newsweek, which ran the general on its cover last
week.

Stuart Proffitt, the publisher of the adult trade division of HarperCollins U.K.
in Britain, said that he had been extremely impressed by General Powell but that
his company was still deciding how to proceed on the book. "It could be a very
commercial possibility," Mr. Proffitt said, "depending on what he does over the
next 18 months."

In any case, the consensus was that it had been a useful stroke to bring General
Powell to Frankfurt. As one international literary agent put it, speaking of
foreigners' attitudes toward the commercial possibilities of the book: "Nobody
cared about him before he came here."

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, at the Frankfurt Book Fair last week. Random House will publish General
Powell's memoirs after the book is finished next spring. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 11, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 926 words


International A3-15

MORE U.S. FIREPOWER TO THE GULF
Iraq said that it was pulling back troops from the Kuwaiti border, but President
Clinton said the United States was dubious and that he was sending in more
warplanes.  A1



PROTECTING KUWAIT'S BORDERS
An Iraqi withdrawal from the Kuwait border could ease the immediate emergency,
but for the longer term, the problem will be how to make certain it stays away.
A1

Marines said they were ready to go back to Kuwait.  A12

American troops stiffened the Kuwaiti Army's fighting spirit.  A12

The Iraq situation reflects policy successes and failures.  A13

Iraq made belligerent statements before moving troops.  A13

Jordan and the P.L.O. were withholding support for Iraq.  A13

HAITIAN JUNTA CHIEF RESIGNS
Protected by Americans, the Haitian military leader resigned and pledged to
leave the country within a few days, clearing the way for the exiled President's
return.  A1

The Haitian resignation was a drama of humiliation.  A14

Among Haitians in America, joy but concern for the future.  A14

No specific plans from the exiled President for running Haiti.  A15

Grief in a Haitian town where Aristide supporters were killed.  A15

Haiti's schools are opening, but nobody knows who is in charge.  A15

THE CHOICE IN GERMANY
The polls in Germany are not much help in predicting how the upcoming
presidential election will go, but the issues boil down to whether Germans want
a change.  A1

BARGAINS SEEN IN RUSSIA
For foreign investors, Russia is too big an opportunity to avoid, despite the
crashing ruble and other risks. Western companies are pouring money into the
country, betting on profits in the long run.  A1

JERUSALEM SHAKEN BY ATTACK
Although political violence has been common in Jerusalem, the attack onSunday
was a reminder that even in an era of peace with Palestinians, terrorism was not
far away.  A3

The body of one cult leader was identified in Switzerland.  A6

NATO challenged the United Nations on its Bosnia role.  A8

Serbs continued to hold up food aid to Bosnia.  A8

Budapest Journal: A crisis over a tainted national spice.  A4

National A16-19

UNEXPECTED BOOM IN OREGON
Three years after logging was restricted to protect the northern spotted owl and
many expected a new Appalachia to be born in Oregon, the number of working
residents has risen.  A1

NORTH DRAWS DENUNCIATIONS
Oliver L. North's relatively smooth campaign for Senator from Virginia has hit a
stumbling block, as opponents and military analysts criticized his statement
that President Clinton's budget cuts had left the military unprepared for an
attack on Kuwait.A16

WRENCHING PAST AND PRESENT
A program by the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation depicting a 1773 slave auction
brought an audience of 2,000, impassioned demonstrators and an agreement that it
realistically showed the human face of the horror of slavery.  A16

TRUCK STOPS' FULL HOUSE
An afterthought in Louisiana's gambling legislation has led to a boom in
building truck stops and filled their parking lots with anything but
tractor-trailers because they are allowed to have video poker machines.  A17

TRASH BURNING ERA MAY END
After many cities and counties built incinerators to burn trash and produce
electricity in the 1970's, high concentrations of toxic pollutants are leading
some to consider closing the incinerators and going back to taking the trash to
the landfills the were built to replace.  A18

Metro Digest B1

Fashion Page B8

In London, designers are all grown-ups.

Masculine, but oh so softly.

Science Times C1-13

NEW TEST DETECTS 3 CANCERS
Preliminary work at Johns Hopkins has led to what researchers hope will become a
general method for screening healthy people for the incipient stages of most
kinds of cancer. But much remains to be done to make the test available for
widespread use, if it ever is.  A1

Peak performance: Researchers say practice makes perfect.  C1

Two Americans share Nobel Prize for discoveries on cell signals.  C1

Prairie ducks return in record numbers.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C15-18

Theater: "Paddywack." C15

Music: In jazz, a pure repertory show.  C16

A record label celebrates.  C17

Art: De Kooning at the Met.  C15

Books: Frankfurt fair.  C17

Tobias Wolff on Vietnam.  C18

Television: Robert MacNeil to leave "Newshour" next year.  C15

"F. D. R." C18

"Out There II." C18

Business Digest D1

Sports B9-14

Basketball: Knicks' Rivers tries to come back.B12

Nets' Coleman a point guard?  B12

Baseball: Cubs' new G.M.  B12

Columns: Araton on Lawrence Taylor.  B9

Figure Skating: High cost of being precocious.  B9

Football: Giants fall to Vikings.  B9

Jets' Mitchell the playmaker.  B10

Esiason makes it happen.  B10

Hockey: Owners mull revised proposal from players.  B13

Obituaries D22

William W. Lapsley, former president of Con Ed.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Iraq's reckless ploy.

General Cedras departs.

Schools for troublemakers.

Letters

Russell Baker: The butler, maybe?

A. M. Rosenthal: Drowning in oil.

Charles William Maynes: To the brink in the gulf, again.

Harold W. Stevenson: "Oscars" made of tin.

Chronicle B5

Chess C13

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 11, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
The Personal Approach To Vietnam Revisited

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 771 words


The Vietnam War -- with its moral ambiguities, its surreal jungle conditions and
the episodic quality of its fighting -- has tended to defy conventional
narrative treatments. In "Dispatches," Michael Herr found a nervous, willfully
subjective voice that captured the chaotic texture of that war, and in "Going
After Cacciato," Tim O'Brien employed the devices of magical realism to convey
its disorienting psychological effects.

In his new book, "In Pharaoh's Army: Memories of the Lost War," Tobias Wolff
tries to tackle Vietnam using old-fashioned, naturalistic methods; he writes
about his decision to join the Army, his tour of duty in Southeast Asia and his
return home one year later. The result, despite its evocative title, has little
to do with the specific emotional gravity of Vietnam; rather, it's a traditional
coming-of-age story that might well have taken place against the backdrop of any
war.

This is not to say that Mr. Wolff doesn't try to convey details of his Vietnam
experience. He writes about the Tet offensive. He writes about bartering
Vietcong souvenirs (like flags, guns and bloodstained ID cards) for television
sets and stereos. He writes about nearly being killed by a grenade placed under
his jeep. And yet the book repeatedly circles the subject of Vietnam without
ever really grappling with it. Mr. Wolff seems nervous about the entire
undertaking, continually allowing his observations of the war to trail off into
self-conscious self-assessments or jokey asides.

He tells us near the beginning of the book that one of the reasons he went to
Vietnam was to gather material to be a writer (when he was a young man, his
literary heroes included Norman Mailer, Irwin Shaw, James Jones, Erich Maria
Remarque and Ernest Hemingway). Having done this, he seems somewhat sheepish
about writing about his adventures, as if his eagerly sought experiences were
not entirely legitimate. As a result, his narrative tends to devolve into a
series of self-deprecating anecdotes, similar to those he set down in his
childhood memoir, "This Boy's Life."

In one chapter, Mr. Wolff and a friend risk their lives on a dangerous,
sniper-ridden road in order to pick up a color television set so they can watch
a two-hour "Bonanza" special on Thanksgiving. In another chapter, Mr. Wolff goes
on a dangerous outing into the Vietnamese countryside so he won't lose face in
front of a macho, bullying friend. In another, he allows an obnoxious officer to
destroy several Vietnamese homes inadvertently, simply out of a desire to see
the officer get himself in trouble.

Such stories dwell on Mr. Wolff's own compromised nature: his naivete, his
posturing, his selfishness, his capacity for carelessness and cruelty. Many of
the anecdotes he relates seem deliberately shaped as metaphors for American
involvement in Vietnam. One story concerns his promise to give an impoverished
woman and her young son a television set out of a sense of altruism and a guilty
conscience; the tale ends with his decision to keep the television set himself.
Another story similarly begins with an act of kindness (he rescues an abandoned
dog from a group of soldiers who plan to kill it) and concludes in cynicism
(when the soldiers end up cooking the dog and serving it to Mr. Wolff, he eats
the meat with enthusiasm).

Most of the chapters in "In Pharaoh's Army" have a tidy O. Henryesque feel to
them. They possess a distinct beginning, middle and end, with some conveniently
ironic reversals thrown in along the way. Because Mr. Wolff writes so fluently,
because he is able to startle the reader with the incongruous detail and the
telling phrase, one feels the stories' contrivance only as they end. In
retrospect, the chapters seem like anecdotes people tell on talk shows,
anecdotes that have been told and retold and polished so many times that they've
taken on a light fictional sheen. Not only are they vaguely unconvincing as real
reminiscences (and in one chapter, Mr. Wolff admits he has invented a twist to a
story), they also suggest that the war experience is a somehow rational or at
least logically patterned one.

It is when Mr. Wolff stops forcing his memories into neatly tied little packages
that he is most convincing. For some reason, he seems most able to be
spontaneous when he isn't writing directly about Vietnam. Indeed, the passages
in this book dealing with his decision to enter the Army, his emotionally
fraught relationship with his father, his awkward homecoming and his
determination to become a writer possess an immediacy and persuasiveness that
his war stories unfortunately lack.

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: IN PHARAOH'S ARMY Memories of the Lost War By Tobias Wolff 221
pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23. (Jerry Bauer/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Homicide' Is Back, in a Cloud of Tension

BYLINE: By ANDY MEISLER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 577 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 11


As an unconventional show that has already had two unsuccessful runs in prime
time, the critically acclaimed crime drama "Homicide: Life on the Street,"
returning on Friday night at 10, needs all the help it can get. But a dispute
has arisen over whether NBC -- which broadcasts the show, and this year even
owns it -- is giving it any help at all.

The film director Barry Levinson, who is a co-creator of the series and its
executive producer, says NBC has already given up on "Homicide." Warren
Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, says the network is devoted to
the show's success.

It is a rare public airing of the arguments that flare up constantly between
networks and producers of programs with marginal ratings.

"If the show's not a dead duck, it's not floating very well in the water," Mr.
Levinson said on Monday. "They're just not promoting us."

He added: "I've been keeping track, and I haven't seen any on-air spots, and
neither has anybody else I know. When I talk to people in the business, they
say, 'Gee, I'm sorry that "Homicide" was canceled.' "

On the contrary, replied a slightly exasperated Mr. Littlefield.

"Look, first of all, we're very proud of the show," he said in a telephone
interview. "And if we didn't believe it could succeed, we wouldn't have gone
forward with it the first time, we wouldn't have gone forward the second time
and we certainly wouldn't have gone forward with it the third time."

He said promotional spots had begun and would pick up steam this week. "And this
time out, we've got an advantage," he added. "With 'Law and Order' on
Wednesdays, and 'E.R.' on Thursdays, we're dominant in the dramatic form at 10
P.M."

Too late, Mr. Levinson believes. "I think they needed to start promoting it this
summer," he said. "Yes, when I talk to Warren Littlefield at NBC, he says
they're going to 'take care of it.' What else are they going to say?"

In any case, "Homicide," the continuing story of eight Baltimore police
detectives, seems to have more than one strike against it. It will be up against
two established hits, CBS's multi-Emmy Award winner "Picket Fences" and ABC's
long-running news magazine "20/20."

" 'Homicide' could run into problems here," said Betsy Frank, a media analyst
for the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising agency. "NBC has never done well on Friday
nights, and these other two programs appeal to the same audience that it does."

"Homicide" was first shown in January 1993, in the choice spot immediately after
the Super Bowl. In its first half-season, it averaged a 14 percent share of the
audience.

In January 1994, "Homicide" reappeared for four weeks, leading off with a
powerful episode starring Robin Williams (who worked with Mr. Levinson on his
motion pictures "Good Morning, Vietnam" and "Toys"). That episode scored a 28
share; the four-week average was 22.

Along the way, "Homicide's" first producer, Reeves Entertainment, went out of
business. NBC Productions picked up the show, and for its second run, the show's
unconventional storytelling methods and jiggly cinema verite camera work were
toned down.

This season, a second female detective, who becomes romantically entangled with
one of the regulars, has been added to the cast. And there will be more emphasis
on characters' personal lives.

"We've been quite successful in launching product this year," Mr. Littlefield
said. "Barry should trust us. Sometimes there's method in this madness."

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rabin and Arafat Reported to Share Nobel

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 11


The Nobel committee has decided to award the Peace Prize this year to Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and the P.L.O. chairman, Yasir Arafat, people
familiar with the normally secretive deliberations of the committee said today.

The report of the decision first appeared in the Norwegian daily Aftenposten
this morning. It said the decision stirred a dispute within the committee, with
one of its members threatening to resign.

The people who confirmed the report said the committee had decided early on to
grant the award for the peace accord between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization that was struck in September 1993. The only question was who should
receive it.

For two months, they said, the committee debated the selection of the recipients
because one committee member, Kaare Kristiansen, a longtime supporter of Israel,
objected strenuously to Mr. Arafat, regarding him as someone who had espoused
terrorism.

The committee reportedly considered giving the prize, worth $950,000, to Foreign
Minister Shimon Peres and a P.L.O. official ranking below Mr. Arafat, and, at
another point, to "technicians" who negotiated the outline of the agreement
during secret talks in Norway. But last Friday, the committee reportedly
reverted to its original position and decided to give the prize to the two
leaders who signed the agreement and shook hands at the White House on Sept. 13,
1993.

But even as word of the award spread, Israel announced tonight that it was
suspending talks with the P.L.O. after Hamas, a rival Palestinian group,
announced that it had kidnapped an Israeli soldier.

Israeli officials said they held the P.L.O. responsible for the safety of the
soldier, who they said was being held somewhere in the Gaza Strip, which has
been handed over to the P.L.O.-controlled Palestinian Authority. [Page A3.]

The 1993 agreement, which had been negotiated in secret in Norway, called for
the Palestinians to take control of the Gaza Strip and the town of Jericho in
the West Bank. Both Gaza and the West Bank were captured and occupied by Israel
in the 1967 war against Egypt, Syria and Jordan. The agreement also set forth in
general terms the outline of further steps to be taken by the Palestinians to
gain control of additional parts of the West Bank.

The accord was unexpected, as was the decision by the Labor Party-led government
of Mr. Rabin to deal with and recognize the P.L.O. Ever since the creation of
the P.L.O. in the 1960's, successive Israeli Governments have refused to
negotiate with it, preferring to regard it as a terrorist organization.

The decision by Mr. Arafat to negotiate an accord with Israel was denounced by
militant Palestiniansand caused dissension within the P.L.O. leadership.

Mr. Kristiansen vowed that he would quit the committee in protest shortly after
the award is announced on Friday, Aftenposten said. Journalists and others in
Oslo said today that the committee might well hold another meeting before Friday
to re-examine its decision.

Reached by telephone, Mr. Kristiansen refused to comment on the report, saying
that to do so would violate the Nobel committee statutes, which call for
complete secrecy on the selection of candidates and the awarding of the prize.

Mr. Kristiansen, a former Minister of Oil and Energy, is known in Norway for his
pro-Israeli views.

"I have great respect for the Jewish people," he said. "My father was a pastor,
so I learned much about the Jews from the Bible in my young days. I also started
the pro-Israeli group called Friends of Israel in the Norwegian Parliament in
1973."

The accord between Israel and the P.L.O. was negotiated under the mediation of
Foreign Minister Johan Jorgen Holst, who died in January.

That event so dominated the news last year that many had predicted that the
Nobel committee would honor it, in much the same way as the shared prize between
Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk the year before recognized the peaceful
transfer of power in South Africa.

There has been controversy over the awards before. In 1973, when the prize was
shared by Henry A. Kissinger, the Secretary of State, and Le Duc Tho, the North
Vietnamese Foreign Minister, for their role in the peace talks, two dissident
committee members resigned on the ground that peace had not actually been
achieved in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Gore Criticizes North's Remarks On U.S. Military Preparedness

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 11


Vice President Al Gore today added his voice to the criticism of Oliver L. North
for having suggested that the United States military could not repel an Iraqi
attack on Kuwait. Mr. Gore characterized Mr. North's remarks as irresponsible,
dangerous and wrong.

Asserting that American forces were fully prepared in the Persian Gulf while
others were engaged in Haiti, Mr. Gore accused Mr. North, the Republican
candidate in the Virginia Senate race, of placing politics above national
security.

"It is despicable, it is unpatriotic, and, as is often the case with statements
from Oliver North, it is also patently untrue," Mr. Gore said, adding that Mr.
North should apologize and "for once in his life admit he has stated a
falsehood."

Mr. North, a former Marine who saw combat in Vietnam, sounded anything but
contrite. He lashed back at Mr. Gore and accused the Clinton Administration of
"shameful and opportunistic" behavior.

"Al Gore demeans himself and the constitutional role of the Vice Presidency by
using a foreign policy crisis to attack Bill Clinton's political opponents," Mr.
North said in a statement.

Mr. North also invited Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Senate Republican leader,
to counterattack. Mr. Dole responded by calling Mr. Gore's comments
"regrettable."

"Colonel North hit a nerve in the White House by making the point that many
Republicans and some Democrats have been making since President Clinton broke
his campaign promise and started slashing the defense budget," he said in a
statement. "You can't slash the defense budget $127 billion and pretend that it
won't make any difference."

This latest skirmish began on Sunday, when Mr. North criticized the
Administration for cuts in military spending that he contended had sapped the
American military's strength and jeopardized its effectiveness. He also said,
"Bill Clinton is not my Commander in Chief."

Mr. North's Democratic opponent, Senator Charles S. Robb, and others quickly
accused Mr. North of providing Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi leader who has put
troops near Kuwait, with a false impression of American resolve and capability.

Nonetheless, senior White House officials agreed at this morning's staff meeting
that a stronger response to Mr. North's comments was required, so Mr. Gore
interrupted a campaign appearance in Tennessee for Senator Jim Sasser to speak
by telephone with reporters in Virginia and Washington.

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 13, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Why We're Seeing a Persian Gulf War Rerun;
Are They Casualties?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 268 words


To the Editor:

After three tours of duty in Vietnam and one in the Persian Gulf, I am convinced
that every war breeds discontent among a small percentage of its survivors. The
soldier believes he or she is scarred emotionally, as well as physically, and
deserves recognition. If so acknowledged, the soldier has, in his or her mind,
earned the right to be considered one of Anna Quindlen's "Casualties of War"
(column, Oct. 5).

What fuels the search for recognition, and now compensation, are unsubstantiated
claims by presumed victims that whatever ails them now was due to exposure to
something then and there. In Vietnam it was Agent Orange; in Desert Storm it is
"gulf war syndrome." Anecdotal reports of "toxic semen" defy imagination, let
alone science. Likewise, birth defects, unless compared for incidence to other
populations, cannot be blamed on the gulf war.

Three years ago the Air Force completed its extensive study of Agent Orange in a
project called Operation Ranch Hand. The incidence of malignant neoplasm
(cancer) was lower in the group exposed to the defoliant than in controls! Yes,
it was a Department of Defense study, but it was conducted by the National
Academy of Sciences, and the results have not been challenged scientifically.

Whether the "gulf war syndrome" survives as a disease complex will depend upon
time and scientific scrutiny. If it does, I predict it will be relegated to the
psychiatric literature.

KENNETH G. SWAN, M.D.
Newark, Oct. 5, 1994

The writer is a professor of surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry
of New Jersey.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Where Antiques Reflect The Latest Fashions

BYLINE: By CAROL VOGEL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 6;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1958 words


WHEN the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show first opened in
Manhattan six years ago, droves of Europe's top dealers leaped at the chance to
exhibit at the Seventh Regiment Armory. Since most of their best customers were
Americans, the chance to give them shop-at-home service seemed irresistible.

And it was. For the first time, America had a showplace that rivaled Grosvenor
House in London, Maastrict in the Netherlands and the Biennale in Paris. This
year's fair, which opens today and runs through Thursday, still ranks with those
extravaganzas. Viewers have a chance to see objects as varied as a third-century
A.D. Roman glass bottle for $120, a 1944 Picasso oil for $435,000 and a $3.5
million Chinese bronze. It's also a place to follow current fashions in
collecting. (Asian art is hot right now; so are Continental furniture and animal
jewelry.)

The show has also come to be known as the event that kicks off the fall art and
antiques season. Besides a number of smaller antiques shows being held around
the New York metropolitan area this weekend, the auction houses are showing such
big-name collections as those of Alice Tully, Henry Francis du Pont and Bertram
K. and Nina Fletcher Little.

But despite its clout, the show is not aging gracefully. While most of the 78
dealers have brought rare and handsome objects, many seem just a bit too
familiar. The art business has traditionally depended on high-class recycling,
and this season what's been going around seems to have landed at the armory. A
number of objects on display this year have been on the market recently.

It's understandable. As the number of art and antiques shows has grown faster
than the economy, the dealers' mission to keep producing fresh offerings is
getting noticeably tougher. Harder still is the problem of timing. This year,
the show is sandwiched between Grosvenor House (which was in June) and the Paris
Biennale (which opens next month). Few dealers who participate in more than one
of these events have the financial muscle to keep bringing new pieces to each
fair.

But money is only part of the problem. Fewer truly extraordinary pieces are
coming on the market, since people who don't have to sell would prefer to wait
until prices start rising again.

"Just because something has been around doesn't mean there's anything wrong with
it," said Anna Haughton, who with her husband, Brian, organizes the show. "If
the quality is high enough to be in the Biennale or in Maastrict, we don't see
it as a problem. Each show has a different crowd."

Those who missed Grosvenor House will be able to see some of its highlights.
From Pelham Galleries in London, there is a pair of 17th-century Neapolitan
cabinets, circa 1675, with 50 painted glass panels, each depicting scenes from
such literary sources as Ovid's "Metamorphoses" and Virgil's "Aeneid."
"Grosvenor House is the only other place they've been shown," said Alan Rubin,
the owner of Pelham.

Some pieces have had far more exposure. A rectangular commode of rosewood and
lemon wood with inlays of ivory, jade, soapstone and Chinese lacquer, stamped
R.V.L.C. (which stands for Roger Vandercruse called La Croix) and dated 1755,
has been seen at Michel Meyer's shop in Paris, at Didier Aaron's gallery in
London and at an antiques fair in Monte Carlo. Now it's on view at the armory in
the Paris furniture gallery Perrin, one of this year's first-time exhibitors.
Patrick Perrin, one of the directors, confirmed that the piece is owned jointly
by a group of Paris furniture dealers. "It's very special," he said. "It was in
the collection of Marie Antoinette."

Another commode, this one semicircular and intricately inlaid with different
woods, once belonged to J. P. Morgan. It is believed to have been made by
Christoph Furlough, cabinetmaker to the Prince of Wales, in the 1770's and 80's
and is on view at Mallett of London. "We sold it and have taken it back," said
Henry Neville, Mallett's junior director. "It's been on and off the market for
about eight years now." At one time, the piece was also owned by Glenn Randall,
the Newport dealer.

Some works have been bought recently at auction. Two pieces at the New York
porcelain dealer Chait, a Tang Dynasty horse and a large iron figure dating from
1120 A.D., were auctioned at Sotheby's in New York in June. "Great things are
getting scarce," said Ralph Chait. "I always like to sell, but the problem is I
no longer know how I can replace the objects."

Mr. Chait is in good company this year. Asian art is represented in many forms.
Among the star pieces is an 18th-century Chinese bronze vase inlaid with silver
and gold at Earle D. Vandekar, a New York dealer. Even more extraordinary is a
green patinated bronze horse and chariot from the second century A.D. at the
booth of Robert Ellsworth, a New York dealer. The piece is related to the famous
flying horse excavated from a tomb in Gansu, a province in northern China. The
price, $3.5 million, doesn't seem to worry the dealer. "I have people panting to
buy it," Mr. Ellsworth said. "And hopefully they'll give it to a museum."

Khalil Rizk, owner of the Chinese Porcelain Company in Manhattan, calls this
"the year of Asia." He believes the renewed interest in Asian art is linked to
the opening of the Irving Galleries for the Arts of South and Southeast Asia at
the Metropolitan Museum this summer and the exhibition of Asian art from the
Rockefeller collection that opened last week at the Asia Society in Manhattan.
Mr. Rizk's booth is devoted to Famille Verte porcelain of the Kang-hsi period.
There is an interesting selection of objects: miniature figures of Chinese boys,
a wine pot and cover with rectangular panels that depict figures standing in a
trellised garden, a plump toad with bulging eyes and bowls with many
decorations. "Famille Verte is wonderfully old-fashioned," said Coner Mahony,
president of the Chinese Porcelain Company. "It's for people with refined
taste."

Doris Wiener, a private New Yorkdealer who is participating in the show this
fall for the first time, has a spectacular booth of Southeast Asian art. "Ever
since the Vietnam War, the interest in Southeast Asia has grown steadily," she
said. At the entrance to her booth is a Ganesha, a Hindu god with an elephant's
head and a little boy's chubby body, dating from the seventh century A.D., which
she bought from a private collection in England. "Ganesha was the remover of
obstacles, the god of wealth and of literature," Ms. Wiener said. "He was one of
the favorite deities."

While Asian art has proliferated this season, the number of serious paintings
and drawings has declined. Since the show's organizers began the
super-successful International Fine Art Fair: Renaissance to Impressionism in
Manhattan last May, a number of dealers have opted to show paintings in that
more specialized venue. Among the few fine-art dealers left, one of the most
impressive small booths belongs to Mark Brady, a New York dealer. One of his
star pieces is a 1784 portrait of Jonas Brooke by Hugh Douglas Hamilton from
Mere Hall in Cheshire, England. "It's one of the single greatest pastels by
Hamilton," Mr. Brady said. "The last great one on the market went to the
National Gallery in Washington." Mr. Brady bought the pastel recently from the
country-house sale at Mere Hall held by Christie's in May. Even the frame is
special, intricately carved with acanthus vines interwoven with a beaded ribbon
and carved florets.

Some of the smaller booths are easy to miss, but walk carefully, for they hold
some treasures. Among them are two newcomers: David and Constance Yates from New
York City and G. Sarti from London. The Yateses, who specialize in 18th- and
19th-century European drawings and sculpture, are showing a group of bronze
plaques, many made to be mounted on furniture, designed by Alexander
Charpentier, a French sculptor and decorative artist. The booth also features a
plaster bust by David D'Angers depicting a man in pain. "This was the first
glimmer of Romanticism in French sculpture," David Yates said. "It won the Prix
de Rome in 1811. We have four museums in line for it."

G. Sarti has a 16th-century Roman marble table richly inlaid with trophies and
geometric motifs.

Less exotic, but always a staple of the show, are the several dealers who carry
Continental and English furniture. At Didier Aaron, the New York dealer, there's
an opulent Austrian giltwood armchair circa 1790. And the London dealer
Ciancimino has a selection of objects ranging from a pair of drop-dead
gilt-bronze hall lanterns, circa 1800, from Corby Castle in Cumbria to a fine
Regency bookcase. "I'm worried because things are getting so much more
expensive; I hope collectors will understand," Jean-Claude Ciancimino said. "The
old-timers are overstocked; they've been buying so much for so long. And whether
there's a new crop of potential clients, well, that remains to be seen."


For Browsing or Buying

Here is a sampling of auctions and antiques shows taking place over the next few
weeks in the New York metropolitan area:

Antiques Shows

INTERNATIONAL FINE ART AND ANTIQUE DEALERS SHOW, Seventh Regiment Armory, Park
Avenue and 66th Street. More than 78 dealers. Hours: Daily through Wednesday, 11
A.M. to 8 P.M.; closes at 6 P.M. Thursday. Admission: $15 a day. Information:
(212) 382-0969.

FALL ANTIQUES SHOW AT THE PIER, Pier 92, Berths 5 and 6, Hudson River and West
52d Street, Manhattan. A preview on Wednesday, 5:30 to 9:30 P.M., is a benefit
for the Museum of American Folk Art; tickets: $150 to $500 in advance; $175 to
$525 at the door. Show hours: Thursday and next Friday, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Oct.
22, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Oct. 23, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: $10 a day. Shuttle
buses will offer free round-trip rides to the pier from the Museum of American
Folk Art, Columbus Avenue at 65th Street, with a stop at the museum shop at 62
West 50th Street. The buses begin a half-hour before the show opens, with the
last to leave the pier a half-hour after closing. Information: (212) 777-5218.

ST. IGNATIUS LOYOLA CHURCH, Park Avenue at 84th Street. About 50 dealers. Today
and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: $10 a day.
Information: (212) 288-3588.

TRIBAL ARTS SHOW, Metropolitan Antiques, 110 West 19th Street, Chelsea. About 50
dealers offering items from Africa, Asia and North and South America. Oct. 21 to
23. Hours: Oct. 21, 6 to 9 P.M.; Oct. 22, 10 AM. to 6 P.M.; Oct. 23, 11 A.M. to
5 P.M. Admission: $15 on Oct. 21; $5 on Oct. 22 and $3 on Oct. 23. Information:
(212) 463-0200.

LONG ISLAND ANTIQUES SHOW, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay, L.I. More than
35 dealers. Hours: tomorrow and Sunday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: $5 per day;
proceeds benefit the North Shore University Hospital at Glen Cove's Community
House. Information: (516) 926-8852.

Auction Houses

CHRISTIE'S, 502 Park Avenue, at 59th Street, Manhattan. Sale of fine English and
French furniture and objects of art from the Winterthur residence of Henry
Francis du Pont: today, 10 A.M.

Viewings of jewels from the Alice Tully collection: today, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.;
tomorrow, 1 to 5 P.M.; Monday and Tuesday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Sales on Wednesday,
at 10 A.M. and 2 P.M., and on Thursday, at 10 A.M. Admission to viewings and
sales is free. Information: (212) 371-5438.

SOTHEBY'S, 1334 York Avenue, at 72d Street, Manhattan. Viewings of folk art from
the Little Collection: Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M., and Monday through Thursday, 10 A.M.
to 5 P.M. Sales on Oct. 21, 2 P.M., and Oct. 22, 10:15 A.M. and 2 P.M. Admission
to the viewings and sales is free. Information: (212) 606-7171.

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A seventh-century stone figure of Ganesha, the elephant-headed
deity, on view at the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show. (Doris
Wiener Inc.); A large Chinese bronze vase, inlaid with silver and gold, from the
18th century or
earlier. (Earle D. Vandekar of Knightsbridge) (pg. C1); An Austrian giltwood
armchair, circa 1790, at the antiques show. (Didier Aaron) (pg. C34)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 15, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Administration Reports a Breakthrough in North Korea Nuclear Arms Talks

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 14


Clinton Administration officials said today that they are on the verge of a
"significant breakthrough" with North Korea that would permanently freeze its
threatening nuclear weapons project and provide for a resumption of
international inspections.

In return, the officials said, Washington is offering a number of concessions,
including an agreement to assure the Communist Government a steady supply of
coal and fuel oil, and later to arrange for America's allies in Asia to
construct nuclear power plants in the North worth billions of dollars.

In another concession that could stir considerable criticism here and in South
Korea, the Administration would agree to defer a special inspection of two sites
that would likely reveal information about North Korea's past production of
weapons-grade plutonium.

The West's insistence on such an inspection has been a central dispute with
North Korea for a year and a half. The history of Washington's negotiations with
North Korea has been filled with false starts, near agreements, collapsed
negotiations and accusations. But American officials said they were convinced
that this time there was reason for optimism.

"We believe we're on the edge of a possibly major agreement," said Winston Lord,
the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian Affairs, at a State Department
symposium on economic cooperation in Asia.

Mr. Lord gave no details of the negotiations that have been underway for the
past two weeks in Geneva between North Korean officials and an American team led
by Robert L. Gallucci, the senior State Department official in charge of
nonproliferation.

But other officials involved in the talks described the agreement in detail, and
said that a final accord could be reached as soon as next week. "We are very,
very close," one senior official said today.

Mr. Gallucci refused to give any details of the pending agreement to reporters
in Geneva today, saying only, "We are going to continue meeting for a while."

Some American officials, however, speculated that the North could be attempting
to complete the accord before the formal installation of Kim Jong Il as North
Korea's paramount leader. Mr. Kim has apparently met little resistance to his
taking the job since the death of his father, Kim Il Sung, in mid-July.

But the younger Mr. Kim has yet to assume several of his father's titles, an
event that could take place as soon as the end of this month, when the 100-day
mourning period for the elder Mr. Kim ends.

As described by American officials, a draft agreement being refined in Geneva
calls for North Korea to permanently freeze operations of its five-megawatt
nuclear reactor, whose waste fuel can be purified into weapons grade plutonium.
It would also freeze the construction of two larger reactors that would have
given the North a far larger supply of plutonium, the core ingredient of nuclear
weapons, in coming years.

The North would also agree to full, regular inspections by the International
Atomic Energy Agency, whose inspectors have been barred from many sites since
early last year, when the North threatened to withdraw from the Nuclear
NonProliferation Treaty.

North Korea would also would be required by the agreement to fully re-enter the
treaty, which it first signed in 1985, the officials said.

But as part of the deal, the Clinton Administration also appeared ready to back
down on a key demand, that the North send its recently acquired inventory of
8,000 nuclear fuel rods, enough to make four or five bombs, to a third country.

Instead, Pyongyang would be permitted to keep them in a cooling pond for a
lengthy period of time, perhaps years. That would essentially create an
insurance policy for the North, assuring that it would keep a supply of
plutonium at hand in case the United States, South Korea, or Japan reneged on
their parts of the agreement.

The accord now being made final would also apparently delay, perhaps for several
years, a "special inspection" of a suspected nuclear waste dump that could
reveal how much plutonium North Korea has produced in recent years.

The North has steadfastly refused to allow that inspection to take place, saying
the site was a military facility unrelated to its nuclear program.

If the United States agreed to put off such an inspection, it would constitute a
significant change of position for President Clinton and his aides. Since last
year they have repeatedly said that such an inspection is a prerequisite for any
comprehensive agreement.

South Korean officials, who have expressed sharp reservations in recent weeks
about the wisdom of striking a deal with the North's new leadership, said in
Seoul that they thought an agreement could come as quickly as this weekend.

Last week, in an interview with The New York Times, South Korea's president, Kim
Young Sam, accused the Administration of naivete in dealing with the North, and
said that the West should do nothing to prevent the Communist Government from an
economic and political crisis that could sweep it from power.

Getting the South's full agreement to any deal with the North is essential,
because Seoul would be stuck with much of the bill for aid to Pyongyang. The
Adminstration is considering sending Defense Secretary William J. Perry to the
South Korean capital next week, after his trip to Kuwait, China and the
Philippines, apparently to try to sell the deal to South Korea's leadership.

For the North, the most important feature of the pending agreement is likely to
be the assurance of a steady source of energy to keep its few remaining
factories running. While there are no reliable measures of North Korean output,
American intelligence agencies have estimated that half to two-thirds of North
Korea's industrial facilities have ground to a stop, largely because of a lack
of power.

Under the accord, the North would receive coal and fuel oil in sufficient
quantity to make up for the power that would have been generated by the three
nuclear power plants it has agreed to abandon. It is unclear who would provide
the fuel, but experts speculate that most of it would come from the South, under
terms that would not require the bankrupt Communist government to pay for it for
years.

Pentagon officials have been concerned for some time that any fuel given to the
North could be diverted to the military, worsening the threat to South Korea.
State Department officials said that problem has now been resolved.

"The way we are structuring the deal, we are making sure the North does not get
any fuel they can pour into their tanks," said one American official.

Over time, the North would also be provided with several light-water nuclear
reactors, a type that produces waste that is far more difficult to convert into
weapons-grade fuel.

The reactors would be financed and built by a consortium led by South Korea,
whose leaders expect to make use of the facilities if the Korean Peninsula is
eventually reunified. Japan would also invest heavily in the power project, but
the United States, which is barred by law from providing aid to the North, has
said it would not be a financial contributor.

The agreement also calls for a gradual upgrading of relations between Washington
and Pyongyang, following the model used with Vietnam. If the North carries out
its early agreements, officials said, the two countries would exchange liaison
offices. But full diplomatic relations would remain years away.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 15, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Prize to Encourage Mideast Peace

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 680 words


There were three winners of this year's Nobel Peace Prize announced yesterday,
but only one -- Yasir Arafat -- has generated all the controversy. Let it not be
forgotten that Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, Israel's Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister, were also honored for their contribution to the most important
peacemaking development of the last year -- the framework agreement between
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Mr. Rabin and Mr. Peres both played key roles in securing the peace agreement,
and the Nobel Committee was right to have them share the honor. The two fought
bitterly over the leadership and direction of Israel's Labor Party for many
years. But they set aside their differences, and Mr. Rabin's well-earned
skepticism about P.L.O. reliability, to seize a historic opportunity for
peacemaking. In doing so, they at first responded to, and then went on to lead,
a dramatic change in Israeli public opinion.

Mr. Arafat has spent most of his adult life leading a terrorist organization
pledged to Israel's destruction. But last year he put his reputation and life on
the line to work for a peaceful resolution of the long Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.

Of course, a peace agreement is not yet peace. The crisis over the abduction of
an Israeli soldier, Nahshon Waxman, by Hamas extremists, leading to yesterday's
tragically failed rescue attempt, illustrates the continuing vulnerability of
peace efforts. At first Israel blamed the P.L.O. for letting Hamas hold Corporal
Waxman in P.L.O.-administered territory. But the would-be rescue team found him
in an Israeli-occupied area of the West Bank.

Some argue that only pacifist saints, healers or nonviolent crusaders like the
Dalai Lama, Mother Teresa or the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. should win the
Nobel Peace Prize. But there is value also in honoring more worldly political
leaders -- even former terrorists -- who have taken an important and courageous
turn toward peace. Such awards can encourage persistence in a difficult,
long-term process, strengthen the hand of former terrorists like Mr. Arafat
against present-day terrorists like the Hamas organization, and set a positive
example for future converts from the path of violence.

This is not the first time the committee has ignored the warlike past of
candidates to honor their later deeds. In 1973 the prize was awarded to Henry
Kissinger and Le Duc Tho of Vietnam for agreeing to end a war they had
previously helped conduct. The 1978 co-winners, Menachem Begin and Anwar
el-Sadat, were also chosen for switching course from war to peace. Mikhail
Gorbachev, who won the 1990 Peace Prize for dismantling a police state and
liberating a captive empire, was also responsible for waging war in Afghanistan
and authorizing deadly repression in the Caucasus and the Baltics. Andrei
Sakharov, the 1975 winner, was known as the father of the Soviet H-bomb before
he became the father of the Soviet democracy movement.

Such mixed careers and late-life changes reflect the career of the prize's
creator, Alfred Nobel. Though neither terrorist nor politician, Nobel started
out as a munitions maker, earned his first Swedish patent for a method of making
gunpowder and made his name and fortune from inventing and manufacturing lethal
explosives, including the old terrorist standby dynamite.

Yet he is now remembered mainly for endowing the various Nobel Prizes, including
a peace prize that his 1895 will envisioned as going to those "who shall have
done the most or the best work to promote fraternity between nations, for the
abolition and reduction of standing armies and for the holding and promotion of
peace congresses."

For all his past outrages and present equivocations, Mr. Arafat, the former
terrorist, along with Mr. Rabin, the former general, and Mr. Peres, the former
champion of Jewish settlement in the occupied West Bank, have made this year's
most notable contribution to peace -- working to promote fraternity between
nations that have fought so long and so bitterly for so many years past.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              43 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/Graham Greene;
A Literary Heavyweight Slept Here, At the Heart of Today's Matters

BYLINE: By TOM KUNTZ

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1291 words


HAITI, Cuba, Mexico, Africa -- you name it. Wherever the troubled region of the
world, the chances are good that it was visited and written about by one of the
giants of 20th century literature, the late Graham Greene.

Small wonder: Like few other writers of his stature, the British novelist was
acutely attuned to global politics and ranged virtually the world over in
gathering the observations for a formidable body of work: in a 60-year career,
24 novels plus short stories, plays, travel books, two volumes of autobiography,
essays and criticism.

For example, before writing "A Burnt-Out Case," Greene lived in an African leper
colony. His stint as a journalist in Vietnam led to "The Quiet American." And
during World War II he was a spy, gathering grist for thrillers.

Such professional experiences meshed in his art with the deeply personal:
Greene's encounter with psychoanalysis as a suicidal youth, his conversion to
Catholicism, his troubled marriage, his inclination toward indulgence and the
seedy. All, one way or another, went into the writing.

So while many of Greene's novels were at the core parables of the damned and the
arduous paths to salvation, he was able to invest them with great atmospheric
authenticity and dramatic piquancy.

It isn't hard to read Greene and find much of lasting relevance to the human
condition. What is uncanny, though, is just how resonant some passages are in
light of the news today. Here are excerpts.   TOM KUNTZ

Haitian Mistrust

"The Comedians" is Greene's fictional rendering of real terror in Haiti in the
1960's under the dictator Francois (Papa Doc) Duvalier. Greene wrote in the
foreword: "Poor Haiti and the character of Dr. Duvalier's rule are not invented,
the latter not even blackened for dramatic effect. Impossible to blacken that
night." In one scene, the hotel-owner narrator, Mr. Brown, and Dr. Magiot -- the
dedicated Haitian Communist whom Greene contrasts with the faithless "comedians"
of the world -- consider the corpse of a Haitian victim:

"So he's gone," I said.

"He died."

"A natural death?"

"Violent deaths are natural deaths here. He died of his environment."


While "The Comedians" earned Greene the enmity of President Duvalier (Papa Doc
accused him of being a "torturer," among other things), the novel also reflected
Greene's critical view of American foreign policy. Later in the story, Mr. Brown
asks Dr. Magiot, "Do you despair of any future?" His answer illustrates Haitian
mistrust of American motives, stemming from a legacy of intervention:

"No, I don't despair, I don't believe in despair, but our problems won't be
solved by the Marines. We have had experience of the Marines. I'm not sure I
wouldn't fight for Papa Doc if the Marines came. At least he's Haitian. No, the
job has to be done with our own hands. We are an evil slum floating a few miles
from Florida, and no American will help us with arms or money or counsel. We
learned a few years back what their counsel meant. There was a resistance group
here who were in touch with a sympathizer in the American embassy: They were
promised all kinds of moral support, but the information went straight back to
the C.I.A. and from the C.I.A. by a very direct route to Papa Doc. You can't
imagine what happened to the group. . . ."



 Chiapas, the southern state where a peasant revolt jolted Mexican politics this
year, was seething long before guerrillas came out of the hills on Jan. 1.
Greene found it so when he traveled to Chiapas by mule in 1938 -- a trek echoed
in "The Power and the Glory," his 1940 novel about the flight of a "whisky
priest" during the religious repression in Mexico. Greene found much to dislike
in Mexico, and this is reflected in a travel book produced before the novel,
"Another Mexico" (toned down from the British title, "The Lawless Roads"):

Only the bullet hole in the porch showed the flaw in Paradise -- that this was
Mexico. That and the cattle-ticks I found wedged firmly into my arms and thighs
when I went to bed.



When Greene arrived in Las Casas (now San Cristobal de las Casas) he found
alienation: "Chiapas was forgotten in Mexico City; it was so far away Mexicans
didn't know that it existed." He also found Government troops -- "pistoleros" --
out in the streets in tense anticipation of an assault by a rebel Catholic
general. Curious about local politics, he asks residents:

"And the Governor," I said, "who sent the pistoleros? He is, I suppose, a bad
man?" You begin to talk in those terms in Mexico -- he is good, he is bad --
terms as simple as the pistol shot or the act of mercy. Oh no, they said, he
wasn't exactly bad. . . . All the responsible people in Las Casas had voted for
him. They had great expectations from his rule. But immediately after his
election he had to spend three months in Mexico City on business. The result
could have been -- and probably was -- foreseen. They were the important months
when the taxes on the coffee crops came in. When the Governor returned, the
Treasury was bare, and no more revenue would come in for nine months. He had to
govern without money, and that meant loans, compromises with all his opponents,
with the racketeers who had robbed the state, and nothing was done at all. Now
the very people who had elected him considered him the worst governor they ever
had.

That was Mexican politics ...

Cuban Despair

For his comic spy novel "Our Man in Havana," Greene traveled to Cuba in the
1950's before the overthrow of Fulgencio Batista by Fidel Castro. This anecdote
from his autobiography "Ways of Escape" could well evoke modern Cuban despair:

. . . While the story was emerging I set about curing a little of my ignorance.
I made Cuban friends, I took a car and traveled with a driver around the
country. He was a superstitious man and my education began on the first day,
when he ran over and killed a chicken. It was then he initiated me into the
symbols of the lottery -- we had killed a chicken, we must buy such and such a
number. This was the substitute for hope in hopeless Cuba.


Actually, "Our Man in Havana" is less about Cuba than about spies, deceit and
the way an intelligence fraternity covers up its mistakes. As such it might be
profitably read in light of the case of Aldrich Ames, the Soviet mole who left
many clues of betrayal that his C.I.A. colleagues overlooked (Greene knew the
spy world well, having worked in British intelligence in wartime under Kim
Philby, an earlier Soviet mole). The story is about Jim Wormold, a financially
strapped vacuum-cleaner salesman turned spy who boosts his income by sending
London bogus weapons designs based on the appliance he knows best:

"Fiendish, isn't it?" the Chief said. "The ingenuity, the simplicity, the
devilish imagination. . . . See this one here -- six times the height of a man.
Like a gigantic spray. And this -- what does this remind you of?" . . .

"A two-way nozzle." . . .

"Vacuum cleaner again . . . I believe we may be on to something so big that the
H-bomb will become a conventional weapon."

"Is that desirable, sir?"

"Of course it's desirable. Nobody worries about conventional weapons."


When Wormold is found out, he is certain he faces severe punishment. But no:

". . . Listen, Wormold. We've decided to shut down your post, and the question
arises -- what are we to do with you?" It was coming now. . . . He felt that
what came would not be pleasant. . . . "We thought the best thing for you under
the circumstances would be to stay at home -- on our training staff. Lecturing.
How to run a station abroad. That kind of thing. . . . Of course, as we always
do when a man retires from a post abroad, we'll recommend you for a decoration.
. . ."

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graham Greene in 1938.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              44 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Widows of 3 Killed in Crash Question Senator's Effort to Limit Inspections

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTHwith NEIL A. LEWIS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 28;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2309 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


On Feb. 24, a twin-engine Cessna crashed while trying to land in a billowing
snowstorm in Minot, N.D., killing the pilot and three doctors from the Indian
Health Service on a routine trip to a reservation clinic in the northern part of
the state.

The accident was first treated by Government officials simply as the kind of
tragedy that sometimes happens. But the doctors' three widows soon discovered
that the charter company whose plane crashed had been the center of a
complicated dispute among Federal regulators about its safety record.

The most notable aspect was the apparent intercession of an influential Senator
on behalf of the company's owner, a friend who had taught him to fly. A two-year
campaign by the Senator, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, a contender to be the
Democratic leader in the Senate, in effect ended the work of flight inspectors
from the Forest Service, which monitors any company that its officials use. The
inspectors had repeatedly warned that the aviation company, B & L Aviation of
Rapid City, S.D., was run in a slipshod manner and should be barred from doing
work for the Government.

Federal investigators have yet to determine possible causes of the crash, and
there is no evidence that Mr. Daschle's efforts played any direct role in the
accident. But in making their own inquiries the three widows have uncovered a
tale of how political influence, friendship and bureaucratic imperatives can
intertwine. And they ask whether the routine Washington practice of helping
local interests was in this case carried too far.

"I wonder if he was overzealous in his representation of B & L as a
constituent," said one of them, Dianne Vlassis.

The women are also suing B & L and Cessna, and their legal actions are being
contested by the companies.

In an interview, Mr. Daschle vigorously defended his efforts. "My conditions all
along have always been: No. 1, that we attempt to consolidate these services,
and in the process save money and save frustration," he said, "but equally
important, that we maintain at least the level of quality that we have right now
at the level of safety for the users of aviation."

Over the years, B & L Aviation has flown dozens of Government officials,
including many Forest Service officials as well as doctors who work for the
Department of Health and Human Services, like the three Indian Service doctors
who died in the crash. The charter company operates 23 aircraft.

B & L's owner, Murl H. Bellew, in a letter to a reporter, said his company had a
comprehensive safety program, a "policy to place safety above all else," and he
cited an accident-free record for more than 30 years before the February crash.

Like all air carriers, B & L was inspected regularly by the F.A.A. But because
it also flew for the Forest Service, the company was also checked regularly by
its inspectors to insure compliance with its more stringent safety requirements
that address special tasks like flying in the back country.

Different Agencies, Different Reports

Inspectors from the F.A.A. generally gave B & L a clean bill of health.  But
various inspectors from the Forest Service reported numerous violations that the
F.A.A. had missed. Forest Service documents characterize B & L as a company
repeatedly neglecting safety considerations, with equipment problems left
unattended and pilots with an attitude of "bottom line over safety."

Mr. Bellew said he had contacted Senator Daschle because he was upset with what
he saw as unnecessary duplication by the Forest Service.

Senator Daschle was in a good position to help Mr. Bellew as a member of the
Agriculture Committee and chairman of its subcommittee that oversees the Forest
Service. In addition, Mr. Daschle, a 46-year-old Farm Belt liberal, has been one
of the fastest-rising Democrats in Congress.

In response to Mr. Bellew's complaints, Mr. Daschle drafted an amendment to
strip the Forest Service of its ability to inspect aircraft and pushed it
through the Senate this spring without any hearings or debate in the overall
bill reorganizing the Agriculture Department.

But when Mr. Daschle brought his proposal to the House he met resistance.
Members and aides first saw it as a laudable effort to reduce duplication. But
they said they had later been troubled upon finding the connections between Mr.
Daschle, Mr. Bellew and Mr. Bellew's complaints about the Forest Service. This
month, despite pressure by the Senator and his aides, the House killed the
amendment.

But that may not matter. After being repeatedly pressed by Mr. Daschle, the
Forest Service recently adopted much of his proposal on its own in response, an
official said, to Mr. Daschle's repeated urgings.

Charter Company Worries Fliers



As the twin-engine Cessna lifted off from Devil's Lake, N.D. on Feb. 24, its
mission was to take the three doctors, who had flown frequently in their work
with Indian health programs, to the Turtle Mountain Indian Reservation: Dr. Arvo
Oopik, 37, who was part of a national team studying heart problems; Dr.
Christopher Krogh, 45, who ran a program to reduce infant mortality, and Dr.
Ruggles Stahn, 46, who directed an effort to prevent diabetes.

F.A.A. records show that the night before the flight, the pilot, Edward Mellen,
55, called the weather station and was told that forecasters were predicting a
severe snowstorm. He replied, "I will check in the morning to see if we really
want to go or not."

Mr. Bellew, who described Mr. Mellen as highly skilled and a "very conservative
pilot who would rather cancel a flight than take chances or compromise safety,"
said he believed that "Ed checked the weather several times that day."

But the National Transportation Safety Board, which is investigating the
accident, checked the records of various weather stations in the region and
found that Mr. Mellen had not done so.

A few days earlier, Ms. Vlassis, Dr. Krogh's wife, felt a sudden pang of fear
about the coming trip and called B & L, which assured her that the pilot would
take no chances. She said her worry had stemmed from her husband's bad
experiences with B & L, especially a December flight that so terrified Dr. Krogh
and Dr. Oopik that they had a heated confrontation with Mr. Mellen, who was the
pilot on that trip, too.

Dr. Bob Sullivan, an Indian Health Service colleague, recalled that Dr. Oopik
described the flight as harrowing. "He felt that the pilot's control of the
aircraft was pretty poor, bordering on atrocious," Dr. Sullivan said. "After he
landed, he and another physician grabbed the pilot and told the guy, 'Don't you
ever fly like that again!' "

Dr. Frederick Montz, the third doctor on the December flight, said he recalled
that the plane had had equipment problems but he thought that the pilot had
acted appropriately. Mr. Bellew said he was unaware of any equipment problem in
the flight in December.

According to a state police report of the crash in February, the plane went to
Minot because of bad weather, although the storm there was as bad if not worse.
Relying on instruments, Mr. Mellen missed his first approach. On his second
attempt, he crashed more than 1,200 feet away from his intended runway.

The flight in December was not the first time that passengers had complained
about B & L's flying.

Tammy Kirkland of Rapid City, a nurse, had flown several flights with B & L in
the mid-1980's. She said that on one trip on which Mr. Bellew was the pilot he
dozed off for several minutes during the flight, leaving the plane on automatic
pilot. She said she had later complained to Mr. Mellen, who had assured her she
need not have worried because "Murl's a light sleeper" who would awaken quickly
at the sound of anything extraordinary.

Mr. Bellew said he did not remember the incident.

For the Indian Health Service, the crash exposed a current of fear about flying
in small planes, especially those of B & L. One supervisor, who spoke on
condition of anonymity, said it had become a widespread practice for doctors and
nurses in South Dakota to juggle their schedules to avoid flying with B & L.

Tom Bad Heart Bull, a senior official with the health service in Rapid City,
said he now believed that the doctors "took risks that were unnecessary."

Since the crash, Indian Service doctors in South Dakota drive to their tribal
sites, officials said.

Inspectors Find Flaws

Senator Daschle has long had a special regard for Mr. Bellew. "I don't know that
there's anybody in the business better than Murl Bellew in terms of knowing an
airplane and really having a profound love for what he does," Mr. Daschle said.

But several Forest Service inspectors did not think so highly of either Mr.
Bellew or his company.

From the mid-1980's they described a pattern of shoddily maintained aircraft and
pilots willing to take unnecessary risks.

In 1985, B & L was disqualified from Forest Service business after inspectors
reported that Mr. Bellew had disregarded a control tower warning to delay a
takeoff until some turbulence subsided.

"We need not utilize pilots who cut corners, putting their passengers ill at
ease and increasing the risk of accidents," the Forest Service reported.

Mr. Bellew said, however, that he was confident that his action that day did not
endanger anyone. He described his Forest Service problems as involving "minor
discrepancies" that were quickly resolved.

B & L was restored to the list following a reinspection. But then another
inspector found numerous problems and reported in 1992 that "not only would I
not fly in one of B & L's aircraft myself, I would never let my family or loved
ones fly in one!"

Bill Dickson, a former combat helicopter pilot in Vietnam, has been the Forest
Service aviation safety officer overseeing B & L for three years.

Asked why the Forest Service continued doing business with B & L, Mr. Dickson
said his superiors had told him that "the reason we end up using them is there
is an enormous amount of political influence from the Senator."

Senator Daschle denied that, saying he had never told anyone in the Forest
Service to keep using B & L. A Forest Service spokesman declined to comment.

Although Mr. Dickson had the power to disqualify B & L only from Forest Service
business, he said he believed if his office had not been restrained, the company
would eventually have had to improve its safety performance or risk losing all
Government business.

One example he cited as a chronic problem with B & L was that its pilots
typically did not spend the hour of preflight preparation recommended by safety
experts. "From our experience, B & L's pilots just zoomed into the airport and
blasted up into the sky with little preparation," he said.

A preliminary report of the National Transportation Safety Board released this
month, which included no conclusion about the cause of the crash, found that Mr.
Mellen apparently did just that on the morning of the accident, showing up at
the airport about 7:30 and getting up in the air by 8.

Why the Senator Took Action



Senator Daschle readily acknowledges that the inspiration for what he calls his
contribution to reinventing Government was Mr. Bellew.

"No question about it," he said.

Forest Service officials said Mr. Bellew was the only operator with whom they
had a serious conflict. But Senator Daschle said that did not matter.

"When a constituent comes with a problem, I don't say, 'How many others are
there like you?' " he said. "I don't take a poll. If it's right, it's right. I
said to Murl, 'You make a good case.' "

His efforts, he insisted, were not meant to get the Forest Service off Mr.
Bellew's back. Rather, he said, "It was the essence of trying to make Government
work better." It was also, by Senator Daschle's account, the only legislation he
has introduced to streamline Government in 14 years in Congress.

When Mr. Daschle began his efforts in June 1992, neither the Agriculture
Department, the Forest Service's parent agency, nor the F.A.A. supported the
idea. When Mr. Daschle wrote to Interior Department officials to ask about a
similar program they operated, they said it had greatly reduced fatalities.

But Senator Daschle said the Forest Service's resistance was to preserve jobs.
"I believe I'm up against a tremendous amount of bureaucratic intransigence," he
said.

Asked about the Forest Service's consistently alarming reports about B & L,
Senator Daschle said he did not give them credence because he had had good
experiences flying with B & L and still uses their planes regularly.

Early this year, Senator Daschle's stalled campaign on aircraft inspections got
a boost after he raised it directly with Mike Espy, the Agriculture Secretary.

In answer to Senator Daschle's inquiry, Mr. Espy reported that the inspection
program was a modest one, costing $270,000 this year. Mr. Espy nonetheless later
embraced the Senator's proposal. The F.A.A. said it could take over the Forest
Service and Interior Department programs, but did not know how much it would
cost or how they would do it. (Senator Daschle's wife, Linda Daschle, is the
deputy administrator of the F.A.A. He said she had recused herself from South
Dakota aviation matters.)

But Mr. Daschle's campaign to write into law an end to Forest Service
inspections was stymied by Representative Charlie Rose, a North Carolina
Democrat whose subcommittee oversees the Forest Service.

Congressional aides said an angry Mr. Rose blocked the amendment this month
after receiving a letter from Jennifer Brown, another of the widows, alerting
him to B & L's Forest Service problems and its ties to Senator Daschle.

"This gave me pause," Mr. Rose said. "When I found out this concern has been
shared by the Forest Service, I insisted this not go into effect immediately."


NAME: Tom Daschle

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Three doctors working for the Government died along with the
pilot in this crash of a charter plane in February. It was later learned that
Senator Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, had acted on behalf of the
plane's owner, a friend, after a dispute with Federal officials over the owner's
safety record. (Robert Petry/Minot Daily News); Senator Tom Daschle, a contender
for Democratic leader, sought to curtail some Federal aviation inspections after
a friend's charter service was cited. (John Neubauer)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              45 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Memo;
The C.I.A.'s 'Old-Boy' Camaraderie: Deeply Ingrained and Slow to Change

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 30;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1139 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


R. James Woolsey, the man who runs the Central Intelligence Agency, has vowed to
"change the culture of the C.I.A," especially the deeply rooted old boys'
network of the agency's covert operators. But he says he is hearing skeptical
reactions at headquarters, like: "Good luck. The culture is too ingrained."

A dozen present and former intelligence officers and outside overseers offered
some insight into the intricacies of the secret society that shapes the 5,000 or
so spies who work at C.I.A. headquarters, at a few domestic posts like the
United Nations and at more than 100 foreign stations -- the people who spend
their days and nights stealing secrets, suborning foreigners and digging up dirt
on everyone from socialists in Sri Lanka to guerrillas in Tajikistan.

Those officials call the C.I.A. a genuinely elite service betrayed by its own
elitism. They liken its cultural isolation to the island where shipwrecked
British schoolboys set up a tribal society in William Golding's novel, "Lord of
the Flies." They describe it as a sort of a combination of Yale University's
secret fraternity, Skull and Bones, and the United States Postal Service: a
bureaucratic behemoth swathed in a half-holy mystique. They see a gulf between
intelligence and common sense.

People who know the C.I.A. and talk about it are a self-selecting group. Few
chat comfortably with outsiders. But what they have to say is no harsher than
Mr. Woolsey's brutally honest depictions of the agency's blunders in the Aldrich
Ames espionage case: rote behavior, rotten judgment, blatant buck-passing and an
asleep-at-the-switch attitude that added up to an institutional blindness. For
most of a decade, no one saw Mr. Ames for what he was: a spy for Moscow inside
the agency whose betrayals killed 10 double agents and destroyed dozens of
covert operations.

At fault, Mr. Woolsey has said, was "the culture of the C.I.A. itself."

The C.I.A., now 47 years old, is having a mid-life crisis as a consequence of
the Ames case and the dissolution of the Soviet Union, its old adversary. But in
its youth, from 1947 to 1974, there was a great deal of pleasure and excitement
within the directorate of operations, the section of the agency that runs covert
operations abroad. The agency attracted talented, sometimes independently
wealthy men -- lawyers, soldiers, bankers, academics, advertising men,
journalists -- and sent them out to conquer the world.

Survivors of those days, many now 70 or 80 years old, speak of their sense that
everything was possible, of making kings and breaking prime ministers, of their
belief that they were a chosen few. They had bottomless budgets and limitless
opportunities. They were in the tradition of a British definition of a diplomat:
a gentleman who lies for his country abroad. The station chief, the top C.I.A.
officer in a foreign capital, had a status equal to or greater than the United
States Ambassador -- and a lot more freedom.

"God, we had fun," recalled Alfred C. Ulmer Jr., a station chief in Athens and
Paris in the 1950's and 1960's.

A younger man, a veteran of covert wars in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos in the
1960's and 1970's, put it this way: "There was a mysticism, some special thing
that only exists in the D.O.," the directorate of operations. "And no one else
can understand it."

He continued: "Everything's shrouded in secrecy. It's a mist you dip into and
hide behind. You believe you have become an elite person in the world of
American Government, and the agency encourages that belief from the moment you
come in. They make you a believer. You're doing all these exotic things in
exotic lands, and people stand in awe of you. There was a camaraderie that
doesn't exist in normal life. You felt like you were accomplishing something
even when you weren't."

Then, in 1975, it was suddenly not fun anymore. Congressional investigations and
newspaper articles exposed the C.I.A.'s history of spying on Americans, running
coups, trying to kill foreign leaders. Though most of what the agency did was
done on orders from the White House, the agency took the heat. The era in which
secrecy protected every aspect of its work ended in 1977 when Congress began
creating intelligence oversight committees. The covert operators were cut back.
The agency's analysts, who are like desk-bound journalists, became and remain
the dominant part of the C.I.A.

The Reagan Administration began a counter-reformation in 1981. The budget for
covert operations doubled over the next six years, and nearly 2,000 new officers
joined as the C.I.A. went to war in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia and Central
America.

The grade-point averages and the graduate degrees of the new hires met the
highest Government standards. "But smarts has nothing to do with it," said one
intelligence official. "They know what's happening in the Balkans, but common
sense? They always feel their view is the right view. They're arrogant. They
view themselves as a cut above."

In 1986, disaster befell the agency again. The Iran-contra affair led to the
indictments of senior covert operators, all pardoned by President Bush in 1992.
The experience separated the new boys from the old. The new generation saw their
superiors hung out to dry and learned hard lessons that the old boys had never
fully grasped: do not lie to your fellow Americans, play by the rules, talk to
the lawyers.

But the old boys live on, as Mr. Woolsey found out last week. He had to remove
the No. 2 man in the covert operations directorate and his Near East operations
chief after they secretly gave an official award to a colleague whom Mr. Woolsey
had reprimanded severely for his failures in the Ames case.

The incident proved that much about the clandestine culture has not changed: the
imperious attitude, the arrogant sense that the C.I.A. is never wrong, the
still-powerful mystique that secrecy creates.

"Secrecy protects it all and gives it the rites of a college fraternity," said
Angelo Codevilla, a Senate intelligence committee staff member for eight years
and author of "Informing Statecraft: Intelligence for a New Century" (Free
Press, 1992).

"At the bottom of it all is this presumption of competence: 'We, the
professionals, know what's best. Who is Woolsey, who is the Congress, to tell us
what to do?' " he said. "They need not justify what they do by reference to
reality. Whenever you ask them a substantive question, they take it as an
insult. In part that's because an honest answer would reveal their
incompetence."

Can Mr. Woolsey change the culture of the C.I.A.? He swears he will. But more
than one top man at the agency has compared trying to get a grip on the place to
being the Wizard of Oz, standing at a huge facade behind a curtain, pushing
buttons and pulling levers that are attached to nothing.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              46 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Sports of The Times;
The Locker Room Was Less Hospitable Than Hanoi

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 888 words


THE DAY she threw the wad of tape back at the football player, Kristin Huckshorn
knew it was time to get out. Athletes had often lobbed missiles at her and made
remarks, but she had assumed it was their quaint way of expressing befuddlement
at seeing a female reporter in the locker room.

Now she had to move on. Huckshorn became a news reporter for The San Jose
Mercury News in 1988, and recently she became the first American certified as a
foreign correspondent by the postwar Vietnamese Government.

"I still say that covering sports was the most difficult thing I ever did,"
Huckshorn said the other day by telephone from Hanoi. "You feel so alone."

This is a journalist who has covered Bosnia and Somalia, yet many athletes,
coaches and many male colleagues couldn't understand why she was asking
questions about a botched third-down play.

These days, Huckshorn spends her mornings learning the intricacies of a language
in which you either order a bowl of the national soup or insult somebody's
ancestors, depending on the subtle intonations. This is a journalist who travels
the length of that buffeted peninsula, living and dining with the people.

"I have eaten snake," Huckshorn said. "It tastes like chicken."

And most important, she writes about the heritage of America's involvement in
Vietnam. Recently, she went to My Lai, the scene of that ghastly massacre a
quarter-century ago.

"People in Vietnam are so kind, so gracious," Huckshorn said. "But one elderly
woman who was injured at My Lai took me by the shoulders and asked me why
America had come to Vietnam. I had no answer for her."

But Huckshorn feels the respect for her, as an American reporter sent to ask
questions and write stories. She never felt quite that way as a sportswriter.

Because of the priorities of sports-page readers, most ambitious female
sportswriters must take a shot at "the big three," as she calls them, football,
baseball and basketball. But very quickly, many come to prefer sports where
female athletes are prominent, and where the press corps is more equal -- tennis
and Olympic sports and, to some degree, racing. (Bluntly, there is a higher
level of conversation and camaraderie in those press boxes; the gene pool is
bigger and therefore better.)

Even today, there is very little space for female athletes at the front of
sports sections or magazines. Tomorrow, the Women's Sports Foundation will hold
its annual celebration in New York, honoring achievers in every sport, and
particularly Martina Navratilova, who is retiring next month. Navratilova is
about twice as interesting as any male athlete today, yet she languished in the
female-sports ghetto for a long time. Female sportswriters also debate just how
far they've traveled.

"I wasn't even a pioneer," said Huckshorn. "When I started in 1979, most of the
male writers in the Bay Area were tremendously supportive, but you'd go
somewhere else and expect to get into the locker room, and the other men would
glare at you as if to say, 'Why are you causing trouble for us?' "

Is it important that female journalists cover big-time men's sports? My answer
is that we need different perceptions about men's personalities, men's rituals,
men's games. There are female anthropologists. Why not female sportswriters?

After a few years on the job, Huckshorn and several colleagues formed the
Association for Women in Sports Media (pronounced "awesome"). It is part
professional association, part support group.

"There's nothing I've done in my career than has meant more to me than helping
found A.W.S.M.," Huckshorn said from Hanoi.

Eventually, Huckshorn began to realize just how much she had been willing to
play the game. In 1990, reporter Lisa Olsen of The Boston Herald was mistreated
-- I would say sexually harassed -- by a few cretins in the New England Patriots
locker room. By then a news reporter, Huckshorn wrote a column for The Mercury
News: "Female Sportswriter Finally Rocks Boat."

Huckshorn's piece has been reprinted in a significant anthology titled "A Kind
of Grace; A Treasury of Sportswriting by Women," edited by Ron Rapoport of The
Los Angeles Daily News and published by Zenobia Press of Berkeley, Calif. (Yes,
Rapoport is the first to concede the irony of a man's editing an anthology of
women's sportswriting.) I counted 70 different bylines, some of the best and the
brightest in sportswriting.

"I remember being reduced to tears by Indiana University basketball coach Bobby
Knight," Huckshorn confessed. "I didn't complain. I might never again have been
assigned to cover the team. I remember being hit with jockstraps, dirty socks,
wads of tape, obscenities. I didn't snitch. Players might avoid me. I never
rocked the boat." Of Lisa Olsen, Huckshorn wrote: "I wish she would shut up. She
makes me wish that I hadn't."

On the phone the other day, Huckshorn sounded hopeful.

"I know that if Michelle Kaufman of The Detroit Free Press has a problem, she
goes right to the front office and takes care of it," Huckshorn said.

In the last decade, many women have left sports after a few years. Is it because
they couldn't stand the heat? No. It's because talent needs to keep moving. For
Kristin Huckshorn, the trail led to My Lai, where an American female reporter
can ask questions and nobody throws tape.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 1994, Sunday

CORRECTION:

The Sports of the Times column last Sunday, about female sportswriters, referred
incorrectly to the Vietnamese Government's admission of American news
correspondents. Kristin Huckshorn of The San Jose Mercury News was not the first
admitted; she was preceded by George Esper of The Associated Press.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Kristin Huckshorn, standing at center, with other sports
journalists at a ball game in Oakland, Calif., in 1988. (Terrence McCarthy for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              47 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 16, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ANTIPOLITICS '94;
How Much Is His Fault?

BYLINE: By THOMAS E. CRONIN;   Thomas E. Cronin is the author of several books
on American politics, including "The State of the Presidency." He is the
president of Whitman College in Walla Walla, Wash.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 56;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1675 words


Americans pick a President every four years," said Adlai Stevenson, "and for the
next four years we pick him apart." It didn't take long for us to begin picking
Bill Clinton apart, and we are showing no signs of letting up. Why are we being
so tough on him? And, for that matter, why have we been so tough on most all of
our recent Presidents?

Midterm elections are rarely America's finest hour. The guns of the
out-of-office party pound away at the President. Then he fires back. This is, of
course, part of the tribal ritual in which the "outs" trash the "ins" and the
"ins" retaliate by castigating the obstructionist opposition, the mean-spirited
media and the selfish special interests who are depicted, of course, as all
thwarting "progress" -- progress, at least, as defined by those in the White
House.

But this President-bashing of ours is, I think, about something more than "ins"
and "outs." We beat up our Presidents because they invariably disappoint us. And
they disappoint us precisely because we still hold exaggerated expectations of
what Presidents might be able to achieve. While it is true that the mistakes and
misdeeds of Vietnam, Watergate, Iran-contra and Whitewater have made us more
skeptical about Presidents, we nevertheless continue to believe that the
vitality of our constitutional democracy depends in large measure on creative
Presidential leadership. The unwritten Presidential job description, the one we
carry around in our heads, calls for a President to be a visionary
problem-solver, a unifying force for the nation, a healer and sage. Thus, every
four years we search anew for a fresh superstar who is blessed with the judgment
of Washington, the brilliance of Jefferson, the genius of Lincoln, the political
savvy of F. D. R. and the youthful grace of J. F. K. Expectations always rise.
Yet an exaggerated sense of the possibilities of the perfect -- or what I have
called our notion of "the textbook President" -- inevitably blind us to the
limits of what a President can accomplish.

The novelist John Steinbeck put it as well as anyone when he wrote in the
mid-1960's that "we give the President more work than a man can do, more
responsibility than a man should take, more pressure than a man can bear. We
abuse him often and rarely praise him. We wear him out, use him up, eat him up.
. . . He is ours and we exercise the right to destroy him."

CLINTON HAS MOST ASSUREDLY CONTRIBUTED TO HIS OWN PROBLEMS. He lacks discipline
and focus. He vacillates and procrastinates. He tries to please everyone and he
is a relentless spinmaster. His advisers don't inspire much confidence. He
shoots himself in the foot. He plainly doesn't cultivate allies; he doesn't
delegate enough; he doesn't laugh enough.

Yet Clinton has achieved more, both with regard to legislation and to foreign
policy, than might have been expected of a President elected by 43 percent of
the voters in a contest in which the electorate was voting Bush out, not
embracing a Democratic platform. Clinton had virtually no mandate. Moreover, he
came to office with more baggage -- his draft board controversy, Gennifer
Flowers and so on -- than almost any President in modern times. He tries,
justifiably, to claim credit for reducing the deficit, creating more jobs and
overseeing the general recovery. Americans, however, are unwilling to give him
much credit because they continue to fear the worst -- inflation, reduced
purchasing power, job loss. Then there is the challenge of charting an appealing
and coherent foreign policy in the post-cold-war era. Clinton has had successes
in the Middle East; he has been steady with regard to Russia; he won passage of
Nafta. But to get to the White House, Clinton concluded he had to talk tougher
than his opponents about Bosnia, Haiti and China. What served Clinton well in
winning the White House, however, is often making it hard for him to exercise
effective leadership as the President. This campaign tough talk haunts him -- he
has had to commit or waiver, and either way he's been hurt. With the cold war
over, Americans are anxious and unsure about where and how they want their
country to intervene.

Clinton gets a lot of unfavorable press. The media don't especially like or
respect him. Reporters don't feel he levels with them, and members of the
national press corps often felt Clinton did end runs around them in the 1992
campaign by going the talk-show route. But it is what Clinton hasn't done about
his press relations that has probably hurt him most. He has not, despite his
having tried several different press secretaries, chiefs of staff and P.R.
handlers (like David Gergen), found anyone who speaks with authority for his
Administration. (He gets precious little help from his Cabinet officers.)
Moreover, there seems to be no one in the White House creatively capitalizing on
good news, as there was in the Reagan and the Bush Administrations. For all the
worrying about Clinton's image, there seems little effective effort to associate
the President with achievement.

Clinton himself is an effective speaker and he would serve himself better if he
had more J. F. K.-style news conferences. He has to counter the negative slant
of most media stories by more effective use of the bully pulpit.

ALTHOUGH CLINTON HAS doubtless created some of his own political problems, the
larger ones are not of his making but of ours. In fact, all the heated midterm
charges and countercharges mostly serve to distract us from appreciating certain
enduring realities and fundamental characteristics of our relationship to
political leadership.

Today, as ever, we tend to distrust Presidents because Presidents are a prime
agent of the Federal Government. We don't like government much, and nowadays we
dislike the Federal Government most of all. In times of popular war or dire
economic crises, we can be aggressively led by a President, but generally we
want a President to preside over and unify us. Further, we subject Presidents to
many paradoxical and contradictory expectations -- making it hard for a
President to remain popular for sustained periods.

Let's face it: Americans are lousy followers. We admire power, yet fear it. We
like to unload responsibilities on our leaders, yet we dislike being bossed
around. We celebrate the individual and the idea that one person can make a
difference, yet we inherently suspect those who have made it to the top --
especially those at the top of large institutions.

Every President has to understand the fine line between providing strong,
decisive leadership and infringing on the individual rights and liberties of the
people. This ambivalence toward executive power is hardly new. The founders of
the American Republic knew the new nation needed an office that could exercise
leadership, yet they feared the development of a national leader who might
incite the people and yield factious or demagogic government. So they wrote a
Constitution that makes it possible but difficult for Presidents to exercise
decisive leadership.

Alexis de Tocqueville said it well when he wrote that Americans sometimes yearn
for leadership but that they also want to be free and left alone. Americans love
their country and are highly patriotic. Yet we cherish individualism over
collectivism and individual liberty over the rights of the state. We are a
difficult people to lead in any predictable manner or direction.

One of the persisting paradoxes of the Presidency is that, on the one hand, it
is always too powerful and, on the other, it is always too weak. It is too
strong because in many ways it is contrary to our ideals of government by the
people and decentralization of power. It is too weak because Presidents seldom
are able to keep the promises they make (as on health care). And the Presidency
is always too constrained when we believe a President is striving to serve the
public interest -- as we define it.

We want dynamic, charismatic leadership. "We need leaders of inspired idealism,"
Teddy Roosevelt wrote. "Leaders to whom are granted great visions, who dream
greatly, and strive to make their dreams come true, who can kindle the people
with the fire from their own burning souls." However, we also want Presidents to
heed our view.

We expect our Presidents to provide bold innovative, programmatic leadership,
but expect them, too, to respond pragmatically to public opinion majorities.

We may want a certain amount of visionary innovation, yet Americans routinely
resist being led too far in any one direction. Lead us, we say, but also listen
to us.

While we want a President who can unify us, the job of being President requires
taking firm stands on issues that frequently divide us.

Every now and then, we want change, yet we also fear it. Charlie Brown in the
Peanuts cartoon once said, "I have my strong opinions -- but they don't last
long." So American public opinion shifts -- sometimes quickly.

THE PRESIDENCY WILL surely remain one of our nation's best sources for creative
leadership. Indeed, a strong, effective President is a necessity if we are to
make our system work. Hamiltonian energy in the Presidency is needed to make our
Madisonian system of checks and balances work in such a way as to allow us to
achieve those cherished Jeffersonian ends of liberty, freedom and social
justice. The paradoxes of the Presidency do not lie in the White House so much
as in our own feelings and exalted hopes. There continues to exist some element
in the minds of Americans that it is possible to find a savior-hero who will
deliver us to some promised land. And then when this pseudo-messiah fails us, we
inflict upon him the wrath of our vengeance. It is almost a ritual purifying or
savaging -- we venerate the Presidency and the White House though we punish the
President. Perhaps this is to be expected when we elevate flawed and very human
politicians who lust after fame and glory to an office we fill with our hopes
and our fears and about which we remain of so many minds.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              48 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


Several years ago, WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER represented David Hampton, the young
impostor whose scams perpetrated on several prominent New Yorkers became the
basis of the play "Six Degrees of Separation."

"At the time I didn't really understand what 'Six Degrees of Separation' meant,"
Mr. Kunstler said the other day. "Now I do."

The title stands for the numerous connections among people. He learned of these
firsthand in the course of his television acting debut on the NBC series "Law
and Order."

In tomorrow's episode, he plays a lawyer who defends a character closely
resembling Katherine Ann Power, the Vietnam-era radical and fugitive who was
convicted last year for her role in a 1970 bank robbery in which a police
officer was killed. When Mr. Kunstler, who represented one of her co-defendants,
told the show's producers of his connection, they changed his character's name
from Harrison Fielding to William Kunstler.

He continued: "I discovered that the director, Steve Robman, had been part of my
daughter's Peace Corps contingent in Senegal in 1966. Sam Waterston, one of the
stars, appeared with me in 'The Trial of the Catonsville Nine' in 1971, about
the trial of nine Catholic opponents of the Vietnam War. Then, one of the women
extras came up to me during rehearsals and said I had represented her husband,
Ring Lardner Jr., a member of the Hollywood 10."

And lastly, he said, Gary Dawson, who plays the court clerk, "turned out to be
my daughter's biology teacher at the United Nations International School." Whew.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              49 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 18, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Patterns

BYLINE: By Amy M. Spindler

SECTION: Section B;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Style Desk;  Fashion Page

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: PARIS



Thierry Mugler on a Roll

Designers this season have a vexing task: how to interpret the trend toward the
1940's and not have the result look like clothes by Thierry Mugler. Through
every trend since he started his own house, Mr. Mugler has designed what
everyone else is only trying to do now: sculptured 1940's silhouettes, achieved
by modern cutting technique.

Mr. Mugler in the past made a specialty of campy runway shows, but a year ago he
suspended those star-studded spectacles in favor of showroom presentations.
Everyone in his pale-blue-colored house seems to know this is his moment. "It
started a year ago," said the company president, Didier Grumbach. "No one knew
it yet, but it just started selling. Ask Bergdorf Goodman, Saks Fifth Avenue or
Neiman-Marcus."

Sales for the upper-end line, called Thierry Mugler, have increased 35 percent
in the last year; the second line, called Mugler, had a 50 percent increase. "It
shows this movement started longer ago than we think," Mr. Grumbach said.

The house presented its spring line this week, four times a day, to buyers who
were talking as if they had rediscovered an old flame. "It's his time," said
Joan Kaner, the fashion director of Neiman-Marcus. "It suddenly doesn't look too
structured or hard. It looks just right."

Mr. Mugler's current collection will be shown on the runway for the first time
in Berlin at the Opera, on Nov. 19, and it is full of the sort of energy and sex
appeal that made his name. There are waists cinched with corselets, big
heart-shaped bustier dresses trimmed in raffia and jackets with pads at the
hips.

There have been rumors, since Mr. Mugler is living in New York now and working
on film and photography, that he's no longer interested in his fashion house.
"Every designer of any stature has a time when they get the seven-year itch and
wonder if it's all worthwhile," Mr. Grumbach said. "But I don't think he's ever
worked with so much passion and efficiency as he does now. People can say what
they want. He's the only designer in the house, and he's always here when he's
needed. And he works like mad."

Tears, the Happy Kind

Just when fashion seems too commercial to bear, designers like Fred Sathal,
Ocimar Versolato, and Gilles Rosier and Claude Sabbah for GR816 have shows.
Instead of the parade of press and buyers heading backstage, the show ends with
the relieved tears of young designers who knew their work was well done. Mr.
Versolato, a former assistant to Herve Leger, showed a pin-stripe cotton
dresses, some pieced so elaborately that the result looked like an Escher print.

Mr. Rosier and Mr. Sabbah, for GR816, based their collection on Vietnam during
the war, mixing palm frond prints with khaki cargo pants and jackets. Fred
Sathal, who took the wateriest-eyed bow, showed beautiful artisanal skirts, some
embroidered with hearts, some with sequins shooting across them.

Haute Ready-to-Wear?

Perhaps the Cassandras who have been predicting the death of haute couture
really meant to say that ready-to-wear was just going to eclipse it in price and
prestige. How else to account for this season of clothes so sculptured that John
Galliano could match every curve in a jacket by referring to a similar one on
the model who wore it?

Between the amazing ornamentation at Valentino and the elaborate fit at Vivienne
Westwood, people kept wondering where the haute ended and the pret-a-porter
began. Certainly there is confusion at the price level. Barbara Weiser, the head
of Charivari's women's division, was ready to buy a kimono from Yohji Yamamoto,
before discovering that the price, at retail, would be $30,000.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              50 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to China: Be More Open On Arms Plan

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Oct. 18


In a rare address to Chinese military officers, Defense Secretary William J.
Perry urged China's armed forces today to be more open about the budget and the
planning in order to ease concerns abroad.

"Your capabilities in all areas, including the military areas, are growing by
the day," Mr. Perry told 300 Chinese colonels and generals.  "It would be
helpful if your defense budget and strategic planning were more open and visible
to the outside world."

China's efforts to strengthen its armed forces has led to worries that Beijing
might use its military to bully its neighbors and support its territorial claims
in the South China Sea. And those concerns have been aggravated by the
military's penchant for secrecy.

Aides to Mr. Perry reported that the Chinese had agreed to send a team of
defense officials to the Pentagon to outline their military plans until 2000, as
part of a reciprocal information exchange.

But the officials said it was not clear just how forthcoming Beijing was
prepared to be about the areas of concern cited today by Mr. Perry: China's
actual level of military spending, its military strategy and its plans to
upgrade its weaponry.

As the first American Defense Secretary to visit China since the Tiananmen
Square crackdown in 1989, the simple fact that Mr. Perry was speaking to the
officers was itself something of an event.

As he arrived at the National Defense University in Bejing, a military band in
gleaming white uniforms struck up "America the Beautiful."

A large Red Star, the emblem of the People's Liberation Army, dominated the room
as Mr. Perry spoke to a crowded room of officers dressed in green uniforms with
yellow epaulets.

During the speech, a soft-spoken Mr. Perry made his case for closer ties between
the American and Chinese militaries, saying that Washingon and Beijing have a
special responsibility to insure stability in the western Pacific.

Mr. Perry said China needed to do more to restrain its sale of missile and other
military technologies. Alluding to Chinese arms deals with Pakistan, he warned
that an arms race between Pakistan and India, two nuclear powers, could lead to
a "catastrophic" war on China's southern border.

Mr. Perry also warned that a nuclear-armed North Korea would be a menace. And he
said China and Vietnam needed to eschew inflammatory statements and military
issues intended to reinforce their territorial claims in the South China Sea.

Mr. Perry's mention of human rights, however, was brief and somewhat indirect.
He said the failure to make progress in this area would give ammunition to
critics of ties between Washington and Beijing.

Then the Defense Secretary took questions for about an hour from the Chinese
officers, most of whom appeared to be looking toward their superiors on the
podium for a guide about how to react.

At the end of the event, Gen. Zhu Dunfa, the president of the defense
university, said Mr. Perry had given a speech of "great significance," raised
his hands and gave a hearty applause. The officers quickly followed suit.

Mr. Perry's speech was one of the highpoints of his three-day visit to China, in
which he also met with top military and civilian leaders, including Premier Li
Peng. Mr. Perry's visit ends on Wednesday, when he visits Wuhan and Chongqing,
and meets with President Jiang Zemin.

The polite and occasionally warm reception Mr. Perry received from the Chinese
military stood in marked contrast to his meeting this morning with American
business representatives. At the meeting, sponsored by the American Chamber of
Commerce, business officials expressed little interest in the military issues
Mr. Perry said were important for the future of the region and complained that
Washington was not doing enough to help American companies do business here.

But in Washington, Mr. Perry's military talks have attracted more interest,
including some criticism from conservatives and human rights supporters.

Mr. Perry sought to deal with the critics today by underscoring the potential
benefits for American security of dealing with the Chinese while playing down
expectations for immediate results.

Describing the overall progress in the talks as "modest," Mr. Perry said the
Chinese appeared sensitive to American concerns. But he added, "The value you
can put on those steps needs to be seen yet."


LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary William J. Perry watched as Gen. Zhu Dunfa
directed the People's Liberation Army band to play patriotic American music in
Beijing yesterday. Mr. Perry spoke of the challenges facing the region. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              51 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
GENERAL MOTORS UNIT IN VIETNAM PHONE DEAL

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 86 words


The GM Hughes Electronics unit of General Motors signed a $120 million contract
yesterday to supply telecommunications equipment in Vietnam. Hughes plans to
supply 120,000 digital phone lines in Ho Chi Minh City by the end of 1995. Its
"fixed wireless access" technology is a digital system that technically
resembles a mobile cellular system. Instead of servicing portable phones or
terminals, services are provided to fixed installations. Vietnam, a nation of 72
million people, had 346,934 phones in July.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              52 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Martha Raye, 78, Singer And Comic Actress, Dies

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 947 words


Martha Raye, the big-mouthed, big-hearted entertainer whose career spanned the
decades from vaudeville to videos, died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center
in Los Angeles. She was 78.

In recent years, she had suffered a serious of ailments, including a stroke and
circulatory difficulties. Ron Wise, a spokesman for Cedars-Sinai, said, "Her
death was an aggregate of that and other problems."

Miss Raye sang, she danced, she acted on Broadway, in Hollywood and on
television, but the knockabout comic won perhaps her greatest renown as an
indefatigable trouper who traveled thousands of miles through three wars to lift
the morale of America's fighting forces.

"They ask so little and give so much," she said during the Vietnam War. "The
least we can do back home here is give them the love, the respect and the
dignity that they, our flag and our country deserve."

Her real name was Margie Yvonne Reed. She was born on Aug. 27, 1916, into a
show-business family in the charity ward of a hospital in Butte, Mont. Her
father and mother, Pete Reed and the former Peggy Hooper, were Irish immigrants
whose song-and-dance routine, under the name Reed and Hooper, took them to
carnivals and vaudeville houses around the United States.

"I didn't work until I was 3," Miss Raye was to say years later. "But after
that, I never stopped."

Her mother taught her to read and write while the family, which also included
her sister and brother, crisscrossed the country. From time to time, she
attended schools in Montana, Chicago and New York.

"Our home was in an old, broken down Pierce Arrow auto which my father drove,"
Miss Raye remembered. "We put the scenery in the back seat and that was where we
slept at night. We cooked on Sterno. And we went from town to town, looking for
bookings."

She played burlesque houses, nightclubs and saloons, where she said she worked
for tips only. "On a good night, I made a dollar," she said. "On a bad one, 25
cents."

At 15, she was singing, dancing and clowning in a children's act. She picked the
name Martha Raye from a phone book and piled up the credits. She was a member of
the Benny Davis Revue and the Ben Blue Company, a trouper on the Loew's
vaudeville circuit, a member of the Will Morrisey act and a feature performer in
"Earl Carroll's Sketchbook" and "Calling All Stars."

Eventually she made her way to Hollywood. And on one of the Sunday nights when
stars gathered and entertained one another at the Trocadero nightclub, she got a
couple of her friends to play straightmen to her comedy. Their names were Jimmy
Durante and Joe E. Lewis. The producer Norman Taurog saw her perform, and the
next day she was working with Bing Crosby on the 1936 film "Rhythm on the
Range." She did a slapstick drunk scene and sang a song called "Mr. Paganini,"
and became a star overnight.

Miss Raye appeared in films like "Waikiki Wedding," "College Holiday," "Give Me
a Sailor," "Keep 'em Flying" and "Hellzapoppin." In 1940, she starred on
Broadway opposite Al Jolson in the revue "Hold Onto Your Hats." She appeared on
his radio show and the programs of Eddie Cantor and Bob Hope.

During World War II, she began entertaining troops, and the 1944 film "Four
Jills in a Jeep" was based on a U.S.O. tour of bases in England and Africa she
made in the company of Kay Francis, Carole Landis and Mitzi Mayfair.

In 1969, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences gave Miss Raye the Jean
Hersholt Humanitarian Award for her wartime efforts, and she was given the
Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1993.

She was not happy about her Hollywood career, except for "Monsieur Verdoux,"
Charlie Chaplin's controversial 1947 black comedy about a Parisian Bluebeard who
marries and kills for money. "I must have made 35 or 40 movies and most of them
were mindless," Miss Raye said. "But in those days actors didn't fight the
system; then we thought we were lucky to be under contract."

Her performance in "Verdoux," in which she portrayed Annabella Bonheur, a
raucous, indestructible wife of the killer, was praised as brilliant by Bosley
Crowther of The New York Times. "Do you know," she recalled in 1972, "that when
Chaplin called to offer me the part, I hung up on him; I thought it was a joke."

She blamed her decline in Hollywood on executives who focused on her shapely
legs and ability to fill out a sweater. "They tried to make a glamour girl out
of me," the brown-haired, blue-eyed actress complained. "Let's face it, I'm not
a glamour girl. I'm a clown."

Despite her setbacks in Hollywood, she was far from finished. Milton Berle gave
her a start in television, and by 1954, she was the medium's reigning female
comedian. Ahead of her was more success in nightclubs, cabaret and theater.

Offstage, life was darker. "As an entertainer, she's a genius," one of her
colleagues once said. "Socially, she's completely unsure of herself."

She married again and again. Among her husbands were the makeup artist Buddy
Westmore, the composer David Rose, the businessman Neal Lang, the dancers Nick
Condos and Edward Begley and the policeman Robert O'Shea. Her last marriage was
in 1991, to 42-year-old Mark Harris, her manager.

She had a daughter, Melody, by Mr. Condos. After Miss Raye suffered a stroke in
1991, she and Melody battled in court over control of the actress's money. In
July 1992, Miss Raye filed a lawsuit alleging that the 1991 Bette Midler-James
Caan film "For the Boys" wrongfully appropriated her life story. A judge
dismissed the $5 million complaint earlier this year.

In her later years, many people knew Miss Raye as the star of Polident
commercials.

She is survived by her husband and her daughter.


NAME: Martha Raye

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Martha Raye. (Associated Press, 1983); Martha Raye entertaining
American troops in North Africa in 1943. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              53 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 20, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
CHRYSLER PLANS JOINT VENTURE IN VIETNAM

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 85 words


The Chrysler Corporation is planning a joint venture in Vietnam to assemble and
eventually manufacture Jeeps, pickup trucks and other vehicles, a company
representative said yesterday. The company hopes to sign an agreement with a
Vietnamese partner within six weeks, said Mark Gelinas of the consulting firm
Vatico, Chrysler's representative in Hanoi. Chrysler would become the first
American auto maker to assemble vehicles in Vietnam. Chrysler initially plans to
assemble vehicles from imported kits.(AP)

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              54 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE CHALLENGER
Just Who Is Pataki, Anyway?;
The Politics of Self-Deprecation and Sentimentality

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2377 words


Margaret Pataki is giving her son some campaign advice.

"Have you ever once mentioned that your mother's Italian, and that I was born on
the Lower East Side?" she asks George, the Republican candidate for Governor, as
he roams around the white frame house in Peekskill where he grew up, looking
like a gangly overgrown kid in jeans and black oxfords.

She waves a tabloid article in which Mario M. Cuomo talks about his poor
immigrant roots in New York City.

"I told you not to read the papers, Ma," George Pataki says.

He shows a visitor a sepia portrait of his Italian grandfather and Irish
grandmother, who met working as a butler and maid for a Park Avenue family and
who moonlighted during Prohibition making moonshine gin. His mother, then about
9, put labels on the bottles and her older sister delivered the hooch.

He drags a large, framed piece of green cloth with the legend "Erin Go Bragh"
into the living room.

"It'll be yours someday," his mother promises. "I would give it to him now, only
he might break it."

Mrs. Pataki, in white cardigan and flowered blouse, says that she thinks her son
has a better chance to topple Mario Cuomo "since Matilda put her foot in her
mouth," referring to Mrs. Cuomo's recent attack on George Pataki, which spurred
a tabloid "war of the wives."

"He was such a little angel growing up," she confides, "that we called him
Dollface."

Grimacing, the 49-year-old state senator says it's time to go.

"Call me later," his mother yells after him, "and tell me if you're mad at me."

His mother thinks he would make an honest governor. But to most New Yorkers,
George Elmer Pataki remains a lanky question mark.

In his first statewide race, his manner is stiff, his platform vague and his
speeches forgettable. Like other front-runners in this bizarre election year, he
is embraced on the rebound, more loved for who he isn't than who he is. While
his advisers flinch at the words "empty suit," they don't seem overly worried
about making the tabula less rasa; they think he can surf to victory by talking
tough on crime, taxes and spending.

Is Mr. Pataki "D'Amato's farmer," as the tabloids call him, a puppet controlled
by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato? Is he a slick operator, as the Cuomo campaign
suggests, who climbed the political ladder by stepping on friends and foes, by
waffling on issues, a lawyer who got rich by taking advantage of a tax break on
his $700,000 Victorian house in Garrison?

Less than three weeks before the election, the Republican front-runner remains
so little known that some journalists pass the time waiting for him at campaign
events by brushing up on what he looks like (6 feet 5 and preppy) and where
Peekskill is (an hour north of New York City in the Hudson Valley).

When the candidate and his traveling aide, Tom Doherty, checked into the Omni
Hotel in Albany last week, the clerk assumed Mr. Doherty was the big shot and
handed him Mr. Pataki's room key.

"We both burst out laughing," recalled Mr. Pataki, who says the only way to deal
with campaign mishaps is to turn them into jokes.

While Mr. Cuomo is intense, intellectually challenging, nitpicking, magnetic and
volatile, Mr. Pataki is affable and sentimental. Mr. Cuomo likes Teilhard de
Chardin; Mr. Pataki prefers the Rolling Stones and David Letterman. He seems to
enjoy blending into the scenery as much as Mr. Cuomo enjoys standing out.

"There's nothing about George that's black and white," said his wife, Libby.
"He's the softer shades of gray."

On the road, he makes a constant stream of jokey, self-deprecating comments,
some lame, some amusing. As his van pulled up to a rally at his headquarters in
Rockland County, Mr. Pataki reassured an aide who has spritzed his thinning hair
for a network television interview: "I have no idea what I'm going to say, but I
have hair spray on, so relax."

After a photo opportunity at a pizza shop, Mr. Pataki kept gobbling his slice of
pizza back in the van. "This is horribly rude," he said to his hungry
companions. "Do you want the part I haven't licked yet?"

Driving through a racially mixed Peekskill subdivision that sprouted during his
tenure as mayor, he became excited gazing at the houses.  "Everybody who lives
in 'em is happy," he says.

Challenged on this point, he reluctantly conceded he didn't know for sure:
"You're right, you're right, but isn't this great?"

Senator D'Amato has protected his protege by sending over members of his own
inner circle. Calling into Pataki campaign headquarters one day to check on how
things are going, Mr. D'Amato got on the phone with a reporter long enough to
say that as soon as Mr. Pataki is governor, he will "be the boss."

Zenia Mucha, the sassy, hard-boiled, chain-smoking D'Amato press aide, is now
the sassy, hard-boiled, chain-smoking Pataki press aide.

When a woman with a video camera approached Mr. Pataki at the Rockland County
rally to ask him about his position on educational vouchers, Ms. Mucha swiftly
came to the rescue.

"You have a bee in your hair!" she said, poking a finger toward the startled
woman as she hustled the candidate into his van.

Afterward, when a reporter questioned the existence of the bee, Ms. Mucha shot
back in her rapid-fire New Yorkese: "There was a bee. I was trying to save her
life. What if she had an allergy? Besides, we had places to go, things to do.
Besides, I didn't know who she was. She was holding this hand-held camera. She
could have been anyone."

The Revolution Was Televised

Mr. Pataki grew up on a farm, the son of a mailman and a waitress, surrounded by
both sets of grandparents -- his paternal grandparents were Hungarian -- aunts,
uncles and 13 cousins. He attended Yale University and Columbia Law School on
scholarship. He supported Barry Goldwater and the Vietnam War, although he said
that bad eyesight prevented him from serving.

"I remember seeing the '56 Hungarian revolution crushed on television, sitting
around with my father and grandparents, crying as they interviewed refugees," he
said, sitting in his romantic Victorian House opposite West Point, a house built
100 years ago for the daughter of Hamilton Fish, the Governor of New York. "It
was just very real to us, anti-Communism. Things like captive nations weren't
just resolutions, they were real."

Home movies from his childhood show an idyllic slice of 50's Americana: young
George and his older brother, Louis, picking apples on the farm; his grandfather
carting off the produce in a horse and buggy; a parade down Main Street with his
father, a volunteer fireman, marching.

"We were happy with very little," he said. "That feeling was reinforced, for me,
by the antimaterialistic aspect of the 60's. I loved working for a big firm on
Wall Street, and I enjoyed living on the West Side, but the pot of gold at the
end of the rainbow wasn't an attraction for me.

"What was more of an attraction was the sunrise coming up over the Hudson
Highlands," he said.

"It sounds weird, sitting in a house like this," he said, waving a hand at the
stained glass and gold eagle wall mountings and gleaming dark wood and carved
marble fireplaces. "But I've never been a materialist."

He headed the Conservative Club at Yale, but found elitist attitudes on both
ends of the spectrum hard to take. "At Yale, you saw so many liberals and
conservatives who had a disparaging view of people," he said. "The conservatives
leaned toward social Darwinism and making decisions based on money. And some of
the liberals acted like they knew what was best for everyone and could force it
on them."

After living in Manhattan for several years, he gradually lured his wife back to
the Peekskill farm. An Army brat who speaks fluent French, she had been running
five overseas trading offices for Paine Webber.

First, they went on weekends, staying in a small, sloping house on the farm that
featured cold running water, a refrigerator that gave a shock every time you
touched the door handle, and an outhouse. Eventually, they moved all the way.
George Pataki became a mayor, an assemblyman and, in 1992, a state senator, and
practiced a desultory sort of law. Libby managed the family fruit and vegetable
stand and raised her family.

He said that he would have preferred still to live on the farm where he grew up,
but his wife persuaded him that the big house in nearby, tonier Garrison would
be better. Some have suggested that his plan to cut up half the farm and sell it
off in lots smudges his log cabin image.

But he replied that, if he is to keep any of the farm in the family, he must
raise money to pay property taxes. "I mean, we haven't even sold it," he says.
"It's still there. You want to buy a lot?"

He also rejected the criticism that it was wrong for him to put his father, who
has Alzheimer's disease, into a nursing home for indigent firefighters, where he
can live free. "My father spent more than 40 years in two different fire
companies," he said. "He earned the right to be there."

He dismissed as sour grapes his old opponents' complaints that his campaigns
were below the belt.

"I think I'm as transparent as people get," he said. "I have friends that I've
had since third grade, fourth grade, that are still my friends and hopefully
they will be forever."

The man who wanted to re-create his small-town upbringing for his own family --
he has bragged that he, his father and his daughter all attended the same
elementary school -- certainly has a sentimental streak.

His childhood idol was Mickey Mantle, and he still keeps the slugger's dog-eared
baseball cards from 1952 and 1953 in his living room and has a framed
black-and-white picture of Mantle on the mantel.

His political idol is Teddy Roosevelt. There is an oval picture of Roosevelt on
the wall -- "I bought that at a barn sale upstate for $25," he said -- and he
named his older son, now 12, Teddy.

Late at night, he climbed over his couch to reach an old record player and play
scratchy selections from old country and western albums for his 15-year-old
daughter, Emily. When they were discussing her need to buy a dress for a dance,
he played her Dolly Parton's "Coat of Many Colors." He also likes to play her
Jim Reeves's country album, his father's favorite, with songs like "Put Your
Sweet Lips a Little Closer to the Phone."

Just Call Him A Dreamer

"George is a dreamer," said Libby Pataki, 43, in his campaign office. "I always
tell him, 'You don't know a lightbulb from a door knob.' But he has a great
sense of people. He loves intellectual banter, sitting around the table with a
bunch of people and solving the world's problems. It's kind of an Arthurian
thing."

Looking over with a mischievous smile at Ms. Mucha, who is sitting beneath a
picture of Mr. Pataki and Mr. D'Amato, Mrs. Pataki made an oblique contrast to
Mr. D'Amato: "George is not a one-man band. No comparison here, just an honest
assessment. There's no arrogance about shoving ideas down people's throats."

As his wife talked on the couch, the candidate pushed a basketball with a
stickball bat around the office.

"He has the most amazing sense of fun," she said, "but it's so hard to project
that because on a campaign you have to be so guarded."

She said that he made a detour on his campaign helicopter the other day so that
he could do a fly-by over his house. He called the house from the air and told
his children -- Emily, Teddy, Allison, 9 and George Owen, 6 -- to come out and
watch the helicopter dip.

Body Surfing In a Hurricane

The couple met when they were both body surfing in the Hamptons during a
hurricane. He said he thought, "Who is this crazy woman?" When he proposed at 2
A.M. on the way to an all-night bowling alley in the Hamptons, she said she
thought, "Boy, this guy is very tired or very crazy."

He told about the big fight they had, before they were married, over which rock
group sang "A Whiter Shade of Pale."

"I told you it was Procol Harum," she said. "I bet you won't tell who you
thought it was."

"The Doors," he said, looking chagrined.

He said that they never keep score when they play tennis because she is so good
"she'd kill me."

She said she made him take her out to dinner recently, but that he "fell asleep
in his plate."

The next day, Ms. Mucha reported that Mr. Pataki has asked if he can skip events
on Saturday night to be home to see Emily dressed up to go to her first
homecoming dance.

"Isn't that sweet?" Ms. Mucha asked, beaming. "Unfortunately, we're not gonna
make that happen for him."


In Their Own Words

GOV. MARIO M. CUOMO

At his fund-raiser with President Clinton on Wednesday night, Governor Cuomo
reflected on his youth in South Jamaica, Queens, and the burdens of long
incumbency:

"I had a guy in the old neighborhood, I'll never forget, because he loves me,
told me a story . . . He said, 'Mario, when you won in 1982, man, were we proud.
You know, we had the block party, everybody was cheering. Then in '86, the word
went out: The guy's going to do it again. You think he can do it? Who knows?
Then you did it again. Ninety, we started saying, man, three times?' . . .

He says: 'Now, Mario, you tell us your'e running again. Mario, you sure it's
legal?' So I understand that syndrome. And there is a big, 'Well what is the guy
doing?' You know: 'Can't he get a job anywhere? Is there something he can do?
Does he really love to live in that big 168-year-old house? I mean, what, maybe
he's got mansion-itis?' I understand the question."

 SENATOR GEORGE E. PATAKI

In Queens, Mr. Pataki was asked to respond to Mr. Cuomo's denunciation of a
pataki ad in which a woman blames the Governor for her son's killing because the
assailant was paroled from a state prison.

"If the Governor wants to talk about low blows and poor taste, he can take a
look at his own commercials and take a look at some of the rhetoric that his
family has used in attacking me. We have talked about issues. The issue of crime
and his failed criminal-justice policies are an important issue in this
campaign. And we have not just critized how his criminal justice policy has let
felons and violent felons and repeat violent felons on the streets too soon, but
how we are going to change it."

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "It sounds weird, sitting in a house like this," George E.
Pataki said. "But I've never been a materialist." The candidate in his $700,000
Victorian house in Garrison. (pg. B1); George E. Pataki at his campaign offices
in New York City, before a television interview. (pg. B4) (Photographs by Jim
Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              55 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Premature Prize for Mideast Peace?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 30;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 470 words


To the Editor:

"A Prize to Encourage Mideast Peace" (editorial, Oct. 15), supporting the award
of the Nobel Peace Prize to Yitzhak Rabin, Shimon Peres and Yasir Arafat, notes
that in 1973 the prize was awarded to Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, who had
also engaged in past warfare. But Le Duc Tho refused the prize, on the ground
that the Vietnam war had not yet ended, United States troops were still
occupying his country, and killing by both sides was continuing. It might be
fitting for this year's recipients also to refuse the honor.

Although Israel and the major Arab countries have made strides to end hostility,
the attack by Islamic militants that killed 20 Israelis in Tel Aviv (front page,
Oct. 20) reminds us that for most Palestinians and Israelis there is still no
peace.

The people of Gaza are shut off by an electronic fence, whose gates are
controlled by Israel. Some 4,000 Israeli settlers occupy one-third of the land,
while 850,000 Palestinians are crowded into the rest, suffering from 50 percent
unemployment because most who worked as day laborers in Israel are now cut off
from jobs.

Thousands of Palestinians remain in Israeli prisons, where the torture of
suspects continues. Israel is building new settlements in East Jerusalem and its
western suburbs, changing the demography of what has for centuries been the
center of Palestinian society and culture.

Although the Declaration of Principles agreed to by Israel and the Palestinians
in Oslo provided for negotiations on Jerusalem's final status, Israeli leaders
insist the city must remain under Israeli control.

Israeli troops occupy all but a tiny portion of the West Bank, and for the
Palestinians, the rigors of military occupation have not eased.

Even before the killing of Cpl. Nahshon Waxman, the peace process was at
standstill. The elections the Oslo agreement calls for have been postponed
because Mr. Rabin insists that only a small executive council, not a legislative
body, may be elected and that peace agreement opponents may not be candidates.

Mr. Arafat has rightly objected, saying that democratic government requires a
representative legislature and a separation of powers, not simply an executive
that rules by fiat.

Mr. Rabin's demands are a recipe for civil war, not peace. They also reflect a
double standard, since he would not exclude from Israeli elections the
extremists who call him a traitor for dealing with the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

Until the peace prize ceases to be a piece of paper and results in justice for
Palestinians, there will be no security for the people of Israel, and the honor
will remain a hollow one.

RACHELLE MARSHALL
Stanford, Calif., Oct. 20, 1994
The writer is a member, Mideast subcommittee, American Friends Service Committee
regional office.

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              56 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FORE! Golf in Asia Hits Enironmental Rough

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia


Where once there was a dense tropical forest, today there is the 17th hole. A
triangular flag marked with the number is planted in the middle of this
construction site, 250 acres of red earth carved out of the rain forest in the
cool highlands above the Malaysian capital.

Soon this will be the golf course of the High Hill Resort, the largest mountain
resort in Malaysia. Advance memberships begin at $12,000.

"A year ago this place was covered by thousands of trees," said a laborer who
pours concrete over what used to be a lush hillside of climbing palms and kapok.
"It took us a year, but we pulled down all the trees to make way for the
golfers."

Asia is being carpeted with golf courses. Planeloads of foreign golfers
descending into Kuala Lumpur see an airport surrounded by three golf courses,
and there are 40 other courses within an hour's drive, most of them built in the
last five years.

The booming economies of Asia have created the fastest-growing market on earth
for the golf industry. But while the rush to build new courses has delighted
land developers and the manufacturers of golf gear, it is alarming Asian
environmentalists.

They warn that unrestrained development of golf courses is tearing up some of
the last pristine stretches of the Asian wilderness, throwing thousands of
farmers off ancestral lands, stealing precious water supplies and contaminating
the soil and air with pesticides and chemical fertilizers. Many also see golf as
a symbol of the growing disparity between rich and poor in Asia.

"Golf has become a serious environmental threat all across Asia," said Sreela
Kolandai of Friends of the Earth Malaysia and a founder of the Global Anti-Golf
Movement, an umbrella organization for groups opposed to golf-course
developments. "I call them green graveyards because apart from the grass, these
golf courses support no other form of life. No trees, no birds, no insects, no
nothing."

The golf boom has been most explosive in the nations of Southeast Asia, which
offer tropical weather and plentiful, relatively inexpensive land. In Malaysia,
there are now 153 golf courses, triple the number in 1985, with more than 100
others on the drawing board. This growth has been nearly as extensive in
Thailand and Indonesia. The frenzy has begun to spread to China, Vietnam and the
Indian subcontinent.

The Global Anti-Golf Movement is campaigning to pressure Asian governments for a
moratorium on the construction of new golf courses.

But it is proving a difficult battle. Golf means billions of dollars for the
Asian tourism industry, and newly affluent Asians clearly love the sport, which
has become a status symbol here. Most Asian government leaders are themselves
ardent golfers, and when President Clinton travels to Indonesia in November for
a summit meeting with his Asian counterparts, he is tentatively scheduled to
join them for an afternoon on the links.

The anti-golf movement began among environmentalists in land-starved Japan,
where there are 17 million golfers but only 2,000 courses. (The United States,
with 25 million golfers, has 13,600 golf courses.) In Japan, a single round of
golf can cost hundreds of dollars, and membership at a leading golf course can
top $750,000.

It is the Japanese enthusiasm for the sport that caused golf courses to spread
across the rest of Asia as Japanese golfers in the 1980's searched for an
alternative to the expensive greens fees at home.

"Basically it's much cheaper for a Japanese golfer to fly here to Malaysia for a
week of golf than to stay home," said Douglas K. Lee, a golf-course developer in
Kuala Lumpur. "We're a heaven for them."

Japanese investors have financed the construction of hundreds of courses in
recent years in Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, Singapore and Hawaii. The boom
did not disappear as Japan slipped into recession. The Japanese are being
replaced on the fairways by local duffers -- the number of golfers in Malaysia
and Indonesia grows by about 20 percent a year -- and by golf devotees from
Taiwan and Hong Kong.

Courses are even sprouting in China and Vietnam, two countries in which golf was
banned for years as a symbol of Western decadence.

"Because golf is seen as a rich white man's sport, it's an easy target for
environmentalists," said Hal Phillips, editor of Golf Course News Asia-Pacific,
an industry journal. "At least with golf it's open space that's being developed.
Would you rather have a golf course or a strip mall? A golf club or a 400-room
hotel? If you want to compare the environmental impact, it's really no contest."

Golf course owners say the sport is helping economies in Asia by encouraging
tourism. And while golf courses often do replace agricultural lands, developers
say, they can often put displaced farmers to work in better-paying jobs as
security guards, greenskeepers or caddies.

Asian environmentalists, however, point to development after development where
farmers have been forced off their land, sometimes at the point of a gun. In
Indonesia, where many of the country's best golf courses are owned by members of
the family of President Suharto, environmentalists and peasant farmers have been
roughed up or arrested by the Indonesian authorities as they protested golf
course developments.

In Thailand, where there are now 160 golf courses and another opening about
every two weeks, most courses are built with the backing of powerful military
and police commanders, so the developments are spared any sort of environmental
review.

Private courses have been built in some of Thailand's national parklands and
wildlife sanctuaries, and developers have recently proposed draining one of the
nation's few remaining natural wetlands, a swamp that is the seasonal home of
thousands of migrant ducks and other birds, to make way for a golf course and
hotel.

A recent study by a Thai university showed that a golf course in Thailand
typically uses as much water as 6,000 city dwellers. During a nationwide drought
last year, rice farmers were forced to give up a second crop even as large golf
courses, especially those receiving protection from high-ranking military and
police officers, continued to suck water out of government reservoirs.

"When the people have no food but the rich are still signing contracts at the
19th hole, where will our society be heading?" asked an editorial last March in
The Bangkok Post. "Soon all of us, rich and poor, may well be reduced to a diet
of manicured grass and golf balls."

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Three Japanese executives putt out on the second hold of a new
golf course that was built on top of an old tin mine near Kuala Lumpur. To the
chagrin of environmentalists, golf courses are multiplying across Asia. (Stuart
Isett for The New York Times)

Chart: "THE DETAILS: Teeing Off in East Asia" shows the number of golf courses
currently open in East Asia, and the number of planned new courses. (Sources:
Global Anti-Golf Movement, Industry figures)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              57 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: TEXAS;
Governor and Her Rival Meet in Debate

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Oct. 21


Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas repeatedly attacked her Republican opponent,
George W. Bush, tonight as someone whose inexperience in government could prove
disastrous for the State. But Mr. Bush sought to turn his experience into an
asset, declaring: "I proudly proclaim I have never held office. I have been in
the business world all my adult life. I have met a payroll."

Meeting in Dallas for the only scheduled debate of their gubernatorial campaign,
and locked in a race that polls suggest is a dead heat, the Democratic Governor
and Mr. Bush, the eldest son of the former President, clashed on proposals for
education, crime and welfare overhaul, and even casino gambling, which Ms.
Richards described as "a cheesy way to make money."

But the heart of the debate, held in a hotel, was the 61-year-old Ms. Richards's
contention that Mr. Bush, 48, was simply unprepared to lead the nation's second
most populous state. He lost his only other race for office, a 1978 bid for a
West Texas Congressional seat.

"This is really serious," she said. "This is not a joke. We're talking about who
is going to run the State of Texas. You have got to have had some experience in
the public sector before you get the chief executive's job."

At another point, softening her tone, she said: "I think that George Bush means
very well. I think he sincerely wants to be Governor of Texas. But I think the
question of qualifications is one that is really important."

But Mr. Bush, the managing partner of the Texas Rangers baseball team and a
former executive in an oil company, counterattacked, arguing that as Governor he
would not be "constrained by the current ways of doing things in Austin."
Texans, he said, "ought to give me a chance."

Ms. Richards passed on an opportunity to attack Mr. Bush's service in the
National Guard during the Vietnam War. Reviving an issue that surfaced early in
the campaign, a reporter asked Mr. Bush why he had chosen to serve in the Guard
and whether his father, then a United States Representative from Houston, had
used any influence to secure him a spot there, where the chances of being called
up to go to Vietnam were slight.

Mr. Bush, who flew fighters, vigorously denied he had received any special help
and said: "Putting an F-102 jet in afterburner in a single-seat, single-engine
aircraft was a thrill, but it also wasn't trying to avoid duty. Had that engine
failed, I could have been killed. So I was at risk."

Ms. Richards said she considered the matter a nonissue and used her response to
praise the National Guard for its relief work in the recent Texas floods. "They
did magnificent work, and I think anybody, including George Bush, who serves in
the National Guard does his country a service."

But Ms. Richards jabbed at Mr. Bush about his business career, pointing out that
several companies on whose boards he sat had lost money. He responded angrily.
"This business of trying to diminish my personality based upon my business
career is, frankly, astounding to me," he said. "We ought to be discussing
welfare reform, juvenile justice, ways to make Texas a better place for our
children."

When the Governor initiated another attack -- this one over an investigation by
the Securities and Exchange Commission into Mr. Bush's sale of stock in an
energy company on whose audit committee he sat -- she was undercut by a member
of the audience, who said, "I personally feel we've heard enough about it." The
audience member asked the Governor a question about services for juveniles
instead.

Under the format of the debate, there was virtually no opportunity for the two
candidates to spar with each other directly, as happened the other day in
Florida when Mr. Bush's younger brother, Jeb, the Republican nominee for
governor, clashed repeatedly with the Democratic incumbent, Lawton Chiles. In
Texas, all comments from the candidates were in response to questions from a
panel of journalists and members of the audience.

Reflecting intense public concern about juvenile crime, both candidates left
themselves open to increasing penalties for the young.  When a reporter asked a
question about imposing the death penalty for defendants as young as 13, Ms.
Richards said: "I really don't know. I'd have to see a bill like that."

Mr. Bush said he was the "conservative candidate" and Ms. Richards the "liberal
candidate" and promised to work hard against the re-election of President
Clinton, which he said Ms. Richards would support wholeheartedly.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas and her Republican opponent,
George W. Bush, met in Dallas last night for the only scheduled debate of their
campaign. Gov. Richards sought to make Mr. Bush's political inexperience an
issue, but Mr. Bush said he took pride in his never having held public office.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              58 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
God's Angry Land

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


Anger has become the national habit. You see it on the sullen faces of fashion
models who have obviously been told that anger sells. It pours out of the radio
all day. Washington journalism hams snarl and shout at each other on television.
Generations exchange sneers on TV and printed page. Ordinary people abuse
Congressmen and President with shockingly personal insults. Rudeness is a
justifiable way of showing you can no longer control the fury within. Vile
speech, justified on the same ground, is inescapable.

America is angry at Washington, angry at the press, angry at immigrants, angry
at television, angry at traffic, angry at people who are well off and angry at
people who are poor, angry at blacks and angry at whites. The old are angry at
the young, the young angry at the old. Suburbs are angry at cities, cities are
angry at suburbs, and rustic America is angry at both whenever urban and
suburban intruders threaten the peaceful rustic sense of having escaped from
God's Angry Land.

Enough: A complete catalogue of the varieties of bile spoiling the American day
would fill a library. The question is why. Why has anger become a reflexive
response to the inevitable vagaries of national life?

Living perpetually at the boiling point seems to leave the country depressed and
pessimistic. Study those scowling models wearing the latest clothes in the
Sunday papers and magazines. Those are faces that expect only the worst. What a
pity to waste such lovely new clothes on people so incapable of happiness.

The popularity of anger is doubly puzzling, not only because the American habit
even in the worst of times has traditionally been mindless optimism, but also
because there is relatively little nowadays for the nation to be angry about.

The country happily re-elected President Eisenhower in 1956 because it believed
his campaign boast about giving it peace and prosperity. The "peace," of course,
was life under the endless threat of nuclear devastation.

By contrast the country now, at last, really does enjoy peace, and if the
prosperity is not so solid as it was in the 1950's, American wealth is still the
world's vastest. So, with real peace and prosperity, what's to be furious about?

The explanation, I suspect, is that the country got itself addicted to anger and
can't shake the habit. It was hooked long ago when there was very good reason
for anger.

Massive, irritating and even scary expressions of it were vital in shaking an
obdurate Government, contemptuous of public opinion, from its determination to
pursue war ad infinitum in Vietnam.

Massive, irritating and even scary expressions of anger -- from Americans both
black and white -- were needed for the triumph of Martin Luther King and the
civil rights movement.

These were monumental victories. If the nation had been unwilling to get mad --
to shout, "We're not going to take it anymore!" -- they might not have been won.

But what monumental struggle confronts us now? Giving young black people a stake
in America is our most pressing problem, but nobody shouts much about that. Most
other problems are so unmonumental that we might think the times ripe for
greatness: an era of civility conducive to good feeling among neighbors of all
races and persuasions, a golden age of progress in learning and the arts and
science . . .

Is this making you angry? It's easy to imagine the cries of rage from a people
habituated to crying rage: Are women not still oppressed by glass ceilings? Do
black Americans no longer have to suffer the disrespect of a racist world? Who
dares talk of prosperity when the wealth is distributed so unfairly?

True, all true. There is far too much poverty, racism remains an affliction,
women still don't have economic equality with men. These present economists,
philosophers and statesmen with exceedingly complex problems not amenable to
solution by red-hot anger.

Politically minded people concerned with these issues have always known that
low-grade anger must be maintained, that political feet must be kept to the
fire, that the squeaky wheel gets the grease, and so on. The high-intensity fury
now seething through the land on these and a hundred other issues, however,
doesn't seem focused on any social or economic goal. It's as though the nation
got mad as hell a long time ago, got good results, and now can't shake the anger
habit.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              59 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 23, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 861 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     6   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2     5   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's
           mysterious disappearance.

 3*    4   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman
           and for her first lover.

 4    19   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5     5   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a
           troubled twin sister.

 6     5   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson.
           (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars"
           trilogy.

 7    17   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 8    14   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 9     4   HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982
           novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into
           marriage.

 10   10   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes --
           on a Mexican ranch.

 11    9   GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Bantam,
           $6.50.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen
           disappear.

 12    8   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           mysterious death.

 13   18   A CASE OF NEED, by Michael Crichton writing as Jeffery
           Hudson. (Signet, $6.99.) A 1968 novel about the death of a
           surgeon's daughter.

 14   10   NIGHTMARES & DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.)
           Stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay
           and a poem.

 15   23   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     5   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     6   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3     4   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters,
           both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.

 4    41   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 5     8   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 6    572  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 7     3   FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A
           1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of
           hospitals.

 8    22   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) A manifesto for business
           innovation.

 9     4   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.

 10*  88   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 11*  25   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 12*  41   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 13*   8   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $6.99.) Six
           true-crime cases.

 14*  23   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 15    3   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99.)
           The country singer's memoirs, with an account of her
           relations with daughters Wynonna and Ashley.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     3   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2     9   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           slow-witted wanderer through history.

 3    188  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 4     5   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."
           Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 8,
           at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other
           retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all
           such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
           book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the
           book above.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              60 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
Nixon's Last Taunts

BYLINE: By Max Frankel

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 30;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words


It's become perfectly clear that the mostly worshipful obituaries of Richard
Nixon in April failed to give the man his due. The politician we so enjoyed
kicking around for half a century kicked back in the most resourceful ways. A
new study of his talent reveals perhaps his greatest achievement and finds him
hurling yet another challenge at the media he despised, and played so well.

If those who daily bemoan the media's cynicism and banality would reflect on
Nixon's mastery of the information environment, they'd realize that in the
eternal contest between politicians and journalists it is the current crop of
politicians who don't measure up. Which of them can boast of manipulations and
retaliations comparable to these:
* Nixon became a media star by catching Alger Hiss at perjury, thus impelling
the media to chronicle a melodramatic career fueled and finally destroyed by
lying.


* Nixon was caught by the media in 1952 with a campaign slush fund from
millionaires, used a television speech to overcome the embarrassment with pleas
of poverty and thus inaugurated the age of TV commercials bought with now-legal
slush funds.
* Nixon lost a TV debate, and the Presidency, to John F. Kennedy in 1960 because
of a sweaty upper lip -- but when he finally became President, he returned to
the tube, well powdered, to rouse the public against the media.
* Nixon won one term in the White House in 1968 by having the media advertise
his "secret plan" to get out of Vietnam -- then caused them to forget it and
help him win a second term by treating them to the forbidden fruit of a trip to
China.
* Nixon lost the White House in 1974 by carelessly allowing the media to ferret
out the high crimes and misdemeanors known as Watergate -- but over time, and
most notably in 1992, he fed the media's hunger for conflict to reclaim the
status of honored statesman.

I AM REMINDED OF THESE feats -- and most astutely instructed in the final
comeback of 1992 -- by a new book, "The Nixon Memo," by Marvin Kalb, who was one
of the "instant analysts" muzzled by CBS at the urging of the Nixon
Administration and who, in a truly Nixonian turn, wound up a professor at a
Harvard school named for Kennedy, directing a center devoted to unrelenting
critiques, yes, of the press.

Nixon's rehabilitation, Kalb shows, was accomplished through a long series of
television interviews and writings, building on conspicuous foreign travels,
mostly to Moscow, whose headline value, pro or con, he exploited for 50 years.
Kalb understates Nixon's manipulations and motives, as befits a writer who
conquered any resentments he felt after Nixon had him branded "a Rumanian
agent," had the F.B.I. tap his home telephone and ransack his office and treated
him to annual, albeit fruitless, tax audits.

Yet even understated, it's a dramatic tale, climaxed by Nixon's deft leak of a
four-page memo that propelled him onto the front page of The New York Times and
into the media limelight everywhere. The memo attacked President Bush for
offering "pathetically inadequate" aid to President Boris Yeltsin of Russia just
as Bush, a fellow Republican, was caught in tough primaries against
isolationists opposing all foreign aid.

Nixon's memo threatened Bush with nothing less than the charge of historical
treason. It recalled how Nixon belabored the Democrats for "losing China" to
Communism and warned that "if Yeltsin goes down, the question 'Who lost Russia?'
[to a new despotism] will be an infinitely more devastating issue in the
1990's." In this "watershed moment," the memo said, Russia needed tens of
billions of dollars or "we can kiss the peace dividend goodbye."

The Times and other media found Nixon's cataclysmic prose irresistible -- and
Kalb approves their finding it "news." But the excitement's only consequence was
personal: once again a center of attention in Washington, Nixon passed, in
Leonard Garment's phrase, "through the valley of the shadow of Watergate." Many
students of Russia, including Henry Kissinger, actually had doubts about Nixon's
counsel, but they were not heard above the clashing Republican armor. And in
time, with nothing more to achieve, Nixon himself banked the fires of his
enthusiasm for aiding a visibly corrupt and divided Russia. He lost it
completely when snubbed by Yeltsin on a return visit to Moscow shortly before he
died.

SO THE FINAL NIXON taunt concerns not the distress of Russia but the
malleability of the media. We are suckers for peddlers of fear, threat and
conflict. And we are fixated on "official" news, voices of authority and
pronouncements of government. Nixon knew that he could surely gain attention by
shouting "War!" "Treason!" or "Higher taxes!" into a crowd of politicians.
Preferably all three.

But his taunt also makes a larger point. Why, until Nixon began his self-serving
agitations, was there no active debate about how to promote democracy in Russia?
Why do so few ideas from outside government reach the front page? Think about
it: Who besides the Pentagon and some members of Congress gets media attention
for ideas about the proper size of our post-cold-war military? Who besides
politicians and lobbyists can be heard offering better ideas for financing our
campaigns? Who can counter the opinions of self-serving bureaucracies about the
right way to deal with drug abuse?

Some editorials try to offer substantial ideas, but they've disappeared from
television and rarely command the resources for solid research. Some Op-Ed pages
cull ideas from universities and think tanks but yield most of their space to
in-house columnists and the same authority figures that crowd the front pages.
(In the year after Nixon leaked his memo in March 1992, The Times's Op-Ed page
carried one essay describing it and three more on same subject by Nixon
himself.)

Serious and wealthy newspapers have learned to counter the threat of television
by expanding their definitions of news beyond the drama of disasters and the
collisions of cops and robbers. They are learning to depict poverty, to
investigate Wall Street skulduggery and to spot trends in birthrates and skirt
lengths. But even the best of them don't often find news in an idea -- unless it
comes from an official sponsor or carries the threat of calamity.

If a Harvard professor proves that the media are patsies for a political
has-been, that is surely a newsworthy idea. But so is the inescapable corollary
that without Nixon's self-serving manipulation of us, the imperatives of helping
Russia would never have been aired in high places.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              61 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION VIEW;
The Operation Was a Success: 'E.R.' Lives

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 37;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 922 words


IN HINDSIGHT, IT HAD TO HAPPEN. In a year that has seen ambitious plans for
health-care reform dissolve in the chaos of cutthroat politics and
multimillion-dollar lobbying, viewers have wasted no time rushing to a new drama
series all about hospitals and doctors. Posting hefty ratings Thursdays at 10 on
NBC, "E.R." has vaulted into the top five with stunning ease. It is by far the
biggest hit of the young season.

Why? Some answers can easily be traced to production talent and network
shrewdness. Set in the emergency room of a bustling public hospital in Chicago,
"E.R." was created by the best-selling author Michael Crichton, who once studied
medicine at Harvard. The executive producer, John Wells, held a similar post at
"China Beach," the acclaimed series about nurses and doctors during the Vietnam
War. Further, NBC has given the series a strong time slot following a hit lineup
that includes "Seinfeld." Success on television is seldom happenstance.

But other answers concerning "E.R." must stem from the American public's
escalating anxieties over health care in the wake of the utter confusion and
helplessness in Washington. People want to be assured that basic supports will
be available. In a telephone interview, Mr. Wells theorized, "People are
frightened about going to emergency rooms, about not being cared for by people
who are compassionate." The assurances provided by "E.R." could account for its
immediate victory over CBS's "Chicago Hope," a fine but very different new
hospital drama created by David E. Kelley, whose other show is "Picket Fences."

First running directly opposite "E.R.," now scheduled an hour earlier, at 9,
"Chicago Hope" offers upscale medicine in a high-tech world run by high-priced
doctors. Well-connected, these guys (there are few women in sight) get to
practice their golf swings at Wrigley Field. Poking around in throbbing organs
and pools of blood, they can perform miracles a la Marcus Welby, including the
successful separation and perfect survival of Siamese twins. Great. But the
general public is less interested, I suspect, in expensive machines or virtuosic
and relatively rare operations (not to mention wealthy doctors) than in knowing
that reasonable attention can be commanded, sometimes on short notice. "E.R."
makes a neat surgical incision into those concerns.

This emergency room is in a teaching hospital affiliated with the University of
Chicago. The resident doctors and interns are
idealistic and demographically correct. Dr. Mark Greene (Anthony Edwards) is the
model of selfless dedication, regularly resisting the pleas of his wife, who has
just passed her bar exam, for him to go into easier and more lucrative private
practice. Dr. Doug Ross (George Clooney) is a womanizer and gets drunk on his
infrequent nights off. He can be insensitive but then buy and deliver a badly
needed medical device to a poor young patient in a rundown tenement.

Dr. Peter Benton (Eriq LaSalle) is black and ambitious, his insecurities tucked
behind a gruffly serious facade. Dr. Susan Lewis (Sherry Stringfield) is the, so
far, rare woman on staff -- and she hasn't been given much to do. And young John
Carter (Noah Wyle) is the boyish intern, still capable of weeping over a
patient's death.

This nucleus of characters is carefully choreographed in front of hand-held
cameras and then pushed through a process of rapid edits. The show is always on
the move. Mr. Wells is convinced that audiences are tired of 80's-style
exposition, going in stately cadences from A to B to C. "Chicago Hope" is
generally on that wavelength. Mr. Wells says today's viewers want a faster pace
and more stories. Smoothly jumping from one character to another as they pass
each other in the hospital corridor, "E.R." certainly doesn't stint on plot
lines.

ONE RECENT EPISODE offered the following: two people injured in a car accident,
one a pregnant woman jolted into labor, the other the druggie driver of a stolen
auto; Dr. Greene being informed by his wife that she was considering a job offer
in Milwaukee; Carter worried about a genital rash he acquired after having had
sex with a promiscuous doctor groupie; a poor young girl having a serious asthma
attack; and an out-of-town home builder (superbly played by Alan Rosenberg,
formerly Eli on "Civil Wars" and "L.A. Law") helplessly dying for lack of an
available transplant heart. All this, plus opening highlight scenes and credits,
in the first 14 minutes.

"E.R." can occasionally get uneasily close to the wacky high jinks that marred
"St. Elsewhere." Upon an outbreak of food poisoning at a local restaurant, the
novice Carter was assigned to a slew of stool tests -- then he had to face an
entire bridal party arriving with stomach cramps from the same restaurant yet
eager to continue the reception and Polish music in the hospital ward. It was a
stretch, to say the least.

For the most part, though, "E.R." stays close to the facts of an emergency room.
There are few miracles, and the stories don't always have happy endings. People
do die. What with some residents sleeping on duty and at least one nurse
overdosing on drugs, the series is already being criticized by medical groups,
including the American Board of Emergency Medicine. Gone are the days,
evidently, when the American Medical Association could oversee the content of
hospital dramas. Given the current disenchantment with the health-care debate,
the public is bound to applaud the caring, $36,000-a-year workaholics on "E.R."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George Clooney, left, Eriq LaSalle, Sherry Stringfield and
Anthony Edwards -- Part of the "E.R." medical team. (NBC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              62 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE VIETNAM IN ME

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 76 words


Tim O'Brien's story evoked my most intense reaction to any firsthand account of
the Vietnam War ("The Vietnam in Me," Oct. 2). I was spellbound, shamed and
saddened by what I read, especially the descriptions of our soldiers shooting
babies, young children and adults in anonymous, random groups. How much can we
blame "confusion of orders" for causing horrifying tragedy both to innocent
Vietnamese and innocent Americans?

CARLYN PARKER
New York

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              63 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE VIETNAM IN ME

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 131 words


Tim O'Brien's honest and moving story struck a personal chord in my heart. As a
young teen-ager in the 1960's, I remember all too clearly the horrors of the My
Lai massacre.

As for O'Brien's guilt, obsession and subsequent troubled life, I urge him to
have faith in the fact that he's been blessed with an ability to write clearly
and eloquently about a subject almost too painful for Americans to bear, even 25
years after the fact.

I am a public-school teacher who has taught O'Brien's novel "The Things They
Carried" and I have had great success in sparking student interest in a subject
that many of their parents would just as soon forget. I, for one, celebrate his
literary contributions and his decision to live and tell about it.

JULIE SCHABEL
Clifton, N.J.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              64 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE VIETNAM IN ME

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 93 words


As a veteran of this "splendid little war," I have read Tim O'Brien's writing
with great empathy. For several years, I fought personal battles with the demons
that he combatted. I conquered them. His writing helped me. This article is a
much needed booster. I hope that other men and women who served in Nam will read
it and close their personal Pandora's box of guilt and nightmares. Halfway
through O'Brien's musings, I could hardly breathe and began crying. The warmth
of the tears felt good, and cleansing.

THOMAS REILLY
Safety Harbor, Fla.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              65 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: UNIVERSITY HEIGHTS;
New Culture, New Stresses

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section 13;   Page 11;   Column 5;   The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 624 words


In 1983, when St. Rita's Asian Center opened to serve the Bronx's growing number
of Cambodian and Vietnamese refugees, the new arrivals needed help learning
basic tasks like locking doors and using toilet paper. Now, the center is
holding workshops on problems more familiar to Americans: battered wives,
alcoholism and conflicts between parents and teen-agers.

The reorientation is a measure of the new difficulties facing thousands of
Southeast Asian refugees who were resettled in the Bronx, particularly around
University Heights, under the Refugee Act of 1980. To some extent, the
Cambodians and Vietnamese in University Heights are experiencing any immigrant's
challenges in adjusting to a new culture. But, often, their transition is made
harder because they are refugees of war and genocide.

"It takes between 10 and 15 years for a Southeast Asian refugee to become a
nonrefugee," said Sister Jean Marshall, the center's founder.

In the Bronx, there were 2,574 Vietnamese and 1,603 Cambodians, according to
1990 Census figures analyzed by Dr. Andrew Beveridge, a sociologist at Queens
College of the City University of New York. While Census figures are considered
an under-count, Sister Jean said the actual population is much higher. Since
1990, she said, the Bronx has received two new groups of Vietnamese: Amerasians
and their families who total roughly 1,000 and political detainees and their
families, who also account for about 1,000 people.

Many live within 15 blocks of the center, at 2342 Andrews Avenue North, just
south of Fordham Road, either in University Heights or in areas east or north,
she said.


A handful of Cambodians and Vietnamese have opened grocery stores on Fordham
Road. In University Heights, though they are a minority in a neighborhood still
largely black and Hispanic, the Southeast Asians are becoming more a part of the
community, said Alida Quinones, vice president of community affairs at Morris
Heights Health Center.  "Now they seek out services," Ms. Quinones said. "At
first, we couldn't reach out to them. We didn't understand some of their customs
and their beliefs."

Acquainting the refugees with American hospitals was one of the goals of Saint
Rita's center in the early 1980's, Sister Jean said. Countless other tasks were
doubly difficult for many refugees who, unlike those who arrived immediately
after the war ended in 1975, were often poorly educated farmers.

The center -- which was renamed Saint Rita's Center for Refugees last year to
include the increasing number of non-Asians seeking services -- finds that many
Cambodian parents worry that their children are becoming too Americanized.
Teen-agers talk back to their parents, whose English is not as good, and refuse
to come home after school.

Because they speak little English, many men have low-paying jobs, or none at
all. Some drink too much and take out their frustrations on their wives. Nga
Nguyen, a Vietnamese woman who helps others learn English, said relatives in
Vietnam would pressure a couple to stay together. But here, she said, greater
freedom results in more broken families.

Last week, in an English class at the center, a Vietnamese woman told her
classmates how, a week earlier, her landlord entered her apartment while she was
out and packed up all her belongings. Her husband had left her two months
before, and the landlord used his departure as an excuse to evict her and her
two children.

"If you have trouble with your landlord, with your husband, you come to us the
same day," Sister Susan Mary gently admonished her. "All the people from
Vietnam, you hold your problems in your heart, and you suffer alone. Here, you
don't have to suffer alone."   NORIMITSU ONISHI

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At St. Rita's Center for Refugees, Asian immigrants learning
English. (Chris Maynard for The New York Times)

Map of the Bronx

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              66 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Who Won in the Korea Deal

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 3;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 797 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Clinton Administration said last week that the agreement it signed with
North Korea was about nuclear non-proliferation -- a bargain that made Asia and
the 83,000 American troops based there safe from a hostile state with a bomb and
a 40-year-old grudge. Maybe so. But critics are already saying it only pushed
the most urgent non-proliferation issues five years or more down the road.

"It's a leap of faith," one State Department official conceded, a bet that when
Kim Il Sung was tucked into a glass coffin in July, capitalist spirits rose from
the grave -- and that the bargain will give North Korea time to accomplish a
Vietnam-style revival, a Communist system with lots of Japanese television
plants.

The heart of the deal is a minutely-calibrated schedule under which every
Western concession, from opening up trade to pouring the concrete foundation of
two new, proliferation-resistant nuclear reactors, is met by an equivalent act
by the North Koreans. Over the next decade, they are supposed to dismantle their
nuclear facilities and ship out, rod by rod, their inventory of spent nuclear
fuel, the potential stuff of weapons. If it works, Bill Clinton will be the
biggest winner, a master negotiator on a critical security issue. If it fails,
no one will probably know for five years. Here are some other winners and
losers.

Big Winner: Kim Jong Il

Until last week, things looked pretty bleak for the "Dear Leader" as he
struggled to fill the shoes of his late father, the "Great Leader," Kim Il Sung.
Visitors to the North in recent years always got the impression that even the
North's elite viewed Kim Jr. as a pygmy among dictators.

"All of a sudden he looks as brilliant as Dad," said Nicholas Eberstadt, a Korea
scholar at Harvard and the American Enterprise Institute. "He not only
outmaneuvered the Americans, he talked them out of a few billion dollars."

Actually, it is the South Koreans and the Japanese who will fork over most of
the $4 billion for two new nuclear reactors, built as compensation for the
nuclear facilities that the North has agreed to eventually destroy. But the
hated United States has agreed to supply, gratis, enormous quantities of oil.
That will get factories going again -- provide enormous potential for
black-market profit by the North Korean elite, making that group another winner.

North Korea's peasants aren't expected to benefit much. Few houses are
oil-heated.

Lucky Bystander: Japan

The Japanese Government has been enormously reluctant to impose heavy sanctions
on the North. That would require military reinforcements, and demands that Japan
back up American forces with supplies, airfields and maybe even troops. Failure
to do so would widen rifts with America. But cooperating would probably rip the
Government apart, and perhaps invite terrorism from that part of Japan's Korean
population that is loyal to the North.

Japan's biggest fear, of course, is that if the North collapses there would be a
flood of refugees, about as welcome on Japanese shores as spoiled fish. And few
business executives in Japan are sorry to see the North Korean regime propped
up. It delays the day that Korea unifies and becomes, potentially, a much
fiercer competitor.

Winner-Loser: South Korea

South Koreans are of two minds about the North, which is brother and enemy.
Hard-liners in the intelligence agencies and the military think Kim Jong Il's
Government is on the verge of collapse and needs only a little push. "This
agreement is madness," one former senior official with close ties to the South
Korean President, Kim Young Sam said. "It is aiding the country we've been
locked in combat with for decades."

But the South's business bosses have a different interest: Preventing the same
collapse the hard-liners pine for. They don't want to have to rebuild a bankrupt
country's non-existent infrastructure. Now they can build power plants and oil
delivery systems in the North slowly, while learning their way around the
North's decrepit factories.

Big Losers: Arms Controllers

Critics of the agreement say it encourages rogue states from Iraq and Iran to
Pakistan to keep alive their dreams of a bomb of their own. The United States
has agreed to reward a country for obeying a treaty it signed years ago -- in
this case, the 25-year old treaty intended to contain the spread of nuclear
weapons. Simply by threatening to withdraw from that treaty, the North has won
$4 billion in reactors, billions in fuel oil and an end to the trade
restrictions that have contributed so much to its isolation. The Interational
Atomic Energy Agency feigned enthusiasm, but many of its officials said the
concession on delaying an inspection for years would soon come back to haunt
them.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, gained respect with the
nuclear agreement. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              67 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Historical Study of Homicide and Cities Surprises the Experts

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA


The numbers are in and even experts who study violence are surprised: Cities
have not always been meccas for murder, and this is not the first heyday for
homicides.

Historians now say that homicide rates were extraordinarily high in Europe
during the Middle Ages -- and high in the United States during the early 19th
century -- then declined steadily until the 1960's. And for centuries, it was
villages that were often the scenes of violence.

These findings, published in recent papers and presented earlier this month at
the annual conference of the Social Science History Association here, contradict
a basic tenet of criminology, that violence is endemic to densely packed urban
and industrial centers where traditional social ties and values necessarily
break down. The new research should "undermine the basic claim that the city,
with its anonymity and crowding, is in and of itself the factor in causing
violence," said Joan McCord, a professor of criminal justice at Temple
University and a past president of the American Society of Criminology.

Eric H. Monkkonen, a professor of American urban history at the University of
California at Los Angeles, said: "What we are finding is that violence is not an
immutable human problem. There really has been a civilizing process" in which,
scholars say, an increase in state power and courtly manners beginning in the
16th and 17th centuries helped curb impulsive, violent behavior.

When the first research on homicide rates was reported more than a decade ago by
historians studying England, scholars doubted its accuracy, since it relied on
old court records and coroners' data. In recent years, critics have focused on
the population base used to calculate homicide rates: precisely how many people
were living in England in the 1400's, for example? But with researchers
reporting similar results from many countries over centuries, including the
United States, Australia, England, France, Italy and the Netherlands, there is
mounting agreement, said Lawrence Stone, professor emeritus of history at
Princeton, that "all these figures just can't be false."

New data presented at the conference by a Dutch scholar, Pieter Spierenburg,
showed that the homicide rate in Amsterdam, for example, dropped from 47 per
100,000 people in the mid-15th century to 1 to 1.5 per 100,000 in the early 19th
century.

Professor Stone has estimated that the homicide rate in medieval England was on
average 10 times that of 20th century England. A study of the university town of
Oxford in the 1340's showed an extraordinarily high annual rate of about 110 per
100,000 people. Studies of London in the first half of the 14th century
determined a homicide rate of 36 to 52 per 100,000 people per year.

By contrast, the 1993 homicide rate in New York City was 25.9 per 100,000. The
1992 national homicide rate for the United States was 9.3 per 100,000.

After examining coroners' inquests, Barbara A. Hannawalt, a professor of
medieval English history at the University of Minnesota, concluded that most
slayings in medieval England started as quarrels among farmers in the field.
"They were grubbing for existence," she said. Insults to honor were taken
seriously, and violence was the accepted method of settling disputes, since the
king's courts were slow, expensive and corrupt.

The knife and the quarterstaff, the heavy wooden stick commonly carried for
herding animals and walking on the muddy roads, were the weapons of choice.
"Everyone carried a knife, even women," she said, since "if you sat down
somewhere to eat, you were expected to bring your own." Given the lack of
sanitation at the time, even simple knife wounds could prove deadly.

Why the homicide rate in Europe began to drop in the 16th and 17th centuries is
a matter of debate. The most widely accepted explanation stems from the work of
Norbert Elias, a sociologist who in the late 1930's introduced the idea of a
"civilizing process," in which the nobility was transformed from knights into
courtiers, bringing in a new set of manners, and the modern state spread its
power over the populace.

Official justice administered by courts replaced private vengeance conducted by
feuds, fights and duels. Challenging conventional academic wisdom, Mr. Elias
suggested, too, that the power of the state extended to cities first, so urban
homicide rates would be comparatively low.

Recent research indicates that he was right. In Philadelphia, for example, the
annual average rate of indictments for homicide fell from 4 per 100,000 in the
1850's to 2.2 in the early 1890's, according to research by Roger Lane, a
history professor at Haverford College. The drop occurred as the city became
industrialized and despite the greater availability of firearms during the
period.

As people began to go to work in factories, their behavior was constrained by
the foreman and the whistle, Professor Lane has written. Behavior was also
improved by the spread of public schools, which acted as "agents of social
control," and institutions like the Y.M.C.A. and Sunday schools, which taught
morality. Similar developments helped lower New York's homicide rate in the late
19th and early 20th centuries, Professor Monkkonen said.

Then came the 1960's. Around the world, homicide rates did an about-face. When
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, for example, the national
homicide rate in the United States was 4.6 per 100,000 people. By 1970, it had
doubled, and by 1980 had reached 10.1 per 100,000.

Researchers point to several possible explanations. Post-World War II baby
boomers came of age in the 1960's, increasing the number of young men, the most
violence-prone group, in the population. The 60's also marked a shift among many
social, cultural and economic forces that worked against violence in previous
eras. America began moving into a post-industrial economy, governmental
authority came into question with the Vietnam war, and the traditional family
was threatened by things like divorce.

"The good news is violence can go down," Professor Monkkonen. "The bad news is,
we need to learn how to make it happen."


LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "THROUGH THE YEARS: The Dips and Surges in New York City
Homicide Rates" tracks rates compiled by Eric H. Monkkonen, a professor of
American urban history at the University of California and Los Angeles, and
reserarch associates. The figures are compiled from coroner, newspaper and
police data and are updated as new homicides are discovered. The decline from
the mid 1800's to the 1960's is attributed by some to the spread of public
schools and work in factories. Graph runs from 1800 throught 1993.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              68 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Correction

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 4;  Column 6;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 51 words


The Sports of the Times column last Sunday, about female sportswriters, referred
incorrectly to the Vietnamese Government's admission of American news
correspondents. Kristin Huckshorn of The San Jose Mercury News was not the first
admitted; she was preceded by George Esper of The Associated Press.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              69 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Spy in the Gray Flannel Suit

BYLINE: By Joseph Finder;   Joseph Finder, author of the espionage novels "The
Moscow Club" and "Extraordinary Powers," writes frequently on intelligence and
international affairs.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1622 words



BLOND GHOST
Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusades.
By David Corn.
Illustrated. 509 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
$27.50.

GOOD spy biographies are all too rare. Unlike the troubled, complex characters
in the novels of Graham Greene or John le Carre, the real-life spies who make it
in the intelligence business -- the ones that last -- tend not to be colorful. A
tiny percentage of Central Intelligence Agency employees actually work in the
clandestine services, out in the field where the dramatic spy stuff happens.
Most are analysts, managers, bureaucrats, and about as exciting as the assistant
audit supervisor in an accounting firm.

There's also the nasty problem of trying to write about a profession whose stock
in trade is secrets, cover stories and disinformation; even the most tenacious
investigative journalist will run up against brick walls. Hazarding these odds,
David Corn, the Washington editor of The Nation, has documented the shadowy
career of a C.I.A. clandestine operator, Theodore G. Shackley, who is a legend
in the intelligence community.

"Blond Ghost: Ted Shackley and the CIA's Crusades" is a scorchingly critical
account of an enigmatic figure who for two decades ran some of the agency's most
important, and most controversial, covert operations.

The man who has been called "the godfather of secret warriors" was recruited in
1951 to the clandestine service of the newly established C.I.A. and sent a few
years later to Berlin, then the espionage capital of the world. Early on, he
chose to leave the field for the office, forsaking dead-drops and late-night
rendezvous for the management pyramid. He had chosen the career of an
intelligence bureaucrat -- an "intellcrat," in Mr. Corn's word (or an
"espiocrat," as John le Carre has recently taken to calling such people).

His climb up the greased pole of the C.I.A.'s leadership was astonishingly
rapid. In 1962, at the age of 34, Ted Shackley was named chief of the C.I.A.'s
station in Miami, on the front line of America's battle against Fidel Castro,
during the most dangerous time of the cold war, the year of the Cuban missile
crisis.

After Miami, he became station chief in Vientiane, Laos, where the C.I.A. was
attempting to wage a secret war (though it was hardly a secret), running a
guerrilla force of 20,000 Hmong tribesmen against the Pathet Lao, which was
supported by the North Vietnamese. He dazzled the agency's leadership with his
skills as a covert warrior -- sabotaging the Ho Chi Minh Trail, supplying
high-tech gadgetry to the Hmong, keeping the Communists at bay, even
infiltrating agents into China to collect intelligence -- and in 1968 was sent
to Saigon as station chief.

There, as one of the intelligence community's best and brightest, Mr. Shackley
was, many believed, being groomed as a future Director of Central Intelligence.
In 1976, he rose to associate deputy director for operations, second in command
of the agency's clandestine service. But changing times, as well as damaging
revelations about some of the seamier aspects of Mr. Shackley's high-powered
career (including dealings with Edwin P. Wilson, a former C.I.A. officer who
illegally sold tons of C-4 plastic explosives to Libya), kept him from occupying
the director's seventh-floor office. Sensing his time was up, he resigned from
the agency in 1979 and put his global web of contacts to use as an international
consultant, in which capacity he has been linked, in a vaporous way, to the
Iran-contra scandal.

Mr. Corn makes a compelling case that the very bureaucratic skills that
propelled people like Mr. Shackley so far up the C.I.A.'s hierarchy turned out
to be the agency's undoing. A good, upwardly mobile C.I.A. officer learned to
put the most positive spin on his reports home, to record progress where there
was little or none, to tell the bosses what they wanted to hear.

In Saigon, for instance, Mr. Shackley insisted that his people write their
situation reports in such a way as to show that the C.I.A. was winning the war
in Vietnam. "Shackley would report progress," one of his case officers said,
"because it was his job to bring about progress." As a result, the policy makers
in Washington received a falsely optimistic picture of the progress of the war.
"If the leaders of the United States and the top policy makers were imprisoned
by their assumptions and desires," Mr. Corn writes, "Shackley was not the man to
bust them loose."

Mr. Shackley comes across as driven and emotionless. He loves maps and charts
and numbers; his desk is always clean. Friend and foe alike describe him as
"cold and businesslike," "coldly efficient and dependable," "cold, calm,
deliberate." With his machinelike demeanor, his stony efficiency and his
dead-white pallor (he was nicknamed the Ghost, rarely the Blond Ghost), he was
seen by many as "spooky." "Oh man, was Shackley weird," a C.I.A. man once said.
"Calm, quiet, he just kind of looked at you in this weird way."

Unfortunately, Mr. Shackley doesn't exactly spring to life a flesh-and-blood
character from the pages of this book. This isn't surprising; he seems to be a
rather bloodless figure anyway. Mr. Corn admits that Mr. Shackley "was not a
colorful man" and "did not leave behind a series of striking anecdotes," but
argues that "people who hold the secrets do not have to be deep or interesting."

That may be, but in the end Mr. Shackley was no more than a functionary -- "an
apparatchik," as one of his many enemies called him, "a good bureaucrat" who
"managed well"; "the perfect Company man." Bureaucrats, however, don't make good
heroes or villains, which may explain why Mr. Corn is not content to portray Ted
Shackley as merely an allegorical figure of the failings of American
intelligence.

Instead, Mr. Corn blames Mr. Shackley for an enormous number of the C.I.A.'s
failures over the past several decades. He catalogues one disaster after another
in which Mr. Shackley played some role -- from the disgraceful war in Laos, to
the inadequacies of United States intelligence in Vietnam, to the agency's
clumsy attempt to block publication of an expose by the renegade C.I.A. officer
Philip Agee -- and attributes them to Mr. Shackley's "rampant ambition."

This seriously distorts the recent history of American intelligence. No doubt
Mr. Shackley was an icily ambitious careerist but like all good company men, he
followed instructions sent down from headquarters. He served at the pleasure of
the Director of Central Intelligence and carried out policies dictated from
above -- that is, from the White House. "Mr. Shackley was part of the machine,"
an acquaintance of his told the author. "He had to do what the machine wanted."

In his eagerness to disparage the C.I.A. as either ineffectual or out of
control, Mr. Corn makes many errors of fact. He argues that during the Cuban
missile crisis, for instance, the major credit for the greatest intelligence
coup of the entire episode -- pinpointing the location of Soviet nuclear
missiles in Cuba -- doesn't belong to the C.I.A. at all. Instead, he says, the
real tip-off came from routine debriefings of a couple of Cuban refugees at the
Opa-Locka refugee reception center near Miami.

But the fact is that the intelligence that proved crucial in confirming the
presence of the missiles came from a C.I.A. asset in Cuba. According to
declassified C.I.A. documents, on Sept. 15, 1962, a C.I.A. agent in Cuba, using
secret writing, passed information by mail pointing to a large trapezoidal
region in Pinar del Rio province, bounded by four cities, where top-secret
missile-related work was proceeding.

It was that report, not the Opa-Locka debriefings, that enabled U-2
reconnaissance aircraft to take aerial photographs of the missile site.
(Besides, the Opa-Locka center was in fact established by the C.I.A. as an
interagency interrogation center to aid in the collection of intelligence.)

Mr. Corn also writes that in the middle of the crisis, Ted Shackley defied
orders from Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy to halt all sabotage operations
against Cuba. In fact, as recently declassified C.I.A. documents bear out, even
after the crisis began Kennedy was urging Operation Mongoose -- the effort he
oversaw from the White House to attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro -- to keep up
the sabotage plots.

MR. CORN even recycles a long-discredited canard, much beloved by conspiracy
theorists, that on the day of President John F. Kennedy's assassination, the
agency's chief of covert operations, Desmond FitzGerald, met in Paris with one
of the C.I.A.'s Cuban agents and gave him a "ball-point pen" that could be used
to inject Castro with a deadly toxin called Black Leaf 40. FitzGerald was
actually the host of a lunch in Washington at the time, at the City Tavern Club
in Georgetown.

These errors aside, I think Mr. Corn is on to something important here. For all
the criticism the Central Intelligence Agency has (deservedly) received for its
many failings throughout the years, far too little attention has been focused on
one of the chief causes: the careerism and conformity that continue to pervade
the agency.

In 1962, Richard Helms, who would later become Director of Central Intelligence,
urged his people: "There's a lot of ways you can write the English language to
make it sound like we're moving ahead." Ted Shackley may have been the C.I.A.'s
greatest manager of covert operations, but he was, after all, part of a much
larger machine. He was only one of countless career officers in a corporate
culture of intelligence that prefers good news to bad and that, whatever the
consequences, inevitably produces -- and rewards -- the spy with "the soul of a
bureaucrat."

NAME: Ted Shackley

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ted Shackley in 1991. (BRAD MARKEL/FROM "BLOND GHOST")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              70 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 25, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

At a Civil War Prison, A Salute to All P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: ANDERSONVILLE, Ga., Oct. 18


What was once a field rank with pools of fetid water and odors of gangrene and
death now gently rolls with hillocks of fluffy broom sage and gold and purple
asters. One hundred and thirty years ago, when it was encircled by stockade
walls and strewn with sway-backed tents, the field was Andersonville, the
infamous Confederate camp where 45,000 Union troops were imprisoned, and where
13,000 died.

It is a haunting place whose name over time became synonymous with the horror,
privations, disease and thwarted escapes common to all prisoners of wars. Now,
with President Clinton's signing of an appropriations bill last month,
Andersonville will also become the site of the nation's only museum dedicated to
American P.O.W.'s, from the Revolution to Somalia.

"It won't be just some showplace on a hill," said James B. Stockdale, the
retired admiral who was the highest-ranking American prisoner of war in the
Vietnam War and who is serving, with his wife, Sybil, as honorary chairmen of
Friends of Andersonville, the private group supporting the museum. "You will be
in the trenches, trodding the ground that men agonized over then, just as you
yourself did in your time."

The planned museum, which is expected to be completed by 1996, will be part of
the Andersonville National Historic Site in southwestern Georgia. Andersonville,
a village of 260 people, is about 25 miles northeast of former President Jimmy
Carter's home in Plains.

In addition to the grassy expanse that once was the prison stockade, the
475-acre site includes two small brick buildings and a national cemetery holding
the remains of the soldiers who died in the prison, as well as those of 2,000
other veterans from the Spanish-American War to the Vietnam War. The cemetery,
with its close-ranked, white stone markers, draws about 150,000 visitors a
year..

Mr. Clinton's signature approving Federal financing for the $9 million museum
comes 24 years after the grounds of Andersonville were first taken over by the
National Park Service and designated by Congress as a national historic site.
But only in the last 10 years did private groups and the park service begin to
push for a museum as a memorial to P.O.W.'s throughout American history.

For the estimated 70,000 surviving Americans who were once prisoners of war,
most of them from World War II, the approval of Federal financing comes just as
time is running out, members of veterans groups said.

William Bearisto, 70, who is president of the 30,000-member American
Ex-Prisoners of War, which helped raise more than $3 million in private funds
for the museum, said he looked forward to the museum's completion.

"It will bring back a lot of hurtful feelings for some of us," Mr. Bearisto
said, "and it may bring back some of the shame that many of us were made to
feel, as if it was our fault that we were captured. But this is our No. 1
priority, and we are 40 years late in getting this memorial."

Although the Andersonville military prison operated for only 14 months in the
Civil War, it came to symbolize much about that conflict. In earlier wars there
was little need for large, permanent prisons because prisoners of war were
usually exchanged quickly after signing a pledge not to fight again.

That ended in the Civil War, when Union commanders, tired of capturing and
recapturing the same Confederates, refused to make the exchanges. And
Confederate commanders refused to exchange black prisoners of war, saying they
were fugitive slaves.

After the war, Union forces hanged the Andersonville prison's commandant, Capt.
Henry Wirtz, making him the only person executed for war crimes in the Civil
War. Later, private societies from the North maintained the stockade grounds and
cemetery.

But the historic importance of the former prison camp was never much appreciated
by some Southerners. Many were quick to note that no one had bothered to
preserve Camp Douglas in Chicago, a Union stockade where 15 percent of the
30,000 imprisoned Confederates died, or a camp in Elmira, N.Y., where 32 percent
of the 12,000 Confederate prisoners died. Twenty-nine percent of Andersonville's
prisoners died.

Fred Boyles, Andersonville's superintendent, said the museum's design would
recall that of a prison. Its outer face will be a series of windowless, low-rise
wall sections; an inner courtyard will be ringed with iron gates and barbed
wire, and three "guard towers" will rise above the roof.

Inside will be diaries and oral histories and a concrete cross erected by
American prisoners of war at Camp O'Donnell, the terminus of the 1942 Bataan
death march, which some P.O.W.'s called "the Andersonville of the Pacific."
Exhibits will emphasize the common experiences of P.O.W.'s: capture, forced
marches, shortages of water, food and medicine, escapes and attempted escapes
and and the anguish of prisoners' families.

James S. Edwards of Albany, N.Y., a former president of the ex-prisoners-of-war
group, remembered long discussions about food when he was a prisoner. A crewman
of a B-24 bomber, Mr. Edwards was shot down over Germany near the end of World
War II and held for nearly six months. "If Betty Grable and a plate of food was
put out before us, we would have gone for the food first," he said.

While Mr. Edwards and a diarist of Andersonville both recalled being ignored by
their captors, Admiral Stockdale, who was a P.O.W. for seven and a half years --
an experience he recounted many times as Ross Perot's running mate in the 1992
Presidential election -- recalls something quite different.

"God, how I wish I could have had a little of that neglect and indifference," he
said recently, referring to the "political re-education" and torture sessions
that he and other prisoners underwent at the hands of Communist political
officers. "Andersonville got down to about 1 guard to 30 or 40 prisoners. I
spent two years in leg irons and in solitary with 11 other prisoners, and there
were 2 officers and 33 guards to watch us."

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In the cemetery at the Andersonville National Historic Site,
the tombstones nearly touch because the 13,000 Union soldiers who died at the
Andersonville prison were buried shoulder to shoulder. Two of the cemetery's
150,000 annual visitors inspected the close-ranked markers recently. (Alan S.
Weiner for The New York Times); In a painting, a Confederate guard shoots one of
the 45,000 Union prisoners held at the Andersonville camp in southwest Georgia.
(The Bettman Archive)

Map of Georgia showing location of Andersonville.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              71 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 25, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Andrew D. Kopkind, Writer on Politics And Editor, 59

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 6;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


Andrew D. Kopkind, a political journalist whose work appeared in The New
Republic, The New York Review of Books and The Nation, died on Sunday at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan. He was 59 and had homes in
Manhattan and Guilford, Vt.

The cause was bladder cancer, said JoAnn Wypijewski, the managing editor of The
Nation.

Mr. Kopkind was born in New Haven, Conn., and had degrees from Cornell
University and the London School of Economics. He began his career at The
Washington Post, then was a reporter at Time magazine. In 1965 he joined the
staff of The New Republic, covering the civil rights movement and the birth of
the New Left on college campuses. He was also the American correspondent for The
New Statesman in London.

In 1968 he and James Ridgeway founded the underground newspaper Mayday (later
renamed Hard Times), which covered the antiwar, black-power and student
movements. He also wrote about the Vietnam War in the magazine Ramparts, where
he was a contributing editor.

In the 1970's, Mr. Kopkind also wrote for The Village Voice, The Boston Phoenix
and The Real Paper in Boston. Many of his articles dealt with the emerging
gay-rights movement. With John Scagliotti, he was the host of "Lavender Hour," a
gay radio program on WBCN in Boston.

In 1982, he joined the staff of The Nation, where he wrote many of the
magazine's unsigned editorials, as well as articles on politics and foreign
policy.

He wrote "America: The Mixed Curse" (1969) and, with Mr. Ridgeway, he edited
"Decade of Crisis: America in the 60's" (1972). At the time of his death, he was
working on "The Thirty Years' Wars," a collection of his journalism, to be
published by Verso next year.

He is survived by Mr. Scagliotti, his companion of 24 years.

NAME: Andrew D. Kopkind

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              72 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: MASSACHUSETTS;
Kennedy and Romney Meet, And the Rancor Flows Freely

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1345 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 25


In a vivid piece of political theater, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts attacked his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, tonight for his
views on abortion, health care and Social Security.

"I am pro-choice," Mr. Kennedy said during an exchange on abortion. "My opponent
is multiple choice."

Mr. Romney, calm under fire, gave as good as he got during most of a 60-minute
debate, but he failed to dent the composure of Mr. Kennedy, who came into the
confrontation buoyed by a new poll showing him with a substantial lead. The
challenger scored with jabs at the Senator's use of religion in the campaign and
with depictions of Mr. Kennedy as the spokesman for an outdated brand of
liberalism.

"I am tough on crime," Mr. Romney said. "He is not."

But Mr. Kennedy managed to make his opponent look inexperienced in the
intricacies of Federal finance and the way legislation is enacted. He forced Mr.
Romney to admit he did not know how much his ideas on health care would cost.
And perhaps most important for the Senator, he demonstrated that he was not a
has-been, although Mr. Romney took every opportunity to argue that it was time
for a change after the incumbent's more than three decades on Capitol Hill.

Several of the Republican and Democratic politicians who critiqued the debate
for local news outlets called it a draw in which no knockdowns, let alone
knockouts, were scored by either candidate. If television viewers agree, that
would tend to favor Senator Kennedy because he has no ground to make up.

In one protracted wrangle, involving accusations by Mr. Romney about the
Senator's personal finances, Mr. Kennedy said stonily: "Mr. Romney, the Kennedys
are not in public service to make money. We have paid too high a price."

The debate, telecast statewide, was staged in Faneuil Hall, a red-brick
structure dating from pre-Revolutionary times, whose cupola is crowned by a
gilded metal grasshopper. It was the highlight so far of the midterm election
campaign -- far more robust, in keeping with Boston's liking for politics as
spectator sport, than the tepid exchanges that have taken place in many states.

Much of the first half centered on jobs, a central issue in Massachusetts, and
things quickly degenerated into a shouting match that the moderator, Ken Bode,
had some trouble controlling. Mr. Romney said he knew how to create jobs because
of his "skill and experience in the private sector," while Mr. Kennedy argued
that his seniority in the Senate better qualified him to provide the training
and education needed to guarantee well-paying employment in the state.

Then the Senator accused Mr. Romney of denying medical care to part-time workers
he employs. Mr. Romney called that hypocrisy and said the Kennedy family did the
same thing at its Merchandise Mart in Chicago, and the shouting began.

Afterward, the Kennedy forces distributed a news release, prepared in
anticipation of Mr. Romney's accusations, saying that the mart's 400 full-time
employees were given medical coverage and that its seven part-time workers were
all covered to some degree. The rebuttal, of course, had none of the drama of
Mr. Romney's heated words in the debate, which appeared to be extemporaneous.

Mr. Kennedy, who is 62 years old, allowed Mr. Romney to seize the initiative
during the summer and found himself in a dead heat by Labor Day. Mr. Romney,
trim and darkly handsome at 47, was transformed from a little-known venture
capitalist (albeit one with a famous name) into a David who might slay Goliath.

The last of three political brothers, Senator Kennedy is one of the Democrats
whom the Republicans would most like to defeat on Nov. 8, along with Gov. Mario
M. Cuomo of New York and House Speaker Thomas S. Foley of Washington.

Mr. Romney accused Mr. Kennedy of misrepresenting and distorting his record,
demanding, "When will this end?" In turn, Mr. Kennedy said he would provide
documentation of his assertions and called upon Mr. Romney to talk instead about
his views on the economy and "the pain of the people in Massachusetts."

"Give me a break, Mr. Romney, give me a break," the Senator said angrily after
his rival accused him of being soft on crime for opposing some mandatory
sentence guidelines and noted his longtime opposition to the death penalty.

Despite the spirited exchanges and fleeting looks of anger, the two men shook
hands afterward and exchanged a few pleasantries.

Both Mr. Kennedy and Mr. Romney prepared carefully. In the customary dry runs,
Charles Baker, the Human Services Secretary in the Cabinet of Gov. William F.
Weld of Massachusetts, played Mr. Kennedy for the benefit of Mr. Romney. For Mr.
Kennedy's rehearsal, David Smith, a former Kennedy aide, took the part of Mr.
Romney.

Several hours before the debate began, supporters gathered on the plaza between
Faneuil Hall and Quincy Market, a popular tourist attraction in downtown Boston.
The Kennedy backers carried blue placards, the Romney partisans red-and-blue
ones.

A poll carried out over the weekend by The Boston Herald showed Senator Kennedy
widening his lead, largely because of defections from Mr. Romney by
independents. They hold the key to any Republican's chances in predominantly
Democratic Massachusetts. In The Herald survey, which had a margin of sampling
error of plus or minus five percentage points and was based on interviews with
447 likely voters, Mr. Kennedy led 50 percent to 32 percent, with 18 percent
undecided.

Mr. Romney needed a strong showing tonight and another in a second debate
scheduled for Thursday night in Holyoke to stage a comeback. So he probably had
the most at stake.

For Mr. Romney, a son of George W. Romney, the former Governor of Michigan whose
ill-advised comment about having been brainwashed in Vietnam prematurely ended
his bid for the Presidency in 1968, the debates also offered a chance to
demonstrate that he could deal effectively with issues of substance.

A political neophyte, Mr. Romney had scored earlier in the campaign mainly by
attacking Senator Kennedy and arguing that it was time for a change. Like many
other challengers in this year of anti-incumbent fervor, Mr. Romney had spent
little time defining a program of his own.

One of his most biting commercials, which ran last week, accused Mr. Kennedy of
making big profits on a real estate deal in Washington "at taxpayers' expense."
The Senator, who denied the accusations, had himself run a slashing series of
advertisements accusing Mr. Romney of making big profits on a deal that cost
hundreds of workers' jobs in Indiana. Mr. Romney had issued a denial in that
case.

For Mr. Kennedy, first elected in 1962, the debate offered a chance to show that
three decades in the Senate had not dulled his zest for political battle or
public service, and to rebut his opponent's contention that years of hard living
had enfeebled him.

In political circles in Washington, Mr. Kennedy is considered a legislative
craftsman of great skill. He has long been viewed as the Senate's leading
advocate of liberal causes, and he is admired for his hard work, even by
adversaries like Senator Alan K. Simpson, a conservative Republican from
Wyoming.

But in Massachusetts, his standing has been eroded by such episodes as the
drowning of Mary Jo Kopechne in the Senator's car on Chappaquiddick Island in
July 1969 and the trial of his nephew William Kennedy Smith on rape charges
after he and Senator Kennedy had gone bar-hopping in Palm Beach, Fla., on Good
Friday, 1991.

For many years his considerable influence in the halls of Congress -- his
ability to deliver jobs for his constituents -- has to some degree obscured his
personal troubles, including his divorce from his first wife, Joan.

But in late middle age he has proved vulnerable, and Mr. Romney has proved a
vigorous challenger, even in South Boston, where rancor over the court-ordered
school busing that began in 1974 remains a force, and where Mr. Romney has found
a ready audience for his argument that "the 1960's liberal agenda has not
worked."


LOAD-DATE: October 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Yesterday's debate between Mitt Romney, left, and Senator
Edward M. Kennedy was lively but inconclusive. (Photographs by Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              73 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 763 words



International A3-17

ISRAEL AND JORDAN SIGN TREATY
Israel and Jordan agreed to peace, settling land and water disputes, agreeing to
cooperate in tourism, trade and other areas, and pledging that neither would let
its land be used for attacks on the other.  A1



News analysis: Many Arabs greeted the treaty with little joy.  A14

President Clinton outlined a plan for economic development.  A14

At the signing: mineral water, mutual praise and reflection.  A13

CUBA LIFTS MORE CURBS ON TRADE
Cuba announced that it would allow the sale of a wide range of materials and
consumer products that had been tightly controlled.  A7

FOR MOZAMBIQUE, FREE ELECTIONS
Mozambique will vote today in its first free elections, becoming democracy's
latest beachhead in a region that defies the African trend toward war and
collapse.  A3

U.S. SUED ON BURMESE DRUG EFFORT
The former top United States drug-enforcement official in Myanmar has sued
former top State Department and C.I.A. officials based there, saying they
subverted his anti-drug efforts.  A9

Washington and NATO want the ex-Soviet bloc to join sooner.  A5

President Clinton assured North Korea on nuclear reactors.  A8

Vietnam was praised for helping to account for missing G.I.'s.  A16

Rites for a slain Sri Lankan opposition leader were marred.  A17

Bucharest Journal: Many Romanian babies are abandoned.  A4

National A18-27, B12-15

A REFINED COSMIC TAPE MEASURE
A more accurate measurement of the distance to a remote galaxy has led to a
refined estimate of the size and age of the universe.  A1

FIXED: FERMAT'S THEOREM PROOF
After repairing problems with his original proof, Dr. Andrew Wiles may have
solved the world's most famous mathematics problem.  A1

Fermat's last theorem: a link between algebra and analysis.  B12

CARD-CARRYING CALIFORNIANS
Gov. Pete Wilson suggested that state residents be required to get an ID card to
present when seeking a job, entering school or applying for nonemergency health
care.  A1

GEARING UP FOR DEBATE NO. 2
Mitt Romney is preparing for his second debate with Senator Kennedy and what may
be his last chance in this campaign.  A27

THE MAN WHO WOULD BE SPEAKER
Newt Gingrich won't know until Nov. 9 whether he has a Republican majority in
the House, but when someone calls "Mr. Speaker" these days, he answers.  A1

N.R.A. GUNNING FOR SENATORS
An advertising war over guns is being fought in much of the west between the
National Rifle Association and Senators who voted for the Clinton crime bill.
A26

NEW HAMPSHIRE RABIES SCARE
The death of a rabid pet store kitten in Concord sent hundreds of people in
search of vaccinations.  A18

NEW RULES FOR MEAT SAFETY
Scrapping recently announced rules to control bacterial contamination of
poultry, the Agriculture Department said it would announce new meat safety rules
shortly.  A20

NO MORE FISH FROM GEORGES BANK
A Federal council recommended action that could stop commercial fishing off Cape
Cod.  B14

SIMPSON JURY SELECTION SLOWS
Choosing jurors to determine O. J. Simpson's fate slowed to a crawl after some
candidates failed to follow a ban on watching TV.  B14

Metro Digest B1

THE MAYOR TURNS TO ALBANY
Mayor Giuliani's plan to close a $1.1 billion gap in New York City's budget
calls on the state to pick up millions of dollars in costs of programs that the
city would cut.  A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-12

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

The newest thing in cultural prizes.  C15

A Budapest theater casts off its no-frills Soviet past.  C15

Theater: Wasserstein's "Uncommon Women and Others." C15

Sports B16-21

Basketball: No-strike, no-lockout agreement near.  B17

Columns: Anderson on Art Shell.  B17

Football: Meggett disappears from Giants' offense.  B17

Tennis: Venus Williams on eve of debut.  B17

Obituaries D24-25

Mary Roebling, banker and American Stock Exchange official.  D24

Devendra P. Varma, scholar of Gothic tales.  D24

John Lautner, architect.  D25

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

A jury system for jurors.

McCain's risky Korea strategy.

Tomorrow's interactive home.

Letters

William Safire: Loyalty and perfidy.

Frank Rich: Getting real.

Joel Kotkin: Hotheads in California.

Flora Lewis: Cold hearts in France.

Bridge C20

Chronicle B22

Crossword C20

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              74 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Yang Dezhi, 83; a Leader Of Red Army

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section D;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 376 words


Gen. Yang Dezhi, a Chinese military leader for more than half a century and a
former Army Chief of Staff who opposed the Tiananmen Square crackdown, died on
Tuesday, the official New China News Agency reported yesterday. He was 83. The
cause of death was not given.

Mr. Yang's career in warfare stretched from the creation of the Communist Army
in 1927 to China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979. He made his name as a daring
military leader during the fabled Long March and was a top commander of Chinese
forces during the Korean War.

He also proved skilled in politics, avoiding repeated purges, making a
successful transition from the reign of Mao Zedong to that of Deng Xiaoping
without losing favor, and eventually rising to the Politburo.

In 1927, when Mao launched the uprising in Hunan that marked the founding of the
Red Army, Mr. Yang, 17 at the time, joined the Communists. In 1934 and 1935 he
commanded a vanguard unit in the Long March, the Red Army's 6,000-mile retreat
before the advancing Nationalist forces.

His established his reputation in May 1935, when the Red Army was threatened
with being pinned down by the Nationalists alongside the Dadu River in Sichuan
Province. Mr. Yang's unit surprised the Nationalist forces on one bank of the
river, seizing the only ferry, then crossed and defeated the Nationalists on the
other side, clearing the way for the Red Army's escape.

Mr. Yang moved steadily up the military and political ladders, becoming a member
of the Community Party Central Committee in 1969.

In 1979, Mr. Yang was deputy commander of Chinese forces in their brief
incursion into Vietnam, and the failures of that venture did not appear to hurt
his fortunes. The next year, he was named Chief of Staff of the Army, a post he
held for seven years. He sat on the Politburo from 1982 to 1987.

As Chief of Staff, Mr. Yang oversaw deep cuts in the size of the military, over
the objections of hard-liners, many of them holdovers from the Mao era.

In May of 1989, two weeks before the army crushed demonstrations in Tiananmen
Square, Mr. Yang was one of seven retired military leaders to sign a letter
warning Prime Minister Li Peng against a crackdown and saying that the military
should not enter the city.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              75 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Pacific Commander Praises Vietnam on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 584 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 26


The commander of American military forces in the Pacific praised Vietnam today
for its cooperation in accounting for American troops missing from the Vietnam
War. He suggested that the Vietnamese would continue to cooperate
enthusiastically regardless of whether Washington established full diplomatic
and trade relations with Hanoi.

The comments here by Adm. Richard C. Macke delighted his Vietnamese hosts, who
have long argued that the United States should not use the issue of missing
Americans to delay normal diplomatic ties.

"At all levels of the Government, I heard the desire to continue the cooperation
and in fact to enhance that cooperation," Admiral Macke said after meeting with
Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet and other Vietnamese officials. "We are very pleased
with the cooperation we see now. Overall the meetings with the Vietnamese were
very encouraging."

While the admiral cautioned that the decision to restore full diplomatic
relations with Vietnam would be left to "our political masters," his unqualified
praise for the Vietnamese today will doubtless help Hanoi in its long campaign
to establish normal ties with Washington.

"I don't make that decision," said Admiral Macke, a Vietnam veteran. "I know
that we are working toward it."

The Clinton Administration, which in February lifted a 19-year American trade
embargo on Vietnam, has said the move toward normal diplomatic relations depends
on "tangible progress" in accounting for the 2,214 Americans still listed as
missing in action in Southeast Asia.

Admiral Macke, on his first visit to Vietnam since assuming the Honolulu-based
Pacific Command last summer, said today that tangible progress was being made
with Vietnamese help. "When we lifted the embargo, the cooperation in fact did
not lessen -- the cooperation in fact continued to improve," he said.

Asked whether the military had any concern that the Vietnamese would cut back
their cooperation if Washington took the next step and established full
relations with Hanoi, the admiral replied, "I personally don't have any concern
there."

When President Clinton lifted the embargo, a number of veterans groups and the
families of some of the missing Americans warned that Vietnam would have no
reason to continue cooperating in the effort to determine the fate of the
missing.

They are using the same argument in urging the Administration to withhold full
diplomatic and trade relations for the Vietnamese, who are especially eager for
American trade privileges that would allow them to sell a wide variety of
Vietnamese goods in the United States.

Admiral Macke, a former fighter pilot who flew more than 150 combat missions
over Southeast Asia in the 1960's, met with reporters after visiting two sites
in Vietnam where joint American and Vietnamese teams are searching for clues to
the fate of missing Americans.

"I was impressed by the tremendous cooperation, the working shoulder to shoulder
between the Vietnamese townspeople and the Americans who are out there digging
and excavating in those sites," he said. "I saw that not only at the national
level, but at the regional, at the province, at the district, at the village
level, there was tremendous cooperation between the Americans and Vietnamese."

The Pentagon maintains a staff of American investigators, working under Admiral
Macke's command, at an office in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, to carry out
searches in the countryside, an effort that is expected to continue for years.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              76 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Loan for Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 6;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 61 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 26


The World Bank has approved a $150 million loan to Vietnam to support efforts at
changing the Communist country's banking, tax and public finance systems,
according to the bank's Hanoi representative, Bradley Babson. The loan, the
World Bank's fourth to Vietnam, is intended to deepen the country's transition
to a free-market economy, a process begun in 1986.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              77 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN;
Answering the N.R.A.

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 371 words


CANDIDATE Senator Bob Kerrey, a Democrat being challenged for re-election in
Nebraska by Jan Stoney, a Republican, is one of several lawmakers being opposed
by the National Rifle Association because of his vote for a ban on assault
weapons. This is Mr. Kerrey's response to an association's advertisement
featuring the actor Charlton Heston, who asserted: "You said you wouldn't vote
for gun bans. But you went to Washington and voted for the first Federal gun ban
in American history."

PRODUCER Struble/Totten Communications

ON THE SCREEN Opens with men on a shooting range, with red letters declaring, "A
Message to Charlton Heston from Bob Kerrey." The camera zooms in on Mr. Kerrey,
dressed in hunting garb, as he fires at a clay pigeon. As he talks into the
camera, he ejects the shell from the shotgun he just used, and then, midway
through, puts the gun down and picks up another weapon.

SCRIPT An announcer says, "A message for Charlton Heston from Senator Bob
Kerrey." Then Mr. Kerrey says: "I'm a hunter, and I believe in the
constitutional right to bear arms. When it's time to hunt birds, you need a good
gun like this Ruger Red Label. Twenty-five years ago, in the war in Vietnam,
people hunted me. They needed a good weapon -- like this AK-47. But you don't
need one of these to hunt birds." The announcer then says: "Bob Kerrey. The
courage to lead."

ACCURACY The distinction Mr. Kerrey draws is correct. A spokesman for the Bureau
of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms said that the semi-automatic version of the
AK-47 would be covered by the ban in the crime bill, which covers 19 types of
semi-automatic weapons. The spokesman also said that shotguns like the Ruger Red
Label would be unaffected by the ban.

SCORECARD The ad is a tough response to a tough attack: Mr. Kerrey deals head-on
with the charge that his support for a ban on semi-automatic weapons was a
sellout of Nebraska hunters and gun owners. By word and message, he is trying to
tell hunters that he is one of them. And, as is often the case with Mr. Kerrey,
his background as a veteran of the Vietnam War, where he lost a leg and won the
Medal of Honor, gives a political argument an emotional punch.   ROBIN TONER

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              78 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 27, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE GUN DEBATE;
Senator Decides to Fight N.R.A.'s Fire With Fire

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26


There is a fierce advertising war over guns being fought in much of the West. On
one side is Charlton Heston and the National Rifle Association; on the other is
a group of senators, like Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, which is fighting back with a
vengeance.

The battle largely stems from the passage of the crime bill, which included a
ban on 19 types of semi-automatic weapons. Or, as Mr. Heston, a spokesman for
the N.R.A., puts it in the advertisement against Mr. Kerrey: "You said you
wouldn't vote for gun bans. But you went to Washington and voted for the first
Federal gun ban in American history."

These are not the kind of charges that go unanswered in much of the West and
Midwest, where, as Steve Jarding, the Senator's press secretary, says, "Most
people of the male persuasion, if they don't hunt, someone in their family
does." Mr. Kerrey, a Democrat, was maintaining a lead over his Republican
opponent, Jan Stoney, in a poll published by the Lincoln Journal this week, but
in this jittery year no incumbent is taking anything for granted.

So Mr. Kerrey, in blue plaid shirt and baseball cap, armed with a shotgun,
answered back in a commercial filmed on a shooting range. It shows Mr. Kerrey
taking aim, hitting a clay pigeon, then turning to the camera to talk about the
difference between guns used to hunt game and guns used to hunt people, like the
AK-47, versions of which were used by communist forces in the Vietnam War.

Or, as Mr. Kerrey puts it, the time when "people hunted me." The Nebraska
Democrat won the Medal of Honor and lost his leg while serving as a Navy Seal in
Vietnam.

Mr. Jarding said: "A lot of people in Nebraska and the Midwest are hunters, but
most people by far have never seen one of these things, much less hunted with
them. So there is a sense where you want to hold up one of those and say, 'This
is what we're talking about.' "

Moreover, the press secretary said, the rifle association's advertisement was
"asking for him to come back in your face."

Similar versions of the advertisement are being aired in Nevada, against Senator
Richard H. Bryan; in Oklahoma, against Representative Dave McCurdy, the
Democratic candidate for Senate; in Washington State, against Speaker Thomas S.
Foley, and in several other areas.

Mr. Bryan responded with a spot that showed his vote being defended by a local
law-enforcement official -- and an N.R.A. member. "Dick Bryan is a strong
supporter of our right to bear arms," the official says. "His fight against
crime targets criminals, not gun owners."

Mr. Bryan's media consultant, Bill Knapp, said: "The unfortunate thing about TV
politics is if you don't come in with a different perspective, people will
believe it. So we're responding."

A spokesman for Mr. Foley's campaign said the campaign had not yet aired a
response ad, but that the Speaker was vigorously addressing the issue on the
campaign trail, arguing that the guns that were banned were "designed to kill
lots of people very quickly."

Tanya Metaksa, chief lobbyist for the N.R.A., said: "This is not about hunting.
It's about freedom and the rights of law-abiding Americans to own guns." Asked
how they chose their target states, Mrs. Metaksa replied, "Our members are
incensed at the vote that took place in the Senate and the House, and these were
races that we thought we could make a difference in."

She added that Mr. Heston donated his time to the rifle association because "he
believes in our point of view."

Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who is a leading
advocate of the ban, argued that the N.R.A. strategy was "hardball," but might
prove counterproductive. "They'll turn off members, and even their friends, and
they'll end up with a very hard-core group, maybe a fourth of the Congress, and
push everyone else to the side that argues there should be some sane laws on
gun," Mr. Schumer said. He noted that many of the people being targeted by the
rifle association were swing voters.

But Mrs. Metaksa said her organization was responding to its membership. "Our
members are energized and want us to be out there doing something," she said. "I
think that in many of these races, gun owners are going to turn out and going to
make a difference."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              79 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. Yang Dezhi, 83, Dies; Was Chinese Army Chief

BYLINE: By RICHARD PEREZ-PENA

SECTION: Section D;  Page 20;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 388 words


Gen. Yang Dezhi, a Chinese military leader for more than half a century and a
former Army Chief of Staff who opposed the Tiananmen Square crackdown, died on
Tuesday, the official New China News Agency reported. He was 83. The cause of
death was not given.

General Yang's military career stretched from the creation of the Communist army
in 1927 to China's invasion of Vietnam in 1979. He made his name as a daring
military leader during the fabled Long March and was a top commander of Chinese
forces during the Korean War.

He also proved skilled in politics, avoiding repeated purges, making a
successful transition from the reign of Mao Zedong to that of Deng Xiaoping and
eventually rising to the Communist Party Politburo.

General Yang was born in 1910 into a poor family in the town of Liling in Hunan
Province. He joined the Communists in 1927, when Mao began the uprising in Hunan
that marked the founding of the Communist army.

In 1934 and 1935 he commanded a vanguard unit in the Long March, the Communist
Army's 6,000-mile retreat before the advancing Nationalist forces. He
established his reputation in May 1935, when the Communist army was threatened
with being pinned down by the Nationalists along the Dadu River in Sichuan
Province. General Yang's unit surprised the Nationalist forces on one bank of
the river, seizing the only ferry, then crossed and defeated the Nationalists on
the other side, clearing the way for the Communist army's escape.

He moved steadily up the military and political ladders, becoming a member of
the Communist Party Central Committee in 1969.

In 1979, General Yang was deputy commander of Chinese forces in their brief
incursion into Vietnam, and the failures of that venture did not appear to hurt
his fortunes. The next year, he was named Chief of Staff of the Army, a post he
held for seven years. He was on the Politburo from 1982 to 1987.

As Chief of Staff, General Yang oversaw deep cuts in the size of the military,
over the objections of hard-liners, many of them holdovers from the Mao era.

In May of 1989, two weeks before the army crushed demonstrations in Tiananmen
Square, General Yang was one of seven retired military leaders to sign a letter
warning Prime Minister Li Peng against a crackdown and saying the military
should not enter the city.

NAME: Yang Dezhi

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Yang Dezhi (Camera Press, 1982)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              80 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 30, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 862 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     7   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2     6   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's
           mysterious disappearance.

 3     5   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman
           and for her first lover.

 4    24   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 5    20   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 6     6   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a
           troubled twin sister.

 7     1   A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux,
           Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four
           romantic stories.

 8    18   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 9     6   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson.
           (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars"
           trilogy.

 10   15   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 11   11   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes --
           on a Mexican ranch.

 12*   5   HIDDEN FIRES, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $5.99.) A 1982
           novel about a Texas preacher's daughter who is tricked into
           marriage.

 13    9   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           mysterious death.

 14*   1   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three
           American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German
           activities in 1942.

 15    2   THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty,
           $6.99.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy
           saga.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     6   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     7   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio personality.

 3     5   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters
           reflect on their lives.

 4    42   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 5     9   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           Monotheism over 4,000 years.

 6*   573  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 7     1   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More
           comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 8     1   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 9*    1   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 10   23   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.

 11    4   FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A
           1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of
           hospitals.

 12*   5   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the Great Plains.

 13*  89   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) A memoir.

 14*   1   JOHN CHANCELLOR MAKES ME CRY, by Anne Rivers Siddons.
           (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Essays on life by an Atlanta
           novelist.

 15   24   GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Vintage, $10.) A
           memoir of mental illness.

 16*  42   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 17*   4   LOVE CAN BUILD A BRIDGE, by Naomi Judd. (Fawcett, $6.99.)
           The country singer's memoirs.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     4   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2    189  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 3    10   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           slow-witted wanderer through history.

 4     1   THE OLD FARMER'S ALMANAC 1995. (Yankee Publishing, $3.95.)
           The 203d annual edition of a collection of facts and
           counsel.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 15, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              81 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 52;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 949 words


CHRISTMAS IN JULY: The Life and Art of Preston Sturges
By Diane Jacobs. University of California, $18.
This book celebrates one of Hollywood's first writer-directors, a man who
supervised the filming of his own screenplays long before Woody Allen. Sturges's
heyday in the 1940's produced "The Lady Eve" and "Hail the Conquering Hero" as
well as the film that gives the book its title. This is "by far the best
critical biography . . . of one of America's most treasured makers of film
comedy," Peter Bogdanovich said here in 1992.
BAND OF ANGELS


By Robert Penn Warren.
Louisiana State University, $12.95.
Originally published in 1955, this novel is narrated by Amantha Starr, a young
black woman who doesn't realize she was born a slave until her father dies and
she is forced to face a future as someone else's property. The New York Times's
reviewer, Arthur Mizener, said, "There is certainly no one writing in America
today who can dazzle us as Robert Penn Warren can by the way he tells such a
story; he brings to it the most penetrating and most beautifully disciplined
historical imagination we have." Louisiana State University is also restoring to
print the works of other noted writers in its "Voices of the South" series. THE
WIDOWS OF THORNTON, by Peter Taylor ($11.95), consists of eight stories and a
play about black and white families who once lived in the town of Thornton,
Tenn. The pieces are "outwardly simple, but psychologically complex and
powerful," F. H. Lyell said in The New York Times in 1954. THE GAUDY PLACE, by
Fred Chappell ($9.95), refers to a rundown area of Braceboro, N.C., where two
desperate teen-agers -- a gambler and a prostitute -- conspire with a local con
man. In 1973 our reviewer, Jonathan Yardley, called the author "a serious and
uncommonly skillful writer."
CHICAGO '68
By David Farber. University of Chicago, $14.95.
The author analyzes the political climate that led to the violent street
protests during the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968, noting
that the self-destructive tendencies of the New Left and the blue-collar rage of
the city police force made confrontation inevitable. Mr. Farber "meticulously
dissects the motivations of all the principals," Nelson Lichtenstein said here
in 1988. One of the Chicago protesters was James Miller, author of "DEMOCRACY IS
IN THE STREETS": From Port Huron to the Siege of Chicago (Harvard University,
$14.95). Mr. Miller's book reconstructs the beginnings of the New Left,
concentrating on the men and women who drafted its seminal manifesto in 1962:
the Port Huron Statement. In 1987 our reviewer, Hendrik Hertzberg, said, "He
makes a fine guide -- accurate, sympathetic, critical, learned." The birthplaces
of the student movement are the focus of CAMPUS WARS: The Peace Movement at
American State Universities in the Vietnam Era, by Kenneth J. Heineman (New York
University, $17.95). This "useful book examines the outside forces . . . that
led to antiwar protests on campus," Herbert Mitgang said in The New York Times
last year. The legacy of the 1960's is carried on in NO MORE NICE GIRLS:
Countercultural Essays, by Ellen Willis (Wesleyan/University Press of New
England, $16.95). These pieces, most published in the 1980's, deal largely with
feminism. Last year our reviewer, Claudia Ricci, praised the author's "rich
historical perspective."
THE TANGO PLAYER
By Christoph Hein. Translated by Philip Boehm.
Northwestern University, $13.95.
This novel explores the emotional state of Hans-Peter Dallow, an East German
academic trying to reconstruct his life after nearly two years of imprisonment
in the late 1960's. His crime? Playing the piano at a club while a seditious
skit was performed. "Mr. Hein's work is a skeptical and troubled inquiry into
the nature of freedom," Rand Richards Cooper said here in 1992. Northwestern
University has also reissued a fictional view of totalitarianism, THE FOUNDATION
PIT, by Andrei Platonov, translated by Mirra Ginsburg ($12.95). Voshchev, the
novel's unemployed Russian hero, joins a group of workmen digging the foundation
for a huge building that represents Stalinism at its height. In 1974 our
reviewer of an earlier translation, Paul Theroux, called it "obviously a
masterpiece."
JOSEPHINE HERBST
By Elinor Langer. Northeastern University, $14.95.
The author re-creates the changing world of the 1920's and 30's, a period that
Josephine Herbst, a novelist and essayist active in left-wing politics, both
witnessed and wrote about. The result is "a dramatically revealing biography,"
Robert Gorham Davis said here in 1984.
THE PIANO TUNER: Stories
By Peter Meinke. University of Georgia, $11.95.
The 14 pieces in this collection, which won the Flannery O'Connor Award for
Short Fiction in 1986, illustrate the potential for sudden chaos and conflict in
what appear to be well-ordered lives. One critic said the book "exhibits strong
and consistent writing throughout."
BIRD OF JOVE
By David Bruce. Texas A & M University, $13.95.
Previously out of print, this book describes the author's relationship with an
Asian golden eagle, a bird he rescued, took home to Wales and taught the ancient
art of falconry -- with his own humane modifications. This is a "hypnotic and
sometimes hair-raising interlude," Thomas Lask said in The New York Times in
1971.
HERO JESSE
By Lawrence Millman.
University Press of New England, $13.95.
The title character is a retarded adolescent boy whose fantasies of achieving
glory in the Vietnam War are translated into horrific crimes. In 1982 one critic
said the novel "wrests meaning from the very limitations of its narrator."
LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Penn Warren. (ROLLIN A. RIGGS)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              82 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Kill for Life?

BYLINE: By Lisa Belkin;   Lisa Belkin, a former Times reporter, writes
frequently about social issues and is completing a book on race relations.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 47;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6963 words


THE NEW WOMAN MEDICAL CENTER OF JACKSON, Miss., has not yet opened on this
autumn morning, when a pair of dark blue vehicles arrive. First, a midnight
Chevy pickup rolls past the seven-foot-high fence and through the opened metal
gate. It parks by the rear of the lot, near the unprepossessing white trailer
that is the temporary quarters of the United States marshals.

Moments later, a navy Crown Victoria, with tinted windows, pulls to a stop
behind the pickup. The two armed men in the front seat leave the car and are
joined by two other marshals, who have emerged from the pickup. The four form a
ring around the car's back-seat passenger, Dr. Joseph Booker Jr., the only
physician currently providing legal abortions in the state of Mississippi. His
bulletproof vest is not visible under his gray shirt, and some say he carries a
gun in his black leather waist pouch. His protectors hustle him toward the back
door of the single-story, wood-shingled clinic. Just then, a bearded man in a
rattan sun hat pops his head over the fence, boosted by the folding step stool
that he brings on protest days. His smile is downright gleeful and his voice is
taunting. The marshals barely react. They have been expecting him.

"You can come in the front door, Booker," the man yells, as the marshals rush
the doctor inside. "You don't have to kill in the back alley anymore. Haven't
you heard? You can kill on Main Street."

The marshals, the fence, the caravan of cars, the guns -- they are all here to
see that C. Roy McMillan does not kill Booker. The latest twist in the
anti-abortion movement seems to be murder, and McMillan -- a genial zealot who
dresses for his thrice-weekly protests as if for a golf game, a man whose wife
opened the first abortion clinic in Jackson but has since repented, a man who is
slapped on the back by admiring strangers when he stops for lunch -- this man is
outspoken in his belief that it is "not a sin to go out and shoot an
abortionist."

"Whatever is biblically justifiable to protect the born child is biblically
justifiable to protect the unborn child," he says. "I would warn people who are
abortionists that there may very well be people out there willing to take the
risks and make the sacrifices to do what is right."

The 51-year-old McMillan is quick to add that he has no plans to shoot anyone
himself. "I've simply made a theological, philosophical statement," he says.
"I'm not prepared to do it. I don't relish being put in an electric chair."

But that is little comfort to those defending the Jackson clinic, who describe
the tension of waiting for an assassination. "I'm afraid we know the victim, and
the killer, and probably the place," says Gail Chadwick, a journalism professor
at Jackson State University and a spokeswoman for Pro-Choice Mississippi. "What
we don't know is the date and time."

Says Sheila Moore, who trains volunteers to escort patients into the Jackson
clinic: "It wouldn't surprise me to hear it any day. It wouldn't surprise me to
hear that Roy took a shot at Booker."

ROY MCMILLAN DOES NOT REPRESENT the whole of the anti-abortion movement. His
views have been denounced by nearly every anti-abortion group, from the United
States Catholic Conference to a Right to Life group in his hometown of Jackson.
John Cardinal O'Connor of New York has said publicly that "if anyone has an urge
to kill an abortionist, let him kill me instead." In fact, it is not clear who
cringes at McMillan's kind of talk more, the abortion-rights groups who worry it
will make it harder, still, to find doctors willing to perform the procedure or
the anti-abortion groups who see sympathy for their cause dip in the wake of
violence.

It is not known how many people hold views as extreme as McMillan's. What is
known is that more than 30 people were willing to go public. Last year, a
petition circulated through the anti-abortion world praising Michael F. Griffin,
who killed Dr. David Gunn outside a Pensacola, Fla., abortion clinic with three
bullets to the back. The statement declared the "justice of taking all godly
action necessary to defend innocent human life, including the use of force."
Gunn's murder was "justifiable," the statement continued, "provided it was
carried out for the purpose of defending the lives of unborn children." Those
who signed included a convicted clinic arsonist, a convicted clinic bomber and a
priest who has been stripped of his church job -- a list of the movement's most
radical members. The second signature from the top is C. Roy McMillan.

It is too simple, therefore, to dismiss McMillan as an aberration. The
anti-abortion fight has gotten increasingly violent in recent years. Since 1977,
there have been 129 bombings and arson attacks at clinics, 200 death threats
against clinic staffers and nearly 600 recorded acts of vandalism.

The first murder, however, was not until March 1993, when Griffin killed Gunn.
Since then, two more doctors have been shot (one fatally); one escort has been
killed and his wife wounded. This summer, Dr. John Bayard Britton was shot and
killed in Pensacola. Paul Hill, a longtime friend of McMillan's, faces trial for
the murder. It was Hill who circulated the Griffin petition that McMillan
signed. That prompted the Department of Justice to look into conspiracy charges
against those who believe as McMillan and Hill do -- an investigation that
abortion-rights groups say they have requested for years -- and to send Federal
marshals to protect dozens of doctors thought to be in immediate danger.

"It's the natural progression of a social movement," says Dallas A. Blanchard,
an ordained Methodist minister and sociology professor at the University of West
Florida who is the author of three books on the anti-abortion movement. A
similar path was taken, he says, by those who fought against desegregation and
the rise of labor unions.

"They try the more normal legal channels, changing laws, electing people," he
says, "and when that doesn't work, it escalates to more drastic action.

"It tars the entire movement. It puts them on the defensive. It weakens their
resources. Their support withers, both financial support and people support."

That McMillan raises the wrath, not only of those he's fighting against, but
also of those he's siding with seems to be fine with him. "They can agree with
me or not," he says. "They can denounce me. But they can't ignore me."

MONDAYS ARE BOOKKEEPING DAYS AT THE New Woman clinic. Tuesdays and Wednesdays
are for pregnancy tests and counseling. Abortions are performed on Thursdays,
Fridays and Saturdays. The easiest time to talk a woman out of an abortion,
McMillan says, is at the beginning of the week, when she is less likely to have
made up her mind. It becomes more difficult later in the week, when she returns
to the clinic after the 24-hour waiting period imposed in Mississippi and six
other states. McMillan usually chooses to be there on procedure days.

He estimates that during the past decade he has spent 7,000 hours protesting
abortions -- and that he has talked some 700 women out of them. When he began
his protests, there were three abortion practitioners in the city of 200,000;
now there is only one -- a situation common throughout the United States where
84 percent of counties have no abortion doctors. "We found out where they lived;
we picketed their homes," McMillan says. "We made it very uncomfortable to be an
abortionist in Jackson."

On this September morning, as on most mornings, he arrives at 8:30, just in time
to shout at Booker. McMillan then prepares his materials on the grassy strip
alongside the clinic fence: a dozen or more homemade posters, some with
four-color photos of dismembered fetuses; a selection of pamphlets; business
cards from an anti-abortion pregnancy crisis clinic.

As he sets up, passing drivers honk and give him the thumbs up sign. He is a
well-known figure here. There are 12 pages of churches listed in the Jackson
telephone book, compared with only 10 pages of restaurants, and McMillan's
strident anti-abortion message is apparently well received. "This here is the
Bible Belt," he says, sweeping his hand along Briarwood Drive, past the entrance
to I-55, the Amoco station and the La Quinta Inn motel. "This is not the
Republic of Mario Cuomo, not the Left Coast of the fruits and the nuts. There
are God-fearing Christians down here."

Every so often, however, a driver raises a different finger. "Ma'am," he shouts,
in a sugary drawl, "I'm not No. 1; God is No. 1. If you're trying to mock and
insult me, look where your finger's pointing."

McMillan seems to have a radar for which cars are going to turn into the clinic.
When he spots one, his face darkens, his shoulders square, he picks up his
pamphlets and strides to the center of the driveway. He intends to confront,
challenge, change some minds.

The first patient of the day arrives in a faded red pickup, a pale young man at
the wheel. She's a teen-age girl, holding her long blond hair over her face.
McMillan and the two other activists with him race toward the car. "Sir, please
help her help her little baby," McMillan shouts at the closed driver's- side
window. He manages to slip a pamphlet under the windshield wiper before the
pickup rolls past.

Next, a gray-haired woman drives in, with a younger woman at her side. A toddler
sits in the back seat. "Ma'am, if you're pregnant and considering an abortion,
please let me help you," McMillan yells. "The baby in your womb is as alive as
the one there in your car."

To two teen-age girls in a Mustang: "You're always going to remember how you
walked away and didn't let anyone talk to you."

To a couple in an aging station wagon: "Ma'am, are you a Christian?" When the
car is out of earshot he says: "That always gets them. Everyone in Mississippi
thinks they're a Christian."

The shouting has been going on for 15 minutes when a white, late-model
Thunderbird arrives with an older woman, a younger woman and a 3-year-old boy.
McMillan presses his face toward the driver's closed window. Flustered, the
driver inches the car to the right, trying to move away. He keeps pressing; she
keeps inching. She puts her foot on the gas and there is a loud crash of metal
hitting metal. Her right bumper has left a large dent in the clinic's gate and
there are shards of orange plastic lying on the grass.

Once parked inside the lot, the woman gets out of the car and leans on the hood,
shaken. McMillan seems almost pleased. "Maybe it will upset them enough that
they'll reconsider," he says. "They were more concerned about the damn post and
the car than about the little child that might be in the womb." As it turns out,
the woman was driving her baby sitter for a pregnancy test and did not know this
was an abortion clinic.

WHEN ROY MCMILLAN TALKS ABOUT his life, he falls into the patter of one who has
told a story many times before. "I was abandoned in a shoe box at birth, naked,
in the middle of the night, in the middle of winter, on the doorstep of a church
in Alexandria, La.," he begins in a conversation over lunch. "That was 1943.
February the 25th. The pastor took me in. The church fed me, clothed me, housed
me and healed me."

He was adopted before he was a year old, he says, by the McMillan family of
Kosciusko, Miss., a town of 7,000 about an hour north of Jackson. His adoptive
mother, he explains, had been told she could not have any more children, and she
and her husband contacted the adoption agency because they did not want their
daughter to be an only child. His childhood, as he describes it, was blessedly
innocent: "We weren't using drugs; they were not available. We weren't drinking
beer or whisky; they weren't legal in my town. There were no pornographic book
stores, no topless bars. Gambling was illegal, and I never remember anybody
gambling. We were not sexually active. Nobody was getting pregnant."

The story of McMillan's birth and of his childhood is what attracted him, he
says, to the fight against abortion. ("If abortion had been legal, I probably
would have been aborted in the summer of '42, by a mother who was so desperate
to abandon her child.") It is a story he recounts every time he is arrested.
("They ask me my date of birth and I say I don't know my date of birth, but I
can tell you the day I was found abandoned in a shoe box, naked. It kind of
touches the arresting officer.") It is his reason for rejecting abortion even in
cases of rape or incest. ("I could have been conceived in rape. I could have
been conceived in incest. I have no way to know.")

It is a perfect story for his crusade. Much of it, however, is not true.

"Roy knows who his Mama is," says Della Sanders McMillan, 80, who adopted Roy
when he was an infant. "His mama is kin to my husband. I can't tell you any
more; it's a secret. She lives here in town. She's married. She has other
children."

Yes, baby Roy was left in a box on the steps of a church, Mrs. McMillan says.
But he was not naked. ("That's ridiculous. Where on earth did you get that
idea?") And he was not abandoned. "She left him there, but she made sure we knew
it. The mother made sure they knew who his kinfolks were. The welfare department
in Alexandria called us and said to come and get him."

McMillan's natural mother was someone he knew all his life, his adopted mother
says, although he did not learn she was his mother until he was an adult. When
asked if that was true, McMillan says, "I started my pro-life work with that
story and I didn't want to change the story in the middle."

As for the innocent days of her son's youth, where no one had sex or became
pregnant outside of marriage, Mrs. McMillan says: "Nonsense. They did it, but we
didn't talk about it. There was drinking, too. The kids would sneak around and
drink, but we pretended we didn't see." Roy too? "Why certainly he did," Mrs.
McMillan says with a laugh.

Asked if she is proud of her son and his role at the center of the abortion
fight in Jackson, Mrs. McMillan does not hestitate. "I'm very proud of him," she
says. "I don't agree with him, that's all. I think there's some cases where
abortion is O.K. An unmarried girl, her future and all that. I don't look at
things like Roy does."

And what of her son's belief that it is moral to kill a doctor who performs
abortions? "I don't believe he would say anything like that. I don't believe in
any kind of murder. No. Uh uh. Thou shalt not kill."

OUTSIDE THE NEW WOMAN CLINIC, McMillan is flipping through a stack of posters.
There are different slogans for different purposes, different moods. His fellow
protesters prefer signs like the one with a cherubic baby and the slogan
"Abortion: Ultimate Child Abuse." But McMillan leans toward more graphic
posters, like the picture of a decapitated seventh-month fetus.

"I'm a little more offensive and challenging than most," he says.

Even fellow protesters think he is sometimes too challenging. "Roy is very
compassionate, very caring, but. . . ." says Donna Brevick, 26, who had four
abortions before she says she changed her life around and married a pastor four
years ago. Now she often brings her 3-year-old son to clinic protests. The
toddler stands at the gate and calls out to passing cars: "No go in there.
Please no kill your baby."

Brevick's first two abortions were when she was 15 and she wonders whether
McMillan's approach would have affected her back then. "To be honest with you,
if Roy McMillan were standing out there, I think I would have run scared from
him. A sidewalk counselor does have to be careful in their approach."

McMillan says there was a time, maybe a decade ago, when he first took on the
anti-abortion cause full time, that he might have agreed. But gentility, he has
concluded, has not stopped abortion. "Without agitation," he says, "there is
stagnation." It is one of his many slogans. He picks up the poster of the
headless infant and faces it out, toward passing traffic.

SOME OF THE MORE SURPRISING FACTS ABOUT Roy McMillan have to do with his wife. A
soft-spoken woman, with an almost childlike manner, she was Dr. Beverly Smith
when she moved to Jackson with her first husband and their three children in
1974, the year after Roe v. Wade, the Supreme Court's landmark abortion
decision. As part of her obstetrics training at the Mayo Clinic, she spent six
months at Cook County Hospital in Chicago in 1969, where she cared for 15 or 20
women each night who had been given incomplete illegal abortions. So when she
was approached by several Jackson social workers and clergymen to staff the
city's first abortion clinic, she agreed enthusiastically.

"I thought the Supreme Court decision was wonderful," she says now. "I thought
it sounded like sanity had arrived. At that point, I was very much in the
woman's lib frame of mind."

The clinic did well. Dr. McMillan did not. She says she found herself
increasingly depressed, barely able to drag herself to work, thinking constantly
about suicide. She turned first to self-help books and, eventually, to religion.
The more she read, Dr. McMillan says, the more difficult it became to perform
abortions. Finally, one evening in 1977, it became impossible. She remembers
completing what was to be her last abortion and removing the cotton trap from
the suction machine. She then walked to a nearby sink and did as she was trained
to do -- check that all the fetal parts were accounted for, "two arms and two
legs, the spine, the thorax and the skull." If any parts were missing, it meant
the abortion was incomplete and she would have to go back and find them so the
patient did not develop an infection.

"My youngest son at the time was about 2 or 3," she says, "and he was always
going around showing us his muscles. And there I was, sifting through the stuff
in the cotton trap, and there was this little arm, with this perfect little
bicep muscle on it. I thought, 'Five minutes, ago this was all together in one
piece.' I thought, 'I don't want to do this anymore.' And I didn't."

Dr. McMillan resigned from the clinic in 1978. She got divorced, joined a
Protestant church, and started speaking publicly against abortion. In 1982, she
spoke at a local church and one of the members of her audience was Roy McMillan.
He had left Kosciusko years earlier, first to major in journalism at the
University of Mississippi, in the hope of taking charge of the string of local
newspapers his adoptive parents owned, and then to spend two years in Vietnam.
He lived in New York City for several years after the Army, taking ads over the
telephone and attending, but not graduating from, Columbia Journalism School.
When McMillan decided he did not want to return to Kosciusko, his father retired
and sold the family newspapers. McMillan, then in his late 20's, moved to
Jackson and worked in public relations and advertising for an insurance company.
He married, had a daughter and then divorced.

It was Beverly Smith's speech against abortion 12 years ago that launched Roy
McMillan's ongoing fight. Before then, he says, "I had never really thought
about abortion; nobody talked about it here.

"I was so touched by that presentation, I wanted to know her. I was single. I
was raising a little girl by myself. We became friends. Then we became husband
and wife. Then we became lovers. In that order."

During the early years of their marriage, Dr. McMillan, largely at her husband's
prompting, changed the way she practiced medicine. She had long since stopped
referring patients for abortions or prescribing intrauterine devices as birth
control, since they often do not prevent conception. But Roy felt she should go
further and stop prescribing birth control of any kind for unmarried women.

"She was trying to keep them from becoming pregnant," McMillan says. "I said,
'Hey, God loves babies so much he uses fornicators and adulterers often to make
them, and you're participating in their sin by trying to take away the
consequences.' "

Says his wife: "Roy is a very uncomfortable person to be around. He says the
obvious. Thinking it over, I concluded he was right, that I should not be
encouraging unmarried women in a life style that, if I believe in the
Scriptures, will separate them from God for eternity. So I started not doing
that."

Then her husband's attentions turned to sterilization. "The only reason a
divorced or single woman wants her tubes tied is so she can fornicate without
getting pregnant," Dr. McMillan says. She stopped performing that procedure,
too. Now she prescribes no birth control whatsoever and advises patients to use
natural family planning. She is strict in the nonmedical advice she gives as
well. One patient remembers being told, "Stay with your man, even if he cheats
on you, even if he abuses you."

So far, Dr. McMillan says, her beliefs have not hurt her practice. During the
past year, she moved her office to a sprawling new suite next door to the River
Oaks Hospital, where everything is turquoise and mauve, brass and porcelain. The
walls are filled with needlepointed selections of Scripture. There is a
three-month wait for a gynecological appointment.

SHORTLY AFTER MCMILLAN'S encounter with the woman whose car hit the clinic
fence, another car pulls into the clinic with two black women in the front seat.
Then one with a black woman and a black man. Another with two black women. And
another. And another. Roy McMillan switches signs again. This one reads:
"Abortion Is Black Genocide."

One of McMillan's favorite analogies is between abortion and slavery. In his
view, the slaves are like unborn children, with no rights and no control over
their own destinies. Slavery is an example of a system, he says, that was legal
but was not right. "Born people" making it legal to kill "unborn people," he
argues, is as unjust as white people voting to enslave black people.

Consistent with that theme, McMillan sees himself as an "abortion abolitionist."
His hero is John Brown, who was hanged in 1859 for trying to arm slaves at
Harpers Ferry, W.Va. "I'd rather be called an abortion abolitionist than a
pro-lifer or than an anti-abortionist," he says. "The abolitionists weren't just
writing about slavery being wrong, they weren't just praying, they weren't just
trying to change the laws; they were actually coming to the South and organizing
underground railroads. They were persecuted. They were jailed. They were tarred
and feathered. But they were firm in their resolution."

Another of McMillan's constant comparisons is between abortion and the
Holocaust. When "Schindler's List" was playing in Jackson, he stood outside the
movie theater, passing out literature.

"Would it have been wrong to go into Auschwitz in the middle of the night and
burn the building down knowing they were ready to bring in the next group of
Jews in the morning?" he asks, his voice rising. "No, it wouldn't be wrong. It
wouldn't have been wrong to have blowed it up if you knew there were security
guards in there. Or to shoot the guards when they came to work to do the
killing. If I were to be beheaded or decapitated, and I was innocent of a crime,
I would want somebody to take some measures to protect me. Just like if I'd been
a Jew in Nazi Germany."

McMillan's comparisons infuriate his opponents.

"Slavery was about denying people control of their lives. This is about giving
women control over their lives," says Booker, who is black, and who refused to
directly discuss McMillan for this article because "I don't want to give that
lunatic more attention."

Not content to limit himself to the mine fields of race and religion, McMillan's
other favorite themes are about men protecting their families and women
listening to their men.

"There's no one I know who, if their wife were being mutilated, would walk over
there and say: 'Sir, you're doing a sinful act. I'm going to lay a tract down
beside you, and when you get through raping and maiming my wife, please take it
home and read it and know that I'll be home praying for you.' "

About three months ago, McMillan says, a couple arrived at the clinic. The man
was "a big guy, big black guy, looked like a football linebacker, and he's
walking about 10 feet behind her." He remembers calling out, "Sir, be a real
man, protect your child." Imitating the man's response, he says: "Ain't nothing
I can do about it.

"I said, 'Then you ought to change underwear with her. She ought to have the
boxer shorts and you ought to be wearing the pink lace panties.' " A few minutes
later, the man came out of the clinic and walked toward McMillan. "I thought he
was going to beat me up, but he said, 'No, I want to talk.' I said: 'Sir, you're
220 pounds. You can handle her.' He went back in, he grabbed her by the arm and
dragged her out, put her in the car and drove away. That's appropriate to do if
you save a life."

ROY MCMILLAN CREDITS Paul Hill for shaping his current view that it is
justifiable to kill a doctor who performs abortions. In the early 1980's, long
before Hill was accused of murdering in Pensacola, McMillan was a student at the
Reformed Theological Seminary in Jackson. At the time, McMillan's involvement in
the anti-abortion movement consisted of sending out news releases promoting
fund-raising and educational dinners and wondering why reporters rarely
attended. Hill, in contrast, "was the first person in Jackson who actually went
to the abortion clinics," McMillan recalls. "He kept saying, 'If we know where
or when they're killing people, we should go to that place and do what we can to
convince the people to stop.' "

At first, McMillan says, he was turned off by Hill's approach. "When you think
of picketing, you think of blue collar people, and we're pretty antilabor around
here."

But one afternoon, McMillan went to take photos of Hill's protests for a monthly
newsletter and was impressed by what he saw. "I watched some lady talk somebody
out of having an abortion, a teen-age girl," he remembers. So he started joining
the protests on Saturdays.

Once McMillan had decided it was acceptable to picket and "sidewalk counsel," he
says he had to decide whether he was willing to trespass, as Hill and others,
particularly the growing Operation Rescue movement, were advocating. Then one
Saturday, while marching with a sign outside a clinic, he caught the ear of a
young woman. "I knew this little girl didn't want to have an abortion," he says.
"I felt in my heart if there was a scene inside that place she wouldn't do it.

"I went in with this girl. I just sat down beside her on the floor. She was
crying and the nurses were running around. What do you do when a guy who was
outside picketing is now in your lobby? She walked out with me. Two days later,
I was arrested at my house. My next seven arrests or so were for going into
abortion clinics in Jackson with girls."

Having decided to trespass, McMillan's next psychological hurdle was malicious
mischief. Eventually he decided that was O.K., too, and he claims to have filled
the locks of abortion clinics with Super Glue "20 or 30 times. I call it the
'Super Glue Angel.' "

At every step, McMillan says, he always asked himself two questions: Is it
moral? Will it hurt the anti-abortion cause? For these earlier choices, the
first answer was easy. He was certain that breaking trespass and property damage
laws was justified for what he saw as a far greater good. The second question
was more difficult -- would a reputation of lawlessness keep the movement from
swaying public opinion and achieving its legislative goals?

"I kept coming back to this," he says of his eventual conclusion that what
others think does not matter. "Would I care about strategy for the movement if
they were at the front door of my house to kill my children? No. I wouldn't give
a damn about the movement. I wouldn't give a damn about public opinion."

Then, in March of last year, McMillan heard that Michael Griffin had killed
Gunn. Local reporters began calling, asking for his opinion. At first, he
refused to comment, because he had not decided what his opinion was.

"I was not one that jumped on the bandwagon and said this is sin," he says. "But
I wasn't prepared to give my public support, not at that time."

Griffin's act came at a time when McMillan was beginning to believe that the
anti-abortion movement had failed. An abortion-rights President had been elected
and legislation -- enacted this spring -- was in the works. The Freedom of
Access to Clinic Entrances laws would make it a Federal offense to restrict
access to abortions, punishable by up to six months in prison for a first
offense. Protesters willing to face the often-sympathetic judicial systems in
their hometowns would be far less willing, McMillan believed, to risk Federal
prison terms.

In addition, the Supreme Court has since ruled that anti-abortion groups fall
under the purview of Federal racketeering laws and that "buffer zones" to dim
the noise and presence of protests around clinics did not violate the First
Amendment.

Even when the penalties were fairly light and the court rulings limited, the
protest movement never reached the heights that McMillan had envisioned. "I
thought that tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of people would say this
is a low-risk way to defy the Government, stop the killing and make our point,"
he says. "It didn't happen. So there's no doubt in my mind that the sit-in
movement's over. It's old hat; it's old news; it's had its day in the sun."

That's when he started thinking about murder. For several months after Gunn was
killed, McMillan wrestled with this new tactic but did not go public with his
thoughts. Then he received a letter from Paul Hill containing the petition
calling Michael Griffin's actions "justifiable."

McMillan says he signed the document with little hesitation. "How can I condemn
someone who would do for a stranger what I would do for my own family?" he says.

McMillan says he is not willing to act on his beliefs and shoot a doctor
himself. And he worries that this makes him weak. "Is it a sin," he asks, "not
to do what you think is right?"

Not long after McMillan signed the petition, Paul Hill shot and killed Britton.
McMillan believes Hill was right and has signed a similar petition in support of
his old friend.

"What's supposed to separate us from nonbelievers is what we're willing to do
for a stranger," McMillan says. "So in that respect, Paul has my admiration and
I honor him.

"What I don't understand is why he did it publicly. I think if I were to do
something like that, I would do it clandestinely. Why go to jail for the rest of
your life for doing something that you could do and not go to jail for. That
surprised me about Paul. Why would a person do it publicly, when maybe he could
have done it clandestinely with a high-powered rifle in his [Britton's]
neighborhood."

ONE OF THE FIRST THINGS McMillan makes clear upon introducing himself is that he
is not just a lone protester. He is the founder and director of the Christian
Action Group, which advocates active intervention to close down abortion
clinics. The group is not incorporated, McMillan explains, because it was formed
"to do something illegal" -- namely, blockade abortion clinics -- "and if you
have corporations you have to have boards of directors and get permission." In
the eight years since he founded the group, he says he has accumulated a mailing
list of 5,000 names. In a typical month, he says, that list brings him $1,000 in
contributions.

"I use it all for the pro-life movement," he says. "Like I tell everybody, my
wife makes enough money that I don't have to live off" the contributions.
McMillan says he was fired from his job at an insurance company eight years ago
for anti-abortion activities and has since devoted himself full time to his
protests. Sometimes people drive by the clinic, he says, and yell that he should
"get a job." He points out that, were the roles reversed, no one would think
twice. "If Beverly and I make the decision that I'm going to do this, what right
does anyone have to question our personal choice?"

Much of the McMillans' money seems to be spent helping women whom Roy talks out
of having abortions. The staff at Beverly McMillan's office is used to his
arriving out of nowhere, with a pregnant woman at his side, announcing that he
has promised they will help with her medical care.

"The joke in Jackson is if you want to see Dr. McMillan, you couldn't get into
her if you just called," he says. "But if you went to an abortion clinic, met
her husband and said, 'I'm thinking about an abortion,' he will get you in and
it will probably be for free."

Trish Moon is one such woman. Seven years ago, she was pregnant, unmarried and
out of work. The father of her child was married to someone else. She called a
pregnancy hot line, thinking it was an abortion clinic, when instead it was a
counseling center run by an anti-abortion organization. When Moon said she could
not afford to see a doctor, she was put in touch with Roy McMillan, who in turn
contacted his wife. Not only did Beverly McMillan provide free prenatal care;
the couple let Moon live in their house for several months after her son was
born, bought her an air-conditioner and gave her their old car, a Volkswagon
Rabbit, when they bought a new one. Her married lover has since become her
husband. Beverly and Roy McMillan were invited to the wedding, but they couldn't
make it.

Not all of Roy's McMillan's stories have such endings, however. Leah Lehman
hitchhiked 100 miles from her home in Greenwood, Miss., to the New Woman clinic
some six years ago in order to have an abortion. Her two children were in foster
care for reasons she declines to discuss and she was in the middle of getting a
divorce. Her soon-to-be-ex-husband was not the father of her unborn child.

Close to Jackson, a friend of McMillan's gave her a ride, learned her plans and
drove her to his home instead of the clinic. He showed her some photographs of a
3-month-old fetus, then took her to a pregnancy counseling center to see some
videos. "By then, I was really wishing I had gone for the abortion," Lehman
says. "But he had made me late for the appointment, so I couldn't go that day.
So Roy drove me home."

All through the two-hour ride, McMillan talked about the evils of abortion. "I
never had a man be so pushy before. When we got to my house he said he wanted to
show me something. He went to the back of the van and got this thing of baby
parts sealed in a kind of plastic. I couldn't erase that out of my mind."

Soon McMillan had contacted Lehman's mother and her pastor, asking them to
dissuade her from rescheduling the abortion. She says she never really decided
not to have it. She just kept listening to McMillan and soon she was too far
along in her pregnancy. Roy and Beverly let her live at their home for a year.
Beverly provided all her medical care. They lent her $1,500 when she needed
dental work and she paid them back by cleaning their bathrooms. They helped her
regain custody of her two other children.

Despite all that Roy McMillan did for her, Lehman says today: "I just don't like
him. He tells everyone how to live their lives and sometimes it isn't the right
way for them." In recent months, she has lost all three of her children to the
foster-care system. In September, McMillan came and bailed her out of jail on a
drunken driving charge.

The most universal comments of women who know McMillan are also troubling, given
how often he describes his work as being motivated by respect for women, whom he
believes are risking their physical and emotional health by having abortions.

"He's a lech, hundred percent," says one woman whom he helped. She and other
women describe times when McMillan has touched them or spoken to them in ways
that made them uncomfortable.

It is an attitude evident not only to those he persuades to keep their babies.
During an interview for this article, he says: "Pro-abortionists say it isn't a
person, it's just a glob of cells. Well, we all began as a glob of cells." He
pauses and looks his interviewer over. "And I really like the way your globs
have developed."

McMillan sees nothing wrong with such comments and says they reflect no
disrespect to women. "I've always admired beautiful women," he says. "Women like
me because my tolerance is low. I think all women are beautiful."

And what does his wife think of that? "She doesn't think anything. It isn't
anything for us to talk about."

SHEILA MOORE COMES TO THE NEW Woman clinic on Saturdays, wearing comfortable
jeans, a gray T-shirt that says "Clinic Defense Team" and a bright orange vest,
so that patients can tell she is on their side. After a patient drives past Roy
McMillan and his fellow protesters, Moore walks over to the car, as she has
trained dozens of other escorts to do over the years.

"Hi," she says. "I'm a volunteer here at the clinic and I'm here to walk you to
the door and help you protect your privacy." As shouts come from the other side
of the fence, she usually adds: "They're just here to mind other people's
business. Please don't feel you have to be polite to them."

Those like Moore, who view McMillan from inside the parking lot, think he has
become more of a threat in recent months. His language is bolder, they say, and
his actions seem more reckless. Until recently, they say, he would tone down his
act whenever a camera came on -- be it a local television camera or one of the
video recorders that the escorts sometimes use. Now, the camera does not seem to
faze him. "He's always been out there," Moore says. "He's always been shouting
things, but he's stepped it up a notch."

Gail Chadwick agrees: "He has evolved over the past year from a guy who was
fairly benign, almost a comic figure. We don't look at him that way anymore."

The day after Britton was shot, Booker's security guard says he heard McMillan
shout, "You could be next, Booker." McMillan says he doesn't remember making the
comment, and if he did, he says, he didn't mean it as a threat.

Even if McMillan does not act on his beliefs, there are those who worry that he
is a threat nonetheless. "I don't know if Roy McMillan will do this or not,"
says Michele Arocha Allen, spokeswoman for the National Right to Life Committee
in Washington. But his words, she says, "could lead someone to do something they
otherwise might not do."

In the parking lot of the clinic, rumors move quickly. A few months ago, word
spread that McMillan had a scar on the back of his neck, the result of a
recently excised tumor. The cancer had spread, the story went, and would soon
kill him. "That concerned everybody," Moore says. "If he had nothing to lose, he
wouldn't think twice" about shooting Booker.

McMillan confirms that he did in fact have a cancerous growth removed, but that
his doctor has told him his prognosis is excellent.

Another rumor circulating through the clinic lot is that McMillan recently tried
to buy a gun -- a report he vigorously denies. "That's just as preposterous and
outrageous a thing as I have ever heard," he says. He does not need a gun, he
says, because he already owns three in a state where no registration is
necessary to purchase a gun, just to carry one.

McMillan is equally adamant about talk among volunteers that there is a
conspiracy to commit murder among those who signed the petitions.
Abortion-rights leaders, particularly Eleanor Smeal of the Feminist Majority
Foundation, urged the F.B.I. to investigate those advocating justifiable
homicide, including McMillan.

The ongoing investigation has forced a note of caution into McMillan's otherwise
free-form way of speaking. Each time he mentions an anti-abortion crusader who
believes as he does, he purposefully distances himself from them.

"When Michael Griffin shot David Gunn," he begins, then quickly interrupts
himself. "Of course, I never met either one of them."

Later in the conversation he says, "Paul Hill called me twice since he was
arrested." Suddenly he adds, "Of course, it's been years since I really spent
time with him."

The disclaimers do not convince people like Christy Henderson, director of
Pro-Choice Mississippi. "It's not as sophisticated as everyone sitting in one
room and deciding you do this and you do that," she says. "But they all know
each other. There's a general sharing of information about 'How can we close the
clinics down.' I can't believe they even try to deny it."

MCMILLAN HAS BEEN outside the clinic for less than an hour when a uniformed
officer arrives to arrest him. The driver of the car that hit the metal fence
has signed a complaint against him, charging him with obstruction of traffic,
and soon he is handcuffed and being led to a patrol car.

"Roy, what are you being charged with?" shouts Brace Knox, a fellow protester.

"Being a Christian, I guess," he answers, proudly. "Roy's been slammed again.
No. 60."

Several hours later, his $367.50 bail paid by his wife, he leaves the local
jail. A guard escorts him to the front door.  "I used to think like you, but
then I saw so many babies born to crack-addicted mothers," his jailer tells him.

"We shouldn't solve poor blacks' problems by killing their children," McMillan
responds. "Then you could just go into the ghettos of Jackson and just shoot
everybody. We could come home at night and say we just solved poverty in
Jackson."

The officer thinks about this for a moment, then offers McMillan his hand.
"Shoot for the moon," the man sworn to uphold the law tells the man who believes
it is sometimes O.K. to commit murder. "If you miss, at least you will be among
the stars."

NAME: C. Roy McMillan

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "They can denounce me," McMillan says. "But they can't ignore
me." (D. GORTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Certainly not at the New Woman clinic
in Jackson, Miss., inset. (FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 46-47); As Dr.
Beverly Smith, she opened the first abortion clinic in Jackson. Then she had a
change of heart and began speaking out against abortion. Roy McMillan, now her
husband, listened. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 48);
McMillan is restrained at a 1992 women's rights rally at which Dr. Joseph Booker
accused him of having molested a child, a charge McMillan denies. MICHELE
STAPLETON/THE CLARION-LEDGER); McMillan in action: He approaches a car pulling
into the clinic, pressing toward the window. Startled, the driver inches away;
McMillan presses on. The driver accelerates and hits a gate before continuing
into the lot. The driver, bringing her baby sitter for a pregnancy test, was
unaware it was an abortion clinic. McMillan was arrested for obstructing
traffic. (FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. 50-51)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              83 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 21; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words



'VITA & VIRGINIA'

Vanessa Redgrave and Eileen Atkins are the co-stars of "Vita & Virginia,"
opening at the Rich Forum in Stamford tomorrow through Nov. 13.

The two-character play, directed by Zoe Caldwell, was written by Ms. Atkins,
drawing on the contents of some 500 letters that Vita Sackville-West and
Virginia Woolf, two of this century's more controversial writers and
personalities, exchanged during the decades from the early 20's until Woolf's
suicide in 1941. The work is an examination of their intense relationship and
its impact on the separate lives they led with their respective husbands and
families.

A preview is scheduled today at 3 P.M., for which tickets are $25 and $35.
Performances on Tuesday through Friday will be at 8 P.M., Saturday at 3 and 8:30
P.M. and Sunday at 3 and 7:30 P.M. Prices range from $30 to $45. The theater is
off Exit 7 of I-95, at the corner of Atlantic Street and Tresser Boulevard. Box
office number is 325-4466.

ART FOR ALL AGES

An exhibition to delight people of all ages has opened at the Whitney Museum in
Stamford, where it will remain through Dec. 30.

"Fables, Fantasies and Everyday Things: Children's Books by Artists" is a
compendium of some of the best published works for children. About 140
illustrated books and related paintings, prints, photographs, collages and
sculpture are included, gleaned from the museum's collection and on loan from
the Beinecke Rare Book Library at Yale and private collections. A list of the
artists whose work is on display reads like a Who's Who in American art: Winslow
Homer, Childe Hassam, Peggy Bacon, Lewis Hine, Jacob Lawrence, Reginald Marsh,
Edward Steichen and many others.

A sampling of some individual works includes Rockwell Kent's 1931 "A Birthday
Book," for which he wrote the text as well as providing the illustrations; Andy
Warhol's 1967 "The Index Book," elevating pop-up books to fine art; etchings of
beloved fables by Alexander Calder; Faith Ringgold's 1991 "Tar Beach," the
vision of an enchanted Harlem, and William Wegman's 1993 "Cinderella," whose
pumpkin coach is pulled by 10 Weimeraner puppies.

The museum, in the Champion Building at Tresser Boulvard and Atlantic Street is
open free of charge Tuesday through Saturday from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., with
gallery talks for families on Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday at 12:30 P.M.

A family bookbinding workshop will be held on Saturday from 2 to 4 P.M. in which
family photos and memorabilia will be incorporated in a book to take home. The
fee is $5 a person. For reservations or more information call 358-7652.

THE 60'S REVISITED

The Green Berets, the transformation of Richard Nixon in the popular media,
Vietnam war memorials and veterans, the hippie culture and its commercialization
and the civil rights movement are among the subjects to be discussed by scholars
and interpreted by poets and writers at a conference, "Sixties Generations: From
Montgomery to Vietnam." It will take place at Western Connecticut State
University in Danbury on Friday from 9 A.M. to 10:30 P.M., Saturday from 9 A.M.
to 11 P.M. and Sunday from 9 A.M. to 2:15 P.M.

Exploring one of the most explosive and complex periods in our history, an
anticipated 75 academicians will present papers and participate in 25 panel
discussions. In addition, workshops will be conducted in the arts and humanities
of the 60's. All events will be held in the Westside Classroom Building.

Fees for the entire three days are $75, $15 for students and $35 for people who
are not employed full time. A single day's admission will be half-price in each
category. For reservations and a schedule of events call 387-6882 or 837-9045.

KARATE AND MORE

The Okinawan Karate World Championship and Folk Festival in progress today from
1 to 5 P.M. at the Garde Arts Center in New London promises to be a colorful
exhibition of Asian cultural traditions. The event honors Miyagi Chojun, an
Okinawan who founded the Goju-ryu style of karate. So-called karate dancing
evolved when the martial art was outlawed in Okinawa in the 1600's and parents
resorted to teaching their children the movements by feigning dance routines.

The championships have been held in California for the past four years, but this
year were moved to Connecticut, with the first four days of competition held in
East Lyme and the finals at the New London theater. Demonstrations of techniques
will be performed as an introduction to the championship rounds. Tickets are $12
for adults, $8 for children. The box office number is 444-7373 for reservations.
The theater is located at 329 State Street on Captain's Walk.

MARITIME PASTIME

The Connecticut Humanities Council has organized a conference focusing on the
state's shoreline and its history of tourism and maritime pastimes, to be held
at Mystic Seaport on Saturday. Registration begins at 9:30 A.M. in the Mallory
Building and a fee of $30 covers morning and afternoon programs, lunch and
admission to all the attractions on the Mystic Seaport grounds.

John R. Stilgoe, professor of the history of landscape at Harvard, will be the
keynote speaker on the subject of "Natives and Newcomers: Heritage and Tourism
on the Connecticut Coast," at 10:45 A.M. Preservation issues will be discussed
by Dale Plummer, Norwich historian, at 1:30, and a variety of seminars on health
and the seaside, the state's maritime history and the emergence of a New England
concept of leisure in the 19th century are scheduled.

A reception will end the event from 3:45 to 5 P.M. Reservations and more
information may be obtained by calling 685-2260.

ANTIQUES GALORE

Towns throughout the Northeast corner of Connecticut will become an
antiquarian's heaven as more than 40 shops, some of them not usually open to the
general public, welcome visitors on Friday and Saturday from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.,
Sunday from 10 to 5.

Some of the more unusual specialties include New England furniture from 1680 to
1840 at Bogg Lane Antiques in Windham; egg cups and cast iron at Cackleberry
Farm in Canterbury; Christmas trees and decorations at The Christmas Barn in
Woodstock, and linens, lace, and old bottles at Dot's Cluttered Cupboard in
Brooklyn.

Mario Buatta will give a talk on decorating with antiques from noon to 2 P.M. on
Saturday in Putnam, and floorcloth painting will be demonstrated on Friday from
10 A.M. to 6 P.M. in Dayville. Lectures on dolls, toys, quilts, firearms and
Victoriana are scheduled in various towns, and early American cookery will be
featured in a beehive-oven workshop on Friday and Saturday from 10 A.M. to 2
P.M. in Putnam, with everyone welcome to return at 7 P.M. to consume the
results. A list of events, maps, lodgings and prices may be obtained by calling
928-1228.   ELEANOR CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William Wegman's "Framed" is part of the exhibition, "Fables,
Fantasies and Everyday Things: Children's Books by Artists" at the Whitney
Museum in Stamford.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              84 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Art Is Easier the 2d Time Around

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words


RECYCLING is no longer confined to Diet Coke cans and Evian water bottles. It's
become one of the dominant impulses in American culture today.

Nor is it simply a matter of translating plays and novels into movies, or
spinning sequels and prequels off television shows and books. It's far more
pervasive than that.

Woodstock is recycled as a merchandising extravaganza, with its logo plastered
on Pepsi cans and shopping bags from the Wiz. Barry Manilow grafts his own voice
to the big-band sounds of Tommy Dorsey and Glenn Miller, while a new generation
of fans embraces old television shows like "Gilligan's Island." Ralph Lauren
recycles clothing styles from Victorian England and colonial Africa into high
fashion. And Premiere magazine photographs contemporary performers recreating
famous movie scenes from the past: Sarah Jessica Parker as Marilyn Monroe in
"The Seven Year Itch," Ann Magnuson as Audrey Hepburn in "Breakfast at
Tiffany's" and Gwyneth Paltrow as Jodie Foster in "Taxi Driver."

Whether you call it nostalgia, postmodernism or a simple vandalizing of the
past, all this recycling essentially amounts to the same thing: a self-conscious
repudiation of originality, a bemused preference for style over content and a
boundless faith in the creative possibilities of irony and spin.

For Douglas Rushkoff, the author of "Media Virus," the techniques of "recycling,
juxtaposing, and recontextualizing existing imagery and doing so with ironic
distance" are the favorite tools of a new generation of artists. "What
characterizes the GenX aesthetic and its conceptual preoccupation is a
regeneration of imagery already in the media," he writes. "Taking their cue from
postmodern artists like Andy Warhol, GenXers examine and re-examine the images
from the media that formed their own world-views and do so with humor."

Irony and allusions to earlier works of art are nothing new, of course. The
difference is that the current recycling vogue has no real interest in using its
borrowed references in the service of a larger artistic vision, no interest in
participating in an intelligent conversation with the past. As a consequence,
the results tend to be reactive rather than subversive, amusing rather than
disturbing. At best, one ends up with parody or satire (the short story writer
Robert Coover's dark, clever retellings of fairy tales); at worst, one ends up
with ersatz reproduction (Elvis lip-synching contests).

JUST why has recycling become so fashionable? In part, of course, it's that the
technology of borrowing has become readily accessible to the consumer.  Video
equipment enables one to splice home movie footage, say, with footage from the
news, while computers, CD-ROM technology and copying machines facilitate the
production of postmodernist works of collage. Cable TV exposes us to an endless
loop of reruns and playbacks, while MTV pelts us with videos that mix and match
new images with images filched from old movies and news reports alike.

Recycling also boasts a user-friendly appeal. As the manufacturers who have
turned Monet and Mondrian canvases into living room rugs have surely discovered,
it takes a lot less imagination and energy to recycle an existing image than it
does to concoct something new. What's more, the familiarity of the recycled
image acts as a built-in audience hook, even as it absolves the creator of any
responsibility or risk.

In fact while Donald Barthelme's satiric rewrite of Snow White or Kathy Acker's
satiric feminist version of "Don Quixote" have won accolades as sly
postmodernist deconstructions, the impulse behind them is remarkably similar to
the one behind those life-size inflatable dolls based on Munch's famous painting
"The Scream." In both cases, the animating premise is a joke shared by audience
and creator, a joke that validates our hipness while allowing us to maintain a
coy stance of detachment.

Recyclers, after all, need never reveal their own feelings or beliefs; they need
only rev up the Xerox equipment and raise a skeptical eyebrow. Recycling
requires no commitment, no point of view, for it's predicated on the emotions of
mockery, knowingness and wit, not on those of earnestness or passion -- which is
perhaps why it has flourished in our post-Watergate, post-Vietnam age of irony
and spin.

Indeed, things are being recycled so promiscuously these days that we are
constantly left with a vague sense of deja vu. Michael Jackson in a whimsical
military jacket? Didn't the Beatles wear something similar for "Sergeant
Pepper"? A deliberately cute stage show called "The Real Live Brady Bunch"?
Weren't we subjected to something similar on TV in the 70's?

THOUGH this sense of familiarity can make us feel jaded, even numb, artists and
advertisers like to use it to give their work a sense of freeze-dried resonance.
The ubiquitous Gap ads featuring photos of Humphrey Bogart, Gene Kelly and Pablo
Picasso, dressed in khaki pants, for instance, play upon their images of casual
glamour and achievement. That these people had nothing whatsoever to do with
trousers sold by the Gap is quite beside the point; they have been turned into
visual symbols of a certain style.

Advertisers are hardly the only ones to engage in this sort of reductionism.
Turning old images, events, and ideas into manipulable found objects has long
been a favorite tactic of highbrow artists. The formula is simple: wrench the
item out of its original context, then colorize it, spin it or de-historicize
it. In the hands of a Jasper Johns or Robert Rauschenberg, of course, this can
result in provocative and daring art. More often, however, it simply degenerates
into a synthetic junk shop pastiche -- a Lettermanesque list of cultural
tchotchkes.

By appropriating a style, an attitude, a look, recycling focuses on surface
appearance. Madonna dons Marilyn Monroesque clothes and strikes Marilyn
Monroesque poses, then exchanges them for poses borrowed from Marlene Dietrich,
implying as she does so that identity is mutable, that labels can be shrugged on
and off at will -- reasoning oddly echoed by Marion Barry and Oliver North, who
similarly suggest that there are second and even third acts in a life, that the
past can always be reinvented.

PERHAPS the biggest problem with the recycling esthetic is that it suggests that
attitude is everything, that content and context do not matter, that
tranformation for the sake of transformation is a worthy end.

As a result, the original meaning of a recycled item can be completely
superseded or forgotten. As the writer Mike Rubin recently observed in Spin
magazine, Woodstock "lent its name not only to a generation, but to the
inscrutable yellow bird in Charles Schultz's 'Peanuts,' who in turn became a
fowl-feathered shill for Met Life." Charles Manson has been turned into a hip
symbol of alienation -- his songs have been recorded by rock groups; his face
has been plastered on T-shirts popular among surfers -- while the likes of David
Berkowitz and Jeffrey Dahmer have been turned into celebrities with their own
trading cards and comic books. This, then, is the garbage heap of history that
recycling can ultimately lead to: serial killers recycled as chic collectibles.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marilyn Monroe: Vintage 1953. (Reuters); Marilyn Redux: Andy
Warhol's "Shot Red Marilyn," 1964. (Christie's New York); Marilyn Re-Redux:
Madonna in 1990 from her "Vogue" video. (Lorraine Day/Warner Brothers Records)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              85 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Silver Protest Reunion For Yesteryear's Yippies

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 43;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 519 words


Still defiant, still organizing for change, still, as they would be the first to
say, revolting after all these years, several survivors of the 1969 Chicago
conspiracy trial gathered in Manhattan Friday night for a 25th reunion of the
courtroom melodrama that in many ways defined the rebellious 60's.

"It's not over," Tom Hayden, a founder of Students for a Democratic Society and
now a California State Senator, told an audience of several hundred, some with
their children, gathered in a school auditorium on the Upper West Side.

The evening of fondly remembered outrage brought together Mr. Hayden, William
Kunstler, the defense lawyer; David Dellinger, a longtime pacifist, Bobby Seale
of the Black Panthers and Lee Weiner, a rank-and-file radical who spent most of
the trial disdainfully reading from a growing pile of books that eventually
obscured him.

It was a time when the Vietnam War raged and campuses seethed with opposition.
At the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago, Mayor Richard J. Daley's police
gassed and beat demonstrators in the streets, and the convention hall was only
marginally quieter. President Richard M. Nixon's new Administration brought
Federal conspiracy indictments against eight radicals.

Friday night began on a fine old 60's note as a band of disgruntled lawyers laid
off from the financially hard-pressed Center for Consitutional Rights, Mr.
Kunstler's base, burst in shouting: "Unfair to labor!  Union busters!"

The dispute simmered down to sporadic shouting, and someone among the aging
leftists -- the evening was sponsored by the Learning Alliance, an adult
education program offering such courses as the Lost History of Women Drummers --
called the police on their own meeting. Somewhat sheepishly, the demonstrators
departed, as a score of bemused officers, most of them barely in grade school
during the 60's, lined the sidewalk.

"I agree with Tom; it's not over," the 79-year-old Mr. Dellinger, who regularly
fasts in a protest to change the name of Columbus Day to Native American Day.
"Not as long as you are a part of the beloved community fighting for love,
equality and closeness to nature."

Many in the audience remembered Abbie Hoffman, the free-spirited Yippie who
taunted the autocratic Judge Julius J. Hoffman. "Abbie is still with us today,"
Mr. Dellinger said. The other defendants were Jerry Rubin, Rennie Davis and John
Froines. Convicted in Judge Hoffman's court, they were freed on appeal.

Originally the Chicago Eight, the group became the Chicago Seven when Mr.
Seale's case was severed.  Now a community organizer affiliated with Temple
University in Philadelphia and working on a movie about the Panthers, Mr. Seale
hopped across the stage shouting "clang, clang clang," recalling how he was
bound with chains and gagged at the trial's outset.

When Mr. Weiner, who now works for the Anti-Defamation League, "fighting
fascism, bigotry and anti-Semitism," and whose oldest son is a rock musician and
water bed salesman, was asked if he would do it all again, he didn't hesitate
for a second.

"I'd do it better," he said.


LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: David Dellinger, left, a longtime pacifist, and William
Kunstler, the defense lawyer, at Friday's reunion of Chicago Seven survivors;
"It's not over," said Tom Hayden, one of the founders of the Students for a
Democratic Society; Bobby Seale recalled how he was bound with chains and gagged
at the beginning of the trial. (Photographs by G. Paul Burnett/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              86 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Iraq Has M.I.A.'s Too

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 104 words


To the Editor:

For more than 20 years the United States held accounting for its missing in
action in the Vietnam War as a condition for resuming business in Vietnam -- as
long as it took for us to acknowledge that the Vietnamese also lacked news of
their M.I.A.'s.

So too, accounting for the 609 Kuwaitis missing since the Persian Gulf war has
become a condition for lifting economic sanctions against Iraq. Must Iraqis
suffer for 20 more years before the United States acknowledges the thousands of
Iraqi M.I.A.'s? In war, the innocent suffer on both sides.

SUZY T. KANE
Bedford Hills, N.Y., Oct. 23, 1994

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              87 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OUTDOORS;
Fishing in Brooklyn: The Lore and the Lure

BYLINE: By Peter Kaminsky

SECTION: Section 8; Page 13; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 981 words


Brooklyn's Marine Park is rarely mistaken for Vietnam or Siberia. However, last
year, a wayward spotted red shank, which is a long-legged shore bird customarily
an inhabitant of both those places, ended up spending the season here just
across from Rainbow Lanes at the corner of Knapp Street and Avenue X. The
homeless bird thrived on the marine life in the shallows of Gerritsen Creek, a
long salt marsh that extends from Jamaica Bay back up to the ball fields of
Marine Park where, every weekend, West Indian cricket teams, in sparkling white
uniforms, bowl and bat on the green lawns. There are flounder in the creek and
stripers and blues which chase baitfish right up to the shoreline.

Dave Azar, a dentist who has set himself the task of learning the fly fishing
opportunities of the Brooklyn shore of Jamaica Bay, catches blues and stripers
in the creek among the old pilings that dot the inlet. When he took me there one
recent morning at 7 A.M., blues were working the middle of the channel, penning
up bunker and slashing through them. But they were too far out to reach with a
flyrod. We tried small streamers in the pilings for stripers and had a few
tentative takes but no hook-ups.

Earlier that morning near Floyd Bennett Field, we walked on a path through the
shore grass to Dead Horse Bay, so named because of the glue factories where some
of the more vexing also-rans from the nearby Steeplechase Racetrack no doubt
ended their days in the early part of the century. Wages for the largely
immigrant work force at the factories were rather high because of the
overpowering odor. Birds working over the sandbar were a good sign of baitfish,
but a half hour of casting yielded nothing.

We retreated to a Flatbush Avenue deli for coffee and bagels and, looking
somewhat out of place in waders and fishing gear at 6 A.M., pondered our next
move.

"The fish are there, but not catchable," Dave said. "Why don't we run out to
Breezy Point and check it out."

We agreed and headed over the bridge to the Rockaways. There were no reports of
anything happening, but in New York, if you are a shore fisherman, when all else
fails, you head for Breezy for the same reason that you hit a malfunctioning TV
when other measures fail: It often produces results.

The wind was from the southwest and the tide was rising. Low-wheeling bands of
gulls occasionally dipped to the water and, beneath them, we saw telltale white
slashes. My heart swelled as we saw leaping albacore. The albacore (as they are
called in the East; more properly, they are the false albacore, not the tuna
variety) is perhaps the most exciting game fish for the surf angler. He is big,
fast, strong and dogged. You must be prepared at all times for your quarry to
make a lightning-fast appearance and, when he does, you must guess his direction
and then respond quickly and accurately if you hope to intercept his path.

At the end of the jetty, we saw a number of fly casters fighting fish. Even
though I didn't have my cleats I began to clamber over the rocks and took a
shoulder-crunching fall. As the waves washed over me, I held onto the rock with
my right arm. I was soaked, cold, and less enthusiastic about jetty hopping. I
righted myself and began to cast, hoping that the fish would come within range.
They didn't.

Meanwhile, at the other end of the jetty (don't try getting there if you are not
in good shape and you don't have cleats), Peter Chan, a devout Breezyphile who
works at Urban Angler in Manhattan, was into fish after fish. At first I enjoyed
watching someone succeed, but as my shoulder began to throb I began to feel
first depressed and then somewhat unfraternal about the success of my fellow
angler.

I went home, popped a number of aspirins and went to sleep. The next morning, my
shoulder hurt a lot. I took a few more aspirins and headed back for Breezy. Tom
Colicchio, the chef of Gramercy Tavern and a flyfisherman, drove me to the
point. When we arrived, the wind was blowing at 20-25 knots. There were albacore
everywhere and, there in mid-jetty, Peter Chan had returned. This time I had my
cleats.

Taking Chan as our talisman, we moved alongside and began to cast. The fish came
close but not close enough. Still, there is a difference between not catching
fish when there are no fish around and not catching fish when they are there to
see and hear. We were excited and happy to be out on a beautiful fall afternoon.

I gave things a rest on Tuesday, but by Wednesday afternoon I had severe
albacore lust. I tried to work. I couldn't. I hit Breezy at the beginning of the
outgoing tide. There was one other angler out at the tip of the jetty, a Russian
flounder fisherman. I cast for two hours. At six o'clock, a line of boats, all
flounder fishermen, had taken up position at a right angle to the jetty,
extending back toward the Verrazano Bridge.

I cast a small, chartreuse streamer straight into the sun and began to strip
when an albacore hit with extraordinary force. I raised my rod and struck hard.
The albacore took off with a blazing run like a bonefish. My line disappeared
and I was well into the backing before I began to recover line. Then the fish
ran again. Then I stopped him again, but each time he took more line.

He was making for the rip that ran on the far side of the anchored boats. If I
didn't stop the fish, he would no doubt have created an unhappy mess among the
fishing lines and anchor ropes of the flounder fishermen. I palmed my drag and
bore down. My jettymate reeled in a flounder. He put down his rod and watched
me.

"Is big blue?" he asked in a heavy accent.

"Albacore," I answered.

My line described a wide, hundred-yard arc. There was a lot of drag on the fish,
in fact too much. My rod tip sprung back.

"Is gone?" the Russian asked.

"Is gone," I assented.

I never felt better after losing a fish.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: A Season on the Harbor: Nature's Cycle on the City Waterways
Fifth of eight monthly articles



GRAPHIC: Map: Geristen Creek (The New York Times)
Photos: Sharing a pre-dawn bagel in Brooklyn before a day of flyfishing for
stripers and blues in Gerritsen Creek, a long salt marsh that extends from
Jamaica Bay to Marine Park. (Photographs by Keith Meyers/The New York Times)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              88 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bob Detmer, a Visionary Video Maker

BYLINE: By PENNY SINGER

SECTION: Section 13WC;   Page 10;   Column 3;   Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1266 words


THERE is a television production company in Armonk, Detmer Enterprises, which is
producing high-quality videos for nonprofit organizations, programs that are
then distributed to local cable stations. It is the cost of the programs, said
Bob Detmer, the owner of the company, that initially shocks people.

"At first, no one believes me when I tell them that if I do a professional video
of their organization, it will cost them nothing; that I do the work for free,"
he said. And thereby hangs the news.

Back in the days when Poughkeepsie was a company town and the company was
International Business Machines, it wasn't unusual for 18-year-olds in
Poughkeepsie to go straight from high school to I.B.M.

"I was one of them," recalled Mr. Detmer, who is now 47. "When I graduated from
high school in 1966, I got my first job working on the assembly line at the
I.B.M. plant, where I earned $2 an hour putting together mainframe computers. It
wasn't so bad when you realize the minimum hourly rate then was $1.25 an hour."
But four months later, Mr. Detmer said, he was drafted. "For two years I was a
combat medic in Vietnam," he said. "It was an indescribably horrible experience.
To stay sane, I would plan the rest of my life. I vowed then, if I got out
alive, my plan was to work hard for 30 years and retire early and then do what I
wanted to do. I felt it was owed."

Mr. Detmer survived Vietnam and went back to his assembly line job at I.B.M.
"But the monotony of it got to me," he said. "I couldn't see myself doing the
same thing for the rest of my life. But I knew my lack of education was always
going to hold me back. So I took a leave of absence from I.B.M. and under the
G.I. Bill I enrolled at the State University at New Paltz and majored in
communication arts. And there I found myself."

With his new skills, Mr. Detmer also found a new career at I.B.M. after college
graduation. "I.B.M. gave me a job that was a dream come true," he said. "I was
put in charge of producing the first internal I.B.M. TV news program. It dealt
with company-related subjects like new research, advancements, inventions, the
price of I.B.M. stock. We featured prominent I.B.M. people, and there were memos
carried from management, that sort of thing."

Mr. Detmer soon branched out, producing scores of business, marketing and public
relations videos for I.B.M. Some were instructional, produced for employees or
customers, others focused on human-interest stories centering on the volunteer
organizations and various community projects that I.B.M. employees were involved
in.

"I.B.M. encourages the volunteer efforts of its employees with help and money,"
he said. "We did videos of everything from senior citizen retirement homes,
programs for fund-raising for organizations that make up the United Fund, to one
about inner-city children who were sent to Green Chimneys, which is a farm for
disadvantaged kids in Brewster. Many of the videos were made after work and on
weekends as my own volunteer effort."

And, he said, although he always intended to retire after 30 years, his
retirement finally came two years ahead of schedule.

"As a result of I.B.M.'s downsizing, my department was virtually eliminated as
being too costly," he explained. "But I had a great run at I.B.M. From starting
at $2 an hour, I ended at a salary range of $60,000 to $70,000. So in 1993,
after 28 years with the company, I was 46 and I was offered voluntary retirement
so I took it and figured it was time to do something else."

The something else was "an idea I always had, to make videos for needy
organizations," he said. "Most of them don't have the money for professional
videos, and the local cable stations don't have manpower or budgets to cover all
the events they would like to. So, I thought, here is an opportunity for me to
volunteer something. But I knew I couldn't run a production company alone, so I
asked three longtime friends who are professionals in the business and they
agreed to volunteer."

The volunteers included Carl Holman, a contractor who also has a production
studio, Euro-Video in Carmel. Mr. Holman agreed to supply the equipment for the
new production company.

"Carl has over $100,000 of state-of-the-art equipment," Mr. Detmer said. "He was
not only willing to lend it to me, he also volunteered to be the cameraman. Dave
Radovich, who is a professional musician, and Mary Williams, who is a video
editor, also signed on."

Each video feature that the company makes takes about 30 hours to produce. Among
the first videos they made last spring at Cocker Farm in Bedford was a horse
show, sponsored by Pegasus, a nonprofit group that teaches horseback riding as
therapy for disabled youngsters.

"During the shooting, we met Joanne Woodward, who is an active member of
Pegasus," Mr. Detmer said. "Pegasus had been contemplating having a video made
to bring the group to public attention, but the prices they were quoted were so
high -- one quote was $50,000 to do the video -- that they dropped the idea."

Detmer Productions also did a feature, "Renaissance Days at Caramoor," for the
Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah and a walkathon for the
Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals of Westchester in Briarcliff
Manor. The company is now working on a video for Byram Hills High School in
Armonk to "encourage school spirit and participation in sports," Mr. Detmer
said. "We have been interviewing football players, cheerleaders, parents,
coaches, members of the band and students. It's a fun feature."

Mr. Detmer said the company has also produced a more serious feature, which is a
53-minute video that stresses outdoor safety.

"The idea came from a camping trip I took with my kids just after I left
I.B.M.," he said. "We got lost in the Adirondacks and, using the survival
techniques I learned in Vietnam, we found our way out. But the experience got me
to thinking about making a video to show kids how to prepare for and cope with
the unexpected."

Enlisting the help of his children -- his son, Eric, and his daughter, Kristina
-- and their friends, the video production company went on location in the
Adirondacks. "The project took about a year," Mr. Detmer said. "We went back and
taped in all four seasons. It's called 'Wilderness Bob's Outdoor Survival
Video,' and it has about 300 survival tips that range from how to find
directions without a compass -- by using a stick in the ground -- to keeping
warm -- stuff leaves into your clothes."

The success of the wilderness video, Mr. Detmer said, was overwhelming. "Boy
Scout troops bought it," he said. "The Army bought it for troops stationed in
Germany. Timber companies on the West Coast bought it. I priced it at $19.95 to
cover costs, but I underestimated my expenses so I'm in the hole on that one. I
figure I've spent about $60,000 of my own money on producing videos so far."

And has it been worth it? "You bet," Mr. Detmer said, not missing a beat. "This
has been the most interesting time of my life. For one thing, I have done
something I have always wanted to do, which is establish strong ties with my
children. Eric, 17, and Kristina, 16, will be going off to college soon. And I
have spent a lot of time with my parents and have also been able to really get
to know my neighbors. My wife and I are pretty frugal. I have health benefits
from I.B.M., and my pension will kick in in 1996. In the meantime, I figure I
have enough money to keep working for free for another 12 months. Then I hope to
continue to produce videos, but I will have to get paid."

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 'No one believes me when I tell them that if I do a
professional video of their organization, it will cost them nothing,' said Bob
Detmer, above and below, taping Byram Hills Bobcats for a feature promoting
school spirit and sports participation. (Photographs by Claire Yaffa for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              89 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pope Appoints 30 Cardinals, 2 From U.S.

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: ROME, Oct. 30


Pope John Paul II appointed 30 new cardinals today, cementing his influence on
the uppermost ranks of the Roman Catholic Church for years to come and
broadening the field of possible successors.

The addition of the cardinals means that Pope John Paul II appointed 100 of the
maximum 120 cardinals eligible to vote in the secret ballot to elect a successor
when a Pope dies.

In an address on a breezy fall day from his apartment above St. Peter's Square,
the Pope said that he would summon the existing cardinals to Rome on Nov. 26 to
confirm the appointments. They include men from 24 countries, among them two
from the United States: William Henry Keeler, 63, the Archbishop of Baltimore,
and Adam Joseph Maida, 64, the Archbishop of Detroit.

As president of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, Archbishop Keeler
is the church's chief spokesman in the United States. He has also served the
Vatican as a sort of ecumencial diplomat, working to improve relations between
Catholics and Jews.

Archbishop Maida has led the Detroit archdiocese of 1.5 million Catholics since
1990.

The confirmation ceremony, called a consistory, will be the sixth since he
assumed the papacy in 1978 and the largest to date. The last was in June 1991,
before the Pope, now 74, began to show signs of ill health.

The Pope has traditionally used consistories to appoint clerics who share his
conservative views on abortion, contraception and the ordination of women,
insuring that his influence will not die with him.

In recent months, there have been widespread reports of maneuvering over the
succession and much speculation about who the next Pope might be. But the latest
appointments change the lineup of political forces.

"For all we know, the next Pope could be one of these new cardinals," said a
senior Vatican official, who spoke in return for anonymity.

Of the 137 cardinals, only 98 are "cardinal electors," meaning that they are
younger than 80 and therefore eligible to vote for a new Pope. Of the 30 new
cardinals, 24 are younger than 80.

The Pope said the wide geographic range of the appointees showed "the
universality of the church and the multiplicity of its ministries."

The choices of Msgr. Paul Joseph Pham Din Tung from Hanoi, Vietnam, and Msgr.
Jaime Lucas Ortega y Alamino from Cuba seemed to reflect the Pope's support for
Christians under Communist rule.

Several appointments were made in former Communist countries. The elevation of
the relatively young Archbishop of Sarajevo, Msgr. Vinko Puljic, 49, seemed to
underline the Pope's quest for a Balkan peace -- and his support for Catholics
there.

For the devout among the world's 980 million Catholics, the appointment of a
cardinal is a matter of pride, and in naming cardinals from lands where the
church was long persecuted, the Pope is clearly sending a message of thanks and
solidarity to the faithful.

Albania's first Cardinal, Mikel Koligi, 92, was jailed for almost half his life
by the Communists.

While the appointments will further the internationalization of the church
hierarchy begun by Pope Paul VI, 55 cardinals from Europe will remain the
dominant presence among the "cardinal electors."

In the Vatican's breakdown of the cardinal electors' after the appointments, 33
are from the Americas, 15 from Africa, 14 from Asia and 3 from the Central and
South Pacific.

John Paul, who was made a Cardinal in 1967, was the first non-Italian in
centuries to assume the papacy, and his appointments since 1978 have gradually
whittled down the once-dominant Italian influence to 20 of the 120 cardinal
electors.

Cardinals were appointed from Lebanon, the Czech Republic, Italy, Japan, Chile,
Scotland, Mexico, Cuba, Indonesia, Belgium, France, Switzerland, Uganda, the
United States, Canada, Peru, Spain, Bosnia, Madagascar, Vietnam, Ecuador,
Belarus, Albania and Germany.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pope John Paul greeted Archbishop William Keeler of Baltimore on
an earlier visit to the Vatican. The Archbishop was one of two Americans
appointed Cardinals yesterday along with 28 others. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              90 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 31, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS;
Paradox of '94: Gloomy Voters In Good Times

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words

DATELINE: LORAIN, Ohio, Oct. 28


The ornery and ill-tempered voters who will sit in judgment on Election Day
cannot exactly put a finger on why they are so disgusted with Washington and
politics.

They know that inflation is low and unemployment is down. They know that the
country is not at war, that even the disparaged expedition into Haiti turned out
better than many of them expected. Sure, some were disappointed that no health
care plan was voted on. But others were relieved because they did not want to
lose their own coverage or pay any more for it.

So what are they complaining about? "The unknown," said Russ Carver, a Michigan
steelworker standing in a union office. "What could be."

That may be a nearly impossible thing to campaign against, the vague notion that
no matter what anybody does, things might get worse. But that is exactly what
politicians are facing from a mercurial and bored electorate.

To listen to voters in two Midwestern steel towns where things are better than
they were in the 1980's but a long way from booming, it has gotten to the point
where some seem to think there is very little that politicians contribute to the
country.

In River Rouge, Mich., a city of about 11,000 just south of Detroit, a retiree
standing in line at a drugstore said, "They're doing absolutely nothing for the
citizens."

Here in Lorain, about 30 miles west of Cleveland, Al Fuzy, the owner of a karate
school, said he did not even know whether to believe the inflation and
unemployment figures that he said some politician somewhere would take credit
for.

"We don't really know what's going on in Washington at all," Mr. Fuzy said.
"There are so many facts and statistics. They don't use a language that normal,
everyday people can understand. It's nothing more than a spider web of deceit."

In recent years, it has, of course, become fashionable to attack Washington and
politicians in general. Whether the bad mood comes from alienation, ignorance,
indifference or "did not-did too" campaigning is hard to tell.

But all of this has made things harder for precinct captains like Michael Koury,
an old-time Democrat who is a real estate agent when he is not passing out
political literature. He has not been thrown off porches or anything, but he
said he knew not to try the hard sell that might have worked a generation ago.

"Everybody is a free-thinker nowadays," Mr. Koury said. "Nobody likes to be told
how to vote. They want to go their own way."

The problem now, he said, is that people may have it too good. "They forget
where they came from," Mr. Koury said. "Business is good. The people are
working. It's a great time to live in America. They got it good, and they want
it better."

Mayor Alex Olejko of Lorain, a Democrat, said he could not figure it out. The
Ford plant in this city of 71,000 cannot churn out minivans and Thunderbirds
fast enough, the steel mill started hiring this year for the first time since
1982, and unemployment has gone to 6 percent now from 24 percent a decade ago.

"We're doing as good as we did with Truman," the Mayor said. "Your son is
working. Your daughter is working. You're working. You're getting your pension.
What more can you ask for?"

He caught his breath and thought of something else. "Housing is going up," he
said. "What more do you want?"

The answer from voters in both Lorain and River Rouge was as vague and unformed
as their general discontent. People mentioned the idea of a third party or term
limits, but not with any particular fervor. The only thing clear was their lack
of interest.

"Politics is like life insurance," said Bob LaForest, president of Local 1299 of
the United Steelworkers union in River Rouge. "It's something I got to have, but
I don't want to know nothing about it."

Whereas bad news bounced off President Ronald Reagan like oil on Teflon, bad
news seems to be sticking to President Clinton, at least in the minds of many
voters interviewed, like lint to Velcro.

To hear the impressions of voters in the last week is to be transported back to
1992, as if the last two years never happened.

Gennifer Flowers, the President's statement that he smoked marijuana but did not
inhale, his absence from the Vietnam War, all seem to be as fresh in voters'
minds as they were when Mr. Clinton was riding the bus across the country
instead of Air Force One.

"He flip-flops," said Nancy Sabath, a program coordinator at Head Start in
Lorain. "He just doesn't stay with things. And underlying that, he didn't serve
in the military. That's part of being American."

For some people, whatever Teflon President Clinton may have seems to work only
with good news. Many voters seem to look past the low inflation and drop in
unemployment and give him no credit for a favorable economy.

"The economy is cyclical," said Bob Orlowski, a sales representative in River
Rouge. It was an observation made over and over in the two steel towns, where
people seem to conclude that their jobs depend on things other than politics
when the going is good.

Mr. Orlowski said he had not decided who would get his vote in the various
Michigan races, but he said he was getting little help from the finger-pointing
in campaign advertisements.

"They muddy the water to purposely confuse the voter," said Mr. Orlowski, who
works for an industrial gas company. "Even if it's not true, it's what you
remember when you pull the lever."

With so many races involving candidates whom voters do not know or do not care
about, people are having a hard time distinguishing the players.

In the Ohio Senate race, in which Joel Hyatt, a Democrat, is running against
Lieut. Gov. Mike DeWine, a Republican, only two things stood out to Ruth
Wilhelm, a Lorain steelworker. This is what she gleaned from the gauzy DeWine
advertisements that paint the usually dark-suited politician as a down-home
family man.

"DeWine?" she asked. "Plaid shirt. Lots of kids."

Mayor Olejko of Lorain said he missed the old days. "Years ago you'd see Kennedy
and Nixon debate," he said. "They'd shake hands and talk about the issues. Now
they're talking about families and scandals. It's sickening. I've been in
politics since 1957, and I've never seen such crappy ads."

Rick Crum, a steelworker in River Rouge, said politicians could not be believed
anyway. "They're all a bunch of leeches," said Mr. Crum, who added that
politicians must have been looking at different economic figures than he was.
"If inflation is so low, how come cereal is $4.75 a box?"

He is tough on all politicians except his own. His Congresswoman is Barbara-Rose
Collins, a Democrat. He said she was doing a good job, as best as he could tell.
"I get a lot of mail from her," Mr. Crum said. "She seems to be trying."

Some voters said they did not want to be bothered with having to watch every
step made by their members of Congress. "You put these guys in office so you
don't have to keep an eye on them," said Frank Shonebarger, sales manager at a
tool repair shop in Lorain.

But Mr. Shonebarger has noticed the gridlock and grandstanding, and it angers
him. "As long as there's Republicans and Democrats going at each other on both
sides of the street, nothing gets done," he said.

He shook his head. "There's too much politics in politics," he said. Yogi Berra
could not have said whatever was meant any better.

But some voters are not so hard on politicians. Elected officials are, after
all, people too, Mr. Fuzy conceded. "On an individual basis, they are probably
some of the nicest people you would ever want to meet," he said. "But get them
together and put them in Washington and we still don't know how low they'll
stoop. Your standard American is just tired of everything."

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lorain, Ohio -- As Election Day approaches, voters seem to
alternate between cynicism and indifference. "We don't really know what's going
on in Washington at all," complained Al Fuzy, a karate school owner. "It's
nothing more than a spider web of deceit." Ruth Wilhelm, a steelworker, could
remember only two things about the Republican candidate for Senate: "DeWine?
Plaid shirt. Lots of kids." (Photographs by Dan Levin for the New York Times);
River Rouge, Mich. -- Bob LaForest, right, summed up his feelings about the
elections with an analogy that seemed to reflect the mood of many voters:
"Politics is like life insurance. It's something I got to have, but I don't want
to know nothing about it." Bob Orlowski was equally unhappy with politicians:
"They muddy the water to purposely confuse the voter. Even if it's not true,
it's what you remember when you pull the lever." (Photographs by Peter Yates for
the New York Times)(pg. A16)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              91 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Defense Blames Mental Trauma For a Shooting

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 407 words


The Lebanese immigrant charged with killing one Hasidic student and wounding
three others in a shooting attack on the Brooklyn Bridge suffered from a
post-traumatic shock shared by many Arab victims of Mideast warfare and was thus
not mentally responsible, his lawyer contended yesterday at the opening of his
murder trial.

"He had no more control than a fire knows why it's burning," Eric M. Sears, the
lawyer for the defendant, Rashid Baz, said in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
"Eighteen years in Beirut left scars on his personality."

"He was a traumatized, teen-age war veteran," he said. As a result, Mr. Sears
said Mr. Baz's "state of mind made him not responsible" for the shooting that
killed Aaron Halberstam, a 19-year-old Jewish divinity student who was returning
to Brooklyn on March 1 in a passenger van with 14 other students, three of whom
were wounded in the attack.

But in his opening statement to the jury, the assistant district attorney,
Armand Durasante, said the attack "essentially was a blind-side ambush on 15
young men in a van in which the defendant attempted to kill all of them."

Mr. Durasante did not refer to the defense's attempt to invoke what amounts to
an insanity defense.

But Mr. Halberstam's mother, Devorah, criticized the defense during a court
recess.

"Insanity?" she said again and again. "Do you believe it? Does anyone believe
it?"

"He deserves nothing but death," Mrs. Halberstam said of the 28-year-old
defendant, who faces a maximum sentence of 25 years to life in prison if
convicted. "My life was shattered forever when he killed my son. I died when my
son died."

While an insanity defense has usually been based on evidence of a mental defect
or disease, it has been increasingly invoked over the years as post-traumatic
stress syndrome, in many cases by combat veterans of the Vietnam War.

In a large courtroom crowded with parents and friends of the victims, Mr.
Durasante said the attack began when a sedan driven by Mr. Baz "containing an
arsenal of weapons" pulled next to the van as it was moving up an entrance ramp
on the Manhattan side of the bridge. Inside, he said, the students were praying,
talking or napping.

Pointing to the defendant, Mr. Durasante said, "He simply pulled along the
passenger side and fired a burst from a fully automatic gun into the van,
shattering the rear window and firing a bullet in the back of the head of Aaron
Halberstam."


LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              92 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 3, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Embargo of Cuba Violates U.N.'s Wishes

SECTION: Section A;   Page 30;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 324 words


To the Editor:

The United States has asserted itself as the key player in the United Nations,
utilizing it as a bulwark in creating multinational forces. The United States
has prided itself on the cohesiveness of these coalitions. I do not want to
debate its role in any of these actions; I merely seek to point out the
hypocrisy of continuing an embargo against Cuba when the General Assembly last
week voted 101 to 2, with 48 abstentions, to condemn the embargo.

The question is: Does America respect the wishes of the nations of the world as
represented in the United Nations General Assembly, or not?

How can the United States continue to vote against allies like Spain, France and
even its North American Free Trade Agreement trading partners, Canada and
Mexico? The Clinton Administration must come to the realization that this
continued embargo is more trouble than it is worth. A recent Associated Press
article detailed how Mexico is investing in Cuba at a tremendous pace while the
Caribbean countries continue to increase their trade with Cuba. Canada recently
renewed foreign aid to Cuba. At the same time Cuba continues to open up its
economy, with more and more private initiative in food and consumer goods.

If the United States can maintain most-favored-nation trade status with China,
end the embargo against Vietnam and begin negotiations with North Korea, how can
it not lift the embargo and normalize relations with Cuba?

The best place for the Clinton Administration to start is to restore family
visits and remittances. Cuba should also be invited to the Summit of the
Americas in Miami as a sign of good faith. In addition, the United States should
give the green light to the Organization of American States, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to bring Cuba into these organizations.

RAYMUNDO DEL TORO
President, Cuban American
Committee for Peace
Linden, N.J., Oct. 27, 1994

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              93 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
Family Values and Love In Vietnam Aftermath

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 10;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


Set in a small Mississippi town and centered on a children's battle over a tree
house, "The War" is an allegory about love, death, pacifism, family values and
the spiritual and physical wounds of Vietnam. To no small degree it is also
about movie stars, who have the power to transform platitudes into warm,
affecting insights when they make their presence sufficiently persuasive on
screen.

"The War" has the benefit of two such presences: Kevin Costner, who is at his
most disarming in the role of Stephen Simmons, a Vietnam veteran having trouble
returning to his wife and children (the year is 1970), and Elijah Wood, who
plays his son.  Mr. Costner's folksy sincerity is enough to lure the Spanish
moss right off the live oaks, and he works hard in the potato fields the way
only a major movie star can. He's effortlessly appealing, and Mr. Wood holds up
his end of the story with equal assurance.

Well established as a first-rate child actor (in films including "The Good Son"
and "The Adventures of Huck Finn"), Mr. Wood has also developed that stellar
shine. He eases effortlessly into the role of a tough, sturdy Southern boy who
struggles to hold his family together, and whose sentimental scenes late in the
story will send many hardened moviegoers groping for their hankies. If "The War"
had confined itself solely to the love between this father and son, it would
have had a small but satisfying story to tell.

As it is, "The War" contends with too many minor plot threads and a
too-wrenching switch of gears late in the story. As written atmospherically but
sometimes preachily by Kathy McWorter, it incorporates a wider array of lessons
than it can comfortably handle. Jon Avnet, whose first feature was "Fried Green
Tomatoes" (after a successful producing and directing career on television), had
better luck last time in juggling characters and keeping a busy story on track.

Mr. Avnet grew up in Great Neck, L.I., but he clearly has a strong feel for the
rural South. "The War" does a fine job of conjuring tiny Juliette, Miss., where
Stephen and his wife, Lois (Mare Winningham), struggle to support their
11-year-old twins, Stu (Mr. Wood) and Lidia (Lexi Randall). Life is hard, thanks
to poverty and the town bullies. But the Simmonses have love.

The film's big contrivance is a fight with those bullies over an elaborate tree
house, which Stu and Lidia build with some friends' help, and which looks almost
as big as the Simmons home. (Kristi Zea's production design brings visual
interest to both these settings.) The fight turns into overkill once the Simmons
children experience a tragedy and Stu digs out his father's leftover Vietnam
artifacts in order to escalate the battle. If the story weren't set in the
backwoods, this behavior would be called acting out. It gives a stagy,
moralizing tone to an otherwise gently realistic story.

"The War" works best in small, uninstructive moments, like some sweet scenes
between Lidia and her two best friends (Latoya Chisholm and Charlette Julius),
who defy the doldrums of country life by dancing like the Supremes. Children's
roles here have been cast with an eye toward naturalness, which works with the
film's hominy-and-homilies rustic style.

"The War" views the world through the eyes of children even when depicting
adults, as when Mr. Costner explains that he gave cotton candy to two little
bullies " 'cause it looked like they hadn't been given nothin' in a long time."
Mr. Costner is star enough to turn the noblesse oblige of that gesture into
nobility.

"The War" is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes mild
profanity, fleeting violence and sad events that might disturb very young
children.


THE WAR

Directed by Jon Avnet; written by Kathy McWorter; director of photography,
Geoffrey Simpson; edited by Debra Neil; music by Thomas Newman; production
designer, Kristi Zea; produced by Mr. Avnet and Jordan Kerner; released by
Universal Pictures. Running time: 127 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.

WITH: Elijah Wood (Stu), Kevin Costner (Stephen), Mare Winningham (Lois), Lexi
Randall (Lidia), Latoya Chisholm (Elvadine) and Charlette Julius (Amber).

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kevin Costner, left, and Elijah Wood in "The War." (Richard
Felber/Universal Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              94 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 5, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Safer Russian Army

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 515 words


The Clinton Administration has made remarkable headway in its efforts to help
Russia dismantle its nuclear forces. Washington's engagement in this enterprise
has reached levels that would have been unthinkable just a few years ago. The
U.S. has built housing for former Soviet missile controllers; Pentagon officials
now give virtually the same briefing on U.S. nuclear policy to Russia's
Parliament as they give to Congress.

Unfortunately, Washington has not yet given equal attention to the need to
downsize Moscow's non-nuclear forces. U.S. cooperation is essential to reduce
Russia's army to a level that Russia and its neighbors can live with.

Russia currently has 1.1 million people under arms. It cannot afford to maintain
a force that size. Draft-dodging has reached epidemic proportions as recruits
recognize that the army cannot provide them three square meals a day, never mind
a timely paycheck. Yet even with its defense spending in free fall and arms
procurements near a standstill, Moscow's defense bill still drives up its budget
deficit, and threatens new inflationary pressures.

To generations that grew up fearing the Soviet threat, that may sound like good
news. Yet while the armed forces must shrink, letting them collapse
uncontrollably is risky. A collapse would put thousands of troops on the street,
freeing them to engage in mischief in newly independent republics. It would also
embitter career officers and help fuel a nationalist resurgence. The obvious
course is for Russia to reduce its armed forces in an orderly way. But even that
will meet strong political resistance unless the U.S. takes concrete steps to
reassure Russia about its security.

Russia's vaunted air defenses, for example, have sprung leaks. The Defense
Ministry may thus be tempted to keep more fighter planes than it can afford. The
U.S. could ease Russian fears by offering to integrate Moscow into the Western
air traffic control network. It could also invest in housing and job training
for officers mustered out of the armed forces -- much as it has invested in
those who manned Russia's nuclear arsenal. That would help minimize the prospect
of a nation full of unemployed and potentially unruly soldiers.

Above all, the West should resist any immediate temptation to include Poland and
the rest of Eastern Europe in an expanded NATO. Russian military planners are
certain to view any such expansion as a serious regional threat and will be even
less inclined to shrink their forces.

No U.S. official is better positioned to encourage a broadened dialogue on
Russia's conventional forces than the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Gen. John Shalikashvili. In the aftermath of Vietnam, when morale in America's
armed forces hit bottom, he tasted the bitterness the Russian army is now
experiencing. General Shalikashvili further understands the risks of an expanded
NATO -- a move that would commit his troops to the defense of Eastern Europe but
inspire a recidivist backlash in Russia. He should take the lead in discussing a
Russian military build-down.

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              95 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By JULIE JUST

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 24;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 212 words



FIRST NOVEL
RAINY LAKE
By Mary Francois Rockcastle.
Graywolf, $22.50.

Foreboding hovers a little too densely over Mary Francois Rockcastle's first
novel, a wistful coming-of-age story set in a lakefront community during the
1960's. "This isn't just about us -- my brother and me and our parents -- how we
started out with such grace and steered right into the eye of the hurricane,"
says the narrator, a young girl named Danny Fillian, whose own life-changing
gale comes in the form of Billy Dove, a boy from the other side of town, the son
of a white father and a black mother. What begins as a summertime idyll in the
family's cabin on Rainy Lake is soon darkened by Danny's parents' failing
marriage, small-town hatreds and the far-off war in Vietnam. The novel flirts
with cliche as it builds to a violent climax, but there is emotional heft in Ms.
Rockcastle's careful portraits of the pensive narrator and her disappointed,
hard-drinking parents, and of Billy, who goes "down the tracks" with the local
girls but falls in love with 15-year-old Danny. Occasionally marred by intrusive
foreshadowing, "Rainy Lake" is best when it sifts through Danny's layered
impressions of a safe, dreamy world on the verge of coming apart forever.
JULIE JUST

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              96 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 6, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 857 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     8   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2    25   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 3     7   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           young girl disappears.

 4    21   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5     6   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of a young boy creates a crisis.

 6     2   A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux,
           Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four
           romantic stories.

 7    19   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly in North Vietnam.

 8     7   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a
           troubled twin sister.

 9*   12   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes --
           on a Mexican ranch.

 10*   1   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery
           writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to
           take his place.

 11*  10   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) A
           child's mysterious death.

 12*   7   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson.
           (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars"
           trilogy.

 13    2   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three
           American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German
           activities in 1942.

 14   16   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 15    1   THE DEVIL'S OWN, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A 1987
           novel about a woman who accepts the advances of a rogue to
           save nine orphans.

 16*   1   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story
           of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the
           1967 war.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     7   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     8   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 3     6   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters,
           both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.

 4    43   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 5     2   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More
           comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 6*   574  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 7    10   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 8     2   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 9     2   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 10    6   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.

 11*   5   FIVE PATIENTS, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A
           1970 book about the practice of medicine and the ways of
           hospitals.

 12*   1   ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour"
           of an armored cavalry regiment.

 13   90   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 14*  24   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 15   26   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade
           teacher.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     5   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2    190  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 3     6   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."

 4    11   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           character.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 22, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              97 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Book Idea, Post Gutenberg

BYLINE: By THOMAS STAUDTER

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 4;  Column 4;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: TARRYTOWN


WITH "Alfred the Ant," the children's storytelling book he has written,
illustrated and privately published, Jehan Clements wants to parlay his gift of
invention in a more literal sense: the well-traveled purveyor of traditional
tales and original yarns has nearly patented his book's unusual format and
design.

Encouraging greater interaction between a storyteller and his or her audience,
the 48-page, spiral-bound teacher's edition of "Alfred the Ant" is now available
at many bookstores and retailers of educational materials.

And, on Nov. 11 at the Barnes & Noble bookstore in White Plains, Mr. Clements
will demonstrate and autograph copies of "Alfred the Ant" as well as recite some
of his enchanting tales.

Referred to as "the first storytelling flip-over picture book," the concept
behind Mr. Clements's invention, although singular, is quite simple. Instead of
uncomfortably holding a book aloft between forked fingers, or constantly turning
away from a group of listeners to view and read a book, storytellers easily flip
the pages forward for the audience to see.

The real ingenuity of "Alfred the Ant," though, is the page on the reverse side
of the binder, opposite the brightly colored illustration that faces the
audience: a page containing the text of the story, some suggested questions for
listeners and, most important, a smaller version of the illustration facing the
audience.

In addition, the book contains a "pure" storytelling section without
illustration and several activity pages for children, including a picture to
color, a worksheet and a sign alluding to the story's conclusion -- Please Feed
the Ants -- for children to tape to garbage cans.

Dr. Steven Kanor, president and founder of Toys for Special Children, said that
his Hastings-on-Hudson company was featuring "Alfred the Ant" in its catalogue
because "the concept ought to be promoted."

He added, "I even tried to help Jehan pitch his idea and storytelling book to
some of my friends in the publishing business" but his help was to no avail.
Indeed, like many of the stories from his repertory, Mr. Clements's four-year
pursuit of a patent for his flip-over picture book is the saga of an earnest
quest amid strange vagaries.

Starting several years ago with the help of a patent attorney, Mr. Clements
began to research all of the previous inventions closely analogous to his own to
make sure his book was undeniably one of a kind.

Then in May 1990, a prepared application for a patent was sent to the United
States Patent and Trademark Office at the Department of Commerce.

"But the examiner at the Patent Office didn't understand the invention," Mr.
Clements said. It was argued that another patented book idea, an introduction to
the alphabet, preceded his patent claim. Mr. Clements said the examiner never
addressed the storytelling nature of his book or the idea of duplicating the
illustrations.

Three years passed while Mr. Clements waited for a reply from the patent
examiner. During that time he continued to use the prototype of "Alfred the Ant"
at his storytelling performances, and he would explain to teachers and students
how he was trying to get official recognition for his invention. "Everybody was
very supportive, especially the children," Mr. Clements said. "They urged me on
and told me to keep trying."

Representative Benjamin Gilman, Republican of Greenburgh, interceded on behalf
of the storyteller a year ago, only to have the Patent Commissioner declare the
application misplaced. A new application was reconstructed from notes and
microfilm, but the delay and ineptitude cost Mr. Clements an additional $20,000
in legal fees.

A new examiner has since evaluated the storytelling flip-over picture book and
suggested some modifications to Mr. Clements's claims. "I should have the patent
in six months," Mr. Clements said. Meanwhile, he has been promoting "Alfred the
Ant," exhibiting it at the New York Is Book Country in September in Manhattan
and at the recent New England Booksellers Association fair in Boston.

Two Central Park storytelling appearances in September, where sales of "Alfred
the Ant" were donated to Central Park's Playground Partners, brought Mr.
Clements and his invention full circle: he first developed the tale of his
adventurous insect in the park 20 years ago while presenting storytelling
programs for the New York City Parks and Recreation Department.

To some extent, Mr. Clements seems to be fulfilling his destiny. Born in San
Francisco and named for Shah Jehan -- the Mogul emperor who built the Taj Mahal
for his favorite wife -- Mr. Clements grew up in a succession of college towns.
His father, Dr. Millard Clements, is a professor of elementary education and now
teachers at New York University.

After attending six high schools and studying music at two Wisconsin colleges,
Mr. Clements enlisted in the Army and was sent to Vietnam, where he served from
1967 to 1970 as a saxophonist in the Army band.

When stateside again, he alternated between college studies and stand-up comedy
before landing a job developing park programs and storytelling in New York City.

With his beard, handsome appearance and gentle manner, Jehan Clements evokes the
rare aura of a congenial and personable entertainer. He recently captivated a
group of students at the Warner Library here -- demonstrating "Alfred the Ant,"
playing the recorder and, of course, telling stories.

"He tells interesting stories, and I like his book," said Marelyn Pichardo, a
fourth grader from North Tarrytown. She smiled and then also said that the
49-year-old storyteller "looked like Santa Claus."

Advance orders of "Alfred the Ant" have almost depleted the initial printing of
2,000 copies, so perhaps Mr. Clements's saga may be nearing a happy ending.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jehan Clements regaling a group of young people at the Warner
Library in Tarrytown. (Lenore Davis for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              98 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Memorial Cracks Studied

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 46;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Teams of architects and engineers have begun examining cracks in the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in an effort to determine whether wall panels should be
repaired or replaced.

The survey group from the National Park Service Historic American Building
Survey used special cameras and equipment to inspect hairline separations on
Friday.

The cracks have been found in 19 of the 140 black marble panels that make up the
500-foot length of the memorial, which is inscribed with the names of more than
58,200 American soldiers who died or were reported missing in southeast Asia.
The cause of the cracks has not been determined.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              99 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Japan Asks Why A Prophet Bothers

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


EXCEPT for a brief period during the 1960's, Kenzaburo Oe has been the sort of
intellectual, left-leaning author who was well known among brooding Japanese
undergraduates and scholars, but was not particularly widely read. Still, when
he became the surprise choice for the Nobel Prize in Literature last month, most
Japanese, even if they could not name any of his books, took pride in this
affirmation of the richness of their culture. And they left the matter at that.

But Mr. Oe has not let them off so lightly. This owlish, fidgety man, who loves
to talk in excited bursts, toss out French phrases and explicate "Moby Dick,"
caused outrage by doing something dangerously unfashionable here: He took a
stand on principle.

Just days after his Nobel Prize was announced, his name was hastily added to a
list of eminences being given Japan's highest cultural honor, the Imperial Order
of Culture. When he received the call with that news, Mr. Oe said, he responded
without hesitation -- and rejected the award.

It was an almost unheard-of public affront in this polite country, particularly
because the Emperor was involved. Worse, Mr. Oe did not bother with the
elaborate ambiguities that accompany criticisms; he explained his thinking in
plain terms. It seemed like the first shot in a potentially fiery public debate.
In fact, it was not, and that may say more about Japan's current state of mind
than Mr. Oe's politics.

For anyone familiar with his passionate, lyrical books -- especially his morally
charged analysis of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima -- his reasoning could not
have come as a surprise. At the peak of his popularity in the 1960's, he was a
standard-bearer for an angry, disillusioned generation that welcomed the
collapse of the authoritarian imperial system.

Mr. Oe says he regards the Emperor as an undemocratic relic and a reminder of
the horrors of World War II, for which he holds the imperial system responsible.

"The reason I declined the cultural award was that I would not recognize any
authority, any value, higher than democracy," Mr. Oe said in an interview, which
was interrupted by the arrival of a police officer warning that rightists were
planning a big demonstration in front of his house. "This is very simple, but
very important."

He thought for a moment, and added, "I am in a very delicate situation."

A Quaint Thought

That "situation" involves much more than the anger of the thuggish right-wing
groups, which relish any opportunity to rev up their sound trucks and bellow
tinny indignation. Mr. Oe's real problem is that he has found so little public
sympathy for his stand, which seemed to leave most people angry or puzzled, but
conspicuously unmoved. The thought that an ideal was worth fighting for struck
people as quaint.

Indeed, the general reaction was like that of Kazuo Aichi, a former Defense
Minister and a member of a reform movement in the parliament. "My own feeling
was that he hadn't changed at all over the years," Mr. Aichi said in an
interview. "I would have expected that he would have matured, so to speak, and
accepted the award."

A man who had suddenly become the most famous author in the land had raised
serious questions about the imperial system and Japan's odd, American-written
constitution, and thus the more emotional issue of what it means to be Japanese.
Japan is preparing for the 50th anniversary next summer of its surrender after
World War II, a moment for reflection and debate. Also, with an odd coalition of
Socialists and conservatives governing the country, Japan's basic political
values are being questioned for the first time in four decades.

Still, Mr. Oe was greeted with what amounted to a scolding for pushing people to
think so much. It was a revealing moment. Japan is admired for its competitive
economy, the near absence of serious street crime and an unemployment rate of
just 3 percent despite a severe recession. But what of its intellectual life?

"I think it's very interesting that the reaction in general to my tying my life
to my principles was for people to say I'm old-fashioned," Mr. Oe said. "It says
a lot about current attitudes in Japan."

Of course, the days when Washington bristled with impassioned protests about
civil rights or Vietnam are long past, too -- like the demonstrations and riots
here opposing the American military presence.

But moral outrage lives on in the United States and elsewhere -- just witness
the debates over abortion or immigration.In Japan, rarely does any public debate
stir such emotion. For example, there has been a long dispute over whether the
military should participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations. But a
contingent is now helping Rwandan refugees in Zaire, the third time the military
has joined such an operation, and the public is quiescent.

Critics complain the lack of tension has taken a toll on the arts. The movie
industry, which once turned out classics by artists like Akira Kurosawa, is now
known for predictable formula dramas. The most popular movies come from
Hollywood.

Bloodless Books

A number of experts look at literature as hollow and bloodless. "Oe's trying to
do something no one else is trying to do: he's trying to do solid books," Donald
Keene, a professor emeritus at Columbia University and the dean of Japanese
literary experts in the West, said here. "If you go to a bookstore here, unless
it is a very big bookstore, you won't find a real solid literary work. Authors
today are writing for the passing tastes of a young audience. University
students were the real market for serious books, but they don't really read them
anymore. It's a very depressing period."

Mr. Keene added: "It is a statement on a prosperous country, a country that is
very pleased with itself. People don't feel any sense of agitation."

That was evident this past summer, after the Socialists joined with their
conservative foes, the Liberal Democrats, to form a government. During the cold
war, the Socialists saw themselves as the nation's conscience, putting principle
ahead of power as they fought for a pacifist foreign policy, a strong social
welfare system and the closing of American bases here. The positions, however
impractical, struck an emotional chord.

Last June, when the Socialists formed their awkward ruling coalition, they
abandoned most of those principles. And the Socialist Prime Minister, Tomiichi
Murayama, saw his ratings rise.

"Japan has lost the power to connect the principle or theory and reality," Mr.
Oe said. "I think literature's value is in making those connections. That's the
mission of literature. Morals are significant."

He admitted his disappointment at the generally tepid level of discussion of all
the problems: "I was hoping that the 50th anniversary of the war's end would be
a time to reflect, especially on Hiroshima and the use of nuclear bombs. But
that kind of attitude does not exist in Japan. Not now."

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Japan, admired for its dedicated work force, is no longer
stirred up by intellectual passions. A business-training "Boot Camp." (Ethan
Hoffman/Picture Project); Nobel Prize winner Kenzaburo Oe. (Ellen Rudolph for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              100 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Double Trouble

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


Those of us who live a safe distance from Virginia and California are probably
having too much fun arguing the No. 1 election-eve question over dinner: Who
would be scarier, Senator Oliver North or Senator Michael Huffington?

It's a deliciously down-to-the-wire debate. Just when it seemed that Mr. North,
a convicted felon who got off on technicalities, would be the clear winner on
the grounds of proven criminality, Mr. Huffington had to go and admit that he,
too, may have violated Federal law by employing an undocumented nanny. Both men
have a special talent for blaming others for their own misdeeds -- Congress in
Mr. North's case, his wife in Mr. Huffington's -- and both men are outspending
every other candidate in the country to sell themselves in ads rather than face
questions for which their handlers cannot supply answers in advance.

Both men have also been disowned by leaders in their own party, though here Mr.
North has a clear lead. The Reagans, Robert Bork, George Shultz, Caspar
Weinberger and Robert McFarlane have all dissed the colonel, while Mr.
Huffington was snubbed merely by Richard Riordan, the Mayor of Los Angeles, and
was actually given a clean intellectual bill of health by a charmed George Will,
who pronounced him "Not Only 'Not Feinstein' " after plumbing his depths over a
pasta lunch.

Mr. North leads on another front, too. Where Mr. Huffington's record campaign
chest comes from a single donor -- himself -- Mr. North's money derives from the
thousands of foot soldiers of the religious right, who see him as the
charismatic national leader they need to front for the pro-life,
pro-school-prayer, anti-gay agenda that can only be advanced so far by the
less-presentable likes of Jesse Helms and Pat Robertson. Since the religious
right is in striking distance of controlling G.O.P. state organizations in some
30 states, Senator North may be the spiritual leader, if not the
standard-bearer, of a '96 Republican convention that could make its '92 Houston
predecessor look like a pep rally for the A.C.L.U.

Given that Arianna Huffington, who stands in for her husband in most debates, is
a minister in a cult whose leader regards himself as more powerful than Jesus,
Mr. Huffington is never going to be a darling of the religious right. Especially
given his unwavering support for homosexuals in the military.

But Mr. Huffington's support of gay rights is one of the few known and
consistent positions he has ever taken about anything in a scant career that
includes two years in Congress during which he spoke a total of eight minutes
from the floor and a stint in the Reagan Pentagon during which his only known
activity was going to lunch.

Asked about his position on Vietnam as a student at Stanford in the late 1960's,
Mr. Huffington recently said that he was "basically neutral." In a Los Angeles
Times interview, he even tried to dodge questions about Thomas Jefferson, saying
that "I have no idea about what kind of man Jefferson was." Though Mr.
Huffington is now notorious for his hypocritical support of California's
immigrant-bashing ballot initiative, as recently as Oct. 11 he had been unable
either to identify Proposition 187 or take a position on it when questioned
before San Francisco's Commonwealth Club.

So who's scarier -- a well-documented outlaw like Oliver North with a clear
ideological program and an army of zealots to back it up or a nonentity like
Michael Huffington, who stands for little, has no history and has not even been
able to command the loyalty of his fleeing campaign employees and household
help?

On the premise that it's easier to battle the devil you know than the one you
don't, I give the edge to Mr. Huffington. There is, after all, a precedent for
demagogues like Mr. North in our history, and his positions, not to mention his
long paper trail of iniquity, can be fought on specifics. But there is no
precedent for Mr. Huffington. As Alan Brinkley, an American historian at
Columbia University, says, no one in American politics, not even Warren Harding,
"has ever come this far this quickly on the basis of nothing but money and an
artificially created image."

That Mr. Huffington has done so proves that angry California voters, unlike
nature, do not abhor a vacuum. Who next will be sucked in?

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              101 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL STUDY;
The Quadrangle Becomes a Globe

BYLINE: By WILLIAM H. HONAN

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 14; Column 1; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 2412 words


In the late 1860's, when well-to-do American college students began to spend
their junior year abroad and Europe also played host to struggling American
artists, wandering expatriates and well-heeled sightseers on the grand tour, the
novelist Henry James, who probably understood these footloose Americans better
than anyone before or since, was asked to describe them.

"There is but one word to use -- vulgar, vulgar, vulgar!" he rumbled, explaining
that he could not abide their ignorance and "perpetual reference of all things
to some American standard or precedent."

James's novels took a kinder view, frequently emphasizing a noble quality in
American character, but his ill-tempered putdown of his countrymen living abroad
(reported by his brother) has echoed down through the decades.

Today, a growing number of American educators believe that the world is too
small, too competititve and too dangerous to tolerate the sort of ignorant
chauvinism that so provoked James. The cure, they say, is not small, easy or
cheap: American higher education needs to go global.

That does not mean lightheartedly dispatching students to sample cultural
bonbons in exotic lands. To serious-minded American educators, globalization
means such things as the presence of large numbers of foreign students and
professors on campuses in the United States, so that this fall at New York
University's Washington Square campus, for example, more than 30 different
languages are being spoken.

It means tens, ultimately hundrends of thousands of American students resident
in foreign countries, mastering the local language and culture and -- as with
present-day University of California students -- taking a full load of rigorous,
faculty-screened courses taught in the native tongue at one of 100 institutions
in 32 different countries.

It means internationalizing the curriculum, as in a course in accounting at the
University of Michigan School of Business that now includes the study of
Japanese regulations permitting the depreciation of assets at many times the
rate allowed in the United States.

It means using the latest technology so that sudents at Ramapo College, a small,
publicly supported institution in Mahwah, N.J., join in discussions with other
students, scholars, artists and officials around the world in 120
teleconferences every year.

"International education is not a new idea, but the times have now conjoined to
make it dominant," said L. Jay Oliva, the president of New York University, who
has taken a leading role in the movement.

"What's happening here," he continued, "is comparable to what happened in the
19th century when Johns Hopkins University adopted the philosophy of the great
German research universities and set the pattern for Harvard, Yale and the
others."

The number of American student studying abroad has grown steadily over the last
five years and is now at a record high of 72,000, according to the Institute of
International Education, the nation's leading educational exchange organization.
This figure is small in comparison with the number of foreign students studying
in the United States (438,000, or six times as many), but -- significantly --
the profile of these itinerant American students has changed.

"Typically, they used to be affluent women in their junior year at one of the
elite Seven Sisters colleges and they would be studying architecture and French
language in Paris," said Richard M. Krasno, president of the institute. "But
today more of them tend to be male, they are less likely to be affluent, they
may be interested in business or industry and there's a slight shift away from
Europe as their destination."

One conspicuous sign of the growth of international studies is the number of
study-abroad programs now being offered. Ranging from a business and economics
course at the university of Hungary in Pecs to another concentrating on language
and culture at the leading university in Hanoi, Vietnam, these programs have
virtually doubled over the last decade, from 1,857 to 3,701.

Students are eagerly responding. At an elite institution like Harvard
University, 51 percent of the undergraduates participate in at least one work or
study program abroad. At Kalamazoo College, a small, selective liberal arts
school in Kalamazoo, Mich., 85 percent of the students study overseas thanks to
a private gift of more than $5 million that subsidizes travel and on-site living
expenses.

A few American colleges and universities have not been satisfied with merely
offering study-abroad programs but have adopted globalism as a fundamental
objective for the entire institution. Speaking for N.Y.U., Mr. Oliva recently
declared: "We plan to enter the next century as the quintessential global
university. We will extend to every undergraduate the opportunity to study
abroad as part of his or her N.Y.U. education, and we will become a center for
global faculty inquiry and a center for worldwide conferences of university
leaders."

Robert A. Scott, president of Ramapo College in New Jersey, said his institution
aspired to be "a global college" for more practical reasons. "We believe," he
said, "that our graduates likely will either supervise or be supervised by
someone of another race, ethnicity or nationality, and that their careers and
lives as citizens will be affected by international and intercultural life."

Several American colleges and universities have established campuses in foreign
countries so that students may spend extended periods abroad and earn credits
readily accepted by employers and graduate schools in the United States. Webster
University in St. Louis operates wholly owned branches in Geneva, London, Vienna
and the Dutch city of Leiden.

Emerson College, a small liberal arts school in Boston, has established a branch
in Maastricht, the Netherlands, where students study subjects such as global
marketing, communications and advertising.

Some of these branches fare better than others; Japan, for example, has proved
especially tricky for American institutions to penetrate. Of the more than 20
American branches established in Japan in recent years, at least 9 have failed,
most recently a Texas A & M branch in Koriyama. All are said to have been
victims of the economic recession in Japan and the unexpected difficulty of
recruiting Japanese students.

But if it has not always been easy to attract foreign students to American
compuses overseas, foreign students have for years flocked to attend colleges
and universities in the United States. In fact, according to the Department of
Commerce, the 438,000 foreign students currently resident in the United States,
while only a small fraction of the total enrollment of 14.5 million, have fed a
major and all-but-hidden export industry bringing some $6 billion annual to the
American economy.

The cohort of foreign students has kept growing steadily at the rate of about
4.5 percent a year for the past two decades. Quite often, these students become
leaders in their societies at home. Chang-Lin Tien, chancellor of the University
of California at Berkeley, said he recently attended a state reception in Seoul,
South Korea, at which no fewer than seven Cabinet ministers introduced
themselves to him as Berkeley graduates.

"That's typical," Chancellor Tien remarked. "I get the same greetings in
Indonesia and Singapore."

The reasons for all of this activity are many. The first and most important is
the rise of the global economy. Alert, job-oriented students have come to
realize that as the world shrinks, many of the best jobs are going to go to
college graduates who possess international skills. For example, after
graduating from Wellesley College in 1987, Cynthia Jeffers taught English for
two years in Japan under a program run by the Ministry of Education. She then
returned to the United States, entered the Harvard Business School and upon her
graduation last June landed a job as an associate in the corporate finance
department of Goldman, Sachs & Company, one of the major brokerage firms on Wall
Street. Her experience in Japan, she said, greatly increased her prospects in
the job market.

Another stimulus for globalization is that most financial aid for students has
recently become "portable," as college officials like to say. In the past,
vaguely worded Federal statutes authorizing financial aid for college students
-- Pell grants, Stafford loans and the like -- made many student advisers
hesitant to recommend the use of these grants overseas.

Stephen Cooper, the director of academic programs abroad at Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge, said that he and a group of associates successfully
lobbied Congress to make every form of Federal aid for students applicable for
study overseas. The new explicit language appears in the Higher Education Act of
1992.

"Judging from the number of inquiries I've received from around the country,
this is having a big impact," said Professor Cooper.

Still another spur is the development and prevalence of new communications
technology that allows educators to leap oceans and cross borders with impunity.
B. Joseph White, dean of the University of Michigan Business School and a
pioneer in the field educators now call "distance learning," has taken the new
technology a step further. Last year Dean White set up a program sponsored by
Cathay Pacific, the national airline of Hong Kong, that employs interactive
television to link M.B.A. candidates in Hong Kong with professors at Ann Arbor.

"It's actually a complex teaching system because we don't believe we can provide
the quality we want with interactive TV alone," said Dean White. "Consequently,
we send our faculty to Hong Kong and bring their students here for face-to-face
meetings."

"It's the future," he continued. "Our pilot project for Cathay Pacific carries
with it a vast productivity potential."

Another reason for the growth of interest in globalization is that travel
abroad, like hit shows on Broadway, has good word of mouth. "It's a cliche, but
over and over you hear students saying 'It changed my life!' " said Dr. Krasno.

It is a point confirmed by Corbin Smith, the director of Stanford University's
Overseas Study Office. "When we surveyed the senior class here over the last few
years," Mr. Smith said, "asking what was the most meaningful experience during
their undergraduate years, more than 87 percent of those who participated in a
Stanford study-abroad program gave that the highest rating."

Not everyone is so enthusiastic. Roger Kimball, the neoconservative author of
"Tenured Radicals," which takes a skeptical look at academia, observes that
colleges are "making out like bandits" by collecting full tuition from students
and "placing them at a fraction of that cost at overseas institutions."

It is true that the ranks of foreign students in the United States have been
swollen not only by the quality of colleges here but also by sharp-eyed
admissions officials who have successfully recruited well-heeled foreign
students when they were unable to fill their campuses with enough American
students able to pay the ever-rising tuition costs.

In fact, unregulated overseas recruitment proved so easy -- and profitable --
that a few years ago unscrupulous hucksters began to recruit foreign students
for small community colleges in the United States with misleading promises that
after a year or two the student could transfer into Harvard or M.I.T. Today,
some professional organizations have adopted generally effective guidelines and
codes of ethics to substantially reduce such misrepresentations.

And some critics, like Mr. Kimball, say there is a great
 Continued on Page 31
 Continued from Page 26

 deal of wishful thinking in the notion that "a semester abroad is going to make
one into an internationalist."

Holly M. Carter, dean of the office of educational opportunity programs at
Northeastern University, argues that the belief that today's college students
are more culturally aware than their predecessors is a comforting myth that
ignores "the increase in hate crimes, blatant bigotry and racism on the
campuses."

But educational leaders like Mr. Oliva of N.Y.U. argue that a global perspective
is vital to the international community. "There are at least three factors
driving the globalization of education today," he said. "The first is purely
serendipitous: We're on the cusp of a new wave of immigration." (About a million
immigrants have come to New York over the past decade, many of whom have
attended N.Y.U.)

"Second," he continued, "people realize that the more different environments you
move into, the more you learn. Conversely, the more you study with people just
like yourself, the less you learn.

"I realize in my own life that I never learned more than when I was overseas for
a year and a half. Everything became very vivid. There was no moment when I
could let my mind relax. And gradually, I discovered that I could master
change."

"And third," Mr. Oliva said, "the demise of the Soviet Union has made Americans
more international than ever. It made us realize that the Soviet Union had been
a major force in policing ethnic rivalries. The world got capped under big
cloaks. We used to think of the division between Northern and Southern Ireland,
and what's happening in Yemen, as anomalies. Now we see them as the rule.

"In the future," he continued, "we probably face 30 to 40 years of instability
and border wars like the 19th century, but with one frightening difference --
small nations possessing immensely destructive weapons. So our job in
international education is to help provide a global environment in which these
ethnic disputes can be handled on the basis of intellectual discourse and
debate, not war."

John Markham, director of the University of California's Education Abroad
Program, says, "The question I like to ask is: Should the University of
California have a foreign policy?"

Most educators acknowledge that the vast majority of American faculty and
students are still relatively insular, but they are optimistic that economic
forces will prevail.

"The sea change will occur," Dr. Krasno said, "when the global economy drives
corporate leaders to say they want to hire people with foreign language skills
and knowledge of foreign cultures, and that all things being equal they will
hire them first. That's when the rush will begin."

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Many universities are encouraging students to spend time
abroad. New York University students relaxing near temple ruins in Cape Sounton
in Greece. (New York University); For students abroad, getting to know a new
culture, rather than simply sightseeing, has become a primary concern, with a
combined emphasis on both living in another society and maintaining traditional
academic activites. Above, students from Kalamazoo College shopping at a fruit
stand in Caen, France. At right, Deanna McHugh studying in the Library of
Magdalen College at Oxford University in England. (Jonathan Player for The New
York Times; Kalamazoo College)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              102 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 595 words



International

South Korea said it would ease restrictions on business with Communist North
Korea. Little is known about the workings of North Korea, but the chance to open
one of the world's last closed economies seems likely to pique international
business interest of the kind whetted by China and even Vietnam. [Page A1.]
Losses at Carl Zeiss reflect the difficulties in reuniting economies of eastern
and western Germany. The lenses and optics company says it faces collapse unless
it further slashes jobs. [D1.]


Companies

Levi Strauss has begun offering digitally tailored blue jeans. A personal
computer at an Original Levi's Store can transmit the measurements of a customer
to a factory in Tennessee, where a robotic tailor will cut a bolt of denim to
order. The jeans are part of a trend toward mass customization, in which
computerized instructions permit factories to modify mass-market products to
suit the needs of individual customers. [A1.]

Sears, Roebuck handed over ownership of the Sears Tower to a trust set up to
benefit the building's mortgage holders. [D1.]
The appeal of producing videos for the home market is growing in Hollywood.
Virtually every large studio is trying to cash in on the "direct-to-video"
approach. [D1.]
Bell Atlantic and Nynex settled a lawsuit with AT&T, removing a final hitch in
AT&T's absorption of McCaw Cellular. [D1.]
An alliance between Apple Computer and I.B.M. was met with skepticism. Until the
two companies form a common software strategy, they will be at a disadvantage,
some analysts said. [D4.]
Upjohn will sell its agricultural seed subsidiary to Empresas La Moderna of
Mexico for $300 million in cash. [D4.]
The chief financial officer of Gtech Holdings plans to resign. [D4.]
Service Merchandise named a Saks Fifth Avenue executive as president and chief
operating officer. [D5.]

Siemens announced an interactive video alliance with Sun Microsystems and
Scientific-Atlanta. [D5.]
NEC says it can build a supercomputer that is the fastest of its kind. NEC wants
to build market share in supercomputers. [D7.]
ESPN agreed to acquire 80 percent of Sports Ticker, a sports-wire news service,
from Dow Jones, which will keep 20 percent. [D24.]

The Economy

Three-dimensional computing is taking its first steps. Engineers in the United
States and Japan are starting to build computing systems that rise from the
surface of silicon chips the size of a fingernail. The goal is more power in
less space. [D1.]
Consumer borrowing increased at a 14.6 percent annual rate in September. Growth
in auto loans was especially strong. [D2.]
The Supreme Court heard arguments on Amtrak's rejection of a political ad, a
potential First Amendment case. [A15.]

Markets

Stocks were mixed as traders awaited today's elections. [D10.]
Treasury prices were flat in quiet trading. [D21.]
Crude oil prices tumbled after a report showed supply could outstrip demand this
winter. Cotton prices rose. [D23.]
The dollar was little changed against other leading currencies amid uncertainty
over United States monetary policy. [D23.]

Today's Columns

Campaign attacks are the least of National Education's problems. Its stock was
battered even before the company became a target in the California race for the
Senate. Market Place. [D10.]
The selling of the candidates has had little to teach marketers. Ugly,
mean-spirited tactics have dominated the advertisements of Campaign '94. Stuart
Elliott: Advertising. [D24.]

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              103 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

South Korea to Lift Curbs On Business Ties to North

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1393 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 7


South Korea said today that it would begin lifting restrictions on business
dealings with North Korea, clearing the way for economic cooperation between the
two countries still divided by the legacy of the cold war.

In short North Korea, one of the world's most isolated nations and a last
bastion of Stalinism, looks open for business.

The announcement today by President Kim Young Sam of South Korea effectively
fires the starter's gun for a race by South Korean companies to establish
factories and build resorts in North Korea. Such plans had been announced two to
three years ago, but were frozen last year as a crisis developed over the
Communist nation's suspected nuclear weapons program.

"It is true that in the past, intra-Korean relations were bogged down over the
nuclear issue and went through a difficult phase," President Kim said in a
speech today to a group of businessmen in Seoul. "However, we have reached the
point when we should seriously re-examine this topic and start pushing for a
policy of economic cooperation with North Korea."

Mr. Kim said he would take "step-by-step measures" to create an atmosphere
conducive to cooperation by encouraging joint industrial projects between North
and South Korea.

Little is known about the workings of North Korea, a reclusive Communist state,
so its worth as an emerging market is hard to calculate. Yet the prospect of
opening one of the world's last closed economies seems bound to pique the kind
of international business interest that has been whetted by China and, to a
lesser degree, Vietnam.

Until now, direct trade between North and South Korea has been prohibited. But
indirect trade, through Hong Kong or other third parties, has grown to about
$200 million a year. Much of the trade consists of North Korean exports of raw
materials and clothing.

South Korea's huge conglomerates, known as chaebol, began staking out their turf
in North Korea well before the latest nuclear crisis.

The Hyundai Group, for instance, has expressed interest in developing a resort
near Mount Kumgang, a scenic spot north of the eastern end of the demilitarized
zone separating the two Koreas. And another conglomerate, Daewoo, reached an
agreement with North Korea to run factories in Nampo, a port near Pyongyang, the
capital, to produce shirts, underwear, eating utensils and other light products.

American, European and Asian companies are also quietly exploring opportunities
in North Korea. But the American companies are generally quiet about their plans
because Washington has not yet lifted restrictions barring them from doing any
business with North Korea.

"There's no reason to go beyond the borderline at the moment," said an executive
of AT&T in Seoul. The company, which would like to connect North Korea to its
telephone service and sell it telecommunications equipment, has been talking to
people at the North Korean mission at the United Nations.

Businessmen in Seoul say other American companies interested in at least looking
at North Korea include Coca-Cola, Bechtel and Hewlett-Packard.

Shell Oil and the ING Bank of the Netherlands are two European-based companies
whose officials have visited North Korea, but say they have not yet decided
whether to invest.

Kim Jong Il, who took over as North Korean leader in the aftermath of the death
of his father, President Kim Il Sung, in July, seems to be looking for foreign
investment to shore up a tottering economy. The North Korean economy has been
contracting at a rate of 5 percent a year and is beset by severe fuel shortages.
The country's gross national product has been estimated at well below $1,000 per
capita in a population of about 22 million.

The Communist Government is soliciting foreign companies to set up operations in
a free trade zone in the far northeast corner of the country, near the Tumen
River and the borders with China and Russia. This especially isolated area was
believed to have been selected, in part, to prevent Western and capitalist ideas
from loosening the Pyongyang leadership's hold over the population.

In foreign economic terms, what North Korea is believed to offer is an obedient,
low-wage work force and a location near the attractive markets of China, South
Korea and Japan. The country is also rich in some metal ores.

But roads and telecommunications are extremely poor. The potential market of 22
million is small by Asian standards, and the nation lacks a convertible
currency.

Prospective investors will also wonder whether North Korea, with no history of
private enterprise, will respect private property and profit.

"We don't even know how much water costs there," Yi Hyo Keun, senior researcher
at the Daewoo Research Institute, said in an interview in Seoul, the South
Korean capital, last week.

As a result there is a lot of information-gathering, but foreign companies have
not yet committed themselves to an economic or business role. "Everyone seems to
be waiting for someone to make the first leap," said Michael Breen, a
Seoul-based consultant on North Korea.

Tony Michell, president of the Euro-Asian Business Consultancy, which offers to
help set up shop in North Korea, said his company had been approached by 42
companies -- 10 American, 10 Asian and 22 European. But only five of those
companies are serious about investing in North Korea, he said. He did not
identify them.

The American Chamber of Commerce in Korea, which is based in Seoul, is trying to
arrange an information-gathering trip to North Korea. Some executives are
concerned that American companies will be left behind if Washington does not
move rapidly to lift restrictions.

American businessmen are allowed to visit North Korea and pay for their hotel,
food and transportation. But United States laws forbid them to open a bank
account, hire a North Korean employee, enter into a contract or transact just
about any other business.

The companies most interested in North Korea are South Korean. The common
language and culture and proximity to home compensate for the possibility that
the North's wages may not be as low as in Vietnam or China.

South Korean companies have expressed fear that Japanese competitors might beat
them to set up factories in North Korea. But Japanese companies are expected to
go slow, partly because of a history of poor relations between Japan and Korea
resulting from World War II.

Moreover, profit is not the only motive for South Korean companies. Another is
to bolster North Korea's economy in expectation of eventual reunification on the
Korean peninsula.

"I'd like to see that North Korea can be built," said Kim Young Chull, who
escaped from North Korea as a boy with his family in 1946. Mr. Kim is now vice
chairman of the Jindo Corporation, which makes fur coats and shipping
containers.

The Kolon International Corporation, a manufacturer of clothing, sporting goods
and other products, has been sending fabrics to North Korea to be sewn into
school bags and backpacks since 1989, when Seoul first loosened some
restrictions on business with the North.

But Kolon officials have never been able to visit the company's factories in the
North or even to talk directly to the factory managers, Instead, they work
through middlemen in Hong Kong or Beijing. With restrictions now likely to be
lifted on business travel, a Kolon manager said, the company can produce more
finished goods, like fashionable clothing, in North Korea.

                             --------------------


U.S. Backs Seoul Move

ELMENDORF AIR FORCE BASE, Alaska, Nov. 7 (Special to The New York Times) -- In
another sign that the barriers to dealing with North Korea are crumbling, the
United States will support the Communist country's entry into the 18-member
forum for Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation and will encourage North Korean
economic ties with South Korea and the rest of Asia.

Secretary of State Warren Christopher announced the Administration's position
today as he embraced remarks by President Kim of South Korea that Seoul would
lift its ban on business contacts with the North.

Speaking to reporters on the way to Seoul, where he will meet with South Korean
leaders, Mr. Christopher heaped praise on the policy shift by the south and
credited the Administration's recent nuclear accord with North Korea for making
it possible.

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              104 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 8, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 803 words


International A3-12

OPENING UP NORTH KOREA
South Korea will ease curbs on doing business with North Korea, opening one of
the world's last closed economies. The prospect seems bound to pique the kind of
international interest that has been whetted by China and Vietnam.  A1



PALESTINIAN MILITANCY GROWS
Islamic militancy has become widespread in the West bank and Gaza, fed by
dissatisfaction with the Palestine Liberation Organization's performance in the
self-rule areas under its pact with Israel.  A1

WEST BANK HOSTILITY REMAINS
The shrine in Hebron where a Jewish settler killed 29 Muslim worshipers, has
reopened, but the tensions continue and the failure of each side to recognize
the other's legitimacy there remains.  A10

ITALIAN HEALTH CARE FAILING
The Italian health care system offers free service to all, but it is
increasingly coming under criticism, in part because it has become embroiled
with Italian politics.  A3

BOSNIAN WAR CRIMES CHARGE
The tribunal that will try war crimes in the former Yugoslavia made its first
indictment, of a Bosnian Serb accused of murder and torture as the commander of
a concentration camp.  A5

NEW U.S. STRATEGY FOR ZAIRE
The United States is trying to help the new reform-oriented Prime Minister of
Zaire to build a power base independent of the country's dictator, but some fear
that the strategy could backfire.  A9

RWANDAN OPPOSES U.S. ENVOY
Rwanda's most powerful leader accused the American ambassador of there of
informing Washington incorrectly out of sympathy to the former Government, and
urged that he be replaced.  A11

Rebels were retreating from their stronghold in Angola.  A8

Moscow Journal: Soviet dreams, now for sale.  A4

National A14-21

FINAL FLURRY OF CAMPAIGNING
President Clinton made an election eve dash to Delaware, Michigan and Minnesota,
hoping to turn a Senate race in at least one of those states to the Democrats'
favor.  A1

GOVERNORSHIPS AT STAKE
Many prominent Democratic governors are in close races for re-election, while
the best-known Republican governors seem safely ahead of their challengers.  A20


A GUIDE TO ELECTION NIGHT
What to watch for, whom to watch, and where. What does it all mean? A political
road map.  A21

The last day of campaigning in Virginia's Senate race.  A21

California's bitter, and close, Senate campaign remained both.  A21

NATIONAL DECLINE IN CRIME
Murder, robbery and assault have declined in most of the nation's largest
cities, a survey by the New York City Police Department has found.  A14

A SEQUEL TO TAILHOOK
The Navy is investigating accusations that several male instructors at a large
training base in San Diego demanded sex from female sailors in return for
passing grades.  A14

SIMPSON TRIAL TO BE TELEVISED
Judge Lance Ito will allow a single television camera in his courtroom for the
trial of O. J. Simpson.  A16

PUBLIC SPACE OR PRIVATE SECTOR?
Can Amtrak ban political ads from its train stations? Only if the Supreme Court
declares the railroad a Government entity.  A15

DOUBTS ABOUT A VENERABLE NAME
The NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund is contemplating how to differentiate
itself from the troubled civil rights group.  A18

DIGITALLY TAILORED LEVI'S
Levi Strauss has begun offering digitally tailored blue jeans. Customers visit
an Original Levi's Store; their measurements are transmitted to a factory in
Tennessee, and a robotic tailor cuts the denim.  A1

Metro Digest B1

CLINICAL TRIALS TO BE CUT
New York City is losing three of its four federally funded clinical trials. As a
result, the number of New York AIDS patients treated in the research projects
will decline to 534 from 2,130 over the next three years.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-12

Clues to the cerebellum's role in human cognition.  C1

The benefits and drawbacks of early cancer testing are debated.  C1

How to make a male fish look good to females.  C1

Fashion Page B9

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Three Stooges's heirs in a lawsuit.  C13

Theater: "Inside Out." C13

Music: Schumann weekend.  C13

Television: "Cosmic Slop." C18

Sports B10-15

Football: Jets hit a peak.  B11

Obituaries B7-8

Milton J. Petrie, retailer and philanthropist.  B8

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Vote!

Election Day choices.

The champ, until May.

Leon Sigal: Nuclear diplomacy.

Letters

Russell Baker: Howls from the jungle.

Ronald A. Heifetz: We're to blame.

Gabor S. Boritt: Ike liked term limits.

Kern Delince: Haiti needs no army.

Chronicle B20

Chess C9

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              105 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
In Crumbling Embassy, Echoes of a Fateful Day

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Nov. 2


Nearly 20 years after the end of the war, there are still places in Vietnam that
can make an American shudder. The battlefields of Khe Sanh. The village of My
Lai. The prison known as the Hanoi Hilton. The rooftop of the United States
Embassy in Saigon.

Today, the killing grounds of Khe Sanh and My Lai are grown over in places with
rice paddy, verdant proof of the desire of the Vietnamese to put the war behind
them, and much of the Hanoi Hilton is destined for the wrecking ball to make way
for a modern office building.

But the old American Embassy is still here, the gravel-strewn rooftop still
littered with United States Army-issue green vinyl sandbags and, now rusting,
the helicopter landing pad that, as dawn approached on April 30, 1975, was the
scene of the frantic, humiliating evacuation of the last Americans from Saigon.
Hours after the Americans fled, the city was overrun by North Vietnamese troops
and renamed for Ho Chi Minh.

The 20th anniversary of the evacuation is only five months off, and as it
approaches the United States Embassy is being emptied again. This time it is the
Vietnamese who are leaving.

The Vietnamese Government has ordered the current occupants, the state-owned oil
company PetroVietnam and its affiliates, to vacate their offices by the end of
next month to make way for the building's old tenants. Vietnam is about to hand
the embassy compound back to the United States.

"It's our building and for better or worse, good memories or bad, we get it
back," said an American diplomat who is helping negotiate the return of the
embassy building and 21 other American-owned properties, most of them seized by
the North Vietnamese when they overran the South. "There has been no decision
about what to do with it. It's in bad shape."

American officials who have inspected the six-story chancery, which was built in
the mid-1960's for what was then a princely sum of $2 million, say that it has
so deteriorated in southern Vietnam's unrelenting tropical heat that it may now
be unusable.

The white concrete exterior is crumbling, with thick tangles of clinging vines
and even small trees pushing through cracks in the building's grime-smeared
shell. Inside, the plumbing and electrical wiring barely function. Toilets are
flushed with water scooped out of plastic tubs lined up near the sinks.

The elevators broke down years ago, and the only way to the once-restricted
sixth floor, where a series of American ambassadors and their military
counterparts plotted in secret to save the South from the North Vietnamese
threat, is up a dank staircase.

A separate, unlighted staircase leads from the sixth floor to the roof, and it
was up those stairs that hundreds of Americans scrambled on that night in April
1975, desperate to get on board one of the helicopters shuttling between the
embassy and Navy ships waiting off the coast.

"I know this embassy is an historic place, historic both for the Vietnamese and
the Americans," said Pham Van Tuan, who works at the building as a caretaker. He
stood on the roof near a stack of rusty C-ration cans left behind 20 years ago
by the American marines who manned the embassy's rooftop gun emplacements. "I
think this building should be a good symbol of the new friendship between the
United States and Vietnam," he said.

It will not be used as an embassy again. The capital of the reunified nation is
Hanoi, and the United States has found a new nine-story building there to serve
as an embassy when full diplomatic ties are restored. American officials say the
old embassy building here could possibly serve as a consulate, although it may
be too big for that purpose.

If the building does come down, it would disappoint many of the Vietnamese who
walk past it every day, especially the many southern Vietnamese who, whatever
their memories of the war and the ignominious American departure, still remember
the Americans fondly.

Chau Cam Khanh, 45, the director of a health clinic in Ho Chi Minh City, was
born and raised in a city that he still calls Saigon, and he says he can
remember the thwonk-thwonk-thwonk of the American helicopters that landed on the
embassy on the night of the evacuation.

"I could not see it because I was hiding, but maybe everybody in the city could
hear it," he said. "This is a bad memory."

Still, the recollection does not shake his insistence that the crumbling embassy
is "very beautiful, and I think of it like an historical palace."

"I hope it stays forever."

Americans might be forgiven for thinking differently about a structure that, as
much as any in Vietnam, symbolizes the American failure here.

"This building represents a terrible part of American history," said George
Miller of Lido Beach, L.I., who stood outside the embassy early one morning with
a busload of other American tourists.

Gerald Sobel, an internist from Chicago, shook his head as he stared up and down
the hulk of the old embassy, agreeing that it might be best for the United
States simply to tear it down.

"Seeing it makes me think about the whole significance of our involvement in
Vietnam," he said. "I can understand how the local people might feel, but I
think a new building might be better. It would give us a new start in Vietnam."


LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: On April 30, 1975, the last Americans to be evacuated from
Saigon left in helicopters from the American Embassy roof. Signs of that frantic
retreat are still evident as Vietnam prepares to hand back the building. (David
Portnoy/Black Star, for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              106 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1994 ELECTIONS: MAN IN THE NEWS -- John Grosvenor Rowland;
Behind the Issues, a Yearning for Lost Innocence

BYLINE: By GEORGE JUDSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 14;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WATERBURY, Conn., Nov. 8


In his victory speech on primary night two months ago, John G. Rowland talked
about the good old days in his hometown of Waterbury, a time not so long ago
when children had the run of not just their neighborhoods, but the entire city.

In his neighborhood, he recalled, he and his friends hopped a fence so often to
cut across one family's yard that the father finally did something about it: he
put a gate in the fence. "Now," Mr. Rowland said, "they'd probably call the
police."

In running for governor, Mr. Rowland campaigned against a state government that
he said had grown at the expense of its constituents, overtaxing and
overregulating them while failing to protect their jobs from a weak economy and
their homes and families from criminals.

But beneath those issues, the 37-year-old Republican was campaigning against the
loss of innocence felt by so many people since his own childhood in the 1960's.
Neighborliness has diminished, fear and insecurity have grown, and to Mr.
Rowland, government is to blame. Or at least, government is one problem about
which something can be done.

"We're told by government every day what to do and how to do it," he told his
cheering supporters that night.

"Our philosophy is sound," he said. "We want less government in our lives."

John Grosvenor Rowland was born in Waterbury on May 24, 1957, the first of five
children -- four sons and a daughter. Rowlands had lived in Waterbury for
generations, and they were Republicans active in the city's politics. Both his
father and grandfather had served as comptroller.

Growing up in the Overlook section, a hilltop neighborhood of large stately
houses, Mr. Rowland attended Holy Cross High School, where he was captain of the
wrestling team and senior class president. After graduating in 1975, he attended
Villanova University and earned a business degree.

Mr. Rowland's main energies at Villanova, however, were invested in his
fraternity, Tau Kappa Epsilon, which elected him president, and the campus
chapter of College Republicans, which he also led. "Work hard, play hard," was
his motto, friends say.

He also found time to manage the primary campaign of another young Republican,
Robert McMahon, challenging the party machine for a legislative seat in
Pennsylvania. His candidate narrowly lost.

In 1979, Mr. Rowland came home to Waterbury to work in his family's insurance
agency. The city was in economic eclipse, its brass industry wiped out by the
popularity of a cheaper material, plastic, and by cheaper labor in other states.
In 1980, at age 23, he ran for the State House of Representatives and was swept
into office in the first Reagan landslide.

In Hartford, Mr. Rowland became a member of the Republican opposition, voting
against the growing state budget and proposing a plan to change Connecticut's
welfare system. In 1982, he won re-election and was appointed a House minority
whip.

Economic distress made Waterbury and the Naugatuck Valley a prime territory for
Reagan Democrats, and in 1984 Mr. Rowland rode the second Reagan landslide to a
victory over the Democratic incumbent in the Fifth Congressional District,
William Ratchford.

In Washington, Mr. Rowland, at 27, combined youth and a fraternity president's
good humor with patriotic conservatism. He won a seat on the Armed Services
Committee and led a task force pressing the search for soldiers missing in
action in Vietnam. In 1988, he won re-election to a third term with 74 percent
of the vote.

Among Connecticut Republicans, power was shifting from the old elite to a more
conservative middle-class base exemplified by Mr. Rowland. When Lowell P.
Weicker Jr., a liberal, lost his Senate seat in 1988, he also lost his hold over
the party, and Mr. Rowland emerged as its candidate for governor in 1990.

Democrats were in disarray, but Mr. Weicker entered the race as an independent
and quickly took the lead. And in a statewide campaign, Mr. Rowland's youthful
conservatism hurt him for the first time. His endorsement of abortion rights, a
reversal of his longstanding opposition, was attacked as insincere. He appeared
alternately harsh and flippant as he vowed to end the state's fiscal crisis at
the expense of state employees rather than raise taxes. Even so, he lost to Mr.
Weicker by only 32,736 votes.

After 1990, Mr. Rowland founded a consulting firm and worked with some of the
state's largest military contractors. He also separated from his wife, Deborah,
with whom he had three children, and in 1994 was divorced.

Mr. Rowland, in interviews, has maintained that he has never had a grand plan
for his political career. "When I was a state rep I never thought I would go to
Congress," he said. "When I was in Congress I never anticipated running for
governor."

And early this year, he announced as a candidate for governor again, saying
Connecticut was worse off than in 1990. Looking to Christine Todd Whitman in New
Jersey and William Weld in Massachusetts as models of fiscally conservative but
socially moderate Republicans, he set restoring Connecticut's economy by cutting
taxes and spending -- by getting government out of the way -- as the main issue
in the campaign.

"We want to get back to the basics," Mr. Rowland would say throughout the
campaign. "We want to bring back things to local control."

NAME: John G. Rowland

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              107 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 10, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Accused on Rights

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 91 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Nov. 9


A human rights group says the police have arrested Buddhist leaders in Ho Chi
Minh City after they tried to deliver aid to flood victims in the Mekong River
region.

The Foreign Affairs Ministry today denied the report.

A spokeswoman for the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights, based in Gennevilliers,
France, said on Tuesday that the police had detained at least five monks and
leaders of the Unified Buddhist Church of Vietnam. The church was banned after
the Government set up the state-controlled Vietnam Buddhist Church in 1981.

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              108 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A New Guideline on History Looks Beyond Old Europe

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words


A Federal education panel today will announce new world-history standards that
keep William the Conqueror and the Battle of Hastings in public-school lesson
plans but also give emphasis to non-European hallmarks like China's Sung
dynasty, which developed paper currency, gunpowder and wood-block book printing
from the 10th to the 13th century.

The standards, which are voluntary, retain the study of the Greek city-states
and the Roman Empire but add the Mauryan Empire in India and the Olmec culture,
which influenced the Zapotec and Mayan civilizations.

Two years in the making, the standards ask teachers to broaden their scope
beyond Europe and ask students to go beyond rote memorizing and explain, analyze
and explore historical movements around the world.

"They represent a commitment to genuine globe-encompassing history, not just the
history of Western civilization," said Ross E. Dunn, who served as the
coordinating editor for the standards, developed by historians commissioned by
the Department of Education and the National Endowment for the Humanities during
the Bush Administration. Mr. Dunn is a professor of history at San Diego State
University and former president of the World History Association.

The historians who wrote the standards are well aware that their work may offer
yet another opportunity for the culture wars to enter the high school arena,
just as their American history standards did when released last month.

"The more strident debate," said Peter N. Stearns, a historian at
Carnegie-Mellon University who helped evaluate the standards, "is between those
who think there are some special marvelous features about the Western tradition
that students should be exposed to -- indoctrinated in -- as a way to realize
their own values are privileged, and others who feel it's much more important
for students to have a sense of the way the larger world has developed
historically and the position of Western civilization."

The new standards have now been seen and supported by hundreds of historians and
educators but have not been made generally public.  Many professors and
historians who have been most vocal in debates over multiculturalism have not
yet seen them.

In the teaching of world history, there is a "legitimate discussion about what
kind of non-U.S. history can be best digested," said Mr. Stearns, who is dean of
the College of Humanities and Social Sciences at Carnegie-Mellon and head of the
American Historical Association task force that evaluated the standards.

Mr. Stearns said he thought the standards were "quite strong" although
characterized by "a level of detail that may be slightly self-defeating."

"I could have been more comfortable with a sparer set of standards," he said.

The release of the world-history standards follows the release of new standards
for American history, published on Oct. 26, that drew fire from Lynne V. Cheney,
who was chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities when the
endowment commissioned the work.

Mrs. Cheney contends that for the sake of political correctness, history
focusing on minorities was included in the American history standards at the
expense of much that is significant about the nation's past. Teachers and
historians who worked on the standards disagree.

This week Under Secretary of Education Marshall S. Smith, former dean of the
School of Education at Stanford University, rejected Mrs. Cheney's contention
that the Clinton Administration would adopt the proposed standards as matters of
official knowledge. "We're really trying to keep hands off," he said, stressing
that any national standards would be voluntary.

The world-history standards, for grades 5 to 12 -- and elementary-school history
standards, for kindergarten through fourth grade, also to be released today --
are the result of a collaboration by historians, classroom teachers, school
administrators and educational groups across the country. They are among a
series of curriculum standards, in a range of subjects, written by panels of
educators appointed during the Bush Administration.

The world-history projects were coordinated by the National Center for History
in the Schools, at the University of California at Los Angeles, and were
directed by Charlotte Crabtree, professor of education emeritus, and Gary B.
Nash, professor of history, both at U.C.L.A.

In addition to the suggested curriculum frameworks, the new standards emphasize
ways to encourage children, from the earliest grades, to think beyond the here
and now. They are a dramatic departure from the rote memorizing approach -- the
"dead men and dates" method that has been fading from style but that for years
made the study of history a forgettable experience for many schoolchildren.

"The study of history involves much more than the passive absorption of facts,
dates, names and places," the new standards caution.  "Properly taught, history
develops capacities for analysis and judgment. It reveals the ambiguity of
choice, and it promotes wariness about quick, facile solutions which have so
often brought suffering in their wake.

"It trains students to detect bias, to weigh evidence and to evaluate arguments,
thus preparing them to make sensible, independent judgments, to sniff out
spurious appeals to history by partisan pleaders and to distinguish between
anecdote and analysis."

The new world-history standards divide human history into eight eras and seek to
focus on developments that affected large numbers of people and had broad
significance for later generations.

Philip D. Curtin, professor of history at Johns Hopkins University and co-author
of a world-history textbook for secondary schools, "The Human Achievement, used
in the 1960's, reviewed the standards for the National Council of History
Education. "'In the old-fashioned course, you're drifting over the world at a
depth of one millimeter," he said. In contrast, the new standards "permit
looking at things in a systematic way."

"In the older fashion," he said, "it was like the great-man theory, where you
study the great men. You studied the great civilizations. But you left out a lot
of places that weren't great civilizations but were part of the human
experience. Southeast Asia was an important place we lost a war in. Part of that
mistake was ignorance that ran through the educational system."

The new standards "bring in more African material than has been discussed in the
past," Professor Curtin added. "There is a good balance between Western and
non-Western history."

In New York, new social studies standards due next month stress global studies
and the interrelationships among the regions of the world. Under those local
standards, teachers would be asked to focus on broad patterns and themes, with
emphasis on the 20th century.

In a similar way, the national standards suggest ways for teachers get their
students thinking about history. To achieve an understanding of the cultural
achievements of ancient Greek civilization, for example, fifth or sixth graders
might participate in a play of the trial of Socrates. Seventh and eighth graders
might be asked to compare creation myths from Sumer, Egypt, Babylon and Greece
with the nationalized myths in China. High school students might read excerpts
from Herodotus and Thucydides and evaluate them as historians.

And to understand the origins and the consequences of the trans-Atlantic slave
trade, fifth graders might draw a diagram of a slave ship, while eighth graders
might be asked to study the efforts of the kingdoms of Kongo and Benin to resist
that trade. They might explore why some African governments opposed the slave
trade while others participated in it.

The standards are 313 pages long. "It's an impossibly ambitious and rich
curriculum they're putting before high school teachers and students," said
William McNeill, professor of history emeritus at the University of Chicago, who
is a member of the National Council for History Standards.

"The choices will have to be made by teachers in the classrooms," he said. "You
want that kind of flexibility. This justified the commission in putting in more
than wisdom dictated. If we could have agreed on a more slender volume, it
wouldn't have looked so formidable."


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  The new national standards in world history emphasize various
cultures, rather than Western civilization, and asks students to analyze and
explain, rather than to memorize. Following are excerpts:

Demonstrate understanding of early hominid development in Africa by tracing the
approximate chronology, sequence, and territorial range of early hominid
evolution from the Australopithecines to Homo erectus.

Demonstrate understanding of how Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Indus valley became
centers of dense population, urbanization, and cultural innovation in the fourth
and third millennia B.C.E. by comparing the character of urban development,
including social hierarchy, occupational specialization and differentiation of
the roles of men and women.

Demonstrate understanding of how China became unified under the early imperial
dynasties by assessing the policies and achievements of the Qin emperor Shi
Huangdi in establishing a unified imperial realm.

Demonstrate understanding of the emergence of Islam and how Islam spread in
Southwest Asia, North Africa, and Europe by describing the life of Muhammad, the
development of the early Muslim community and the basic teachings and practices
of Islam.

Demonstrate understanding of the development of Japanese and Southeast Asian
civilization between the 11th and 15th centuries by explaining the sources of
wealth of Vietnam (Dai Vet), Champa, and Angkor (Cambodia), and comparing the
influence of Confucianism, Hinduism, and Buddhism in these states. (pg. A22)
Chart: "EXCERPTS: Change in World History Curriculum"

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              109 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 852 words



International A3-10

U.S. TO SKIRT BOSNIA EMBARGO
Breaking with its European allies, the Clinton Administration has directed the
American military to stop enforcing the arms embargo against the Bosnian
Government beginning on Saturday.  A1

SARAJEVO ATTACK TIED TO MUSLIMS
Releasing a crater analysis, United Nations officials suggested that the Bosnian
Government's Muslim-led forces fired the shell that killed a child in Sarajevo
this week.  A10


IRAQ RECOGNIZES KUWAIT
In a move to persuade the United Nations to lift at least some sanctions, Iraq
said it would recognize the independence and present borders of Kuwait. The
United Nations and the Clinton Administration responded guardedly.  A1

BEATEN BUT UNBOWED IN ANGOLA
News analysis: By the ordinary calculus of war, Jonas Savimbi, the guerrilla
warrior whose quest for power has left Angola in ruins, at last appears to be a
beaten man. All the same, Mr. Savimbi is shunning the peace table.  A3

CLINTON PRESSES G.O.P. ON GATT
In a speech, President Clinton appealed to the newly victorious Republicans to
maintain their party's traditional support for free trade and approve a
worldwide trade agreement in Congress.  A8

PACIFIC RIM WARY OF TRADE ZONE
The notion of making even a vague commitment for a giant Pacific free trade zone
extending from Chile to China has stirred apprehension as well as expectation
among the nations of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum as they gather
for a meeting in Indonesia.  A8

I.R.A. RELEASE PLAN IS HALTED
The Irish Government withdrew its plans for the early release of Irish
Republican Army prisoners after a postal worker in Northern Ireland was shot
dead by men suspected of being I.R.A. guerrillas.  A5

Ethiopia plans trials for mass killings by the Mengistu regime.  A4

National A12-28

VOTER ANALYSIS OF ELECTION '94
Large numbers of white men abandoned Democratic candidates, a trend that
Democratic leaders fear might be hard to reverse.  A1

A look at the Republican agenda for the 104th Congress.  A26

MORE WORLD IN WORLD HISTORY
A Federal education panel wants teachers of world history to broaden their scope
beyond Europe to explore the development of cultures around the world.  A1

DIXIE WHISTLES G.O.P. TUNE
As Democrats picked up the pieces from Tuesday's Republican landslide, nowhere
was the shock greater, the loss bigger, the implications harsher than in the
South.  A27

THE CHILDREN OF PROPOSITION 187
The passage of California's initiative barring services to undocumented aliens
left many students at Hollywood High in fear of losing their right to an
education.  A28

SEARS TO GIVE UP ALLSTATE
Returning to its retailing roots, Sears, Roebuck & Company said it would give
control of the Allstate Corporation to its shareholders, ending its grand
strategy to build a financial services empire.  A1

A WALL OF REVERENCE AND RESPECT
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial has emerged as the monument that most closely
approximates a national shrine.  A12

U.S. SHIFT ON OBSCENITY LAW
The Justice Department reversed its widely criticized interpretation of a
child-pornography law.  A15

THE PRICE OF HIGH ANXIETY
The risk of sudden cardiac death from anxiety is two to three times greater than
that from cigarette smoking, researchers said.  A17

A simple test for Alzheimer's disease appears promising.  A20

JUSTICE SHEDS LLOYD'S INTERESTS
Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer apparently paid a big price to extricate
himself from a controversial insurance investment.  A24

INCREASING TROOP MORALE
The Pentagon plans to spend an additional $2.7 billion over the next six years
to improve programs for troops and their families.  A24

Law Page B20

California's immigration measure faces a rocky legal path.

At the Bar

Metro Digest B1

PATAKI LEARNS OF BUDGET DEFICIT
Governor-elect Pataki expressed shock on learning that he would inherit a
projected $4 billion budget shortfall from the Cuomo administration, but said he
remained committed to cutting taxes.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-31

A day at Muscoot Farm.  C1
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
"Das Barbecu." C4
Film: "Interview With the Vampire." C1
Art: "Black Male.' C1

Sports B8-15

Baseball: Owners, new tack.  B12
Basketball: Knicks nip Magic.  B9
Column: Araton on Ewing.  B9
Football: Jets get physical.  B11
Prairie View's futility run.  B9

Obituaries B6-7

S. O. Adebo, pioneer of the Nigerian civil service and U.N. envoy.  B6
Louis Nizer, lawyer.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

Getting serious on Bosnian arms.
A victory for public justice.
Mr. Dole's Packwood problem.
Topics: Connecticut income tax.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Anger and reality.
Jennifer Harbury: The death squads have my husband.
Richard Brookhiser: Reagan revolution redux.
Susan Katz Keating: Ghosts of Vietnam.

Chronicle B2

Crossword C28

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              110 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans Day at a National Shrine

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, scholars say, has become more
than a secular monument and is now viewed by Americans as almost holy. Large
crowds are expected there today, Veterans Day. Page A12. (Paul Hosefros/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              111 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

More Than a Monument: The Spiritual Dimension of These Hallowed Walls

BYLINE: By GUSTAV NIEBUHR,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


Americans have long revered places that they link to the shaping of their
national identity: the bridge at Concord, the Alamo, the hulk of the battleship
Arizona at Pearl Harbor. Few pieces of ground are so hallowed as Gettysburg,
where the Civil War battle and Lincoln's address paired national unity and
purpose in a way that is seen as almost mystical.

But veneration occasionally imparts even more to a hallowed site: a spiritual
dimension that transforms it into something like a sacred shrine, where pilgrims
come and devotions are paid. For generations, Gettysburg was such a place. The
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, several scholars of religion and culture say, is
becoming one now.

"It's an altar," said Conrad Cherry, director of the Center for the Study of
Religion and American Culture at Indiana University-Purdue University at
Indianapolis. "You approach it with reverence and respect and silence. The
supreme sacrifice is very much there."

The memorial's appearance is starkly dramatic. A pair of black polished granite
walls, devoid of all but rows of names of the 58,196 American men and women who
died in Vietnam, are set into the ground of the Washington Mall so that they are
invisible from the rear. The walls meet to form a V, its arms embracing a broad,
sloping piece of ground to create a thin boundary that narrowly separates the
living from the dead.

Once controversial because of its unconventional design, by the architect Maya
Ying Lin, the memorial opened in 1982 and for years has drawn more visitors than
either the Washington Monument or the Lincoln Memorial.

"People make pilgrimages -- which is what people do at the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial -- to be transformed intellectually and spiritually at a place of
power," said Edward Linenthal, a professor of religion and American culture at
the University of Wisconsin at Oshkosh, who is the author of "Sacred Ground:
Americans and Their Battlefields" (University of Illinois Press).

Visitors often approach the memorial in a reverential hush. Some, park rangers
say, are so overcome with emotion that they stop in their tracks, never to come
closer. Some touch names inscribed in the walls. Many leave personal items:
photographs, stuffed animals, combat boots or other tokens of a life.

Authorities on religion and culture liken this to people's behavior at sites
considered holy in a religious sense: Lourdes, the Western Wall in Jerusalem,
major Buddhist shrines.

"The kinds of things people do there," Dr. Linenthal said, "are acts of
commemoration -- touching the names, leaving flowers, photos, flags. Those are
the things people do in sacred places."

That is not what the monument's creators envisioned, but they are certainly
intrigued by it. "Here's essentially what is designed to be a military memorial
commemorating people who took part in a military effort, and it's been
transformed into a national shrine where all these feelings come alive," said
Jan C. Scruggs, president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, the former
infantry corporal who led the campaign for a monument to the Vietnam dead.

Because Friday is Veterans Day, when attendance at the memorial is particularly
heavy, Ron Stufflebean of St. Joseph, Mo., is working there as a Park Service
volunteer all this week. He said many people who stand for a while looking at an
individual name often say they "can see the reflection of that person in the
granite."

His wife, Paula, said the couple had known men whose names are listed there.
Last year she made a Christmas wreath, decorated it with a wedding bouquet and
handmade baby booties, and brought it to the memorial. "I typed up a letter,"
she said, "and framed it and put it in the wreath. It said, 'For all the men and
women, for what they missed in life.' "

Such gifts have set the memorial apart from most secular monuments, instead
inviting the comparisons to religious shrines.

"It's a way to communicate with people who died," said George Mayo, a Washington
lawyer who is a director of the memorial fund. And, he said, because many
visitors also bring along tracing paper to make impressions of individual names,
"you take away part of the memorial with you."

Since the memorial opened 12 years ago, visitors have left more than 30,000
items, said Duery Felton, a Vietnam veteran who serves as curator of these
objects for the Park Service, which collects, catalogues and stores all but the
flowers, since they are perishable.

On Wednesday afternoon, objects placed at the memorial included several
bouquets; four copies of a poem, each addressed to a different soldier; a
photograph of a young girl, and a small stack of metal bracelets engraved with
the names of prisoners of war.

Morris Brevard, a ranger at the memorial who served as a marine in the invasion
of Panama and the Persian Gulf war, said he had come across athletic trophies,
military medals, a tomahawk and a half-empty wine bottle with two glasses. Mr.
Brevard said that one woman had once brought small cans of fruit cocktail -- a
favorite of her son, whose name is among the thousands -- and that another had
brought a birthday cake and lighted a candle.

"It's a place of healing," he said. "It's a place of remembrance."

Walking with a visitor the length of the memorial, Mr. Brevard passed its apex,
where the list of names rises highest. "You notice how quiet it got at the
center?" he said.

Others too have commented on this. The Rev. Philip Salois, who was an
infantryman in Vietnam and is now a Roman Catholic priest, likened the
experience to that of visiting a cemetery. "Everybody speaks in hushed tones,"
said Father Salois, chief of chaplain services at the Veterans Affairs Medical
Center in Boston. "It's that aura of mystique, that mysticism."

Thomas A. Tweed, a professor of religious studies at the University of North
Carolina, observed that "almost any time you go, someone is there grieving."
That keeps fresh the memory of Vietnam itself, he said.

"That's the way a lot of shrines work," Dr. Tweed said. "It's very powerful,
very fundamental stuff."


LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial has taken on the aura of a shrine,
a sacred place to which Americans make pilgrimages to scan the granite walls and
their more than 58,000 names. Workers, at right, added several more names. Mary
Schaaf, center, searched for the name of her husband, Lee, then made a rubbing
of it. (Photographs by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              112 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Makes Public Millions of Long-Secret Papers

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 24;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


President Clinton today signed an executive order declassifying nearly 44
million pages of long-secret documents, some dating to World War I, in an action
delayed for nearly a year by the objections of military and intelligence
officials.

The papers represent roughly an eighth of the secret documents held by the
National Archives. All have been classified on national security grounds until
today.

Some date to the spring of 1917, when the United States was entering World War
I, while others discuss once-sensitive techniques like making and using
invisible ink, said archivists who have reviewed the documents.

The World War II documents, 21 million items, include hundreds of thousands of
index cards from the declassified files of the Office of Strategic Services, the
wartime intelligence group; 1.7 million pages giving details on the bombing runs
of the Army Air Forces, and 9.5 million pages from the European command and the
Mediterranean theater of operations.

Mr. Clinton had planned to announce the opening of World War II papers in June,
at ceremonies marking the 50th anniversary of D-Day, but his announcement was
delayed by objections from military and intelligence officials who did not want
the documents made public in one fell swoop.

The release covers the largest single batch of secret papers to be declassified
by the National Archives and is a sign, historians and archivists said, that the
President may fulfill a promise he made more than 18 months ago to change cold
war secrecy practices on military and intelligence records. Twenty-two years
ago, President Richard M. Nixon promised "immediate and systematic
declassification" of Vietnam War documents.

Nearly five million pages are still being withheld at the demand of military and
intelligence officials, including nearly three million pages about Vietnam,
public records show. Gregg Herken, chairman of the department of space history
at the Smthsonian Institution's Air and Space Museum here, said the new
disclosures are "good news, but I wouldn't drink all the champagne yet."

"I would reserve judgment until I see what's there about atomic weapons,
intelligence and dealings with foreign governments." he added.

In fact, such files have been identified and removed from the records that were
declassified today, said Michael Kurtz, the acting assistant archivist at the
National Archives.

"We've carefully excluded records with ongoing security concerns," he said. The
post-World War II records declassified today were mostly civil records and
military headquarters files, although they include nearly six million pages of
papers from the Vietnam War, he said.

Other Government officials said the release had been delayed largely because of
the continuing objections to the idea of a bulk declassification expressed by
officials of the Defense Department, the Central Intelligence Agency and the
National Security Agency.

But the fact that the idea came to fruition is in itself significant to
historians. The long delay in declassifying old secrets that pose no threat to
national security -- a situation that the acting National Archivist, Trudy
Peterson, has called "intolerable" -- has in part resulted from the inability of
the National Archives to find people to comb through hundreds of millions of
pages of documents.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              113 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

With Thai Rebuff, U.S. Defers Plan for Navy Depot in Asia

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Nov. 11


The United States has put on hold a proposal to build a floating war depot in
Southeast Asia that would strengthen American military readiness in both Asia
and the Middle East, senior United States military officials said today.

The plan was frozen, at least for the moment, after Thailand rejected a proposal
last month to base a flotilla of up to six supply ships permanently in the Gulf
of Thailand.

Since then senior officials in Malaysia and Indonesia have indicated publicly
that they would also reject any proposal to position United States ships off
their coasts.

"The plan of where the ships are going to go is on hold," said a senior American
military official involved in formulating it. But the official emphasized that
"the plan is not dead in the water -- it's being looked at again."

The rebuff by Thailand follows a decision by Saudi Arabia last month to refuse a
United States request to base enough tanks and planes on Saudi soil to support a
brigade of troops.

The United States wants to position the flotilla permanently in Asia to augment
its eight-ship flotillas in Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean and in Guam in the
Western Pacific. Such pre-positioning, as it is called, gives the military
much-needed flexibility, so that if troops are flown quickly to a crisis in the
Middle East or Asia, the tanks, heavy artillery, ammunition, fuel, food and
medical supplies to support them will already be in place.

After the Persian Gulf war of 1991, which began more than four months after Iraq
invaded Kuwait, a Pentagon study on mobility concluded that the shipment of
weapons and other equipment took too long and recommended that the United States
seek offshore bases in Southeast Asia.

So far the United States Pacific Command, which is based in Hawaii and has
responsibility for Asia, has failed to come up with an alternative location
because military planners disagree on what country to approach, senior officials
said.

President Clinton first proposed anchoring a flotilla in the Gulf of Thailand at
a meeting in September at the White House with the Thai Prime Minister, Chuan
Likphai.

Thailand, a close United States ally, initially indicated a willingness to allow
the ships to use its refueling and repair installations, and the United States
hoped to send the first ships by the end of the year.

The flotilla would be able to sustain up to one heavy brigade or one armored
cavalry regiment for at least 15 days.

But after the plan was attacked both within and outside the coalition Government
as an infringement of Thai sovereignty, Thailand rejected the proposal, saying
the arrangement might strain relations with China, Vietnam, Cambodia and Burma.

There was another factor: Thai military officials were upset by passage of the
1995 Foreign Operations Act, which included a provision to cut off military
training aid and education to Thailand because of its apparent support for the
Communist Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.

The rebuff will complicate Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to
Thailand next week after the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation summit meeting
here.

The United States has not approached any other government with the proposal, and
no other government has rejected the plan in advance, a senior Administration
official said.

But in an interview today, Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, said his
country would not be interested because of its policy of nonalignment. "America
knows full well it would be against our nonaligned policy, so I don't think
they'll come to us," Mr. Alatas said. "I don't know what the purpose of these
ships is, but it's very interesting that even Thailand said no."

Malaysia's Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, has said such an arrangement could
contribute to regional hostility.

It is questionable whether Singapore would agree to play host to the ships if
its neighbors said no to the United States. The Philippines, which closed the
last American military base on its territory two years ago, might also be
reluctant to allow what inevitably would be perceived as a floating base.

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              114 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Girl Flees After Clash Of Cultures On Illness

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: FRESNO, Calif., Nov. 11


Officials in this Central Valley town are not sure whether to look for Lee Lor,
a 15-year-old Hmong girl with cancer who ran away from home two weeks ago with a
backpack full of herbal medicines but no money.

The authorities here are uncertain because the girl's parents -- and the entire
community of Hmong, transplants from the mountains of Southeast Asia -- say they
do not believe Lee has cancer and do not want her to have chemotherapy.

So strong are their objections that when the police, acting on a court order,
forcibly removed her from her home to undergo treatment on Oct. 7, they were
pelted with stones and had to wrestle a knife from the father, who threatened to
commit suicide if she was taken away, according to a police report.

For the 35,000 Hmong refugees who have settled in Fresno, making the city home
to the largest concentration of Hmong in the nation, the issue is about more
than the girl's health. It is about whether she and her family have a right to
choose between using herbal remedies or Western medicine.

Her parents, Chong Chang and Yia Her, say the last time they saw Lee was the
night of Oct. 28, when she slept on the family's sofa with several of her eight
siblings. Although they filed a missing-persons report, her parents have not
given the police a picture of the girl or the telephone numbers of her friends.
The family shaman, a spiritual adviser the Hmong consult when they are ailing,
said she had had a vision of Lee being out in the open and well.

But doctors say Lee has only a 10 percent chance of survival without immediate
chemotherapy. With chemotherapy, they say, she has at least an 80 percent chance
of survival.

The Hmong (pronounced mung), who aided American troops in the Vietnam War, were
airlifted from Vietnam and Laos to Thailand after the fall of Saigon and
resettled in the 1980's in cities like Fresno and St. Paul. They have been slow
to embrace American culture, especially Western medicine, and Fresno has been
slow to accept the Hmong.

The case bears some similarities to that of Billy Best, the 16-year-old boy who
is on the run from his home in Massachusetts to avoid chemotherapy and radiation
therapy. But the cases diverge where culture comes into play. In Fresno, a whole
community has tried to stop the authorities from treating Lee.

"They were forcing her into the treatment," said Pao Fang, executive director of
the Lao Family Community of Fresno Inc., a support group for Southeast Asians.

Ever since the Hmong settled in the Central Valley, the authorities have
grappled with enforcing laws while respecting the culture of the Hmong, who
lived without electricity and running water until they came to the United
States.

The Fresno police have raided gardens of opium grown for medicine and responded
to complaints of animals' being ritually slaughtered in apartments. Several
years ago, the police began an education program to discourage men from
abducting teen-age girls to marry, a common practice among the Hmong.

But one of the thorniest issues has been how to treat sick children. The Hmong
worship ancestors, whose misdeeds are said to resurface in illnesses for
generations, said Lia Xiong, a Hmong and Laotian interpreter for Valley
Children's Hospital in Fresno. In 1990, the parents of a Hmong child with club
feet refused to seek treatment because they believed the child's feet were
twisted to atone for the sins of ancestors. In other cases, parents fought to
stop operations because they believed surgery would maim the body, leaving the
patients unable to be reincarnated, Mr. Xiong said.

"If a child is born blind, we don't face it," Mr. Xiong said. "If we try to
change it, someone else in the family will die and get sick."

The disappearance of Lee took hospital authorities and social service workers by
surprise. They say they had been working closely with the Hmong community to
combine Western medicine and the Hmong's own healing practices in helping sick
children. At Valley Children's Hospital, shaman are allowed to burn incense
outside a child's window or sacrifice a chicken or pig in the parking lot, said
Cris Monahan-Bremer, the hospital spokeswoman.

But Lee's case has been difficult from the beginning. In late September, she
went to Valley Children's Hospital complaining of severe abdominal pains.
Doctors said the girl had appendicitis. But cancer was discovered in surgery,
and a tumor, an ovary and part of a Fallopian tube were removed.

The Lors say they were not told about the cancer or the extensive surgery until
three days later. A hospital spokeswoman said relatives were told after the
operation, but there might have been a problem with the translation.

In some ways, Lee is a typical American teen-ager, who likes to draw and write
fan letters to Jonathan Brandis of the television show "Seaquest." But she is
also Hmong and believes in shamanism and herbal remedies, her parents say.

The hospital turned the matter over to Fresno County's Department of Social
Services, which attained the court order to force Lee to get chemotherapy. When
the police took Lee from her home in October, strapped to a gurney, the police
prevented the parents from killing themselves by wresting a knife out of Mr.
Lor's hands, according to Lieut. Tom Frost, a Fresno Police Department
spokesman. When she arrived at the hospital, a security guard was put outside
the girl's room.

In protest, several hundred Hmong marched twice through the city. At a town
meeting, the Hmong accused county and hospital officials of discrimination,
while the officials accused the Hmong of politicizing the girl's condition, said
Ernest E. Velasquez, director of the Fresno Department of Social Services.

After a week of chemotherapy, Lee returned home for a few days. On the day she
left, county social workers and the family attended a court hearing about
whether she should be placed in a foster home until her chemotherapy was
finished.

Her note, written in English, read: "Dear Mom and Dad, I feel sorry it's a bad
time for me, I don't want you guys to cry, it's not your fault. If I stay, there
is so much trouble for me. Don't worry about me, I'll be okay. Take care of Mom
and Dad everyone. I love you all. Everything is so hard on me, goodbye.
Sincerely, Lee Lor."

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lee Lor, who doctors say has only a 10 percent chance of
survival without immediate chemotherapy, last July on the Hmong New Year. The
Lors, in rear, with seven of their children in their Fresno home after Lee fled.
One son lives on his own. (Darcy Padilla for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              115 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 13, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 72; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 858 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery
           writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to
           take his place.

 2    26   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 3     9   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 4    22   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5     8   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           young girl disappears.

 6     7   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of a young boy creates a crisis.

 7     3   A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux,
           Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four
           romantic stories.

 8    20   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly in North Vietnam.

 9    11   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) A
           child's mysterious death.

 10*   8   PEARL IN THE MIST, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $6.50.) The
           ordeals of a girl beset by a hostile stepmother and a
           troubled twin sister.

 11   17   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 12   13   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel.
           (Anchor/Doubleday, $5.99.) Love and hope -- plus recipes --
           on a Mexican ranch.

 13    3   HONOR BOUND, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Jove, $6.50.) Three
           American servicemen on a mission to sabotage German
           activities in 1942.

 14    2   THE DEVIL'S OWN, by Sandra Brown. (MIRA, $4.99.) A 1987
           novel about a woman who accepts the advances of a rogue to
           save nine orphans.

 15    2   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story
           of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the
           1967 war.

 16*   8   CHAMPIONS OF THE FORCE, by Kevin J. Anderson.
           (Spectra/Bantam, $5.99.) The final volume of a "Star Wars"
           trilogy.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     8   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     3   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More
           comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 3    44   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 4     7   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters
           reflect on their lives.

 5     3   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 6     9   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio and television personality.

 7    575  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck
.
(Tou
chst
one/
S&S,
$10.
95.)
Insp
irat
ion.

 8    11   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 9     1   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR,
           by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Reflections on
           44 years of marriage.

 10    3   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 11*  24   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.

 12   43   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 13*  25   LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Penguin, $12.95.)
           A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and
           their effects.

 14*   7   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.

 15   91   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     6   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2    191  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles to practice in the
           pursuit of success.

 3     7   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."

 4    12   GUMPISMS: The Wit and Wisdom of Forrest Gump, by Winston
           Groom. (Pocket, $5.) The witticisms of a fictional
           character.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 29, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              116 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final Correction
                                    Appended

Sam Shepard, Storyteller

BYLINE: By BEN BRANTLEY

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3017 words


SOMEWHERE BETWEEN the East and West Coasts, at least part of "Simpatico," one of
the season's most anticipated plays, was written in a moving truck by its
driver. That's Sam Shepard, who says he believes "all good writing comes out of
aloneness." And you're not too likely to be interrupted driving along an
Interstate.

"You have to do it on an open highway," explains the playwright during a lunch
break for rehearsals of the drama, which opens tonight at the Joseph Papp Public
Theater, with Mr. Shepard directing. "You wouldn't want to do it in New York
City. But on Highway 40 West or some of those big open highways, you can hold
the wheel with one hand and write with the other.

"It's a good discipline," he continues, "because sometimes you can only write
two or three words at a time before you have to look back at the road, so those
three words have to count. The problem is whether you can read the damn thing by
the time you reach your destination."

Mr. Shepard delivers this bit of instruction in wary installments, smiling, it
seems, at the absurdity of the image. A man heralded as the most original
theatrical voice of his generation, he has traditionally regarded interviews
with disdain and loathing. And he probably knows that once these words are in
print, they will add further fuel to the myth of the playwright as an
existential cowboy, forging art out of the wide open spaces of the American
Plains. It is a myth, he says, he has never consciously tried to perpetuate.

"I didn't go out of my way to invent any image," says the 50-year-old Mr.
Shepard. His lean, angular face, known to millions from his roles as an actor in
movies, looks well lived-in now, more evocative of a Walker Evans photograph
than of Gary Cooper. "I think those things are accrued as you go along, having
to do with your work and certain things that have happened. If you set about
trying to create an image, it's possible, I guess. But what do you come up with?
Elvis Presley? And who's in charge?"

What he describes as "the cult of personality and the cult of image" disturbs
Mr. Shepard. "I have no faith at all in that," he says. "I don't see that it has
any substance."

Even in its most pedestrian sense, personality is something Mr. Shepard refuses
to see as fixed. Throughout his 30 years as a playwright, he has created a
series of fluid portraits of people for whom identity is, at best, a tentative
proposition. The young man in "Buried Child" (which won the Pulitzer Prize in
1979) looks into the rear-view mirror of his car and sees his face dissolving
into those of his ancestors. Hoss, the aging rock star of "The Tooth of Crime"
(1972), complains of being "pulled and pushed from one image to another. Nothin'
takes a solid form." And Henry Hackamore, the Howard-Hughes-like recluse of Mr.
Shepard's "Seduced" (1978), has invented himself out of existence. "I'm dead to
the world, but I've never been born," he chants.

IT SHOULDN'T COME AS A SURPRISE when a character in "Simpatico" asks, "How many
lives do you think a man can live?" It is in some ways his most conventional
work, in its structure and emphasis on naturalistic dialogue over the poetic
arias that became Mr. Shepard's dramatic signature. But his obsession with
mutability still shines through.

The play is in a sense a reworking of themes in "True West" (1980), in which two
brothers, a proper screenwriter and a thieving vagabond, gradually exchange
identities. "Simpatico" follows the consequences of the framing of a California
racing commissioner by two men (played by Ed Harris and Fred Ward) years after
the incident. Mr. Shepard estimates that he has written eight or nine unfinished
plays around the two characters, Vinnie and Carter. "It's an old, old situation
that I've been struggling with for years," he says.

The patterns of that situation were clear even in the chronologically scrambled
sequence of scenes in a long day of early rehearsals. As the characters, who
also include Vinnie's mistress manquee (Marcia Gay Harden), the wife the two men
shared (Beverly D'Angelo) and Ames, the man they done wrong (James Gammon),
faced off, always in combinations of twos, the very foundations of self seemed
to quake.

"Identity is a question for everybody in the play," says Mr. Shepard. "Some of
them are more firmly aligned with who they are, or who they think they are. To
me, a strong sense of self isn't believing in a lot. Some people might define it
that way, saying, 'He has a very strong sense of himself.' But it's a complete
lie."

The same sensibility infuses Mr. Shepard's views on the relations between men
and women, which in "Simpatico" are scarcely hopeful. At the time of his play
"Fool for Love" (1982), which portrayed an incestuous affair as a knockabout
fight, Mr. Shepard described what happens between the sexes as "terrible and
impossible." Asked if he still believes this, he takes his time answering.

"The whole thing between men and women is really the most amazing thing" --
pause -- "there is," he says. "But, yeah, it's impossible the way people enter
into it feeling they're going to be saved by the other one. And it seems like
many, many times that quicksand happens in a relationship when you feel that
somehow you can be saved. And of course that's going to be a disappointment." He
laughs fully. "In that sense, yeah, I think the illusions about it are
impossible." Does he still have those illusions? "No," he says, "I don't."

That's about as specific as he gets in the way of personal revelations. Asked if
it can be stated that he still lives with the actress Jessica Lange, with whom
Mr. Shepard has been since the early 1980's and by whom he has two children, he
answers genially, "Yeah, I guess everybody knows that by now." But he would
rather not name the state in which they reside (by most recent accounts, it was
Virginia). "Just say the South," he says, laughing conspiratorially. He knows
it's funny, but he's also absolutely earnest.

The fantasy of disappearing from the known world is woven throughout Mr.
Shepard's plays, and he has been pretty good at it in real life, in spite of his
status as a movie star. "I think most writers, in a sense, have this desire to
disappear," he says, "to be absolutely anonymous, to be removed in some way:
that comes out of the need to be a writer."

For a while, it looked as if Mr. Shepard had disappeared from the New York
theater. Following a brilliant cycle of family-themed plays -- which included
"Curse of the Starving Class" and "Buried Child" and climaxed with the searing,
ambitious "A Lie of the Mind" in 1985 -- there were seven long years of absence,
during which Mr. Shepard appeared as an actor in movies (including such froth as
"Baby Boom") and directed one, "Far North (1988). (A second, "Silent Tongue,"
was released early this year.) When in 1991 he returned to the New York stage
with "States of Shock," an allegorical play about a Vietnam veteran and his
fascistic military keeper (John Malkovich), he was speared by critics. There was
speculation that the playwright's skills had been left fallow for too long.

"I think there was an intrinsic misunderstanding about it," he says, "which was
probably my fault. I think the audience, and obviously everybody else, had a
hard time realizing that this was indeed about a father and son relationship."

Theater, he adds simply, is his natural element. "For one thing, it allows you
to explore language, which film doesn't. Film is anti-language. I don't know why
that is, but that's the way it developed. The other thing is the relationship
between actor and audience: that moment-by-moment hanging in the balance, that
terror of the moment.

"Theater combines everything, for me, anyway," he says. "It's like you pick up a
saxophone and you play a saxophone and that's it. It's a partnership. I feel at
home with it."

"SCAT!" YELLS MR. SHEPARD, from the shadows at the back of the Newman Theater at
the Public. On stage, Marcia Gay Harden, who has been holding her ground behind
a sofa as Mr. Harris advances menacingly toward her, looks up like someone
wakened from a dream.

"Scat!" Mr. Shepard continues, with comic urgency. "Git out of there! Scat!"

Ms. Harden starts to move backward, hurriedly. Mr. Harris follows, bumping into
furniture. The scene has developed a fever; it now seems to sweat as well as
pulse.

"Heh, heh, heh!" The playwright's laughter lances the darkness like an
illuminated smile. It's the first day that Mr. Shepard and his company, after
four weeks in a rehearsal room, have moved into the theater. Loping silently, in
jeans and moccasins, on his rangy stork legs, arms akimbo, Mr. Shepard cuts a
sharp-edged silhouette against the glow from the stage. As he watches his words
assume different lives with each repetition, he does indeed seem very much at
home.

Mr. Shepard experimented a little with live acting when he lived in New York in
the 1960's and early 70's. But with his aversion to "confronting large groups of
people," he didn't do much. "Too spooky," he says.

Directing "Simpatico," he is respectful, affectionate, almost courtly, usually
prefacing interruptions with apologies: "I'm sorry to stop you" or "Excuse me."

The previous weeks had been, he says, a period of letting the actors get to know
their characters with little directorial intervention. "It's a funny thing about
freedom with actors," he says. "You invite them into certain scary territory;
then it becomes a question of how far you let them go into that territory before
you start shaping it. I'm a firm believer that so-called blocking doesn't come
out of the director. If the actor has any kind of chops at all, he's going to
find his way around the stage and find the impulses. To order actors around the
stage like a general is not my idea of a director."

On this day, he seems particularly intent on cadence. "All the unspoken
structures of playwriting are very close to music," he says. He often tells his
actors to "hit the notes," though other forms of imagery also come in handy. As
Mr. Ward's Vinnie lies on a rumpled bed in a hungover depression, Mr. Shepard
tells him to imagine a buzzard circling overhead. To Mr. Harris, whose character
undergoes the play's most devastating transformation (into what the actor
describes as "a quivering ectoplasm"), he advises, "I think what we're shooting
for are the signs of the earthquake."

Mr. Harris, whom Mr. Shepard last directed in "Fool for Love" 12 years earlier,
finds the playwright "more comfortable, easier" than before. "You never get any
feeling of panic," he says. When necessary, the director can be very firm. "You
know," says Mr. Harris, "my character is full of guilt and lies. And I was
asking Sam, isn't there some place where he admits to all that and gets close to
it? He said, 'Sorry Ed, I can't let you off the hook.' "

Much of Mr. Shepard's guidance seems built, as Mr. Harris puts it, around "his
sense of the aloneness of these people." Many of the director's blocking
suggestions put greater distance between the actors. He also admires the
darkness of the scrim behind the sets, a consequence of a blown-out fuse,
because the black space underscores a sense of isolation. He quickly shifts into
parody. "Very existential," he hoots with a French accent, striking a
hieroglyphic pose. "Very Jean-Paul Sartre."

THERE WAS A TIME WHEN MR. Shepard might have spoken those words in all
earnestness, when he came to New York in 1963. A restive, Beckett-reading
19-year-old Californian with three semesters at a junior college and a stint as
an actor with a church-touring amateur troupe behind him, he soon fell in with
the experimental, European-flavored theater groups blossoming on the fringes of
Off Broadway.

His avowed ambition was to become a rock star ("The last thing I'd want to be
now," he says). And Mr. Shepard, who has previously spoken about his
wide-ranging experimentation with drugs in that period, describes himself in his
20's as "crazy and mixed-up and confused like everyone else: sort of raw,
emotionally raw." He adds, using a phrase that shows up in "Simpatico," "I was
fishing in the dark." Isn't he still? "Yeah. But not like that. Not to the point
where you're a candidate for self-destruction."

He was also spinning out plays with the speed and facility that youth allows,
though he says the story that he wrote his first produced play, "Cowboys"
(1964), on the back of Tootsie Roll wrappers is nonsense. From the beginning,
his penchant for electric, inventive language and his preoccupation with the
myth of the vanishing West were in evidence, in works that often took the form
of sustained hallucinations.

Asked if his 1971 play "Cowboy Mouth," which he wrote while holed up with the
cult rock star Patti Smith at the Chelsea Hotel, wasn't an immediate translation
of a collaboration, he answers with an explosive laugh: "It was an immediate
translation of a crisis. Yeah, that's one of those plays that just kind of
spewed itself out there. No craftsmanship at all. Just pure emotion."

In the succeeding years, the traditions of playwriting have become more
important to him. "Who was it who decided to do away with all the plots?" asks a
character in "Simpatico." It is, in fact, by far Mr. Shepard's most densely
plotted work.

Today, he writes slowly and carefully, he says. "One of the things that's become
apparent to me over a long time is that no matter how you cut it, plays are
about storytelling. You know, in the 60's, everybody was down on it. It became
an old-fashioned, archaic structure. There was a huge breakaway with those
European writers like Beckett and Ionesco and Arabel." Now, he says, "I think
you need to include all these notions that at one time you rejected as being
part of the established order of things. There's no reason, uh, to shoot
yourself in the foot."

From early on, in plays like "The Tooth of Crime" and "Geography of a Horse
Dreamer," he seemed to be anticipating the problems of the success that would
overtake him. He soon developed "agoraphobia," which he translates to mean "fear
of the marketplace."

"Everything is co-opted in this culture," he says. "No matter what happens,
there's always this marketing aspect that seems to leap on top of everything
like a vampire." It is a process he knows well from his two efforts as a film
director, of which he says, "The problem there is you don't have the luxury of
learning from your own mistakes. You just get the ax, and that's it."

The same process has occurred with Mr. Shepard's plays, most memorably in his
last previous experience with the Public, in 1980, when the producer Joseph
Papp, against Mr. Shepard's wishes, took over the direction of "True West" from
Robert Woodruff. "He told me he owned my play," Mr. Shepard said. "And he
proceeded to do anything he wanted with it, as though it was a used car that I'd
sold him." He never spoke again to Mr. Papp, who died in 1991.

Mr. Shepard's escalating fame as a movie star, which began after his appearance
in Terrence Malick's "Days of Heaven" in 1978, presented other problems,
exacerbated by his breathlessly chronicled relationship with Ms. Lange, for whom
he left his wife, the actress O-Lan. "I still haven't gotten over this thing of
walking down the street and somebody recognizing you because you've been in a
movie," he says. "There's this illusion that movie stars only exist in the
movies. And to see one live is like seeing a leopard let out of the zoo."

He has also been appalled by "the banditry" of the media. "I came to realize
that in many cases, you're being duped," he says of his experiences with
interviewers. "You're being led to believe that what they're interested in is
what you have to say. But what they're really interested in is the manipulation
of your personality for the sake of selling it to a magazine." After the
publicity around his film "Far North," in which Ms. Lange starred, he decided to
call a near moratorium on interviews. "It was like I'd volunteered to go to my
own hanging," he says. "Thanks a lot."

Mr. Shepard's sustained public silence has fostered a perception of him as a
Garbo-like sphinx, a notion that makes his friend and longtime collaborator
Joseph Chaikin, the founder of the Open Theater, roar with laughter. "He's
really very easy to talk to," says Mr. Chaikin.

Indeed, for anyone at all familiar with Mr. Shepard's biography, it is clear
that his most intimate experiences and feelings gleam piercingly throughout his
work. In fact, his work may be the most intensely personal of that of any living
playwright of his stature, which may account for the fact that his style
(unlike, say, David Mamet's) has never been successfully imitated. In a reading
given by Mr. Shepard in early October at the 92d Street Y, the self-portrait
that emerged from his selections from his plays and autobiographical writings
seemed astonishingly naked. It was almost embarrassing to meet him later.

"Simpatico," on the other hand, would seem to be less directly rooted in Mr.
Shepard's life than many previous works. "It seems that way," he says pointedly,
laughing. Certainly, the playwright's familiar theme of father and son -- for
which Mr. Shepard has admitted he drew from his complicated relationship with
his own father, a salty, hard-drinking man of military discipline -- would
appear to be absent in "Simpatico."

Mr. Shepard isn't so sure. "The odd thing to me is I think all of those
relationships are inside other relationships," he says. "Two friends can have a
father-son relationship or a brother relationship. Those things aren't
necessarily expressed by external character. There are these territories inside
all of us, like a child or a father or the whole man, and that's what interests
me more than anything: where those territories lie.

"I mean, you have these assumptions about somebody and all of a sudden this
other thing appears. Where is that coming from?

"That's the mystery," he says, looking for a moment very young. "That's what's
so fascinating."

NAME: Sam Shepard

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 13, 1994, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
A front-page article in the Arts and Leisure section today about the playwright
Sam Shepard misstates the opening date for his play "Sim patico" in some copies.
It opens at the Joseph Papp Public Theater to morrow, not today.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Playtime -- Sam Shepard, left foreground, during a rehearsal
break with the cast of "Simpatico," which he is directing at the Joseph Papp
Public Theater: front row, Marcia Gay Harden and Ed Harris; rear, from left,
James Gammon, Welker White, Beverly D'Angelo and Fred Ward--Inviting actors into
certain scary territory. (Susan Johann for The New York Times); Brotherly Love
-- Gary Sinise, left, and John Malkovich in Sam Shepard's play "True West" in
1982 -- A progenitor of "Simpatico," but without the women. (Martha Swope/"True
West"); Early Fame -- Brooke Adams and Sam Shepard in the Terrence Malick film
"Days of Heaven" (1978) -- The illusion that movie stars only exist in the
movies. (Paramount Pictures)(pg. 26); Mr. Shepard, whose new play, "Simpatico,"
opens tomorrow under his direction at the Joseph Papp Public Theater. (Susan
Johann for The New York Times)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              117 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Q and A

BYLINE: By Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 30;  Column 5;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words



The S.S. United States

Q.  If I went down to Newport News, Va., would I be able to see the former
luxury liner S.S. United States lying in port? I am interested because I went to
Europe on the ship in 1955. -- Jan Heck, New York, N.Y.

A.  Your last chance to see the liner in Newport News came about 30 months ago,
by which time it had been reduced to a rusting, leaking shell of the ship that
set a record for a trans-Atlantic crossing on its maiden voyage in July 1952.
But if the new owner's hopes and expectations work out it may yet be seen there
again, restored to its former glory. He promises a statement on the ship's
future next January.

The liner's record crossing of 3 days, 10 hours and 40 minutes lasted until
1990, when a catamaran shaved 3 hours and 46 minutes off the time.

The sleek ship's demise came almost as swiftly, its speed and usefulness
eclipsed by jet travel and the growth of cut-price packages. In 1969, after 400
voyages, the owners of the "speed queen" canceled a planned world cruise and
announced the ship would remain indefinetly docked. It was bought by the Federal
Government in 1973 and mothballed for possible conversion to a troop ship, which
never took place.

After changing ownership a couple of times the once-proud star of the American
fleet spent from 1989 to 1992 sitting at a pier at Newport News deteriorating to
the point where its only future seemed to be as scrap metal.

In April 1992 the pier's owner, owed years of back wharf fees, forced an auction
of what remained of the ship.

To general surprise the ship attracted four bidders and the successful bidder,
Fred Mayer, chief executive officer of Marmara Marine, a Manhattan-based
shipowning company, announced he intended to spend about $145 million
refurbishing the ship in grand fashion for cruises. Mr. Mayer said he had
immigrated to the United States from France aboard the liner in 1964.

The hulk was towed to a shipyard in Istanbul for the work to begin and almost
immediately ran into a protest by Greenpeace, the activist group that monitors
environmental hazards around the world.

Greenpeace said large amounts of asbestos aboard the ship would endanger the
lives of Turkish workers engaged in the refurbishing, so Mr. Mayer had the ship
towed to Sebastopol, in the Crimea, where the asbestos removal and other
interior work costing millions of dollars was completed and the ship sent back
to Istanbul with five new coats of paint and a grit-blasted hull.

Mr. Mayer, in a recent telephone interview, said the ship would remain in
Istanbul until a "financial program" is put together for its conversion to a
cruise ship. If the ship remained in Turkey, he said, the refitting would cost
about $180 to $190 million. If the work was done elsewhere the figure would be
around $250 million.

By January, he added, we should all know.

A Visa for Vietnam

Q.  We are scheduled to make a port stop in Da Nang, Vietnam, early next year as
part of a cruise that will go round the world. I have been told by a visa
service that a visa will cost $250 for two people, which seems excessive. What
is the actual cost of a visa and can I apply on my own? -- Ben and Esther Burns,
Chicago

A.  A visa for Vietnam, the Vietnam Mission to the United Nations will tell you,
costs $25. But then it adds that there are "communication" and application fees
on top of that, so that the actual figure is $90. The communication fee, the
mission says, is what it costs to fax a list of tourists' applications to
Vietnam, have them looked at by the Vietnam Tourism Ministry and immigration
officials and then faxed back. Phone calls with Vietnam may also be involved.

If you want to obtain a visa on your own that way, and for Americans that is
probably the least expensive and most straightforward way of doing it, send for
an application form to the Permanent Mission of Vietnam to the United Nations,
20 Waterside Plaza (lobby), New York, N.Y. 10010, (212) 679-3779 or 685-8001,
fax (212) 686-8534. Vietnam and the United States do not have diplomatic
relations, so there is no embassy or consulate to handle such requests.

General visitors to Vietnam should apply at least three weeks before their
departure date.

In your case, however, there is an alternative. If you take the group shore
excursion when your ship arrives off Da Nang, you will be admitted under a group
visa, the charge for which will be included in the cost of the excursion. Final
costs of shore excursions have not yet been determined, according to Golden Bear
Travel of Novato, Calif., sales agent for the cruise. But a spokesman said that
based on last year's prices the Da Nang visit would probably cost somewhere
between $30 and $100.

The visa service you mentioned exists to save passengers the bother of applying
for their own visa and adds $34 as its fee.

Around the World

Q.  I have heard there is an international club exclusively for people who have
traveled completely around the world. I've recently circled the globe and would
enjoy meeting others who have had this experience. How can I contact this group?
-- R.L. Peterson, New York, N.Y.

A.  The organization you have in mind is the Circumnavigators Club, founded in
1902 by three Americans "for adventurous individuals who had actually
experienced the ultimate experience of travel."

Its members, who have included the likes of President Taft, Generals John J.
Pershing and Douglas MacArthur, says its membership is drawn from the ranks of
business and professional people.

Applicants, who have to be approved by a board of governors, must submit
evidence they have traveled the globe in one direction.

New members pay an initiation fee of $100 and the annual dues are $100. The head
office and the several chapters in the United States and overseas each hold
dinner and other meetings during the year, arrange for group trips and put out a
publication five times a year.

More information: Circumnavigators Club, 24 East 39th Street, New York, N.Y.
10016; (212) 724-4448.

London Lowdown

Q.  We will be in London from Nov. 19 to 26. Are there any special celebrations
then as well as regular theater, music and dance events? -- A.M. Henzel, New
York, N.Y.

A.  A booklet called "London Planner," issued each month by the British Tourist
Authority, lists just about everything of interest to visitors, from restaurants
to day trips.  The 48-page booklet for November is available free by calling
(800) 462-2748 or (212) 986-2200, by writing to the B.T.A. at 551 Fifth Avenue,
New York, N.Y. 10176 or dropping by weekdays between 9 A.M. and 7 P.M.
   TERENCE NEILAN

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Question

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              118 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam: Behind a Red-Tape Curtain

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 3;   Page 6;   Column 3;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1790 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


THE big day had finally arrived. The hotel had set out its finest china and
crystal. There were starched linen napkins around a centerpiece of tiny American
and Vietnamese flags.

Everything seemed to be ready for the inaugural meeting of the American Chamber
of Commerce in Ho Chi Minh City, the city still remembered by most of these
American business people and bankers as Saigon. It was to be a day of
celebration and optimism last April, just three months after President Clinton
lifted a 19-year-old American trade embargo on Vietnam.

Then, disaster. Shortly before the meeting was to begin, the American chamber
officials got a call from the People's Committee of Ho Chi Minh City, telling
them to cancel the meeting. "Apparently to have a meeting of more than 10
people, you have to have a license, and we didn't," recalled Rick Mayo-Smith,
the chamber's cochairman.

Mr. Mayo-Smith remains optimistic about the long-term outlook for business in
Vietnam. But the hotel incident, he said, was a stark reminder that "in this
country you have to go strictly by the book, and the book is very thick." And
anecdotes like the one about the meeting of the Chamber of Commerce are being
heard often these days in Vietnam.

After all the years of waiting to get back into Vietnam, many Americans are
finding this a much tougher place to do business than they had ever imagined --
and feared. And their frustration, shared with that of other foreign investors,
is threatening to delay Vietnam's economic revival, possibly for years.

There is little doubt in financial circles that Vietnam will someday emerge as
an economic powerhouse of Southeast Asia, and this country of 74 million people
has made undeniable progress in introducing a free market after decades of
economic stagnation. The economy is expected to grow by 9 percent this year.

But while the Vietnamese Government is delighted over their return, many
American investors complain that they are being blocked at almost every turn in
Vietnam by a layer after layer of bureaucracy, a legal system that barely
functions, crumbling infrastructure and outrageous costs for everything from
telephone calls to office space.

HANOI, the capital, and Ho Chi Minh City, the financial center, are now among
the most expensive cities in Asia to do business, so expensive that some
American investors here talk quietly of giving up and going home, or of putting
money earmarked for Vietnam into projects in other developing nations in Asia.
The costs of opening a business here can easily overwhelm the savings from
Vietnam's low-wage work force.

"There was a lot of hype about Vietnam that was built up in the days before the
embargo was ended, and people believed there was going to be a rush of
Americans," said Antonio M. Cailao, Citibank's representative in Ho Chi Minh
City. "Will Vietnam become a economic dragon, a tiger? Absolutely. But it's not
going to happen quickly."

He invited a visitor to inspect the panorama out his blue-tinted window in the
only modern high-rise building in Ho Chi Minh City. The scene below was of the
bustling but dilapidated Saigon port, the river jammed with many more tiny
fishing boats and rusting ferries than modern ships. "If you want to be a
pioneer, you've got to be prepared to lose a lot of time and money," Mr. Cailao
said.

To the disappointment of the Vietnamese, American investments in this country
have so far been decidedly modest. The long-predicted American investment boom
has not materialized.

AS of September, seven months after the lifting of the embargo, Americans had
announced 21 investment projects, worth $187 million, and only a fraction of the
money committed to the American projects has actually arrived in the country
yet. (By comparison, Americans have invested nearly $500 million in Malaysia
this year.)

In an official list that tallies investments in Vietnam by country, the United
States ranks only 13th, just beneath the Netherlands, Switzerland and Thailand.
Investors from Hong Kong came in first on the list, with 208 projects worth $1.8
billion, followed by Taiwan and South Korea.

Vietnam's senior leaders insist that they are doing what they can to ease the
way of foreign investors -- and especially Americans, who are seen as an
important buffer to the lopsided economic influence of Vietnam's Asian
neighbors.

"This is the greatest concern for the Government right now," Prime Minister Vo
Van Kiet said in blunt remarks printed in a Government magazine last month. "We
must immediately get rid of red tape."

The problem is that Mr. Kiet's message is not moving down through the
labyrinthine Vietnamese bureaucracy that is the legacy of decades of rigid
Communist rule.

In some cases, an investment project will not go forward until it has the
permission not only of the national Government, but of several individual
ministries, as well as officials of local governments. The approval process even
for the most straightforward investment can take more than two years.

"There are so many fingers in the pie," acknowledged Vu Tien Phuc, a deputy
director of the State Committee for Cooperation and Investment. "Every authority
would like to have the last say. We have to improve the investment climate."

THE State Committee, which oversees foreign investment, has promised to
establish a "one-stop shopping" procedure in which the Government would
guarantee investment approval within a short time, through a single office.

Peter N. Sheridan is typical of many of the American businessmen who have come
to Vietnam. A 50-year-old veteran of the Vietnam War, he gave up his law
practice in Atlanta this year to move here, hoping to begin a new career as a
business consultant.

While Mr. Sheridan said that he was impressed with the commitment of the central
Government to open the economy and streamline investment, "if you're going to
get frustrated dealing with bureaucracy, you'd better not be in Vietnam -- the
head of the dragon knows where it's going, but I'm not sure the tail does."

The frustrations of doing business in Vietnam extend even to the giant American
companies that symbolize the United States to the world. Coca Cola has been
informed by the Government that its request to set up a modern soft-drink
factory in Ho Chi Minh City will not be considered for now out of concern over
"harmony with the demand of the market."

It is being allowed to go forward with a $20 million bottling plant 750 miles
north of here on the outskirts of Hanoi, but that is of little comfort to the
company given that most Coke drinkers are in the more prosperous south, which
accounts for nearly two-thirds of Vietnam's soft-drink sales. Coke's rival,
Pepsi, has a joint venture with a Vietnamese company that controls a modern
bottling factory in Ho Chi Minh City.

Coke is sold most everywhere in southern Vietnam, but much of it comes packaged
in cans imported from Singapore. The result is that a can of Coke can cost more
than twice as much as a locally produced bottle of Pepsi, which is why millions
of Vietnamese are taking their first swig of Pepsi.

Mark Ohlson, Indochina manager of Coca Cola, uses diplomatic language to mask
the soft-drink maker's obvious frustrations in returning to Vietnam, where the
word Coke is still synonymous with cola drinks. "There is here a gradualistic
approach to development," he sighs.

Vietnam's defenders in the American business community say that the country
simply needs time, and that most of the complaining is coming from American
investors with little experience in the developing world.

"The rules are not crisply clean yet in Vietnam, and you've got to have staying
power," said Buck J. Titsworth, country manager of the Flour Daniel, the giant
American engineering and construction company. "Still, I don't think it's any
tougher here."

SOME investors say that things are no more difficult in Vietnam today than they
were in China in the early 1980's, as Beijing began to open its markets to the
world. But with a population a tiny fraction the size of China, Vietnam is a
market that is much easier for frustrated foreign investors to bypass than is
China.

And China -- and Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand and other
developing Asian nations that compete with Vietnam for investment -- are much
further along than Vietnam in terms of developing infrastructure and a
functioning system of laws and regulations.

In Vietnam, only 10 percent of the roads are paved and much of the country is
without a reliable source of electricity. The American trade embargo, which for
nearly 20 years barred the World Bank and other development lenders from making
loans to Vietnam, can partly be blamed for Vietnam's lagging infrastructure.

The United States, however, is not to blame for the fact that Vietnam has no
commercial code and that the bankruptcy law has no regulations to support it.
Vietnam is trying to bring its legal system up to date, but the result is often
chaotic.

"There are laws that come out every week, and you're not sure how they are going
to be implemented," said Sesto E. Vecchi, an American lawyer whose firm, Russin
& Vecchi, has recently reopened its office in Ho Chi Minh City. "Even when you
read the laws, you're not always sure immediately what they mean."

FOR some investors, the most daunting obstacle to doing business in Vietnam is
the cost. After the embargo was lifted, land speculators rushed into Vietnam's
major cities. A survey by the property firm of Richard Ellis found that a square
meter of prime office space in Ho Chi Minh City now rents for as $475, higher
than any other capital in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Sheridan, the business consultant, arrived in Ho Chi Minh City in April and
quickly set to work finding an office.

He wanted to find a reasonably priced building that could serve as his office
and house. Early on, Mr. Sheridan was shown a small house, 900 square feet, far
from downtown. The price: $1.5 million. "I just laughed," he recalled.

He eventually found a building in a nondescript neighborhood of Ho Chi Minh City
and negotiated the rent down from an opening offer of $8,000 a month to $800.
But his new business is still burdened by other high costs. Vietnam's
state-controlled telephone system, for example, charges some of the highest
rates in Asia, with the result that a fax to the United States can cost $5 a
page.

Still, whatever the struggle of doing business in Vietnam, Mr. Sheridan says
that he is determined to stay. "These are incredibly hospitable, talented,
energetic people, and they deserve our support," he said. "They are asking us to
help them enter the 20th century before it comes to an end. I am excited to be
part of it."

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The United States embargo has been lifted, and Ho Chi Minh City
has signs of an emerging free-market economy . . . but Vietnam is still a hard
place to do business. (Photographs by David Portnoy for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              119 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Medium Is All These TV Books

BYLINE: By J. PEDER ZANE

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 873 words


IT was bound to happen. Like a ravenous Klingon, television has already devoured
much of popular culture. Music is ruled by MTV. Hollywood cannot recycle reruns
-- "The Fugitive," "The Flintstones" -- fast enough. And, hip journalists, who
in another age might have sprinkled their prose with references to Adonis and
Croesus, now evoke Keith Partridge and Thurston Howell 3d.

So it should surprise no one that the last great frontier -- the printed word --
should begin to fall before the mighty cathode-ray tube. The charge is beginning
with seemingly harmless homages that empower readers to relive those golden
moments as couch potatoes. "The Partridge Family" has a book. So does "The
Addams Family," "The Munsters," "Cheers," "Seinfeld," "Mission Impossible," "Get
Smart," and "Mister Ed" (of course, of course). From the "I'm not a doctor, but
I play one of TV" department, this week's The New York Times's list of best
sellers includes a collection of essays on marriage by Paul Reiser, the star of
"Mad About You," and meditations on life by Tim "Home Improvement" Allen.

"This market is smokin', really picking up steam," says David Lessnick, director
of marketing for Pioneer Books in Las Vegas. "Four or five years ago there were
hardly any of these books, now there are hundreds."

In a nation where more people can name the Bradys' three sisters than Chekov's,
where William Conrad's "Cannon" is more beloved than Harold Bloom's canon and
where the better remembered Vietnam-era Maxwell is Smart not Taylor, the rise of
TV books was inevitable. Although baby-boomer nostalgia is driving much of their
popularity, the books underscore a more fundamental and enduring shift in
society.

"Popular culture, and television in particular, is increasingly the culture of
America, a reference point for our experience," says Gerard Jones, author of
"Honey, I'm Home" (St. Martin's Press), a history of the situation comedy.
"People buying these books are saying that to understand the modern world, they
need to know what makes 'Gilligan's Island' click."

Numbing Detail

What exactly they are learning is another question.

Generally, the books are more cheerful than Mary Tyler Moore. Though teased with
tame tidbits of gossip -- in his best-selling book "Growing Up Brady," Barry
"Greg Brady" Williams confesses he had a mad crush on his Brady Bunch mom
Florence Henderson -- they read like the sitcoms they portray. Everyone in front
of or behind the camera is patient and understanding; the occasional tiff is
settled quickly when everyone remembers they are all in it together.

What they do offer is mind-numbing mounds of detail, reading like they were
penned by fallen Talmudic scholars. Most include a synopsis of every episode,
biographies of every cast member, details of every cast change, every set
change, every change of directors.

Then there is the trivia. For example, "The Seinfeld Aptitude Test" (Citadel
Press) includes hundreds of questions like:

What is Kramer's apartment number?

How does Jerry get his watch back?

Who files a lawsuit against Elaine?

But it is not all minutiae. Many of the books' authors mount elaborate and
spirited arguments that the old sitcoms were not blithering blather meant to
sell soap and cheese but unrecognized works of art that were watersheds of the
American experience.

Joey Green in his "The Partridge Family Album" (HarperPerennial) says the
cute-rock family "radically altered" the "attitudes, manners, morals of a
generation" by advocating the "individuality, the freedom of youth, the
independence Henry David Thoreau commemorates in Walden."

"Addams Family Revealed" (Pioneer Books) suggests: "A Freudian perspective would
classify 'The Munsters' as ego -- hard-working, practical and needing to be
accepted -- and 'The Addams Family' as id, where no desire or whim goes
unfulfilled."

Camp Relevance

"The Hooterville Handbook" (St. Martin's Press) asserts that "Green Acres" was a
study in anomie and the absurdity of modern life, making it "the most
consistently Kafkaesque series ever to come down the pike."

This might seem like high camp, but at some universities these books are
required reading. Robert J. Thompson, associate professor of television at
Syracuse University, says American culture has been so thoroughly transformed
during the last 50 years that modern students have a hard time relating to the
classics. He says they find the issues tackled in shows like "thirtysomething"
-- divorce, cancer, career pressures -- more engaging and relevant than the
subjects explored in "Don Quixote" or "Moby Dick."

While some might bemoan this development, Dr. Thompson says such critics are
hung up on the "tired notion" that television is trash when it is really art. He
sees little qualitative difference between classic literature and classic TV.

"If you back me against a wall, I would say ostensibly, as a piece of art,
'Hamlet' is in some ways superior to 'Lou Grant,' " he says, referring to a
drama written by the English playwright William Shakespeare. "Television is our
modern art form. It is where the national dialogue is being carried on. Rather
than fight this, we should recognize it and embrace it."

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              120 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Agreement in San Francisco Newspaper Strike

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 610 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Nov. 12


San Francisco's bitter and sometimes violent newspaper strike appeared near an
end as management and a conference of eight unions announced a tentative
agreement early today. Members of the unions are expected to meet on Sunday to
ratify the proposed five-year pact.

Union officials said they expected that the two newspapers affected by the
strike, The Chronicle and The Examiner, would be published with union labor
early next week in their full sizes and at full circulations. The strike was the
first at the papers in 25 years.

The breakthrough came at 4:35 this morning, after eight straight days of
negotiations with San Francisco's Mayor, Frank Jordan; a Federal mediator,
Clarence Washington, and representatives of the unions and the San Francisco
Newspaper Agency. The agency publishes both The Chronicle and The Examiner.

Mayor Jordan called the representatives of both sides together three days after
the strike began on Nov. 1. He attended all the negotiations until late Friday
night, when he had to catch a flight to Hanoi to join 30 local business leaders
meeting with Vietnamese officials.

Both Noah Griffin, the Mayor's press secretary, and Bill Wallace, a Chronicle
reporter and one of the union negotiators, said the agreement resulted, in part,
from pressure by the Mayor to settle the strike before he left for Vietnam.

The final sticking points involved a demand by the teamsters union that no
drivers' jobs would be eliminated and that amnesty would be given to those who
had damaged property or were involved in assaults during the strike.

Spokesmen for the negotiators said the teamsters had agreed in the end to allow
the elimination of about 150 drivers' jobs through attrition. The newspaper
owners said they needed to reduce the number of drivers because of changes in
circulation and delivery needs.

On the amnesty issue, the unions insisted that members would not return to their
jobs until all strikers were assured of being able to return, while the
newspaper owners balked at blanket forgiveness in light of the violence during
the 11-day strike.

One member of the teamsters was electrocuted when he tried to cut a high-voltage
line that carried power to a distribution center south of here. Several strikers
and security guards were also injured during the strike, and trucks carrying
papers produced by nonunion labor were pelted with rocks and forced off the
road.

According to early reports on the settlement, all workers will be able to return
to work, except those convicted of felonies in connection with the strike and
those who destroyed property during the strike.

The proposed settlement will affect some 2,600 union members, of whom about
1,100 are reporters, editors, photographers and other members of the Newspaper
Guild.

Over the five years of the tentative agreement, most members of all eight unions
will see an increase of about $105 a week in wages and benefits -- an increase
of about 3 percent a year.

Other provisions in the proposed contract include the extension of benefits to
domestic partners, a 7 percent pay increase for librarians, and improved
severance pay if, as many people here speculate, one of the papers closes down
or is bought out by the other.

Officials of the newspapers and the agency were not available for comment today.

Both newspapers continued to publish throughout most of the strike, although the
delivery was spotty in the early days and the papers were less than half their
usual size. In addition, union members put out their own periodic newspapers.
Versions of all the publications were available on the World Wide Web computer
network.


LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Julie Flier, a striking driver for the San Francisco newspapers,
waved goodbye to nonunion workers yesterday after the pickets learned that an
agreement had been reached to end the walkout. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              121 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OLYMPICS;
An Interim Deputy With the Skills of a Sheriff

BYLINE: By JERE LONGMAN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1184 words

DATELINE: NASHVILLE, Nov. 12


Exactly three years after the final American forces left Saigon, John Krimsky
arrived in Hanoi on April 30, 1978 -- flying, as it were, by the seat of his
pants.

"I found out I was the first American in Hanoi after the war," said Krimsky, who
now is the interim executive director of the United States Olympic Committee.

In his previous career, Krimsky was an executive with Pan American World
Airways. He arrived on the press charter during Richard Nixon's first trip into
China, which eventually led to the opening of Pan Am routes into that country.

In 1978, he secured air space from Hanoi for a route from Hong Kong to Bangkok,
saving Pan Am $100,000 a day and preventing the cancellation of critical air
routes in Southeast Asia.

"It was something I simply could not permit," Krimsky, 54, said in an interview
at the annual United States Olympic Congress here.

With Krimsky applying that same aggressive, shrewd negotiating style to the
U.S.O.C., its marketing and fund-raising movement has evolved, like many Olympic
sports, from hand-to-mouth amateurism to efficient professionalism.

When Krimsky joined the U.S.O.C. in 1986 as its chief fund-raiser, corporate
sponsorships for the period leading to the 1988 winter and summer Games totaled
$23 million; for the four-year period approaching the 1996 Summer Games in
Atlanta, the corporate harvest has grown to $280 million. Olympic merchandising
is available in 40,000 stores. The U.S.O.C.'s budget has swelled to $400 million
in the quadrennium leading to Atlanta; Krimsky is raising $4 million a week, all
of it private financing -- five times the amount being raised a decade ago.

"I call him the Miracle Man," said George Steinbrenner, owner of the New York
Yankees and a vice president of the U.S.O.C. "I'd say he's probably the most
essential part of the Olympic movement."

The question is, which part of the Olympic movement does Krimsky serve best, the
sports apparatus or the fund-raising machine?

The U.S.O.C. is searching for an executive director following the resignation on
Oct. 1 of Harvey Schiller, who left his $350,000-a-year job to become president
of Turner Sports in Atlanta. The executive director is essentially a C.E.O.,
overseeing the 40 Olympic-related sports.

Krimsky, who was born in Manhattan and reared in Connecticut, will serve as
interim executive director while a search committee seeks a permanent candidate.

At this early stage, Krimsky is a leading candidate, along with Mike Jacki,
president of United States Skiing; Jerry Lace, executive director of the United
States Figure Skating Association; Steve Hatchell, commissioner of the Southwest
Conference; Steve Erhart, C.E.O. of the Liberty Bowl; Donna Lopiano, president
of the Women's Sports Foundation; Sandy Knapp, chairwoman of USA Gymnastics; and
Kathy Whitmire, former mayor of Houston who now runs the Junior Achievement
program. The wildest rumors include recent gubernatorial casualties Mario Cuomo
of New York and Ann Richards of Texas.

Given the heavily politicized atmosphere of the U.S.O.C., its factions and
agendas spidered like a broken windshield, Krimsky is remaining smartly
circumspect about his desire for the executive director's job. Many an aspiring
candidate for a U.S.O.C. position has been overlooked for appearing too eager.

"I have a role within the U.S.O.C. that I'm very comfortable and pleased with,
and that I will continue with," Krimsky said. However, he added, if the search
committee cannot find a suitable candidate for executive director, "then I will
serve whatever they define as permanent."

If Krimsky wants the job, he should be hired "in five minutes," Steinbrenner
said.

"If John wants it, they'll have to step over me to give it to someone else,"
Steinbrenner said. "And that's not easy."

Others believe that it would be difficult for anyone to handle the job both of
chief fund-raiser and chief executive, given the Jekyll and Hyde personalities
required.

"As the deal maker you may have to be mean; as the C.E.O. you have to make nice
with people," said Anita DeFrantz, one of two United States representatives to
the International Olympic Committee and a member of the U.S.O.C.'s executive
committee.

Krimsky is known as the Tank for his resolute, no-nonsense style of deal making.
His hardball approach was evident recently in New York, when the owner of the
Olympic Restaurant on Delancey Street was told that he could no longer use the
name Olympic or display the five Olympic rings.

The U.S.O.C. holds exclusive rights to those symbols to generate revenue through
marketing and licensing agreements. In a compromise, the restaurant's owner --
an immigrant from Greece, where the Olympics originated -- has agreed to remove
the Olympic rings from a storefront sign.

"We have no other way of earning income," Krimsky said, explaining why the
U.S.O.C. must maintain vigilance over the Olympic trademark.

Krimsky and the U.S.O.C. are also locked in an acrimonious dispute with its
disabled-sports partner -- the Paralympics -- over the licensing and marketing
use of Blaze, the Paralympic mascot.

Last year, the U.S.O.C. signed an agreement that gives it royalties to licensed
Paralympic products. The disabled-athletes movement believes it should not have
to share royalties that are not directly linked to the 1996 Paralympic Games,
which will be held in Atlanta following the Summer Olympics. The Paralympics has
sued the U.S.O.C., and the case is headed for arbitration.

"John is the toughest negotiator I have ever encountered," said Andrew Fleming,
president of the Atlanta Paralympic Committee.

The very same toughness that serves Krimsky well in deal-making may make him
unsuitable as executive director of the U.S.O.C., some Olympic officials said.
Also, some wonder whether he has suitable passion for sports, given his business
background, or enough patience to coddle the large numbers of volunteers who
comprise the Olympic movement.

"I think it would be a mistake," said Frank Greenberg, past president of the
United States track and field federation. "There is a bit of tartness to John.
The temperament for raising money is entirely different from administrating
sport. I think John is so much better where he is. He does so well at it, I
don't see how he could be replaced."

The need for Krimsky's undivided attention toward fund-raising may become even
more urgent after Atlanta, when corporate sponsorships are certain to decline,
especially if Salt Lake City doesn't land the 2002 Winter Games. Some have
predicted that the U.S.O.C.'s budget for 1997-2000 could shrink from $400
million to $300 million in a worst-case scenario.

Krimsky's contract as chief fund-raiser for the U.S.O.C. runs through Dec. 31,
2000. If Salt Lake is awarded the 2002 Winter Games next summer by the I.O.C.,
his contract may be extended by two years. Meanwhile, he continues to serve
indefinitely as executive director. A week ago, Krimsky welcomed the head of
Vietnam's Olympic Committee to the U.S.O.C. offices in Colorado Springs.

"I have come full circle," he said.

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Leroy Walker, left, president of the U.S. Olympic Committee,
with John Krimsky, the committee's interim executive director. (Christopher
Berkey for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              122 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 13, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TAKING THE CHILDREN

BYLINE: By KENNETH C. DAVIS

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 28;  Column 2;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 195 words



The War
Kevin Costner, Elijah Wood, Mare Winningham, Lexi Randall
Directed by Jon Avnet
PG-13 127 minutes

Set in 1970 small-town Mississippi, this is a "message movie" that tries to
explore the Vietnam War, why people fight, racism and other social ills.
Filtered through the eyes of a young sister and brother whose father, a Vietnam
veteran, can't keep a job and has nightmares about the war, the movie focuses on
a tree fort that the children build and then must defend against neighboring
bullies.

VIOLENCE Never gratuitous but intense, the conflict includes dramatic and bloody
Vietnam combat scenes and a pitched battle between the children vying for the
fort. There is also a troubling "dare" that leads to a dangerous stunt of the
kind that sometimes inspires imitation.

SEX Not an issue.

PROFANITY Some name-calling.
For Which Children?

AGES 3-6 They won't get it.

AGES 7-10 They will probably like the treehouse-building episode, which has a
"Swiss Family Robinson Meets the Lost Boys" feeling.

AGES 11 and up The film may be more appealing to the preteen-age crowd than to
anyone older.   KENNETH C. DAVIS

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              123 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 14, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Lessons of the Plague

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


The plague outbreak that struck India this year caused more panic than was
warranted. The sudden appearance of this ancient scourge sent hundreds of
thousands of residents fleeing from the industrial city of Surat, igniting fears
that they would spread the contagion to the jam-packed slums of India's major
cities. Apprehensive nations cut off air travel and trade with India; tourists
and conference groups canceled trips.

But when a World Health Organization team completed a 10-day inspection
recently, the picture seemed far less frightening. The plague was limited to two
outbreaks in areas far from the usual tourist haunts and business venues. Not a
single case of transmission was confirmed elsewhere in the vast country. Indeed,
the epidemic burned out as fast as it began, leaving it hard to escape the
feeling that if the plague scare was not exactly a false alarm, it was surely an
excessive alarm.

The epidemic started with little notice in August in the Beed district of
Maharashtra state, where villagers developed the swollen lymph nodes of bubonic
plague. No one is sure why it started, but one theory holds that a devastating
earthquake brought infected rats into closer contact with humans, allowing fleas
to spread the disease from animals to man.

Panic did not set in until September, when pneumonic plague -- a more dangerous
form that can be spread by coughing -- popped up in Surat, some 240 miles away.
The new epidemic struck with devastating swiftness, killing many victims in just
a few days. Citizens fled, some private doctors fled, and the plague seemed
poised to spread throughout India.

With the Indian health system on high alert and doctors throughout the country
reporting every fever that might conceivably be plague, the toll of suspected
cases quickly mounted; by the end of October, the nationwide count topped 7,000.
When one of the nation's top laboratories reported, erroneously, that it had
confirmed the first cases in New Delhi, far from Surat, everyone's worst
nightmare seemed to be unfolding.

The only trouble was that very few of the suspected cases were really plague.
Doctors were reporting everything that might be plague, as indeed they should
when the goal is to quench an epidemic rapidly. But problems arose because the
Indian health system lacked the laboratory and epidemiological capabilities to
quickly distinguish real cases of plague from a huge background load of malaria,
dengue fever, enteric fever, typhoid fever and a host of other diseases. Worse
yet, in a fit of false pride, India refused at first to ask for outside help or
even accept it when offered.

Nobody knows how many cases of plague occurred. Indian health authorities claim
more than 800 cases were confirmed by blood tests, but the test they mostly used
is not considered definitive. When the W.H.O. team tracked down a subsample of
cases, only one was deemed plague. The best guess of outside experts is that
there were fewer than 100 cases of bubonic plague in Beed and fewer than 100
cases of pneumonic plague in Surat. The number of deaths was officially put at
54, but Russian experts on the W.H.O. team suspect many of these were not
plague. Comparable plague epidemics occurred with less notice in Peru, Vietnam
and Zaire in recent years.

Not a single case of plague transmission was confirmed in Bombay, the metropolis
closest to those fleeing Surat, or in Calcutta, Madras or New Delhi. The
pneumonic plague, it seems, may not be all that easy to transmit. And the vast
majority of those fleeing Surat had probably never been exposed to the plague to
begin with; they had nothing to spread.

The Indians deserve credit for a vigorous response that helped stop the plague
in its tracks. After a sluggish start, they poured antibiotics into Surat,
isolated and treated those who were sick, and traced and treated their contacts.
Thousands of health and sanitation workers were thrown into the fray nationwide.

But the authorities failed utterly to measure and explain the limited dimensions
of the health threat. On a recent visit to India, this Western journalist was
repeatedly told that sensational press treatment, in India and abroad, had
grotesquely exaggerated the danger. But the deeper fault is India's, for failing
to maintain adequate monitoring and laboratory systems.

India did all the right things to contain the plague but little to contain the
fearful overreaction to it. That is proving a costly mistake in a country that
seeks to become a magnet for foreign investment and a welcome participant in
global trade.   PHILIP M. BOFFEY

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              124 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Working to Keep the Memory Alive

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers cast shadows over the site as work continued yesterday
on the New Jersey Vietnam Veterans' Memorial in Holmdel. The memorial, to be
dedicated next year, will include 366 black granite panels with the names of
those from New Jersey who died or are missing in action in Vietnam. (Sam D'Amico
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              125 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
Khmer Rouge Admit Killing Western Tourists

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 15


The Khmer Rouge admitted today that they had executed three backpacking Western
tourists whose bodies were found in a shallow grave in southern Cambodia earlier
this month.

The rebel Khmer Rouge said in a radio broadcast that the hostages -- an
Australian, David Wilson, 29, a Briton, Mark Slater, 28, and a Frenchman,
Jean-Michel Braquet, 27 -- were killed because they were "spies" for Vietnam,
which backs the Cambodian Government.

Western diplomats described the espionage allegations as ludicrous. They said
the Khmer Rouge apparently killed the hostages, who were seized July 26, in
hopes of frightening away foreign investors who might bolster Cambodia's
democratically elected Government.

Investigators dug up the bodies, which were bound and severely bruised.

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              126 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Study of Death Wins A National Book Award

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section C;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 445 words


Choosing the least controversial book from among volumes that re-examined
everything from the Tet offensive of the Vietnam War to the appointment of
Justice Clarence M. Thomas to the Supreme Court, the National Book Award judges
last night conferred the 1994 prize for nonfiction on "How We Die: Reflections
on Life's Final Chapter" by Sherwin B. Nuland.

The book, published by Alfred A. Knopf, is a doctor's demythologizing of the
fact of death. It was chosen over four other books, including "Strange Justice:
The Selling of Clarence Thomas" (Houghton Mifflin), by Jill Abramson and Jane
Mayer, which had been nominated before it was published last week.

The fiction award went to William Gaddis for "A Frolic of His Own" (Alfred A.
Knopf). Gaddis previously won the award in 1976 for "JR." The poetry award went
to James Tate for "Worshipful Company of Fletchers" (Ecco Press).

The book awards, each of which carries a prize of $10,000, were announced at a
dinner at the Plaza Hotel. They carry great prestige, though publishers are
divided on whether whether winning one actually means higher sales.

The master of ceremonies, Robert MacNeil of the public-television program "The
MacNeil/Lehrer NewsHour," noted that book sales in the United States over all
have been higher, with 914 million copies sold last year, compared with 822
million copies sold in 1992. He said that book sales had continued to increase
in the first eight months of this year. "This is a growth industry," he
declared.

The other finalists for the poetry award were "Like Most Revelations" (Pantheon)
by Richard Howard, "Hinge & Sign: Poems, 1968-1993" (Wesleyan University Press/
University Press of New England) by Heather McHugh, "An Altogether Different
Language: Poems 1934-1994" (Zoland Books) by Anne Porter and "Study for the
World's Body" (HarperCollins) by David St. John.

The other fiction finalists were "Moses Supposes" (Simon & Schuster), by Ellen
Currie, and three books published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux: "White Man's
Grave" by Richard Dooling, "The Bird Artist" by Howard Norman and "The Collected
Stories" by Grace Paley.

In addition to "How We Die" and "Strange Justice," the finalists in nonfiction
were "The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early America" (Alfred A.
Knopf) by John Demos, "Fatheralong: A Meditation of Fathers, Sons, Race and
Society" (Pantheon) by John Edgar Wideman and "In Pharaoh's Army: Memories of
the Lost War" (Alfred A. Knopf) by Tobias Wolff.

The National Book Foundation, which oversees the awards, presented its medal for
distinguished contributions to American letters to the 77-year-old poet
Gwendolyn Brooks.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 18, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article in some editions yesterday about the
National Book Awards misidentified the publisher of "A Frolic of His Own," by
William Gaddis, the winner of this year's fiction prize. It is Poseidon Press, a
subsidiary of Simon & Schuster, not Alfred A. Knopf.


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              127 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 17, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

World News Briefs;
Aid Donors Pledge $12 Billion to Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 5;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 70 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Nov. 16


Foreign donors today pledged $2 billion to help Vietnam transform to a market
economy. The money, in grants and loans, is in addition to $1.8 billion pledged
a year ago and represents an endorsement of policies that have reduced inflation
and fueled growth.

The aid was promised by Japan, South Korea, Australia, Canada, Singapore and 10
European nations in two days of negotiations sponsored by the World Bank.

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 18, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

The headline of a brief report yesterday about a pledge of aid to Vietnam
misstated the amount. As noted in the article, it is $2 billion, not $12
billion.


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              128 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Jailed German Terrorist Wins Court Ruling

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 8;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 616 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Nov. 17


A German court ruled today that a member of the far-left Red Army Faction
terrorist group, convicted of taking part in a 1972 bombing that killed three
American soldiers, should be released after 22 years in prison.

The convict, Irmgard Moller, 47, has been serving a life sentence for her role
in the bombing, which took place at a United States military post in Heidelberg.
A panel of judges in Lubeck, where Miss Moller has been imprisoned since 1980,
ruled that she fulfilled legal stipulations permitting the early parole of
long-term prisoners when no danger exists that they will return to crime.

The court did not explain its ruling. Miss Moller has never repented her role in
the Heidelberg attack. But she did express support for a 1992 declaration by the
Red Army Faction that it was forsaking violence, and newspapers noted that her
organization had disbanded.

Today's decision could hasten the release of seven other former Red Army Faction
members who have been sentenced to life terms and have already served longer
than the 15 years required before they can be paroled.

Prosecutors in Heidelberg have one week to object to the court order.
Commentators suggested that there would probably be no objection, and that Miss
Moller would be freed around Dec. 1 unless outside pressures are brought to
bear.

Such pressures could come from the United States. David Johnson, a State
Department spokesman in Washington, was asked about Miss Moller's case this
month and replied that the United States opposes freeing terrorists who show no
remorse.

"We consider politically motivated attacks on non-combatants as terrorism, and
not as a legitimate part of an 'armed struggle,' as she is reported to have
suggested," Mr. Johnson said.

During the 1970's and 1980's, the Red Army Faction waged a campaign of bombing
and assassination that brought a sweeping Government response, including highway
blockades, spot-searches and intensified security at hundreds of public
installations.

The last fatal Red Army Faction attack was the 1991 killing of Detlev Karsten
Rohweder, who headed an agency charged with liquidating properties formerly
owned by the East German Government. A year later, the group announced that it
was forsaking violence.

The Government has taken several tentative steps in response to the Red Army
Faction's renunciation of violence, including releasing at least 11 imprisoned
members of the group. But none of them had been sentenced for so serious a
crime, or received so long a sentence, as the prisoner released today.

Although she has refused to describe her precise role, Miss Moller was convicted
of driving one of two automobiles that exploded outside the Heidelberg base. A
Red Army Faction communique after the attack said the bombings were acts
"against mass murder in Vietnam." Miss Moller, then 25, was arrested two months
later.

In occasional interviews and statements during her two decades in prison, Miss
Moller has refused to apologize for her act and has asserted, "The armed
struggle was legitimate."

Her celebrity in some circles stems not only from her terrorist credentials and
the fact that she is Germany's longest-held female prisoner, but also from the
fact that she is the only survivor of the "death night" in 1977 when three
imprisoned Red Army Faction leaders died. An official investigation determined
that the three had committed suicide after supporters failed to win their
freedom by hijacking a Lufthansa jet to Somalia. Red Army Faction supporters
maintain that the three were slain.

Miss Moller, who survived the "death night" despite deep chest wounds, has
denied that the wounds were self-inflicted.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              129 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Last Chance

SECTION: Section C;   Page 35;   Column 1;   Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 99 words


Here is a sampling of shows and exhibitions in New York City that are to close
soon:

Closing This Weekend

"ELAINE DE KOONING: ARTISTS AND WRITERS, 1940's and 1950's," Washburn Gallery,
20 West 57th Street. Eleven paintings and drawings. Through Saturday. Hours:
Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Free. Information: (212) 397-6780.


"PASSAGE TO VIETNAM: THROUGH THE EYES OF 70 PHOTOGRAPHERS," Asia Society, 725
Park Avenue, at 70th Street. Through Sunday. Hours: Friday and Saturday, 11 A.M.
to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M. Free admission. Information: (212) 288-6400.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              130 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A;   Page 2;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 27 words


The headline of a brief report yesterday about a pledge of aid to Vietnam
misstated the amount. As noted in the article, it is $2 billion, not $12
billion.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              131 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The King Must Die

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A;   Page 35;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


"Why do we want to kill our Presidents?" A doctor asked me that the other day,
and left me wondering whether there is something about the American system, or
the American psyche, that now makes the Presidency a hopelessly vulnerable
institution.

"With the exception of Reagan, who was sui generis," he said, "we have cut off
every President for nearly 30 years: Johnson, Nixon, Ford, Carter, Bush. Now it
looks as if the same will happen to Clinton.

"We don't just say they failed at this or that. We say they failed as human
beings, and we seem to get satisfaction from that idea. There's almost a glee
about it: 'Boy, he really was terrible.' "

With each of those Presidents one can find a fault that led to his undoing.
Lyndon Johnson dug us into the disaster of Vietnam. Richard Nixon was
responsible for the lies and abuses of Watergate. And on and on.

Vietnam and Watergate, moreover, had lasting effects on the institution. We
ceased to believe Presidents, to assume their good faith. The press became
hostile, and has remained so. It did not give Bill Clinton even a brief
honeymoon.

President Clinton, too, has inflicted many wounds on himself. From Zoe Baird to
Lani Guinier, from Bosnia to prayer in schools, he has repeatedly failed to
stand on principle.

But the doctor's point was that something larger is going on. Whatever the
mistakes of this President or that, we want to find some fundamental, personal
flaw in the man. Is that so?

What is undoubtedly true is that we expect far too much of the Federal
Government nowadays. In this vast country, we think Washington can and should
prevent local street crime. We expect it to repair family life, and make sure
our incomes rise.

And the President is the great symbol of the national Government. We lay on him
almost the personal burdens that King Henry V felt the night before the battle
of Agincourt in Shakespeare's play: "Upon the King! Let us our lives, our souls,
our debts, our careful wives, our children and our sins lay on the King!"

At least since the New Deal, we have had this romantic notion of what Presidents
ought to do for each of us. Asking for the impossible, we are bound to be
disappointed. And as in a failed romance, we turn bitterly on the one who has
failed us. So the theory might go.

Now we are evidently returning to the pre-New Deal political system,
Congressional Government. However much resolve President Clinton can summon up,
the legislative agenda is likely to be set by the newly dominant Republicans in
Congress. It is there in Newt Gingrich's "Contract With America," and no one
should doubt the seriousness of his intention to carry it out.

Will the planned Republican measures fulfill our expectations? Mr. Gingrich has
taken some welcome procedural steps, such as shaking up the House seniority
system. But what about the substantive problems?

The rise in illegitimate births, especially among teen-agers, is one. Will a
denial of welfare benefits to illegitimate children -- the idea being discussed
by Republicans -- solve the problem? Will poor teen-age girls change their
sexual habits if the Government takes their babies away and puts them in
Gingrich orphanages?

Or crime. Longer sentences and more prisons have not affected the level of crime
noticeably so far. Will even more savage policies turn the growing population of
young men without hope into good citizens?

The economy is the problem causing the most profound discontent among Americans.
Real per-capita income has been stagnant or declining for years. The rich have
grown dramatically richer, while the middle class struggles to keep afloat.

Some of the Gingrich Contract's economic ideas are appealing: the $500 tax
credit per child, for example. But the huge cost of the various proposed tax
cuts would make the deficit balloon or require cuts in Social Security, Medicare
and like entitlements on a similar scale. Will such a package ease American
frustrations?

The concern is not an idle or a partisan one. Frustrated expectations can in
time exact a heavy cost in politics. They can turn people against the whole idea
of representative government. Unless political leaders begin to talk honestly
about the limits of what they can produce, the present cynicism and anger may
become dangerous.

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              132 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bratton Builds His Image As He Rebuilds the Police

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2225 words


Police Commissioner William J. Bratton was addressing 50 Queens commanders at a
recent strategy meeting, standing as erect as a Prussian general, his left hand
dug into the jacket pocket of his double-breasted suit.

"I'm the nicest guy in the world normally, and I'm probably the best damned
leader that any of you will ever have," he said. But, expressing frustration at
some detectives who had dropped cases because they misunderstood orders to cut
overtime, he added, "If you're not willing to manage under my style, I'll get
rid of you!"

Having captured the commanders' attention, Mr. Bratton reached for their
imagination. "Just think what it will be like to be part of a department that
reduces crime 30 to 40 percent," he said. "It will be like everybody who
participated in D-Day!"

In the 11 months since Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani persuaded him to leave his post
as Police Commissioner of Boston, Mr. Bratton, the 47-year-old son of a postal
worker, has beseeched, cajoled and threatened his 31,000 officers to shake off
what he views as their lethargy in fighting crime.

At a time when crime has emerged as a dominant concern of the American people,
Mr. Bratton is trying to return the nation's largest police department to a
bygone era when the officer on the beat was a more visible presence in the
neighborhood. Mr. Bratton is expanding the role of neighborhood officers to
include tackling street prostitution and graffiti and to taking the most
aggressive role in combating street drug-dealing in 20 years, jobs that have
been handled by citywide squads since the 1970's.

Using words that belong to the cop on the beat, which he was, and the corporate
reformer, which he views himself now, Mr. Bratton has set out to overhaul one of
New York's most legendary organizational cultures: the centralized and
hierarchical New York City Police Department.

"Like many corporations that have chosen to re-engineer, the N.Y.P.D. was an
underperforming organization without realizing it," Mr. Bratton said in a speech
last month that typified his strategy of beating down his department to build it
back up. "The N.Y.P.D. is an overspecialized and top-heavy organization that has
often failed to perform at the precinct level where we can do the most to
prevent crime."

Always reaching for just the right symbol, he physically removed a panhandler
from a subway car in his first week in office, and in the presence of news
photographers, took away the badges of officers accused of corruption in the
30th Precinct in Harlem.

The Image Maker
Public Relations Or Substance?

Such painstaking image-making has led some politicians and former police
officials to express concern that Mr. Bratton is raising expectations that are
unrealistic, particularly after his warning on Thursday that he may have to
transfer hundreds of officers off patrol duties because of the budget crunch.
But more than anything else, they say he spends too much time promoting himself.

"He gets an A for public relations and a C for substance," said City Councilman
Sal F. Albanese, a Brooklyn Democrat, who added that he feared Mr. Bratton's
calls for more police assertiveness would lead to brutality.

Others note that there has been a long and frustrating history to the efforts of
a series of reform police commissioners, beginning with Theodore Roosevelt, who
wanted to untie the department from Tammany Hall corruption in the 1890's, but
had only partial success. In the early 1970's, Commissioner Patrick V. Murphy
broke police ties with illegal gambling rings -- an effort that worked until
serious corruption re-emerged in the mid-1980's.

But even Mr. Bratton's critics concede that he has a special ability to innovate
and motivate, as he showed when he commanded the Transit Police Department three
years ago and improved its morale.

"He has the potential to be the best New York City Police Commissioner since
Patrick Murphy," said Norman Siegel, the executive director of the New York
Civil Liberties Union. Mr. Siegel noted that Mr. Bratton was pushing to improve
the training and supervision of officers to avoid future corruption scandals.

Still, Mr. Siegel added, "He is overly concerned about public relations, he has
problems taking criticism and while he reaches out to civil rights and civil
liberties groups, he doesn't follow up."

Skeptics say Mr. Bratton remains untested under fire. In a crisis like the Crown
Heights disturbances in 1991, they worry that Mr. Bratton's quick temper could
get him in trouble.

Two days before the gubernatorial election this month, Mr. Bratton exploded in
anger at Robert Ryan, campaign manager for Governor-elect George E. Pataki, when
Mr. Ryan called for an investigation into charges that police officers ripped
down some Pataki campaign posters. Refusing to conduct an investigation, Mr.
Bratton snarled, "Guaranteed, Tuesday morning you'll be off doing something else
anyway."

Man of Action
New Commanders And Uniforms, Too

Mr. Bratton has predicted that next year, "we'll see how good this department
really is."

But first, he is planning to replace a third of the city's 76 precinct
commanders by early February. While weeding out his commanders, he is working on
the final draft of a plan of action intended to revamp everything from uniforms
to make patrol officers look neater, to installing new computer systems to cut
overtime and paperwork, to increasing the number of lieutenants and sergeants to
fight corruption.

Understanding the importance of bringing the bureaucracy along, he has hired a
personal consultant, John Linder, to devise a program of focus groups, videos
and surveys -- tools borrowed from the corporate world. Such efforts are
intended to convince the department's bureaucracy that there is a crisis to
overcome.

At the core of Mr. Bratton's plan is the idea of giving his precinct commanders
the brunt of the responsibilities once left to citywide units like the morals
and narcotics squads. While being told to show creativity, the commanders have
been given a series of anticrime strategies intended to catch a wider network of
criminals by linking gun, robbery and drug investigations.

Already, patrol officers and detectives are broadening cases with more thorough
interrogations of suspects -- for instance, seeking information from robbery
suspects about the stores that buy stolen goods, or questioning drug traffickers
about where they buy their guns.

Department officials credit the new policies with an impressive reduction in
crime this year so far, although several other big cities around the country are
also showing improvements.

After three straight years of modest declines in crime, homicides are down 18
percent so far this year from last, while robbery and auto theft are down almost
15 percent. Shooting incidents citywide are down 16 percent, and 780 fewer
people have been killed or wounded by gunfire, suggesting to some department
officials that criminals may be carrying fewer guns out of fear of increased
police sweeps.

With uniformed officers given a major share of the responsibility for
controlling narcotics for the first time in a generation, drug arrests are up 25
percent this year. Still, there are risks for corruption that go along with
increasing contacts between beat officers and drug offenders.

Civil liberties advocates also express concern that Mr. Bratton's efforts to
improve the city's quality of life by arresting squeegee window washers,
stopping and frisking teen-age truants and confiscating the cars of men caught
soliciting prostitutes are eroding constitutional liberties to expand police
powers.

Man of Many Parts
A Need to Lead And Have Privacy

For all the news media attention he seeks and attracts, Mr. Bratton remains an
elusive figure.

When he returned to New York to take his current post, for instance, Mr. Bratton
removed the name of his one son, David, from his resume because, according to
Judith Laffey, his executive assistant, "he likes to keep his private life
private."

In an interview, Mr. Bratton described himself as a man of boundless ambition.
"Even as a kid," he said, "I used to be the one to direct the action during war
games." Then, as he pursued his career, starting as a military police officer in
Vietnam and moving through the ranks of the Boston police, he said, "part of the
ambition came from the frustration with the people I worked with -- the
corruption, the incompetence and the inefficiency."

He added, "There's always been a motivation to get above them, and to lead."

The Commissioner has many hobbies, and most somehow relate to work.

Mr. Bratton is an avid reader of books on urban affairs and mysteries (he
recently devoured "The Alienist" by Caleb Carr, a novel about Theodore
Roosevelt's police department and the introduction of modern detective methods)
and he is a war-movie buff (he recently rented "The Longest Day," and has been
lecturing his subordinates about D-Day ever since).

But at the same time, he is not particularly fond of guns, in part because they
damage the lining of his suits. He owns, by his count, 35 business suits to go
along with his wide assortment of Hermes animal-print ties. An animal lover, he
owns a dog and five cats named after Polynesian islands.

From inspections of police operations in the morning to late dining at Elaine's
on the Upper East Side, he is virtually inseparable from what he calls his "cast
of characters," particularly his two fun-loving deputy commissioners.

One, John Miller, the 36-year-old former television reporter who became a
man-about-town chasing John Gotti with a microphone, has become Mr. Bratton's
eyes and ears, chasing police cars on their way to crime scenes with the abandon
of Mario Andretti.

The other, Jack Maple, 42, a former transit police lieutenant who cuts a
Runyonesque figure by working out with a punching bag in his office and wearing
homburg hats, bow ties that match his socks and black-and-white spectator shoes,
is his chief crime-fighting strategist.

Balancing Mr. Bratton's "cast" are Peter LaPorte, Mr. Bratton's chief of staff,
and Mr. Linder, his corporate-oriented consultant, who project an image of
well-bred control.

The five are frequently joined by Mr. Bratton's wife, Cheryl Fiandaca, a lawyer
who teaches at John Jay College of Criminal Justice and advises her husband on
racial and legal matters as well as animal rights. By all accounts, she is
enjoying her new life in New York -- no small matter for Mr. Bratton since he
has been divorced twice.

A Day in the Life
Always Running, And Running Late

Mr. Bratton's working day is a balancing act: motivating his officers with pats
on the back and slaps on the wrist, all the while trying to reassure the public
that his force can overcome its scandals and retake the streets.

"I'm juggling a lot of balls in the air," he said, "That's why all my ties have
seals and dogs balancing balls."

On a recent Tuesday, for instance, after walking his dog before 7 A.M.  along
Central Park South, he addressed the morning roll call at the Midtown North
Precinct.

Facing neat rows of 30 officers standing at attention, Mr. Bratton spoke of a
litany of problems: how officers sometimes cut corners when collecting evidence,
or wear disheveled uniforms on patrol or treat citizens without respect.

Then, trying to strike a note of reassurance, Mr. Bratton promised that after a
year of negative headlines, "next year is going to be a good year for us."

"To get there, we're going to need you," he concluded. "You need respect for
yourselves and the public."

Likewise, while listening intently to a group of Harlem police emergency service
officers about their suggestions of how to improve equipment and scheduling
during a dinner of rolled beef and mushrooms they prepared for him, he chided
the group about their waistlines.

It was a day of breakfast and lunch speeches to business groups, a meeting with
Patrolmen's Benevolent Association leaders, test-firing a new small-caliber
handgun at the police range in the Bronx and observation of a midnight sting
operation to catch men in the act of soliciting female police officers posing as
prostitutes. Mr. Bratton also read memos and returned phone calls in his car to
keep up with the latest developments in the Mayor's budget cuts.

Mr. Bratton ran late all the time. But hearing that his Manhattan North borough
commander was holding a community meeting in Harlem, he shifted gears to make a
brief appearance at the Church of the Intercession on West 155th Street.

Before officers of the 30th Precinct and 75 mostly friendly residents, Mr.
Bratton rose to the pulpit solemnly. He said the worst of the corruption scandal
in the 30th Precinct was over, with nearly 40 officers in custody or on modified
desk assignment waiting the results of investigations into charges of brutality,
perjury and a variety of drug offenses.

Then he made an admission remarkable for a Police Commissioner, an admission
that won him a grudging round of polite applause.

"The worst story I have told in my career is the story of the three-oh," he
said, "how members of the Police Department let you down. It's a story of
betrayal, of a violation of trust, of a violation of oath. I want to express to
you our apology."

NAME: William J. Bratton

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Police Commissioner William J. Bratton taking part in a recent
police operation. (Edward Keating/The New York Times) (pg. 1); Police
Commissioner William J. Bratton is always on the move and always running late.
Above, he tests a new handgun at the police firing range in the Bronx, although
he is not particularly fond of guns. Below, he attends a morning roll call at
the Midtown North Precinct and speaks of a litany of problems: how officers
sometimes cut corners when collecting evidence or treat citizens without
respect. (Photographs by Edward Keating for The New York Times) (pg. 26)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              134 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 48;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 933 words



STRANGE PILGRIMS: Twelve Stories
By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Translated by Edith Grossman. Penguin, $10.95.
Most of these tales do not reflect the trademark magic realism of their author,
a Nobel laureate, but reality itself. Featuring Latin Americans who have
resettled in Europe, they are inspired by Mr. Garcia Marquez's youth. Last year
our reviewer, William Boyd, said, "As always . . . the marvel is his tone of
voice."


GENET: A Biography
By Edmund White. With a chronology by Albert Dichy. Vintage, $17.
Unlike many other works about this revered French writer and self-styled
outcast, Edmund White's book focuses on Jean Genet's homosexuality, showing how
it shaped his literature and his world view. Winner of a National Book Critics
Circle Award, it explores Genet's many contradictory identities: anarchist and
political protester, criminal and celebrity, uneducated iconoclast and erudite
member of literary society. "Edmund White's research is impressive and
abundant," Isabelle de Courtivron said here last year. Vintage has also reissued
Mr. White's first novel, FORGETTING ELENA ($10), in which a young man unsure of
his own identity wakes up in an island society where manners are crucial -- and
where an alluring woman tempts him to forget them. In 1973 our reviewer, Alan
Friedman, called the book "astonishing . . . obsessively fussy, yet uncannily
beautiful."
MUDDY BOOTS AND RED SOCKS: A War Reporter's Life
By Malcolm W. Browne.
Times Books/Random House, $5.99.
In his long career, the author filed stories from bullet-ridden zones ranging
from Vietnam to the Persian Gulf. Now a science reporter for The New York Times,
he reflects on life at the front. Last year our reviewer, Dan Rather, said, "For
anyone who wants to know . . . what it is really like to be an admired, envied,
sometimes hated foreign correspondent . . . Mr. Browne delivers."
THE LAND CALLED HOLY:
Palestine in Christian History and Thought
By Robert L. Wilken. Yale University, $16.
The author analyzes the conflicting claims to the Middle Eastern region that
both Jews and Christians -- and now Muslims -- see as their spiritual
birthright, tracing the battles back to the first century. "He exposes the
gnarled and tenacious roots of problems that are very much with us today," G. W.
Bowersock said here last year. The same shared past is examined in JERUSALEM: A
History of the Holiest City as Seen Through the Struggles of Jews, Christians,
and Muslims, by Thomas A. Idinopulos (Elephant Paperbacks/Ivan R. Dee, $16.95).
Originally published as "Jerusalem Blessed, Jerusalem Cursed," this book
demonstrates that this ancient battle is made ever fresh by the constant
permutations of power among the warring parties. In 1991 our reviewer, Jerrold
D. Green, called Mr. Idinopulos "an intelligent and compassionate chronicler."
IMAGINARY CRIMES
By Sheila Ballantyne. Penguin, $9.95.
This autobiographical novel, which inspired the recent film of the same title,
concerns a young girl growing up in the Pacific Northwest, where she has the
misfortune of dealing with parents who are essentially children themselves. "
'Imaginary Crimes' is a very good book," Julian Moynahan said here in 1982.
NO MAN'S LAND:
Men's Changing Commitments to Family and Work
By Kathleen Gerson. Basic Books, $13.
The author documents the results of a study of middle-class men and their
attitudes toward their professional and personal lives. As sex roles change, she
argues for more participation by men in domestic duties and child rearing.
Earlier this year our reviewer, Richard A. Shweder, called the book an "erudite
and scholarly sociological treatise." Also looking to redefine masculinity --
but from a men's movement perspective -- is Michael Meade in MEN AND THE WATER
OF LIFE: Initiation and the Tempering of Men (HarperSanFrancisco, $12).
Analyzing historical symbols and myths about manhood, he "writes quite
brilliantly," Mr. Shweder said in the same review. Perhaps the most radical view
of maleness is to be found in THE END OF MANHOOD: A Book for Men of Conscience,
by John Stoltenberg (Plume/Penguin, $10.95). Mr. Stoltenberg believes that,
aside from anatomy, sex differences are artificial and should be dispensed with.
In the same piece, Mr. Shweder called his work a "well-intended utopian
self-improvement manual."
THE SAILOR WHO FELL FROM GRACE WITH THE SEA
By Yukio Mishima. Translated by John Nathan.
Vintage International, $10.
Restored to print, this novel by a Japanese Nobel laureate deals with a ship's
officer who falls in love with the mother of a young boy; her son belongs to a
vicious gang determined to make the sailor pay for his softness. "Mishima's
narrative skill" has "seldom been more apparent," Edward Seidensticker said here
in 1965.
BETTER TIMES THAN THESE
By Winston Groom. Pocket Books, $5.99.
Vietnam in 1966 is the setting for this novel, previously out of print, by the
author of "Forrest Gump." Here a band of soldiers, already ambivalent about the
war, must embark on a suicidal mission. In 1978 our reviewer, Thomas R. Edwards,
said, "His representation of what combat was like . . . sounds wholly
authentic."
NICHOLAS COOKE: Actor, Soldier, Physician, Priest
By Stephanie Cowell. Ballantine, $12.
The author's protagonist is a contemporary and friend of Shakespeare's and
Marlowe's who tackles the Elizabethan stage -- and numerous other pursuits -- in
this historical tale. "Ms. Cowell has poured heart and a great deal of
intelligence into her first novel," Maria Simpson said here last year.   LAUREL
GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 11, 1994

CORRECTION:

An entry in the New & Noteworthy Paperbacks column on Nov. 20 about "The Sailor
Who Fell From Grace With the Sea," by Yukio Mishima, credited the author
erroneously with an award. He was nominated several times for a Nobel Prize, but
he never received one.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              135 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Scalia v. Merriam-Webster

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 30;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


IN A 1924 DISSENT, Justice Louis D. Brandeis wrote: "Modification implies
growth. It is the life of the law." The law got pretty lively recently on the
meaning of the word modify.

Justice Antonin Scalia, the Supreme Court's conservative dynamo and frequent
dissenter, found himself writing the majority's decision in the case of MCI v.
AT&T. This case, pitting two of the nation's info-age giants against each other,
hinged on the reach of the Federal Communications Commission's power to "modify
any requirement" in a section of the law. MCI argued that this meant the F.C.C.
could make basic changes in that section, which it had made over AT&T's
objections.

"We disagree," Scalia wrote for the Court. "The word 'modify' -- like a number
of other English words employing the root 'mod-' (deriving from the Latin word
for 'measure'), such as 'moderate,' 'modulate,' 'modest,' and 'modicum' -- has a
connotation of increment or limitation."

Having plunged into the language dodge (I would have used the past participle,
derived, rather than the present participle, deriving, in his parenthetical
etymology), Justice Scalia cited several dictionaries in support of his
definition, including the 1976 edition of Merriam-Webster's Third New
International Dictionary, the Unabridged: "to make minor changes in the form or
structure of: alter without transforming."

But the petitioning MCI had found one sense for modify among the seven
variations in meaning listed in Webster's Third Unabridged (similarly set forth
in its current abridgment, Merriam-Webster's 10th Collegiate): "to make a basic
or important change in." Quite a stretch of meaning, but in a previous Court
case involving railroads in which the verb required was seen to have
"alternative dictionary definitions," the Court had allowed the broader
interpretation; on that analogy of a loose required, MCI argued for the
stretched sense of modify.

The conservative Scalia wasn't having any of that. He refused to accept an
ambiguity created by a single dictionary "which not only supplements the meaning
contained in all other dictionaries, but contradicts one of the meanings
contained in virtually all other dictionaries." (I think he means merely rather
than only.) "When the word 'modify' has come to mean both 'to change in some
respects' and 'to change fundamentally,' " he thunders, "it will in fact mean
neither of those things. It will simply mean 'to change,' and some adverb will
have to be called into service to indicate the great or small degree of the
change."

Having delivered himself of the opinion that modify "connotes moderate change,"
the jurist went on to opine acidly that "it might be unsurprising to discover a
1972 White House press release saying that 'the Administration is modifying its
position with regard to prosecution of the war in Vietnam' -- but only because
press agents tend to impart what is nowadays called 'spin.' Such intentional
distortions, or simply careless or ignorant misuse, must have formed the basis
for the usage that Webster's Third, and Webster's Third alone, reported."

This high-court double late hit (both at the 1961 lexicographer, Philip B. Gove,
and the 1972 press secretary, Ron Ziegler, who distributed some Nixon releases I
wrote) required (in the broad meaning of required, as construed in National
Railroad Passenger Corporation v. Boston and Maine Corporation) the attention of
a full Court press. Accordingly, I contacted Merriam-Webster's editor in chief
(not hyphenated), Frederick C. Mish.

"I regret having to say that Judge Scalia is in error on this matter," responded
the lexicographer, on whom the judicial assault has not had a chilling effect,
"but at least he has the satisfaction of knowing that his error is not
reversible by a higher court."

The problem is that sense 4b of the Third Unabridged -- "to make a basic or
important change in: alter" -- seems to contradict 4a, which is "to make minor
changes in the form or structure of." Come on, Fred -- how can it mean both?

"In lexicography, as in biological taxonomy," explains Dr. Mish, "there are
splitters and there are lumpers. The editor who worked on modify for the Third
was evidently a splitter, who came upon the work of an earlier lumper and
thought it would be useful if we acknowledged explicitly that when one speaks of
modifying something, the changes involved are not always minor. Most often they
are, of course, as is recognized in sense 4a, but sometimes not."

Were the users of the contradictory sense cited by the dictionary a bunch of
kooks and language slobs? "One of the authors quoted is T. S. Eliot, a Nobel
laureate in literature," notes Mish. "Another is Edward Sapir, a distinguished
and influential scholar in linguistics." (Sapir wrote about a weakening of
geography in social organization that would "profoundly modify" attitudes toward
personal relations.) "If Justice Scalia wants to call this 'careless or ignorant
misuse,' " ripostes Mish, "well, it's a free country."

So who's right? When someone who's writing for the majority of the Supreme Court
becomes embroiled in a no-holds-barred linguistic dispute with one of the
language's leading lexicographers, who could possibly have the temerity -- the
unalloyed chutzpah -- to presume to adjudicate?

Here is your faithful maven, doing his duty.

I think the dictionary's splitter went a hair too far. In the citation of Edward
Sapir, the linguist's use of profoundly to modify modify indicates his
understanding of the meaning of that verb to be "change," neither major nor
minor. That is neither the historical nor the common meaning; in fact, the
fuzziness of that usage created the need for an adverb -- profoundly -- just as
Scalia predicted would happen if the meaning got muddled. A dictionary is
duty-bound to report what's out there, but need not report every misuse as a
possible sense. Modify means "minor change," as in "modified limited hangout," a
Watergate phrase that got no credit for its correctness.

"It is perhaps gilding the lily to add this," wrote Justice Scalia in piling on
another point. The jurist erred: the Earl of Salisbury in Shakespeare's "King
John" deplored redundancy with "To be possess'd with double pomp, . . . to gild
refined gold, to paint the lily."

Is Scalia's usage a misquotation of the Bard? Yes, but common usage has worn
down the accurate quotation, and -- thanks to its use in a Supreme Court
decision -- confirms our acceptance of what was once a mistake.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              136 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHARLES MURRAY

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 87 words


I guess the upside for those of us on the lower end of Charles Murray's I.Q.
ladder is that we don't have to take responsibility for -- oh, let's see: acid
rain, radioactive waste, smog, ozone depletion, World Wars I and II, the atom
bomb, germ warfare, water pollution, the Exxon Valdez, slavery, genocide,
mercury in fish, the cold war, apartheid, the Vietnam War, Agent Orange, etc.
etc.

Heaven only knows how long it would have taken us to accomplish those feats of
intelligence.

JESSE JUNIOR
Brooklyn

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              137 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Funny Things Happen On the Way to a Treaty

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IF ever anyone needed evidence that the politics of international trade defy
every rule of logic and partisanship, consider the past seven days.

Donning colorful batik in Indonesia, President Clinton claimed his latest
victory in commercial diplomacy, as the leaders of Asia agreed to free trade in
the Pacific, sort of, by the year 2020. Of course, it was an accord with some of
the world's premier protectionists, and as soon as the cameras wandered off, Mr.
Clinton's summiteers quickly noted that this was a declaration of "common
resolve," not a binding agreement. After all, argued the Chinese and the
Malaysians, among others, 25 years might be a little hasty for a radical notion
like opening their markets.

Back at home, the world's biggest and most specific trade accord in history --
22,500 impenetrable pages, mandating $744 billion in tariff reductions scheduled
to start in less than 45 days -- was in danger of running aground in Congress.
Conservative Democrats, who have never liked free trade, were allying with
mischievous Republicans, who see a chance to humiliate Mr. Clinton on a world
stage, even if it means passing up a gigantic tax cut. Suddenly realizing it
does not yet have the votes for passage of an agreement that once seemed like a
sure thing, the White House went begging the new Republican leadership, led by
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, to save an accord begun under President Ronald
Reagan. For a dozen years, it has been the United States that has pressured
every country that seemed interested in scuttling the agreement, warning that
they would become economic outcasts if they let parochial interests prevail over
the growth of the world economy.

"The immediate trade problems are back here, not in Jakarta," growled Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who is trying to scratch together enough votes in the
Senate to pass GATT. "But try getting anyone to notice."

Over the past year the Administration tried desperately to keep anyone from
noticing GATT. Its fear was that if anyone ever seized on the 123-nation
agreement, there could be a repeat of last year's battle over the North American
Free Trade Agreement. That battle split the Democratic Party and brought Mr.
Clinton into conflict with labor unions that could hear, through Ross Perot,
jobs being sucked to Mexico.

For a while the strategy worked. None of the scary tales surrounding Nafta have
yet come true. Stung by its defeat last year, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has said not a
word about GATT, even though it is the Godzilla of free-trade accords. In Nafta,
opponents talked of swarms of low-paid Mexican workers; in GATT, they warn about
some vague loss of American sovereignty to a board of international trade judges
called the World Trade Organization. "These are not issues that resound much
beyond Washington," said Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative.
"In comparison this should be easy."

It isn't. While no one can establish that Nafta hurt the Democrats in the
election, free trade's constituency seems to be diminishing. Mr. Clinton has,
more than any other President in modern history, used his office to argue the
case that free trade means growth and jobs. But there is little evidence he is
winning converts beyond the Boeings and Microsofts of the world, and other big
or high-tech businesses who constitute America's competitive advantage.

Conservative Democrats have never believed the stuff about the new economy,
especially if they are from states with old industries like textiles that have
far more to lose than to gain. "Free trade is the new Vietnam policy," argued
Senator Ernest L. Hollings, the South Carolina Democrat who is trying to torpedo
GATT. "You destroy your economy to save the world."

The Flip Side of Free Trade

What is new is that Mr. Hollings is being joined by the Republican right wing,
which sees a chance to win over dismayed, high-school-educated white men who
have little chance of being integrated into Mr. Clinton's vision of a new
economy of high-tech exporters. While Mr. Clinton has rightly claimed that the
economy is producing new jobs by the millions, 2.2 million workers have lost
their jobs in recent years, and any job found is often lower paying. "The flip
side of free trade is that you have to face up to the fact that some people lose
out, and you have to help them," said Labor Secretary Robert Reich. But money is
short.

So Mr. Dole, who seems to hold GATT's fate in his hands, spent the past week on
the fence, his heart singing the praises of free trade, his pollsters warning
that he has to think about New Hampshire and Iowa, where his Presidential
ambitions will get their first tests. Even a few of Mr. Clinton's economic
advisers are urging the President to pare back the ambitious free-trade schedule
of the next few weeks, and to avoid making promises to Latin American leaders he
will meet in December who want their countries to become part of Nafta. "The
timing is not ideal," a top White House economic adviser said.

But there is no pulling back possible on GATT. The new rules in the treaty --
about tariffs, protecting intellectual property, lowering barriers to services
-- are the foundation of Mr. Clinton's free-trade vision. So GATT is not about
economics but about credibility.

"This is like the vote on the League of Nations or the Marshall Plan," Vice
President Al Gore warned. "Should Congress fail, history will frown upon us."

By then, of course, it will be 2020, and there will be free trade in Asia.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Jakarta, posters of the Clintons and President and Mrs.
Suharto of Indonesia were on display last week. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              138 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Chairman of Joint Chiefs Defends Clinton Against Attack by Helms

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


Gen. John Shalikashvili, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went out of his
way today to reject assertions by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina that
President Clinton was not up to the job of Commander in Chief and that many
military officials shared that view.

"I was taken aback by the implication that he left that somehow the Joint Chief
of Staffs and I shared his view on President Clinton," General Shalikashvili
said in a telephone interview. "Nothing could be further from the truth, and I
think it's important to me that this view not be represented as that of the
military leadership or for that matter the view of the military as a whole."

The general, who contacted several journalists today to make his points, said
there had been no prompting from the Administration to do so. The White House
has not responded to Mr. Helms's remarks on Friday on the CNN program "Evans and
Novak."

Asked on the program whether Mr. Clinton was "up to the job" of Commander in
Chief, Mr. Helms, who is in line to head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
responded: "You ask an honest question; I'll give you an honest answer. No, I do
not. And neither do the people in the armed forces."

Mr. Helms went on to say that "just about every military man who writes me"
thinks the same way.

General Shalikashvili declined to criticize Senator Helms, who is a Republican,
but he offered some personal praise for Mr. Clinton, whose relations with the
military have at times been strained.

The general said he was highly impressed with President Clinton's ability to get
to the bottom of issues and make the right decision. "I have always found him to
be the guy that gets to the core issue the quickest and asks the hardest
questions," he said, "and his decisions I think in all those matters have been
right on."

He also sought to dispel any notion that the military did not respect or support
President Clinton. "President Clinton is our Commander in Chief," he said in a
statement released by his office. "He has and will continue to have the loyalty
and full support of the Joint Chiefs of Staff."

In the telephone interview, he elaborated: "The people of the United States
appointed him and elected him for that. Speaking for myself, and I know for the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, he has and will continue to have the loyalty and full
support of all of us."

President Clinton's standing with the military was a matter of controversy in
the 1992 campaign, when Republicans asked how a man who avoided the draft during
the Vietnam War could command the respect of the uniformed forces.

As President, Mr. Clinton got off to a disastrous start in his relations with
the Joint Chiefs, as the military leaders nearly rebelled against his plan to
allow homosexuals to serve openly in the military. In addition, Democratic plans
for military cuts and the President's attitude toward embroiling the military in
trouble spots abroad raised suspicions within the Pentagon and among the rank
and file.

Since then, however, much has changed. Pentagon officials as well as outsiders
say the military's top brass genuinely support Mr. Clinton and are pleased with
their relations, which they say are now better than his standing with many of
his old supporters, like gay-rights groups.

Those officials attribute the improving relations to these factors:

*Mr. Clinton's retreat on gay rights.

*His cooling toward the use of force in dangerous situations like the fighting
in Bosnia.

*His resolve in episodes like Iraq's recent threat to Kuwait.

*His support for a number of spending initiatives.

"Since coming to this job this past year, I'd say that the relationship between
the military and the President has only improved," General Shalikashvili said.

Mr. Clinton has also gone to great lengths on his travels to visit American
troops and talks often of their service and importance.

Among the enlisted ranks, however, officials and others say, Mr. Clinton is far
less popular. And the issue of his standing with the armed forces is still a
politically sensitive one, particularly after an election in which he proved
unpopular among white men and in the South, a group and a region that have
traditionally supported the military.

In the CNN television interview, whose transcript was released Friday but which
was broadcast today, Senator Helms said the military men who believe President
Clinton is not up to the job included active-duty officers and general-grade
officers.

Mr. Helms said he would not say who those officers were. When he was asked
whether some skeptics were on the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mr. Helms said, "No
comment."

Explaining why he felt a need to respond to Senator Helms, General Shalikashvili
said: "I don't want the soldiers, sailors, airmen and marines wondering what the
uniformed leadership thinks on this issue. He's our Commander in Chief. We owe
it to him. He has our willing and faithful support."

The General, whom President Clinton selected to head the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
said that he was often in contact with military people throughout the world and
that they did not share the judgment of Senator Helms.

"He left the impression that this represents such an overwhelming view in the
military and in the leadership," he said. "That just isn't so."

On "Evans and Novak," Senator Helms attacked the decision to send troops to
Haiti, saying they should have been withdrawn "yesterday," and adding, "I don't
think it's been a successful operation."

General Shalikashvili today disputed Mr. Helms's views on the Haiti operation,
in which 20,000 troops landed in Haiti in September. He said the plan to
withdraw the troops after parliamentary elections are held next year was the
right one.

Today was not the first time a chairman of the Joint Chiefs has come to Mr.
Clinton's defense. General Shalikashvili's predecessor, Gen. Colin L. Powell,
defused a potentially embarrassing situation for Mr. Clinton on the President's
first Memorial Day in office. The General, who friends say came to develop a
warm relationship with Mr. Clinton, escorted him to a ceremony at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial and quieted an angry crowd with an effusive introduction of
his Commander in Chief.


LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              139 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Erwin Griswold of Harvard, Ex-Solicitor General, 90

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 58;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 615 words


Erwin N. Griswold, the United States Solicitor General under two Presidents and
for many years dean of the Harvard Law School, died yesterday at Massachusetts
General Hospital in Boston. He was 90.

Mr. Griswold was a resident of Belmont, Mass., and Washington. The Harvard Law
School announced his death last night, but the cause was not given.

During his career, Mr. Griswold argued more cases before the United States
Supreme Court than any other lawyer. A statement released yesterday by the law
school called him "a champion of civil rights and a foe of McCarthyism."

Last night, Elliot L. Richardson, the Attorney General during the Nixon
Administration and a longtime friend, described Mr. Griswold as "an
extraordinary man" who was held in "a certain reverence" by the faculty at
Harvard.

A native of East Cleveland, Ohio, Mr. Griswold was born on July 14, 1904. He
received his bachelor's degree from Oberlin College in 1925 and three years
later graduated summa cum laude from Harvard Law. Early in his career, he joined
the Solicitor General's Office.

As a staff lawyer for the Solicitor General, he became an expert at arguing tax
cases before the Supreme Court, principally because no one else in the office
wanted to handle them, and he became renowned for his expertise in the field.
Mr. Griswold, a lifelong Republican with a background of Midwest conservatism,
left Washington to return to Harvard to teach in 1934, serving as an assistant
professor until 1946, when he became dean, a post he held until 1967.

During Mr. Griswold's tenure as dean, the law school established its
international legal studies program and its international tax program, doubled
the size of the faculty and enrolled women.

During the McCarthy era, Mr. Griswold denounced Senator Joseph McCarthy in his
book "The Fifth Amendment Today," which examined the constitutional protection
against self-incrimination.

Five years after he became dean of the law school, Mr. Griswold rejected a
demand by the president of the Massachusetts Bar Association to disband the
Harvard unit of the National Lawyers Guild, then under attack by the House
Committee on Un-American Activities.

Later, Mr. Griswold was an expert witness for Thurgood Marshall, then the legal
director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, in
cases the group brought to lay the foundation for the Supreme Court's
desegregation order in Brown v. Board of Education. He later served on the U.S.
Civil Rights Commission under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

Mr. Griswold retired as dean in 1967 to become Solicitor General under President
Johnson and he continued in that post under President Richard M. Nixon.

In one of the most celebrated cases of the time, he supported the Nixon
Administration's position that release of the Pentagon Papers, an internal
Department of Defense history of the Vietnam War, would be harmful to the
national security. The Supreme Court eventually ruled that publication of the
papers could not be enjoined. Mr. Griswold later changed his position, saying
the decision "came out exactly as it should."

Mr. Griswold joined the the law firm of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue of
Washington, D.C., in 1973 and continued arguing cases before the Supreme Court.
He was also the president of the Association of American Law Schools from 1957
to 1958, and of the American Bar Foundation from 1971 to 1974.

Mr. Griswold is survived by his wife, Harriet, whom he married in 1931; a
brother, James, of Exeter, N.H.; a sister, Hope Curfman of Denver; a daughter,
Hope Murrow of Cambridge, Mass.; a son, William, of Belmont, and five
grandchildren.


NAME: Erwin N. Griswold

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Erwin N. Griswold. (Associated Press, 1963)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              140 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Bobby Was a Difficult Child': My Cousin, Robert Lowell

BYLINE: By Sarah Payne Stuart;   Sarah Payne Stuart is the author of two novels,
"Men in Trouble" and "The Year Roger Wasn't Well."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3766 words


MY first cousin once removed was Robert Lowell, the poet -- a fact I just
happened to mention on my application to Harvard University. The worst part was
that I had to work it into the essay section. They had a section for listing
family members who had gone to Harvard, but that was only for immediate family
members. It was 3 o'clock in the morning and the application was due next day.
So I started writing something dumb about my intellectual development -- or was
it my personal growth? -- all the time saying to myself, "I can't, I can't,"
when suddenly out of the blue came, "As I was having dinner last night with my
first cousin once removed, Robert Lowell, the poet, I turned to him and said. .
. ."

That was a long time ago, in 1969, and it is just as well to make a clean breast
of it now. Also, I might just as well admit that I do not get poetry. In high
school I was good at subjects like "The Culture of Poverty" and "The Negro," but
when it came to analyzing those poets, forget it. To this day, put a gun to my
head and I still cannot tell you the difference between the tone of a poem and
the mood of a poem. Still, I did not lie on the application. Bobby -- Bobby is
what we called him in the family -- had been out to Concord the night before.
(Concord, Mass., is where I grew up, under the influence of the writings of
Louisa May Alcott -- my mother said there was an excruciating period when I
called her Marmee and helped with the dishes every two seconds.) Bobby came out
to visit my mother whenever he was teaching at Harvard. They were first cousins,
and Bobby had been reading her his poems ever since they were teen-agers
summering at Rock. They got along great, although neither of them probably
understood a word the other one said. My mother is very pretty and very normal,
and she believes in treating other people as normal even if they're not.

Ever since I was 4 years old and had said something sarcastic in front of him,
my mother had been quoting Bobby at me: "As your cousin the famous poet once
said, 'Sarcasm does not become one so young,' " which didn't do much to build
relations between us. My only other experiences with him had been at Great-Aunt
Sarah's Thanksgivings, where year after year Bobby had looked at me vaguely and
said, "Haven't you grown taller or something?" But that night Bobby was so funny
the tears streamed down my face. He told stories about the family, and then we
had a long discussion about Sir Thomas More. I said I hated him -- he reminded
me of Thoreau, who you knew was getting his laundry done at Emerson's while he
was living in the woods -- and Bobby laughed and said I was original, a comment
I quote back to myself in troubled times. Later he read us his latest poems
while my father slept on the couch and my mother and I listened attentively. I
wanted so much to understand the poems, but of course I didn't. When Bobby got
to the one about Aunt Sarah, my mother said it was a lovely poem but of course
he would have to change the line, "Semi-illiterate, but infinitely wise." Bobby
and my mother talked about the line the rest of the evening, my mother arguing
that Bobby had always said he would never write about members of the family
until they were dead, and Bobby arguing that changing the line would ruin the
poem. But when the book came out, he'd changed the line, and for years,
Great-Aunt Sarah kept the poem framed in her living room.

THE first time Bobby had written about the family, he had really been in the
doghouse, my father said. It had all happened when I was very young, so I got
most of my information from my mother and Great-Aunt Sarah. What Bobby had
written was very disagreeable, Aunt Sarah said. "My father wrote a book and very
interesting it was too," she said, "all about how we are directly descended from
Mary Chilton, the first woman to step on Plymouth Rock." Aunt Sarah used to
dress up as Mary Chilton and step on a rock at the Chilton Club every year. The
big thing in my family is getting on that rock first, but I don't know what
we've done since except marry each other and produce manic-depressives. That is,
except for Bobby, who managed to break out of his Boston constraints and write,
in spite of the fact that he had a breakdown almost every year of his adult
life. When I think of my brother, who had only three breakdowns, and what it was
like in that overheated hospital room with the girl with the pacifier and the
birds chirping in the cages and my brother screaming inside but too drugged up
to wash his face or light a cigarette, I cannot believe Bobby lived to be 60. I
had been told he checked himself into McLean Hospital in Belmont, Mass.,
whenever he needed a rest.

Great-Aunt Sarah was Bobby's mother's younger sister. She was 47 when she got
married, though in pictures she looks 20 -- her secret, she said, was to stay in
bed for five days every month when she got her period. Aunt Sarah lived at home
until she married, so when Bobby was growing up she'd taken care of him often.
She and Bobby had adored each other, according to my mother, but Aunt Sarah
always said to me that Bobby was a difficult child, first leaving Harvard for
some college in Ohio and then marrying that girl (Jean Stafford) just because he
broke her nose. The day "Life Studies" was published in 1959, Aunt Sarah met my
mother, who had been invited for lunch, in front of her house on Beacon Street
and marched her around the corner to Bobby and Elizabeth's on Marlborough to
tell them, as she stood in their foyer refusing to sit down, that what Bobby had
written about his parents was all dreadful lies. Bobby and his second wife,
Elizabeth Hardwick, had bought the house on Marlborough Street after his mother
died to get back to his roots, but instead he nearly dug them up. But then he
won the National Book Award, and for years he could get away with anything. He
would say the most outrageous thing over dinner and Aunt Sarah would turn to you
confidentially and say, "Bobby's a genius, you know."

THEN during my second year at Harvard Bobby ran off to live with the Countess
(the family referred to her as the Countess, even though it turned out that she
was merely the daughter of a marquess), Lady Caroline Blackwood. Bobby was still
married to Elizabeth when he sent the telegram from England to Aunt Sarah and
Uncle Cot, "Robert Jr. born today!" Aunt Sarah refused to talk to him even after
he and the Countess were married in 1972. When we asked her, she would say yes,
she would like to see Bobby, but when he called, she wouldn't come to the phone.

When Bobby came to Harvard the fall of my senior year, he called me and asked me
to try and get him in to see Aunt Sarah. By this time I was very much in awe of
him, and I kept mouthing "Rob-ert Low-ell is on the phone" to my roommate, and
trying to think of something poetical to say. The problem was I couldn't really
understand him because he had this cultured way of talking that must have got
worse over in England. Finally I figured out he had invited me to dinner and
managed to get an address. It was some place in Brookline.

The house they'd rented was Victorian, gloomy and shabby, and there were all
kinds of nannies and children running around. On the floors everywhere were
empty liquor bottles. In Concord we knew a family so sloppy they left sticks of
margarine out all day with bread crumbs stuck to them, but I wasn't prepared for
this. The Countess sat elegantly with an empty liquor bottle at her feet that
she did not even try to kick under the couch. To me, this made her an
aristocrat. She was very beautiful and intelligent looking and held an enormous
drink in her hand. Caroline is a writer, Bobby said, and then he handed me an
equally enormous drink, which I was thankful to get because
they'd invited all these scholarly young men from Harvard, I guess as beaux for
me, and they were conducting a heated discussion about Tennyson, who might as
well have been Longfellow as far as I knew. (Wordsworth I know because I saw the
movie "Splendor in the Grass.")

I didn't know what to say, but Bobby was very nice and gave me a little smile.
He'd given up drinking, he said, indicating his glass. He sat a little off from
the group and drank one iced coffee after another while everyone sat around
saying Cal this and Cal that. I had been told by my mother that Bobby was
nicknamed Cal for Caliban, but later I read he was also called Cal for Caligula.
After my third quart-size drink I managed to work the conversation around from
Tennyson to what had happened to me on the subway the other day. We were all
fairly garbled by thenand anything went. When I left, Bobby asked me to try Aunt
Sarah again and I promised I would and then somehow I drove back to Cambridge.

THAT was the last time I saw Bobby. He died four years later, in 1977. I had
been married a year and had a job writing bank ads like "Get a free gift with a
$200 deposit" or, if I were feeling clever, "It's our anniversary, but you get
the gifts!" Advertising was pretty hard, though I always got the impression that
Bluma thought it was beneath me. Bluma was my shrink. Actually, she's the family
shrink, at least for the ones who are not manic-depressive. Half the family's
manic-depressive and the rest are messed up about it. Bluma treats the second
group. Bluma -- we've always called her by her first name -- is warm with big
brown eyes. She says things like "Sally darling, you're neurotic, but neurotic
is good!" I guess as opposed to psychotic.

Elizabeth was the one who introduced Bluma to the family, although I think she
only saw her a few times to discuss Bobby's breakdowns. To the family, Elizabeth
was always the real wife. She and Bobby used to fly in from New York with their
little daughter, Harriet, to Aunt Sarah's Thanksgivings. Elizabeth was always
very bright and witty and would chat away while Bobby wandered about looking
into the distance. Bobby used to joke how Aunt Sarah always seated him at the
table between his 4-year-old daughter and Cousin Natalie Winslow, a great big
woman who was writing a book in French about her visions of Marie Antoinette at
Versailles. Bobby said he found his 4-year-old daughter more intellectually
stimulating.

ELIZABETH stood by Bobby through it all. She and Bobby had been married more
than 20 years when he ran off with the Countess, and it was to Elizabeth that he
finally returned. Or almost returned. He had left England and was on his way
back to Elizabeth when he died of a heart attack in the cab outside her door.

Bobby had switched back from Roman Catholicism to Protestantism, so the funeral
was at the Church of the Advent in Boston. It was a very High ceremony with
swinging balls of incense and bells chiming. My husband, Charlie, said frankly
it put the Catholic Church to shame. Charlie was very frank in those days.
"Frankly, I could use some more salt on this," he would say. These days he is
merely quite honest. "Quite honestly," he said the other day in rather a loud
voice just as the restaurant hit a lull, "I always wear pajama bottoms." We were
discussing bathrobes and getting quite animated. Charlie is very smart but he is
not what you call an intellectual. He had never even heard of Robert Lowell
until he met me and by then Bobby was living in England. But he did meet
Elizabeth. I have a picture of the two of them at our wedding. Elizabeth is
looking very intense and gesticulating with both arms and Charlie is looking her
straight in the eye. He said he was dead drunk and had not the slightest idea
what they were discussing.

There were thousands of people at the funeral. (Actually, there were probably
only hundreds. I am well known for my tendency to exaggerate. Once, after
Charlie and I had rented our basement apartment to a young bachelor, we were
having a fight and I said, "Keep your voice down, there are thousands of people
living here now." Charlie is in the news business and likes to keep things
factual.) Anyway, there were lots of people there -- relatives, students,
reporters and all sorts of famous people in the writing world. It was pretty
flashy for the Church of the Advent and my Boston relatives, who sat stiffly in
the pews careful not to be too comfortable. Everything was bustling when we
arrived -- my parents, Charlie, me and my oldest brother, Billy.

My father marched us down the aisle with that brisk no-nonsense walk he used
when he ushered at the Episcopal Church. That was before the Vietnam War when my
parents became liberal and joined the Unitarian Church, which is so liberal you
don't even have to go. My father stands very tall and good looking and I always
think of him as very graceful, but it turns out he bumps into things a lot. He's
always got a Band-Aid on his forehead where he's bumped into the steering wheel
or something. My mother had his arm and Billy was already down at the pew.
(Billy is always very speedy. You spend all day cooking him a meal and he's
cleaned his plate lickety-split before you've had a chance to lift your fork.)
When we walked down the aisle, Charlie said I kept whispering who the relatives
were and how we were related, while he kept trying to give a wink to reporters
he knew and still look sad.

I do not remember much about the funeral itself on account of watching the
Countess the entire time. We were seated in the second pew, right behind
Elizabeth and Harriet and the Countess and her entourage. She must have brought
50 people over from England with her, or anyway, 10. Some were her daughters, I
guess, and governesses and I know one was an English Lady. They were all
gathered around the Countess, who looked like someone out of a Greek tragedy,
black eye makeup running down her ravaged face. She shook and shuddered
throughout the entire service while the rest of us simply stared. Even Elizabeth
and Harriet tried to comfort her but it was no good.

Behind us in the third pew sat Aunt Sarah and Uncle Cot, like two sticks of
iron, built to last. "Why doesn't Bobby write about the sea?" she'd said to me
once, as we'd sat on her summer veranda overlooking Uncle Cot's yacht. "It's so
pretty." My mother had brought Aunt Sarah to see Bobby in the hospital when he'd
had the first heart attack the year before and they had been reconciled. Or so
everybody thought. Recently I noticed Bobby's picture had been torn from Aunt
Sarah's scrapbook and his mother made childless on her family tree. When she did
this I do not know. "You're nothing but middle-class trash," she told me shortly
before she died at the age of 99. She was only in her 80's when Bobby died,
though, and not so cranky. "Who are all the women in the first row?" Uncle Cot
shouted in her ear at the funeral. "Those are the wives," Aunt Sarah answered in
a clear voice.

The service was very long. I didn't think they'd ever get the Countess up to the
communion rail and then a lot of people read things. Peter Taylor read a poem of
Bobby's, which I didn't listen to as I was too busy explaining to Charlie, who
didn't care, how this particular writer had taught me at Harvard and only given
me an A because I was Bobby's cousin. It was a rather grisly poem, with skulls
and swarming locusts. "Very pretty, isn't it?" Aunt Sarah had commented.

Bobby had wanted to be buried at the family burial grounds in Dunbarton, N.H.,
two hours away, and somehow my parents were responsible for getting everyone up
there. "Someone has to be in charge," my father had said with a sigh, "and it
might as well be someone who knows directions." The family plot in Dunbarton has
been around since before the Revolution, or at least the bodies and markers
have. They had to move all the bodies and markers several years ago when there
was supposed to be a flood, which never happened. Now everybody is buried in the
new plot while the old plot just sits there. Aunt Sarah wanted me to have my
wedding reception at the old plot and dance on the graves. The new plot, where
we were taking Bobby, is quite small. Once, when I was 18, I got a frantic phone
call from my mother at 7:30 A.M. saying if I wanted to be buried in Dunbarton,
I'd better decide soon, they were running out of room.

CHARLIE had to go back to work after the service, so it was Billy and I and my
parents in their mustard-colored Subaru who led the procession of limousines up
Route 93. My father had stuck a piece of shirt cardboard in the windshield wiper
with "Lowell Funeral" carefully printed on it, which no one could see but the
people driving in the opposite direction. My mother had made the sandwiches.
"Everyone gets a tuna, a peanut butter and a little bottle of sherry," my mother
said, "except for the Countess. She gets a Diet 7-Up."

"What bothers me," my father said, "is where are we going to go to the damn
bathroom."

"It's got to be nice," my mother said. My father thought he remembered one of
those rest areas with the brick bathrooms that was only a little out of the way.

How we all ended up at the rest area I do not know, as my father is the worst
person to follow in the world. He's always racing through yellow lights and
changing lanes and going on short cuts that turn out to be long cuts. (The funny
thing is, my father's family's whole life is directions. Whenever they visit
each other they spend the first half of the time discussing how they got there
and the second half how they're going back. But somehow we all got there.)
Everyone got out of the limousines -- the wives had ridden up together -- and my
mother passed out the brown paper bags and soon everyone was chatting away and
drinking sherry out of paper cups. There were all these young men whom nobody
knew who kept running up to Harriet and saying, "He loved you so much!"

The Countess was evidently still shaking like crazy -- there was a big group
gathered around her limousine. One of them, the pretty English Lady with the
white, white skin, came up to my father and said in the loveliest voice that,
really, you see the Countess was a bit upset and sherry really was
not the thing and did we have anything rather stronger? No one knew what to do,
but my father was sure going to do something, and the next thing we knew he was
striding across the grass and introducing himself to a group of people eating at
one of the picnic tables. It turned out they were on their way up to the
Dartmouth-Harvard game. Well, my father said, wasn't that interesting, he had a
son-in-law went to Dartmouth, he himself went to Williams, and then they
discussed how long they thought it would take them to get to Hanover, and then
my father mentioned that they were on their way to Dunbarton, N.H., to bury his
wife's first cousin, Robert Lowell, the poet, had they heard of him? No? Well,
it seemed his third wife who was a countess from England didn't like sherry,
etc., etc. From a distance you could see they really hit it off. My father
returned with two little airplane bottles of vodka to the profuse thanks of the
English Lady. Soon a tremulous but smiling Countess was being taken around
introduced by Elizabeth. "This is Lady Caroline," said Elizabeth to everyone,
"Cal's wife."

It was late afternoon by the time we reached Dunbarton and damp and chilly. My
grandmother had always said she didn't want to be buried in Dunbarton because it
was too cold. Somehow, though, it seems just right for my ancestors, who lie
there with names like Moody, Savage and Stark. Gen. John Stark was a big hero in
the Revolution and was supposed to be a disciplined and unforgiving man. You can
get all these tacky china John Stark decanters in junk antique shops all over
New Hampshire, and once we gave one to Aunt Sarah at Thanksgiving with a little
poem we read as my father strummed the banjo. (How we dared write little poems
in front of Bobby, I do not know, now I think of it, poems like "Yessir, he's
our relation, / Nosir, he's not in your generation. . . ." Bobby never seemed to
mind, though.) The graveyard is in a clearing of pines in the forest and is very
beautiful. It is snug and fenced in, and outside the fence lie smaller
tombstones marking the graves of servants.

I've actually been to Dunbarton a number of times because my parents have a
cabin nearby and Aunt Sarah and Uncle Cot used to drive up every summer just to
look at the graves and then turn around and drive back again. As I get older, I
begin to see their point. When they lowered the coffin it was very final and
sad. The wives and Harriet threw flowers in the grave, and then someone threw in
a spade of dirt. Bobby was buried next to his mother, Charlotte. I noticed she'd
died young herself, the same age as Bobby. I wondered if her life had been as
hard as his. I never knew her. She was a couple of years older than Aunt Sarah
and very put together and just so. Aunt Sarah admired her greatly. She said she
always wished she could get her hat to sit like Charlotte's. It is difficult for
me to imagine anyone being more of a grande dame than my Aunt Sarah, but I will
say this: I think Aunt Sarah was soft where Charlotte was hard.

MY favorite story of Aunt Sarah's about Aunt Charlotte is the time they went to
visit Bobby in prison. Bobby went to prison in 1944 as a conscientious objector
in World War II, although twice earlier he had tried to enlist. Bobby's life is
sometimes confusing. But Bobby did go to prison and when he was in prison Aunt
Charlotte called up Aunt Sarah one afternoon. "Sarah," said Aunt Charlotte, "I'd
thought I'd go visit Bobby tomorrow, do you want to come along?" Aunt Sarah said
yes, she would love to, what was Charlotte wearing? They had a long discussion
about what one wore to prison -- unlike most Boston women Aunt Sarah and Aunt
Charlotte were always very chic. The next morning, dressed to a T, the sisters
stood out on Beacon Street and Charlotte hailed a cab with white-gloved hand.
"The prison in Danbury, Connecticut, please," she instructed the cab driver as
they got in. The cabby turned to her and said, "Lady, why in the world would
someone like you want to go all the way to Danbury prison?" Charlotte turned to
him grandly. "My son is staying there," she said.

When they arrived at the prison, the guard at the desk gave them a queer look.
"I would like to see my son, Robert Lowell," Charlotte said imperiously. "Oh
him!" said the guard with contempt. "He spends whole days in the library." When
Bobby appeared, his face was aglow. He ran up to his mother and aunt and kissed
them. "Oh mother," he said, "I'm so happy. It's so peaceful here."

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              141 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 802 words



International A3-9

NUCLEAR DANGER FROM RUSSIA

Russian scientists have disclosed that for decades the country has been
disposing of nuclear wastes by directly pumping them secretly into the earth,
which is at odds with global safety standards. A1


TRUCE SIGNED IN ANGOLA

The Angolan Government and rebels signed a truce, with hope because for the
first time it offers power sharing for the rebels, but with the credibility
diminished by the absence of the rebel leader.  A1

NATO PLAN TO BOMB SERB AIRFIELD

NATO has decided to bomb a nationalist Serb airfield in a Serbian-held area of
Croatia in response to the attacks in Bosnia and has held off only because of
bad weather, Western officials said.  A1

Nationalist Serbs continued advancing in Bosnia.  A6

PLEA FOR AID FROM GAZA

The Palestinian self-rule Government, still reeling from riots, called upon
Israel and on other countries to come through with aid they have promised to
relieve the tension caused by poverty. A3

FIGHT FOR A SWISS BANK

The Swiss are getting their full share of a knock-down, drag-out fight over
control of the country's largest financial institution, the Union Bank of
Switzerland. D1

SONY'S HARD LESSON FOR MCA

Sony's loss on its American movie studios carries a grim message for MCA's
executives, who have struggled for more freedom and money from the parent,
Matsushita.  D1

Japan admits bungling before the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941. A5

Italian voting indicated the Prime Minister was losing support. A9

A conciliatory statement from North Korea. A3

Cam Lo Journal: Life gets harder in Vietnam's countryside. A4

National A10-13, A16, B8-9

REPUBLICANS NOT OF ONE MIND

In a highly unusual effort, the nation's Republican governors and
governors-elect put some distance between themselves and their own party's
leaders in Congress.  A1

CLINTON IN '96? MAYBE NOT.

Political Memo: Devastating midterm election losses have fed doubts that Bill
Clinton has a lock on the Democratic Party's 1996 Presidential nomination.  A1

BARGAINING FOR GATT SUPPORT

Senator Bob Dole told Administration officials that he would vote for a
worldwide trade pact if the White House dropped certain objections to a capital
gains tax cut.  A1

LIFE OF UNCERTAINTY IN CALIFORNIA

With Proposition 187 being blocked by the courts, California's undocumented
aliens can still only watch and wait with uncertainty.  A10

USAIR GETTING BACK ON TRACK?

USAir appointed a retired Air Force general as chief of safety operations and
hired an aviation consulting company to make an independent audit of its flight
operations.  A10

NEW LEADER FOR GAY RIGHTS

The Human Rights Campaign Fund, the nations largest gay political organization,
will name Elizabeth Birch as executive director.  A12

INSURANCE FOR SAME SEX COUPLES

California regulators are pushing insurance companies to allow one member of a
homosexual couple to buy life insurance on the other and be named the
beneficiary.  A13

DEMOCRATS PACK UP AND MOVE OUT

As a result of the Republican landslide, 37 incumbent Democrats members of
Congress lost their jobs. And so did their staffs.  B8

Metro Digest B1

GRANDMOTHERS AND AIDS

As the AIDS epidemic rages, grandmothers across the nation are increasingly
thrust into an old role with a new twist: they are caring for adult children
dying of AIDS and for the grandchildren, some also dying, who are left behind.
A1

Business Digest D1

Sports C1-8

Basketball: Ewing still ailing.  C2

Columns: Araton on Fitch.  C3 Anderson on Jets C4

Football: Jets Stun Vikings.  C1

Cowboys lose 2 passers.  C7

L.S.U. eyes Giants' aide.  C5

Bowl system not working.  C2

Tennis: Sabatini ends drought.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C9-16

Why Neil Simon turned his back on Broadway: economics.  C9

Theater: "The Shadow Box." C9

"The Flying Karamazov Brothers Do the Impossible!" C12

Music: "Now Eleanor's Idea." C10

Maw's "Odyssey." C12

Books: "Family." C13

Television: Seinfeld with Abbott and Costello.  C14

"Jihad in America." C14

Obituaries B10 Erwin N. Griswold, former dean of the Harvard Law School.

Melvin A. Eggers, the former chancellor of Syracuse University.

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

What now for Mr. Clinton?

Time for a global criminal court.

Topics: Fatter and fatter.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Dr. Esma's lesson.

William Safire: Self-deportation?

Richard N. Haas: 1,000 Americans on the Golan.

Benjamin Netanyahu: A peace pact? Only if it's genuine.

Chronicle B9

Bridge C12

Crossword C13

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              142 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Army Critique By Young Gore

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 205 words


As a college student writing home to his father, Vice President Al Gore called
the Army an example of "fascist, totalitarian regimes" in a letter described in
the new issue of The New Yorker. Mr. Gore now dismisses that notion as "a
college kid's silly language."

The letter was among others obtained by the magazine from Mr. Gore's parents and
described in its Nov. 28 issue. After writing the letters, Mr. Gore enlisted in
the Army and served in the Vietnam War, an experience he now says "allowed me to
shed that nonsense."

"We do have inveterate antipathy for Communism -- or paranoia as I like to put
it," Mr. Gore wrote in the late 1960's from Harvard to his father, Albert Sr., a
Democratic Senator from Tennessee who opposed the war. "My own belief is that
this form of psychological ailment -- in this case a national madness -- leads
the victim to actually create the thing which is feared the most.

"It strikes me that this is precisely what the U.S. has been doing. Creating --
and if not creating, energetically supporting -- fascist, totalitarian regimes
in the name of fighting totalitarianism. Greece, South Vietnam, a good deal of
Latin America. For me, the best example of all is the U.S. Army."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              143 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Erwin Griswold Is Dead at 90; Served as a Solicitor General

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section B;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words


Erwin N. Griswold, the United States Solicitor General under two Presidents, and
for more than 20 years dean of the Harvard Law School, died on Saturday at
Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. He was 90.

Mr. Griswold was a resident of Belmont, Mass., and Washington. The Harvard Law
School announced his death on Saturday night, but the cause was not given.

A statement released by the Harvard Law School called him "a champion of civil
rights and a foe of McCarthyism."

Elliot L. Richardson, the Attorney General during the Nixon Administration and a
longtime friend of Mr. Griswold's, said, "He was an extraordinary man in many
ways, not least in the discipline he imposed on himself to be fair."

He was a man of extremely keen intellect, and he was sometimes impatient with
what he thought was shoddy or wrong or meretricious. But he was also quite
capable, if he thought he'd overreacted, of apologizing and correcting himself."

The faculty at Harvard, Mr. Richardson said, held Mr. Griswold in "a certain
reverence for what he had done and what he had stood for."

"And everybody called him 'the Dean,' no matter who had succeeded him," Mr.
Richardson said. "And those who did succeed him were not jealous."

A 1960 profile of Mr. Griswold in The New York Times described him as a
"lifelong Republican with a background of Midwest conservatism," who "is built
like a granite block and is just as inflexible in his conceptions of basic
rectitude."

A native of East Cleveland, Ohio, Erwin Griswold was born on July 14, 1904. He
received a bachelor's degree from Oberlin College in Ohio in 1925, and three
years later graduated summa cum laude from Harvard Law School. For a brief time
after graduation, he was with the firm of Griswold, Green, Palmer & Hadden in
Cleveland, but he soon joined the Solicitor General's office in Washington.

As a staff lawyer for the Solicitor General, he became an expert at arguing tax
cases before the Supreme Court, principally because no one else in the office
wanted to handle them, and he became known as one of the great legal scholars in
the tax field.

When he left Washington to return to Harvard in 1934, Chief Justice Charles
Evans Hughes, citing Mr. Griswold's ability to win tax judgments, declared that
his departure would cost the Government a great deal of money.

Invited in 1934 to teach at Harvard Law School as an assistant professor, he
said he would try it out. A year later, he was made a full professor. In 1946 he
became dean of the law school, a position he held until 1967. In that time he
was a -- and many would say the -- dominant figure in American legal education.

In his time as dean, he doubled the size of the faculty. He also oversaw the
enrollment of the first female students in 1950 and lived to see one of the
earliest, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, become a Supreme Court Justice.

In honor of his contributions, in 1979 Harvard dedicated Griswold Hall, which
houses the dean's office, faculty offices and a classroom.

In the early 1950's, Mr. Griswold denounced Senator Joseph R. McCarthy in his
book "The Fifth Amendment Today," which examined the constitutional protection
against self-incrimination.

The 1960 profile of Mr. Griswold in The Times said that "when Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy was in full cry against the use of the Fifth Amendment by witnesses
accused of Communist ties, one of the most forceful voices in defense of the
constitutional privilege against self-incrimination was raised by Dean Erwin
Nathaniel Griswold of the Harvard Law School."

Later, Mr. Griswold served as an expert witness for Thurgood Marshall, who was
then the legal director of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People, in several of the cases that the association brought to lay the
foundation for the Supreme Court's desegregation order in Brown v. Board of
Education. And he later served on the United States Civil Rights Commission
under Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.

In 1965, when public opinion was swinging against the Supreme Court for what
some felt was coddling of criminals, Mr. Griswold made a speech titled "The Long
View," which detailed how years of neglect and injustice in state courts had
forced the Supreme Court to step in and make them improve their procedures.

Two years later, Mr. Griswold retired as dean of Harvard Law to become Solicitor
General under President Johnson, supporting the Great Society legislation. He
continued to serve in that post under President Richard M. Nixon.

During the Nixon years, in accordance with his position as Solicitor General,
Mr. Griswold supported the Administration's more conservative positions. He
argued, in one case, that the Supreme Court should block Dr. Benjamin Spock and
three other minority party candidates from campaigning among soldiers stationed
at Fort Dix, N.J. In another case, he argued that the armed forces were not
practicing sex discrimination when they automatically discharged pregnant
servicewomen.

And in one of the most celebrated cases of the time, he supported the
Administration's position that the courts should bar The Times and other
newspapers from publishing the Pentagon Papers, a secret Department of Defense
history of the Vietnam War. The Supreme Court eventually ruled that publication
could not be enjoined.

In 1989 Mr. Griswold wrote that he had "never seen any trace of a threat to the
national security from the publication." With characteristic candor, he added,
"There's a good deal of difference between foresight and hindsight, and as of
that time (1971) I thought there was substantial risk" to the national security.

As a private lawyer, after joining the firm of Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue in
Washington in 1973, Mr. Griswold continued arguing cases before the Supreme
Court. He also served as president of the Association of American Law Schools
from 1957 to 1958, and of the American Bar Foundation from 1971 to 1974.

Mr. Griswold is survived by his wife, Harriet, whom he married in 1931; a
brother, James of Exeter, N.H.; a sister, Hope Curfman of Denver; a daughter,
Hope Murrow of Cambridge, Mass.; a son, William, of Belmont, Mass., and five
grandchildren.

NAME: Erwin N. Griswold

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Erwin N. Griswold (Associated Press, 1963)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              144 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

POLITICAL MEMO;
Clinton's Grip On '96 Ticket Isn't So Sure

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words


It is still only a question, but a politically portentous one, and it is on the
lips and in the minds of prominent Democrats across the country: Can Bill
Clinton -- should Bill Clinton -- be the party's Presidential nominee in 1996?

So sweeping was the Democratic defeat in the elections 13 days ago, and so deep
is the Democratic dejection in its wake, that the President's place at the head
of the ticket two years from now is no longer taken for granted. The odds are
strongly in his favor: he is still the President, and he has few obvious
challengers. But the doubts are there.

"A year from now, maybe much sooner," a party elder said the other day, "people
will take stock. If they see him as the probable cause of another debacle,
they'll prevail upon him to call it quits, or they'll run against him."

In much the same vein, a young Congressman who survived the Republican onslaught
commented, "Unless he can rebound quickly, a lot of us would just as soon he
didn't seek re-election."

And a well-connected White House aide said when asked whether Mr. Clinton's
staff expected a challenge for the nomination, "The question is not really if,
but when and from whom."

Such talk may turn out to be only talk. But for as long as it persists, it
further weakens an already wounded President and makes it harder for him to
govern the nation effectively.

For the record, the White House expresses confidence that Mr. Clinton can win
the nomination. But even the President's advisers concede that he is likely to
face at least the kind of distraction that President George Bush endured from
Patrick J. Buchanan two years ago, and perhaps a more serious fight of the kind
that Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts gave President Jimmy Carter in
1980.

Much depends, of course, on how successfully Mr. Clinton can assess the new
political reality, rally his remaining troops, establish priorities and reassert
his leadership. Much depends also on whether the exuberant Republicans handle
their newly won power on Capitol Hill constructively or self-destructively.

But in politics as in life, self-preservation is the primal instinct, and at the
moment many Democrats feel threatened, not protected, by their President. Some
of the senior Democrats up for re-election in 1996, including Senators Max
Baucus of Montana, Jim Exon of Nebraska, J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana and
Howell Heflin of Alabama, must run in states where Mr. Clinton is highly
unpopular.

The decision by Senator Richard C. Shelby of Alabama to leave the Democratic
Party and join the Republicans, as well as the possibility that several
Southerners in the House may do the same, suggests how bleak Democrats in the
South consider their electoral prospects to be. And a similar view prevails in
the Midwest, where even the powerful Daley family in Chicago is said to be
disillusioned.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, who is running for minority leader,
said last week that Senate Democrats "need an identity separate from that of
President Clinton."

Three of the last four Democratic Presidents, excepting only John F. Kennedy,
ran into severe political trouble, and all three faced major internal
challenges. Confronted with deep splits within the party, two of the three
decided not to run.

In 1952, Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee announced his candidacy and won the
Democratic primary in New Hampshire. President Harry S. Truman kept his counsel
for weeks, but in April he announced that he would not seek a second full term.
In 1968, Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota challenged Lyndon B. Johnson in
New Hampshire, mainly because of the Vietnam War, and finished a surprisingly
strong second. The President soon pulled out of the race.

In 1980, Senator Kennedy mounted a full-scale campaign to wrest the Democratic
nomination from President Carter. He won several primaries but was ultimately
unsuccessful.

Nor have Republican Presidents been immune to challenge. In 1976, Ronald Reagan
very nearly took the nomination from President Gerald R. Ford, who had been
weakened by the pardon he had granted former President Richard M. Nixon.

Any insurgency this time will have to start early. Changes in the electoral
calendar -- packing more primaries than ever, including California's, into the
early months of 1996 -- make early organization and fund-raising indispensable.

A possible Democratic challenger on Mr. Clinton's left is the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, who unsuccessfully sought the Democratic nomination in 1988.  He has
hinted that he might make a run, but it is not clear whether he is seriously
contemplating such an effort or simply trying to pressure the President not to
move to the right in the wake of Republican successes.

The most frequently mentioned potential challenger from the Democratic center is
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who was re-elected this year by a handsome
margin. He denies any interest, but some of his past contributors have been
discussing a possible campaign, party leaders said, and he is clearly disturbed
by his party's present situation.

"This election was a severe, sharp and obvious repudiation of the President," he
said a week ago. "We are on the wrong side of many important issues."

But Mr. Kerrey's 1992 Presidential candidacy was disappointing. When the
Gennifer Flowers episode temporarily threw Mr. Clinton off stride in the New
Hampshire campaign and for a short time thereafter, Mr. Kerrey appeared
perfectly positioned to profit, but he was unable to do so. His policy positions
remained diffuse, and his presentation of his candidacy, in person and on
television, remained ineffective.

Others who might conceivably mount a challenge are Senator Sam Nunn of Georgia,
who has resisted the idea of running for President in the past and who is
inconveniently up for re-election in 1996, and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts, Mr. Clinton's most effective Democratic rival two years ago.

A conspicuous shift toward the center by the President, one of the options under
study in the White House, might make a challenge from the center less likely but
one from the left more so. Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the
Speaker-in-waiting, offered the mischievous opinion that Mr. Clinton had a
choice between "an insurgency from the left and an insurgency from the center."

Of course, he could face both. In 1948, President Truman won renomination
despite discontent on both wings of his party, but in the general election he
faced not only the Republican nominee, Thomas E. Dewey, but also a States Rights
candidate, Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, who was then a Democrat, as well as
a Progressive candidate, Henry A. Wallace.

Stephen Hess of the Brookings Institution, a scholar of the Presidency, said
last week, "Bill Clinton, who is likely to get the nomination, is also a
possibility to be the first incumbent President since Chester A. Arthur in 1884
to be denied the nomination."

In the view of some analysts, the greater likelihood, in the event of a strong
challenge, is that Mr. Clinton would volunteer not to run again.

Ted Van Dyk, a lobbyist, strategist and newsletter publisher who backed Mr.
Tsongas in 1992, offered the following predictions: "The President will come
under increasing pressure early in 1995 to declare that he is not a candidate
for re-election. At first thought, President Clinton is almost certain to reject
such a notion as being inconsistent with his off-the-floor, Comeback Kid
persona. But as he considers the unpleasant alternatives, he will take it
seriously."

If Mr. Clinton did step aside, the most likely Democratic candidate would be
Vice President Al Gore.  That would not displease party insiders, many of whom
consider him one of the Administration's few political success stories.

Representative James P. Moran Jr. of Virginia said that while he was not
convinced that his colleagues would run from Mr. Clinton, "there may be some
sentiment in some quarters for the Vice President to be at the top of the
ticket" in 1996. He would not say whether he agreed with that.

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: After this month's election triumphs by Republicans, some are
suggesting that President Clinton, top with Vice President Al Gore (Agence
France-Presse), could face a challenge for renomination in 1996. Mr. Gore is
mentioned as a possible candidate if Mr. Clinton decides not to run. Senators
Bob Kerrey, left (Reuters), and Sam Nunn, above left (The New York Times), and
the Rev. Jesse Jackson, above (Reuters), could challenge the President directly.
(pg. B8)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              145 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 21, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cam Lo Journal;
In the Free Market, Vietnam's Poor Pay a Price

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: CAM LO, Vietnam


In the poorest part of the poorest part of the country, all the talk about
Vietnam as Asia's newest economic power is a distant whisper.

The rice farmers who tend the arid, gritty soil along Vietnam's central coast
say they are thankful that their crops can fetch higher prices in newly free
markets. But the land here in Quang Tri Province is so unproductive that even
when prices go up the effect for most farmers can be measured in pennies.

Among the 400,000 people of the province, many farming families earn less than
$200 a year. And in some years, when the land is washed over by salt water that
floods in from the South China Sea, there is no crop at all.

"I have seen pictures of Hanoi and the other big cities, and I think they must
be like paradise, like a dream," said Ho Thi Dong, a 40-year-old laborer, her
sun-leathered face framed by a conical bamboo hat and a frayed yellow ribbon
loosely tied around her neck. "But here in the country, I think life is more
difficult than before. The Government cannot help us as before."

As the Vietnamese Government abandons Communism to make way for the free market,
the services that millions of Vietnamese had come to depend on are crumbling.

In Government schools across Vietnam, students are suddenly being asked to pay
for their books and, in some cases, for classes. Those who cannot afford them
are being pulled out of school by their parents.

Vietnam's health care system, once fully financed by the Government and
considered a model for the developing world, is giving way to a private system
that requires patients to pay for medicine and a doctor's care.

For farmers, there is no longer the promise that in years of flooding or drought
the Government will step in to help them survive by providing seed and
fertilizer.

The loss of Government services is one thing in a place like Hanoi, the capital,
or Ho Chi Minh City, formerly known as Saigon. Under a free market and with
billions of dollars in new foreign investment, Vietnam's cities are booming, and
most of this nation's city-dwellers have never lived so well.

But the new economic system means something else in a place like Quang Tri
Province, where the people are about as poor as any on earth, where few foreign
investors come to visit, and where the opportunities of the free market can
easily be swept away by flood or drought.

The Government began to cut off free services four years ago, directing some of
the money to projects like roads and electricity lines, which are desperately
needed to attract foreign investors.

"It's logical for people to pay something for medicine and education in a market
economy," said Do Duc Dinh, a Government economist who is deputy editor of The
Vietnam Economic Review. "In the cities, this has been no problem. The problem
is with the 10 percent of the population that still cannot afford these
services."

In the scrublands of Quang Tri Province, Mrs. Dong, the laborer, surely falls
into that second category. Abandoned years ago by her husband, she supports two
children on an income of about $12 a month, typical in the province.

One recent morning she was being paid by the local forestry department to lug
two heavy baskets full of tree seedlings, the baskets tied to the ends of a
bamboo stick that dug deep into her shoulder as she walked. The seedlings, she
said, would be planted on hillsides in hopes that when grown they will form a
windbreak against the hot, dry eastern gusts that parch the farmland each year.

Mrs. Dong lifted the pole from her shoulder and sat down to rest. She gently
rubbed her stomach, which has troubled her for years.

"I have trouble keeping food down," she said. "In the old system, I could go to
the doctor and get the stomach medicine for free. Now, I must pay for the
medicine myself."

Because of the illness, Mrs. Dong's life has been reduced to a month-by-month
calculation: Can she find the $2 to buy stomach medicine and an extra $2 for
vitamin tonic for her ailing 6-year-old daughter? "Sometimes I cannot afford the
medicine for either of us," she said.

A few miles down the road at the Quang Tri Provincial Hospital, Dr. Phan Huu
Tai, a surgeon and the hospital's director, took a visitor on a tour of the dank
operating room, pointing to the rusting 20-year-old anesthesia equipment and, on
the moldy wall, an ancient air-conditioner that barely worked. "Sometimes in the
terrible heat of the summer, the electricity will die, and we must operate by
flashlight," he said.

There is no money for renovations, he said. The central Government's
contribution to the 300-bed hospital has been cut by about one-third since 1990,
to about $90,000 a year, and his own salary has dropped to $50 a month.

"The idea is that the patients can pay us to make up the difference," Dr. Tai
said. "I think what is happening instead is that when some patients become sick,
they just do not go to the hospital anymore."

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vo Van Hung, 10, in Quang Tri Provincial Hospital after losing a
hand when he tried to dig up an American-made shell left from the Vietnam War.
As the Government abandons Communism, it has cut its contribution to the
hospital by a third, to about $90,000 a year. Other services are also crumbling.
(Jean-Luc Lenee for The New York Times)
; Map of Vietnam showing location of Cam Lo.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              146 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Helms Takes New Swipe at Clinton, Then Calls It Mistake

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 22


Senator Jesse Helms, the likely next chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee, created a new uproar today when he was quoted saying that President
Clinton was so unpopular on military bases in North Carolina that he "better
have a bodyguard" if he visits the state. Mr. Helms later called the comment "a
mistake."

Asked about the Helms comments at a White House news conference today, President
Clinton said, "I think the remarks were unwise and inappropriate."

Just days after Mr. Helms, a Republican from North Carolina, created a furor by
saying that President Clinton was not up to the job of Commander in Chief, he
told The News and Observer, a newspaper in Raleigh: "Mr. Clinton better watch
out if he comes down here. He'd better have a bodyguard."

Mr. Helms said soldiers disliked President Clinton because he had avoided
service during the Vietnam War, supported homosexuals in the military and had
reduced military spending.

After several senators criticized the comment that Mr. Helms made to the Raleigh
newspaper on Monday, he issued a statement in which he called it "an offhand
remark" not meant to be taken literally.

"I made a mistake last evening which I shall not repeat," he said. "In an
informal telephone interview with a local reporter I made an offhand remark in
an attempt to emphasize how strongly the American people feel about the nation's
declining defense capability and other issues.

"Of course I didn't expect to be taken literally when, to emphasize the cost and
concerns I am hearing, I far too casually suggested that the President might
need a bodyguard, or words to that effect."

Asked about his reaction to Senator Helms's remarks and "if you feel comfortable
with him being chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee that is going to
oversee your foreign policy," Mr. Clinton responded that the comments "were
unwise and inappropriate" and added:

"The President oversees the foreign policy of the United States and the
Republicans will decide in whom they will repose their trust and confidence.
That's a decision for them to make, not for me.

Concerned by the threatening nature of Mr. Helms's remarks, Secret Service
officials said today that they were looking into his comments and whether the
President faced any threats in North Carolina.

In the statement he issued today, Mr. Helms, one of the most conservative
members of the Senate, made clear that he would continue to question Mr.
Clinton's leadership. He defended his statement that the President was not up to
the job of Commander in Chief by saying that Mr. Clinton had "serious problems
with his record of draft avoidance, with his stand on homosexuals in the
military and with the declining defense capability of America's armed forces."

In the interview with the Raleigh newspaper, Mr. Helms defended his statement
that the President was not up to the job as Commander in Chief. While
acknowledging that he "should have said it better," Mr. Helms said: "Every
schoolboy knows that the elected President is Commander in Chief. There's
nothing novel about that. But is that supposed to make him immune from
criticism?"

Several Democratic senators condemned Mr. Helms's remarks, and even some
Republican lawmakers, including Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania,
criticized the comments, which many Republicans said were were embarrassing to
the party.

Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican who is set to become majority leader,
has distanced himself from Mr. Helm's remarks about Mr. Clinton as Commander in
Chief.

By disagreeing with Mr. Helms in recent days, Senator Dole seems to be seeking
not only to put distance between most Republicans and Senator Helms but also to
show that he would not let Mr. Helms take control of Republican foreign policy.

In a CNN interview last weekend, Mr. Helms, a bitter foe of contributing
American troops to United Nations peacekeeping operations, said he opposed
sending American soldiers to the Golan Heights to monitor a future peace
agreement between Syria and Israel.

On Monday, Senator Dole told Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, that he
would back such an idea.

Senator Christopher J. Dodd, a Connecticut Democrat, noted that today was the
31st anniversary of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. "To suggest
on this day of all days, Nov. 22d, that an American President's life might be in
jeopardy because they were to visit an American military base would suggest that
my colleague from North Carolina doesn't seem to know what country he's living
in," Mr. Dodd said.

He criticized Mr. Helms for not formally apologizing and said the Republican
leadership in Congress should demand an apology and repudiate Senator Helms's
comments.

Senator Dole said he had not read the Helms interview, but said, "In my view the
President's welcome to any state."

General John Shalikashvili, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, contacted
news organizations over the weekend to rebut Mr. Helms's comments about the
President's fitness as Commander in Chief.

Today, Defense Secretary William J. Perry also called Mr. Helms's statements
misguided. "In his position as the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, it is important not to make statements which might undermine the
command relationship set up in the constitution between the Commander in Chief
and military forces in the field," he said in response to questions.


NAME: Jesse Helms

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, was at the
center of a new dispute after he said President Clinton was so unpopular that he
"better have a bodyguard" if he visited the Senator's home state. (Associated
Press)

Chart: "FOR THE RECORD: Helms on Clinton"

Asked whether he thought President Clinton was "up ot the job" of Commander in
Chief:

"No, I do not. And neither do the people in the armed forces."   Friday,
interview on the CNN program "Evans and Novak"

                             --------------------

"Mr. Clinton had better watch out if he comes down here. He better have a
bodyguard."   Monday, interview with The News and Observer, Raleigh, N.C.

                             --------------------

"I made a mistake last evening which I shall not repeat."   Yesterday, statement
issued by Senator Helms


TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              147 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Teacher Advising Education Chief Draws Lessons From Own History

BYLINE: By LYNDA RICHARDSON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 2;  National Desk;  Education Page

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Since Terry Dozier, late of Irmo High School in Columbia, S.C., arrived at the
Education Department, meetings have not been the same.

She is the first classroom teacher to become a special adviser to a Secretary of
Education, serving as what Secretary Richard W. Riley calls his "reality check"
on teaching and bringing to the interminable rounds of department meetings a
view from the schoolhouse.

For example, when Education Department officials proposed sharing their wealth
of information via computerized data banks that teachers around the country
could reach with their own computers, Ms. Dozier argued that they were
overlooking one practical hurdle.

"Most teachers don't even have telephones" at school, she recalled saying to the
officials. "These are the kinds of things that they take for granted."

Ms. Dozier, whose specialty is world history, was ducking in and out of
workshops at a Washington hotel the other day as she supervised the second
annual teachers forum on the Clinton Administration's education package, Goals
2000, which became law this year. Goals 2000 supports the development of
voluntary academic standards for students by the states and urges that new ways
be found to measure student achievement.

"Goals 2000 is saying that we should have the same expectation for all
children," Ms. Dozier, who taught 10th graders at Irmo High, said in an
interview. "We have to get rid of the notion that's insidious that you're born a
certain way and nothing can change.

"Goals 2000 is going to be a tremendous support for teachers. In the past, when
I had high standards for children, they very often thought I was being a witch.
Goals 2000 says we have to set high standards for all kids, and then the job of
the teacher is to help children meet those standards."

Ms. Dozier's own life is a testament to what a person can achieve with education
and nurturing, and it fuels her passion to help other teachers better educate
the children in their care.

Ms. Dozier was born 42 years ago in a Vietnamese village near the Chinese
border. She said she learned years later that her father had been a colonel in
Hitler's elite corps, the Waffen SS. As the Allies were rounding up Nazis after
World War II, she said, her father managed to join the French Foreign Legion and
was sent to French Indochina, now Vietnam.

There, he met and married Ms. Dozier's mother, who died shortly after Ms.
Dozier's younger brother was born and while Ms. Dozier was still an infant. Ms.
Dozier said she later learned that her father subsequently sold her and her
brother to a Chinese businessman in Vietnam, who in turn apparently tried to
sell them himself.

When the French authorities heard of this and began investigating, Ms. Dozier
said, the Chinese businessman put her and her brother in a French orphanage in
Vietnam. As the French colonial era in Vietnam was ending in the mid-1950's --
and American involvement was just beginning -- brother and sister were adopted
by an American military adviser and his wife. Ms. Dozier was 2 years old.

Her adoptive parents took the children to Germany and then to Florida, where her
adoptive father retired and she began to soak up literature on the history and
culture of her native land. Inspired by several teachers during her childhood
and haunted by her own history, Ms. Dozier decided at the University of Florida
that she wanted to teach world history.

For nearly two decades, she did just that, in places as diverse as the inner
city of Miami, suburban South Carolina, Singapore and, of course, Irmo High, the
home of the fighting Yellow Jackets, as she likes to remind people.

"The greatest gift that I have received as an American is my education," she
said. "In the core of my being, I believe public education is just fundamental
to the existence of a democracy and giving our most precious resource, children,
hope."

In Uniontown, Kan., her history, related by a friend and fellow teacher, Norman
Conard, has inspired several 11th-grade social studies students to begin work on
a video documentary on Ms. Dozier's life and to try to track down her German
ancestry.

"We see Terry as the American dream," Mr. Conard said. "Here's a young lady who
had horrific circumstances as a child and, with wonderful nurturing by adoptive
parents, was able to reach her zenith."

But Ms. Dozier regards herself as typical of many teachers, attracted to the
work of teaching by a love of education.

She met Secretary Riley in 1985, when he was the Governor of South Carolina and
she was a teacher at Irmo High and had just been named the National Teacher of
the Year by the Council of Chief State School Officers. Ms. Dozier was one of
the first people Mr. Riley called when he was named Education Secretary last
year.

In a statement, Mr. Riley said: "I wanted to send a clear message that teachers
would be part of the change. It's very important that teachers feel connected to
what we are doing and that they are a part of our effort to improve schools."

Ms. Dozier lives with her husband, who is also a teacher, and their 4-year-old
daughter in Fairfax, Va. Ms. Dozier said she expected to return to teaching when
her political appointment at the department ended, but for now she is dedicated
to making teachers' voices prominent in discussions of education issues.

Ms. Dozier has pressed hard in the department for enhancing the professional
development of teachers, and she helped to shape changes in the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act to emphasize that professional development is not a
fringe benefit and should be intensive and continuous. She has also written a
"Teacher's Guide" to the labyrinthine Education Department.

Ms. Dozier is optimistic about her profession and the redefining of teachers as
educational coaches.

"Whether we want to or not, we must become leaders beyond our classrooms and
enable others to do so," she said in remarks at the teachers forum. "Because
until we, as a profession, accept a leadership role in the reform dialogue that
is raging in this country, we will continue to be used as pawns in the game of
education reform and we will never be totally successful in our primary mission
of teaching."

NAME: Terry Dozier

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Terry Dozier, right, at work as the first teacher to serve as a
special adviser to a Secretary of Education. Born in Vietnam and adopted by an
American serviceman and his wife, Ms. Dozier believes that education can be, as
it was for her, the gateway to opportunity regardless of a person's origins.
(David Scull/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              148 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 23, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Lawyer Who Spoke Up

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 335 words


The privilege against compelled self-incrimination, said the dean of Harvard Law
School, is "one of the great landmarks in man's long struggle to make himself
civilized." Forty years ago, when Erwin Griswold spoke out in that manner, not
many were willing to defend the Bill of Rights against Senator Joseph McCarthy,
who railed against what he called "Fifth-Amendment Communists" -- traitors, he
charged, hiding behind their rights.

That defense of liberty, by a lifelong Republican whose patriotism not even Mr.
McCarthy dared challenge, was one of the brightest achievements of Mr. Griswold,
who died last week at the age of 90. There were other peaks and, in an
extraordinarily long career, a number of valleys.

Among the other high points was Dean Griswold's contribution as an academic
strategist and expert witness in litigation leading up to the Supreme Court's
1954 school desegregation decision. Later, on the Federal Civil Rights
Commission, Mr. Griswold helped collect the evidence that proved the necessity
for major civil rights legislation.  President Lyndon Johnson named him U.S.
Solicitor General and he remained in that post into the Nixon years. He stayed
too long, arguing the Government's losing case for suppressing the Pentagon
Papers. No harm came from the publication of that history of the Vietnam War, he
said years later, indicating that the Defense Department had misled him by
implying that the documents contained national security secrets.

Even under political pressures of the Nixon Administration, Mr. Griswold refused
for reasons of conscience to defend the Government's policies toward
conscientious objectors to the military draft, and he declined to deliver
arguments for Federal aid to religious schools.

His 1991 testimony against confirmation of Clarence Thomas for the Supreme Court
was one of his most significant late appearances. He called it a "frightening
prospect" that a nominee of such limited credentials might be a justice for 40
years.

LOAD-DATE: November 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              149 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Hint the U.S. Could Use Port Again

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 12;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Nov. 23


Fearing China, Vietnam has begun to signal an interest in inviting American
naval forces back to Cam Ranh Bay, the large port installation built by the
United States during the Vietnam War.

The United States Navy seems interested in returning. Adm. Richard C. Macke, the
commander of American forces in the Pacific, said on his recent trip to Vietnam
that Washington and Hanoi could begin talking about military cooperation after
settling their final differences over accounting for missing American servicemen
from the Vietnam War.

On Cam Ranh Bay, he said, "I'm a naval officer and naval officers are always
looking for good ports." He was responding to reporters' questions at a news
conference in Hanoi on Oct. 26 after meeting with the Vietnamese Prime Minister,
Vo Van Kiet.

After the fall of South Vietnam in 1975, Hanoi made Cam Ranh Bay's deep-water
harbor and port installation available to the Soviet Pacific Fleet, whose
submarines and surface warships were regularly stationed there for more than a
decade.

But China has expressed its opposition to a renewed American presence at the
base.

"We are opposed to any foreign country establishing a military base or
stationing troops on foreign soil," said Shen Guofang, a Foreign Ministry
spokesman.

The United States has been without a major naval base in the region since 1992,
when the Philippines decided not to renew the American lease on the base at
Subic Bay. The importance of finding forward bases in the Pacific for American
forces and their equipment was underscored in discussions last week between
Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Southeast Asian leaders.

Mr. Christopher tried to persuade Thailand to reconsider its opposition to
accepting "equipment afloat ships" in its coastal waters as a means of
positioning tanks, artillery and ammunition that could support an American
military expedition to the region.

For Vietnam, which fears that China will one day use military power to enforce
its claim over the entire South China Sea and its potentially rich oil reserves,
the desirability of inviting American forces back into the disputed neighborhood
is a form of insurance against what is seen as Chinese hegemonism.

At the time of Admiral Macke's visit to Hanoi, Vietnamese Foreign Ministry
officials expressed a keen interest in opening talks with the United States on
an "access agreement" on Cam Ranh Bay.

In Beijing, Mr. Shen, the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said that China
welcomed the normalization of relations between Washington and Hanoi, but he
admonished the two former belligerents to focus on economic development and not
military cooperation.

"We believe that all countries in Asia are committed to their own economic
development and that all countries in this region will benefit from regional
peace and prosperity," Mr. Shen said.

Some American diplomats in the region cautioned that the United States, which
takes no position on the disputed islands and oil leases of the South China Sea,
should try to avoid being pulled into a territorial dispute.

"Of course the Vietnamese would love to have us back in Cam Ranh Bay," one
Western diplomat said, indicating that Washington would have to take care not to
be manipulated by the parties in the dispute.

China, Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia, Brunei, Taiwan and the Philippines all
assert territorial claims to islands in the South China Sea.

But in 1992 China asserted sovereignty over virtually all of the South China Sea
and its islands. It has twice clashed with Vietnamese naval forces, ejecting
them from one set of islands in 1974 and from another set in 1988.

China, Vietnam and Taiwan have been the most aggressive in patrolling the area
and in establishing a continuous presence on some of the larger islands.


LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows the location of Cam Ranh Bay.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              150 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Election Harvest Crowds Thanksgiving Table

SECTION: Section A;   Page 32;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 531 words


To the Editor:

Election Day and Thanksgiving are close together on the calendar, but this year
they are worlds apart in mood.

On Thanksgiving we remember the devout Pilgrims thanking God for their good
fortune at having made it to the harvest, and we try to imitate their deep sense
of gratitude at our good fortune.

On Election Day this year, by contrast, the American electorate registered the
most selfish, stingy statement I can recall in my 63 years. The country's
spirit, as I remember it, was far more generous in the Great Depression, when a
quarter of the work force was unemployed; in World War II, when a large share of
our young men had to put their lives at great risk; in the years of the Marshall
Plan, the Berlin airlift, Brown v. Board of Education and the civil rights
struggles.

Even in our terrible internal conflicts over the Vietnam War, I never saw the
stingy complaining that came with the election of '94.

This country, with 1.5 million people behind bars (a larger proportion than any
other country, including Indonesia, Zaire, North Korea and Iraq), voted to build
more prisons, due surely to the general perception that not enough people are
locked up. Does it seem paradoxical to anyone that the richest country has the
most people in jail?

In this country of immigrants, California voted to cut off schooling and medical
care for the people the state allows to sneak in to do its farm work and clean
its houses.

This country, with the lowest tax rate in the industrialized world, screamed
that its taxes are too high.

The fundamentalists kept talking about two passages from the Bible on the
subject of homosexuality, but they never mention the hundreds of passages of
Scripture that speak about the poor.

The State of New York, which resents treating its mentally ill, housing its
100,000 homeless and taking seriously the responsibility to educate its
inner-city youth, decided it pays too much in taxes! It elected a Governor who
promised to cut these taxes by 25 percent. Not a word in the campaign about the
need to increase services.

Most of us are much more comfortable than our parents were, and way ahead of our
grandparents. Most of us are enjoying excellent health and have no fear of a
group of diseases that were so frightening only 50 or 60 years ago. Our expected
life span is longer. Yet we refuse to extend the benefits of modern medical care
to 35 million fellow citizens (most of them children) who do not have any health
insurance.

The epidemics of AIDS and crack are creating a new population of orphans, and
conservative computer projections predict 80,000 of these by the year 2000. The
country has just elected representatives who want to reduce benefits for
impoverished children. Representative Newt Gingrich says we should bring back
the orphan asylum. What could be more mean-spirited?

I have a great deal to be thankful for this holiday. This includes my education,
my work, the security of my home, my ability to pass much of this onto my
children, the security of our health. But I cannot be thankful for generosity of
spirit in my country.

JOHN B. STADLER
Larchmont, N.Y., Nov. 21, 1994

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              151 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 24, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Gingrich's Life: The Complications and Ideals

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 2;   National Desk

LENGTH: 2892 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 23


It was September 1942 when 16-year-old Kathleen Daugherty married Newton C.
McPherson Jr., a 19-year-old mechanic in a small town in Pennsylvania. In three
days, the marriage fell apart; nine months later, she gave birth to a baby boy,
whom she named Newton Leroy.

When Kathleen remarried three years later, her new husband, Robert B. Gingrich,
an Army artillery officer, adopted her son.

Today, the boy, Newt Gingrich, is on the verge of becoming the Speaker of the
House and next in the line of succession for the Presidency after the Vice
President.

He says he wants to do nothing less than to save American civilization with a
renewal of family values.

But while he often refers to an idealized American family life with
Ozzie-and-Harriet mores, Mr. Gingrich has made it clear that he did not have
such an upbringing himself. As he told The New York Times in the spring: "I'm
not sitting here as someone who is unfamiliar with the late 20th century."

He was born fatherless to a teen-age mother. He married against his adoptive
father's wishes and later underwent a bitter divorce. While promoting family
values, he remains close to a daughter who vocally supports abortion rights and
a half-sister who is gay. As he has said, "I know life can be complicated."

Kathleen Gingrich, now 68, said her father was killed in a car accident when she
was 16. He had been the stabilizing influence in her family, she said, and when
he was gone, she turned to Mr. McPherson, whom she had known only briefly. "I
never should have gotten married to start," she said in a telephone interview
from her home in Dauphin, a small town near Harrisburg, Pa.

Her new husband stayed out late at the pool hall one night, she said, and when
she tried to wake him in the morning to go to work, "he got mad and he hauled
off and hit me. It was the only time, believe me."

"We were married on a Saturday, and I left him on a Tuesday," she said. "I got
Newtie in those three days."

She was not working at the time and could not support herself, so she moved in
with her mother, a school teacher who lived nearby.

Newt grew up under the tutelage of his maternal grandmother, with whom he shared
a bedroom and who stayed with the family after Kathleen remarried. His
grandmother taught him to read, which he does voraciously to this day. (For his
part, his mother said, he put snakes in jars on the night stand between their
beds and scared his grandmother out of her wits.)

After the war, his biological father, who had been in the Navy, remarried and
had two other children. Young Newt maintained some relationship with him and was
with him when he died at age 48 of lung cancer.

Complex Bonds Of Father and Son

His mother went on to have three daughters with Bob Gingrich. Kathleen Gingrich
summed up the relationship between her son and husband by saying, "Newtie is a
talker; Bob is not." She said her husband preferred doing crossword puzzles.

One of Newt Gingrich's closest friends, former Representative Vin Weber, said
the father-son relationship was complex. "On one hand, there is a side of Newt
that is brash, disrespectful of authority and certainly willing to challenge
authority, but on the other hand, he really does value father relationships if
they can begin to develop," he said.

"I found his relationship with Michel was more complicated than people thought,"
Mr. Weber added, referring to Representative Bob Michel, the House Republican
leader who is retiring this year and whose calm, courtly style differed in every
way from the confrontational style of the younger Mr. Gingrich, the minority
whip. "Newt challenged him and made life tough for him, but I felt he wanted
Michel to like him, at times more than I thought was appropriate. Newt was
bending over backwards to try to get his approval. I think that is related
somehow to something that was missing before."

Mr. Gingrich, who declined to be interviewed for this article, once told a
reporter that he could not finish Pat Conroy's novel "The Great Santini," which
was about a boy's struggle to prove himself to his father, who was an
overbearing military officer. "His father seemed like a cold, austere kind of
person," a former political associate, L. H. (Kip) Carter, said of Mr.
Gingrich's view of his adoptive father. "He's felt abandoned his whole life."

Kathleen Gingrich said that of the myriad photographs that have appeared lately
of her son, the only one her husband wants to frame is the Nov. 7 cover of Time.
It shows a snarling Newt with his mouth agape and the cover line: "Mad As Hell."

At the same time, the young Mr. Gingrich developed an deep attachment to
animals. His grandmother once gave him a leather jacket that he painted with
white stripes so he could look like a zebra, said his half-sister, Roberta. When
he was 11, he was flying alone from Fort Riley in Kansas to Harrisburg and was
late getting home. It turned out he got off the plane in Chicago and took a taxi
to the zoo. Another time, he told his mother he was going to the library in
Harrisburg and went instead to the Mayor's office to plead for a zoo.

To this day, his office in the Capitol is adorned with models of prehistoric
creatures. In 1990, he sent nearly half of his $67,000 in honorariums from
speeches to the Atlanta Zoo. Last year, he sent $15,000 to the Atlanta Zoo to
buy a pair of rare Komodo dragons.

Proud of Being An Army Brat

The Speaker-to-be is also consumed with things military, and he often closes his
speeches with bursts of patriotism and a reference to his adoptive father's
military career.  He practically boasts of growing up as an Army brat, a
rootless existence that started near Harrisburg and included stints in France,
Germany and Fort Benning, Ga. Today, he counts two generals -- Dwight D.
Eisenhower and George C. Marshall -- among his top three heroes (Franklin D.
Roosevelt is the third).

He often points to a visit in 1958, when he was 15, with his adoptive father to
Verdun, the bloodiest battlefield of World War I, and its warehouse collection
of bones, as the seminal moment in his political coming of age.

"It is the driving force which pushed me into history and politics, and molded
my life," he wrote in his 1984 political manifesto, "Window of Opportunity."

The next day, he supposedly told his family that he would run for Congress
because politicians could prevent such madness.

The sense that he might save civilization seems to drive him still. "People like
me," he said last year, "are what stand between us and Auschwitz."

Despite his interest in the military, Mr. Gingrich opted out of the service
himself, taking student and marriage deferments during the Vietnam War. Although
he opposed the war, he was not vocal about it.

Early Years As a Liberal

In his early 20's, he was something of a liberal. As a graduate student in
history at Tulane University, he led a protest against the school administration
for trying to censor pictures of nudes out of the student newspaper. He also
helped to coordinate Nelson A. Rockefeller's 1968 Presidential campaign in
Louisiana.

As a young history teacher with a Ph.D. at West Georgia College in Carrollton,
Ga., he started a program in environmental studies and taught a course about the
future.

But after he lost two races for the House, in 1974 and 1976, he determined that
he could get elected only by moving further right. Many who knew him in that
period attribute his adoption of a conservative agenda and his exploitation of
the family-values theme to his political ambition, not to a belief, at least at
that time, in core conservative values.

"When I first knew him in the 70's, when I was on The Atlanta Constitution's
liberal editorial board, and we were looking for a liberal to get behind, we
chose to endorse Newt Gingrich because we thought he was progressive and thought
he was, to use the terrible L word, liberal," said Bill Shipp, who now writes a
newsletter on Georgia politics.

"Why did he switch?" Mr. Shipp said. "Public opinion polls, what do you think?
Liberal went out; conservative came in."

Richard Dangle, who was dean of arts and sciences at West Georgia when Mr.
Gingrich taught there, said that as a "middle-of-the-road Democrat," he
supported Mr. Gingrich because he was "bright, young, reasonable and rational."
Then, Mr. Gingrich moved to the right. "He said he had grown," Mr. Dangle said.
"I think his motivation was ambition and the need for power."

James T. Gay, who still teaches history at the college, said: "I'm not certain
whether he has principles. He reads polls a lot and adjusts to them."

His former minister, Rev. Brantley Harwell, said: "He saw that swinging to the
right as Reagan did was the way to get to the goal he wanted, which was Speaker.
He sees what will help him; whether he believes it or not, he uses it."

Like his mother, Mr. Gingrich was raised Lutheran (his stepfather was
Pennsylvania Dutch), but as he laid the groundwork for his political career in
Georgia, he became a Southern Baptist.

"People who know him know there's a difference between what he projects and who
he is," said Kip Carter, the former friend, "though it's hard to know who he is
anymore. He's a moderate when that's helpful, he's right wing when that's
helpful, he's bipartisan when that's helpful. Whatever it takes for power,
that's what he'll do."

But Mr. Weber said: "Everyone goes through a political metamorphosis. You can
portray him as opportunistic or as flexible, depending on if you want to be
complimentary. But it's a combination, and that's true for all politicians."

When Mr. Gingrich finally won an open Congressional seat in 1978, he ran a
brutal campaign against his Democratic opponent, State Senator Virginia Shepard,
who he said did not have family values. If elected, Mrs. Shepard intended to
commute between Washington and Georgia and leave her children in the care of a
nanny. Mr. Gingrich ran a television commercial accusing her of breaking up her
family while Mr. Gingrich would keep his family together.

Mr. Gingrich won, but it was his family that broke up.

Bitter History Of a Divorce

His divorce from his first wife, Jackie, has become part of the Gingrich lore
and has been routinely resurrected by political opponents.

His first wife, Jackie Battley, was his high school geometry teacher and seven
years his senior. After high school, as a freshman at Emory University in
Atlanta, he pursued her, despite what his mother describes as her husband's
disapproval because of the age difference. They married in June 1962 when he was
19, with his family boycotting the ceremony. Kathleen Gingrich said that since
her husband would not attend, she and her daughters would not either.

Jackie Gingrich followed her husband to Tulane and, back in Georgia, worked
doggedly on his campaigns. After his election in 1978, they moved to Washington,
but separated soon after. By the end of his first term, he had filed for
divorce.

His wife, who had started treatments for uterine cancer in 1978, underwent
surgery in 1980. A day after the operation, Mr. Gingrich came to the hospital.
Since they had already separated, he called her room to see if he could come up.
Once there, according to friends who knew them both, he began talking about the
terms of the divorce. She has said she threw him out of the room. In a few
months they were divorced, and in 1981 he married his current wife, Marianne.
Jackie Gingrich, who still teaches high school math, declined to be interviewed
for this article.

A few weeks before Mr. Gingrich filed for divorce, he called his political aide
and friend Mr. Carter to talk about his marriage. Mr. Carter said he and other
friends had been worried that the marriage was falling apart. Mr. Gingrich told
him why he wanted a divorce. "He said: 'She's not young enough or pretty enough
to be the wife of a President. And besides, she has cancer.' It sounds harsh and
hokey, but anyone who knows him knows it's perfectly consistent with the kinds
of things he says."

Mr. Gingrich has adamantly denied saying any such thing. His supporters dismiss
Mr. Carter as a disgruntled former aide who was miffed at not being asked to
accompany Mr. Gingrich when he moved to Washington.

Mr. Gingrich was supposed to pay $150 a month for each of his daughters and $400
in alimony to his ex-wife, the same amount he had allotted himself for "food/dry
cleaning, etc." But a few months later, Jackie Gingrich filed court papers
saying he had not provided reasonable support for her living expenses and that
some of her accounts were "two or three months past due." Some of her friends
took up an informal collection on her behalf. The court raised the child support
to $200 a month a daughter and $1,000 in alimony.

Political Points And Private Life

In an 1984 article in Mother Jones that detailed Mr. Gingrich's private life, he
was asked whether his private life had been consistent with what he said in
public.

"No," Mr. Gingrich was quoted as telling the magazine. "In fact, I think they
were sufficiently inconsistent that at one point in 1979 and 1980, I began to
quit saying them in public. One of the reasons I ended up getting a divorce was
that if I was disintegrating enough as a person that I could not say those
things, then I needed to get my life straight, not quit saying them.

"And I think that literally was the crisis I came to. I guess I look back on it
a little bit like somebody who's in Alcoholics Anonymous. It was a very, very
bad period of my life, and it had been getting steadily worse. I ultimately
wound up at a point where probably suicide or going insane or divorce were the
last three options."

In 1992, his Democratic opponent, Tony Center, ran a television advertisement
against Mr. Gingrich that said -- erroneously -- that Mr. Gingrich "delivered
divorce papers to his wife the day after her cancer operation." It went on to
say that Mr. Gingrich had "left his wife and child penniless" while using a
Lincoln Continental limousine and driver as one of the perks of his position as
minority whip.

The commercial prompted Mr. Gingrich's younger daughter, Jackie Gingrich Zyla,
who is 28, to volunteer to make an advertisement defending her father.

"My dad has always stood behind and supported me and my sister in everything we
have done," she said. "We care about our father and he cares about us."

In an interview in 1992 with The New York Times, Mr. Gingrich, who has proved to
be one of the most ferocious competitors in politics, said he was so disgusted
with Mr. Center's attack on his family life that he considered quitting the
race.

"This filth is so sickening," he said. "If survival in public life means this
level of degradation, I don't want to be part of it."

Last year, Jackie Gingrich was back in court saying that her former husband had
failed to keep up payments on a $100,000 life-insurance policy. He subsequently
increased his alimony payments to $1,300 a month, in accordance with his
increase in salary, in exchange for a promise that she would not take him to
court again.

Mr. Gingrich's supporters say he continues to have a strong and close
relationship with his daughters. Both declined to be interviewed for this
article. His older daughter, Kathy, made news in 1992 when she came to
Washington to participate in a news conference staged by the National Republican
Coalition for Choice. She said the Republicans would never attract young people
unless it could "throw off the stranglehold that the anti-choice movement has on
the apparatus of the party." Both she and her father, who opposes abortion, said
their family was strong enough to have their differences and remain close.

The same is true with his siblings. His youngest half-sister, Candy, 28, is gay.
He has made numerous pronouncements about homosexuality, including comparing it
to alcoholism. But as he told The New York Times earlier this year, "Our
position should be toleration. It should not be promotion, and it should not be
condemnation."

Last year, he said he had "no strong position" against President Clinton's
proposal to lift the ban on gays in the military. Nonetheless, when it became a
polarizing public issue, Mr. Gingrich said he had talked with members of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and decided to support the ban. "Unlike the Commander in
Chief, who has changed his position somewhat," Mr. Gingrich said of Mr. Clinton,
"I am sticking with my military advisers."

Those close to him say that if Mr. Gingrich's public pronouncements about family
values are not mirrored precisely in his private life, it does not matter.

"He believes in family values," said his half-sister, Roberta. "And that's a
goal. I don't think it takes away from him that he's not there.

"I'm surprised some of the press is demanding of him that he be his vision. I
don't think anyone is. I think it's to his credit that he aspires to be better
than he is."

Mr. Weber, one of his closest friends, said Mr. Gingrich did not try to square
family values with his own life. "I haven't heard him try to make any
rationalization," Mr. Weber said. "I think he has a deep intellectual commitment
to the notion that values matter and that the country faces almost a crisis
because of the decay of the family structure."


NAME: Newton Leroy Gingrich

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 25, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the family life of
Representative Newt Gingrich, who is line to become Speaker of the House,
misspelled the surname of a Georgia state senator whom he defeated for Congress
in 1978. She is Virginia Shapard.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Newt Gingrich as a boy with his mother in a photo from a family
album. (pg. A1); Kathleen Gingrich with a sketch of her son Newt at her home in
Pennsylvania on Tuesday. (Laura Pedrick for The New York Times); Having lost his
first two races for Congress before being elected in 1978, Newt Gingrich has
seen both electoral defeat and triumph. He stood with his family in the 1970's
after one of his first races. (Calvin Cruce/The Atlanta Consitution) (pg. A28)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              152 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Canada's Trade Efforts Raise Hackles at Home

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, Nov. 24


Canada is pursuing fast-growing markets in Asia and the Pacific to reduce its
dependence on the economy of its neighbor, the United States, though not without
some public misgivings at home.

Earlier this month, the largest Canadian trade delegation to visit China came
away with $6.5 billion of deals with the Chinese. Team Canada, as the Canadian
news media nicknamed the delegation in sports parlance, won Beijing's attention
with its political influence.

It was led by Prime Minister Jean Chretien and included 9 of Canada's 10
provincial premiers. Only Jacques Parizeau of Quebec stayed away.

The Canadians signed more than 50 commercial agreements, ranging from hockey
tournaments to nuclear reactors, with the Chinese during the six-day visit. The
deals could create thousands of jobs for Canadian workers in an economy with 10
percent unemployment.

Other more modest agreements were signed in Indonesia, when Mr. Chretien joined
the leaders of 17 other nations at the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation meeting
this month. He also visited Vietnam and announced, along with a $36 million aid
package, that Canada would extend preferential trade status to Hanoi.

"Our Government is conscious of the need to have more eggs out there and not
just have them in one basket," said Jim Moore, vice president for policy at the
Canadian Exporters Association. "It's not so much a de-emphasis of the United
States as the primary market for most Canadian companies as it is a need to
remember that other parts of the world -- Asia Pacific and Latin America -- are
expanding at an enormous rate."

The mission to China best illustrated Canada's drive for trade with other
countries on the Pacific Rim.  But China's poor record on human rights has also
prompted the kind of criticism from Canadian human rights advocates that has
become familiar in the United States.

"I'm disturbed when I see the public debate has become one of rights versus
trade," Mr. Chretien said. "We must have both,"

Mr. Chretien has insisted that China would change through what he called
"increased mutual understanding and contact."

Other criticism by Canadians has focused on the biggest component of the trade
agreement with China. A memorandum of understanding would let Beijing buy two
685-megawatt Candu-6 nuclear reactors from Canada. About two-thirds of the $2.5
billion cost would be financed by Canadian taxpayers, through the Government's
export credit agency.

The reactors are manufactured by Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., a state-owned
company that employs 4,200 workers. The work force has been threatened with
cutbacks, because of Ottawa's search for budget savings.

Three Candu reactors were sold to South Korea in 1990. The sale of two to China
would take some pressure off Atomic Energy, which lost $101 million last year
and depends heavily on Government subsidies.

Some critics in Canada warn of the risks in selling sophisticated reactors to a
country like China that refuses to abide by copyright laws and seems willing to
pirate technology. Other critics complain that Canada has never before sold its
nuclear technology to a state with nuclear weapons, and that China has refused
to respect the unofficial moratorium on nuclear testing adopted by other nuclear
powers.

"When you look closely at it, this deal is outrageous," said Dr. Gordon Edwards,
president of the Canadian Coalition for Nuclear Responsibility, which represents
300 environmental, professional, labor and other organizations.

Candu reactors have embarrassed Canada in the past. India used Candu technology
in the 1970's to help build its first bomb. Romania bought a Candu reactor in
1981, and was found later to be using forced labor to construct it.

Robert Nixon, chairman of Atomic Energy, said, "We are confident that all the
necessary safeguards are built into this deal."

Canada's heavy dependence on trade with the United States is a big factor in the
push for Asian markets. The United States takes 80 percent of Canada's exports,
a level that many Canadians feel inhibits their country's economic independence.

"The reality is that our future is linked to our ability to be globally
competitive," said Tim Page, senior vice president of the Canadian Chamber of
Commerce.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              153 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fresnes Journal;
Sad Voyages to France: In One School, Many Sagas

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: FRESNES, France, Nov. 24


Sabine Contrepois well remembers the day two years ago when she explained to her
high-school class how the Vietnam War eventually spilled into Cambodia.
Suddenly, Meak, an Asian girl in the front row, burst into tears.

"I asked her what was wrong," Mrs. Contrepois recalled. "She said her father was
shot the day the Khmer Rouge took power in Cambodia in 1975. She and her mother
spent years in concentration camps before they escaped through Thailand. There
was absolute silence in the classroom."

The incident set the teacher thinking. A traditional role of French schools is
to prepare children of immigrants to become French citizens. Yet Meak's reaction
made Mrs. Contrepois realize that she knew nothing of the background of the
young people of different races whom she faced every day.

Clearly, some students' parents came to France simply to find work. Others came
fleeing wars and dictatorships. Yet Mrs. Contrepois, who comes from an immigrant
family herself, also wondered whether the teen-agers themselves knew why they
were in France? Did they know their own family history?

A year ago, seeking answers, she gave the 120 students in her six classes a
research project titled, "In what way has your family been touched by history?"
If they did not know, she told them, they should ask their parents and
grandparents.

The result is "History, My History," a document in which 41 students, mostly in
their late teens, describe the tumultuous paths -- wars in Armenia, Spain,
Algeria, Vietnam and the former Yugoslavia, repression in Poland, Portugal and
Cameroon -- that brought their families here.

The document caught the attention of the daily Liberation, which dedicated two
pages to a report on the project. With France now caught up in one of its
periodic waves of xenophobia, it reminded many fully assimilated French that
they came from immigrant stock. But it has also stirred debate over how
immigrant children find an identity in a foreign land.

The French tradition is for them to become French as soon as possible. But if
this worked with earlier waves of European immigrants, it is proving less
successful with the three million third world immigrants in this country of
close to 58 million people.

Mrs. Contrepois sees the problem through the prism of her students at the
Frederic Mistral High School in this town in the urban sprawl south of Paris.
Her job is to teach youths who are considered by the school system to be slow
learners. Many are immigrant children who have trouble finding jobs after they
finish school.

To her, the youths' main liability is not a lack of ability, but confusion about
their identity.

"It is easier for them to accept being French if they can also come to terms
with their roots," she said. "This project tried to do that. It made them
communicate with their parents. In many cases, they discovered things that made
them proud. And I think it taught them tolerance toward each other."

Yassine, a 19-year-old born in France of Algerian parents, said he discovered
that his grandfather had been tortured and killed by French troops during
Algeria's war of independence. "I didn't know anything about this," he said. "We
never spoke about Algeria at home. I had never dared ask before."

Stephanie, also 19, said she learned that her grandfather was shot by invading
German troops in Poland in 1939. "My father came here illegally in 1946, but
this topic was taboo at home," she said. "He died two years ago, and my mother
told me the story. When she saw the final project, she cried. She was very
proud."

To insure the authenticity of the stories, Mrs. Contrepois asked her
"student-authors," as she now calls them, to provide documentation. Sevana, 16,
found newspaper photos of the Turkish atrocities against Armenians in 1915, when
her great-grandparents were killed. Slawomir, whose father, a Pole, sought
asylum in France in 1981, offered a photograph of her grandmother with Lech
Walesa.

This month, the work was awarded the "Memories of Immigration" prize by the
Foundation for Republican Integration, headed by Kofi Yamgnane, a former
Minister for Integration who was born in Togo.

Mrs. Contrepois was well-equipped to oversee the project. The 36-year-old
teacher was born in a rundown Paris pension shortly after her Spanish-born
father and Algerian-born mother arrived here fleeing the Algerian war. "They
were penniless immigrants, and they knew all about discrimination," she said.

While her family eventually found a place in French society, she knows that is
more difficult for immigrants today. But at least with this group of young
people, she has made an impact. "She has changed our lives," Yassine said,
speaking for the "student-authors" at a recent ceremony here attended by Mr.
Yamgnane and the town Mayor, Gabriel Bourdin.

"History, My History" will soon be published as a book here, and the students
have another plan -- they want to visit New York. Their prize brought them
$5,000, but they must raise $39,000 more.

"We want to compare our experiences with those of young Americans like us, how
they study, what their culture is," Yassine said. "The only New York I've ever
seen is on television."

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Breaking with tradition, a French high school teacher encourages
students to ask their immigrant parents about their history so the youths can
better understand their identity in France. The teacher, Sabine Contrepois, with
her students last week at Lycee Frederic Mistral in Fresnes, south of Paris.
(Jean-Marc Charles for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              154 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fed Raises Interest Rates on Dubious Grounds;
How to Fight Inflation

SECTION: Section A;  Page 36;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 329 words


To the Editor:

After five interest rate increases this year, the Fed has done it again. In
light of all the mischief and dismay these increases have created, has anyone
bothered actually to assess their direct effect on inflation? As far as I can
see they have, at best, had no effect whatever. The lame, convenient excuse is
that it takes anywhere from 6 to 18 months for the effect to show up. Nonsense!
If interest rates go up today, they affect your next borrowing decision.

The shallow rationale for these increases is that they help "fight inflation" by
"slowing down the economy." Has anyone analyzed this reasoning? If we take
housing starts and charitably assume that 10 percent to 20 percent of the buyers
drop out of the market, and 10 percent to 20 percent of the builders curtail or
stop their activities because of higher interest rates, then 80 percent to 90
percent of these participants absorb these increases.

It's like firing a shotgun into a crowd to nail a culprit. The result is a
scarcer, higher-priced house, with no additional compensating value. That is the
essence of inflation.

Our inflation cycle started in 1968 with the Great Society and an expanded
Vietnam War. The shortage of entry-level labor caused big wage-rate rises and
created the inflation psychology epitomized by the thinking behind the 80's
real-estate boom: it doesn't matter what you pay -- in a few years you'll sell
at a profit. These conditions no longer hold true.

Today there are enough unemployed to hold down wage rates indefinitely. But even
if inflation were a threat, raising interest rates is at best a flawed weapon.
The right way to fight inflation is for the Government to pursue policies that
encourage the efficient production of desirable goods and services, so that they
will be sold at competitive prices in a buyer's market.

JACOB HESKES
Forest Hills, Queens, Nov. 18, 1994

The writer is a retired certified public accountant.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              155 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 792 words



International 3-7

ARMY STABILIZING RIO

The use of army troops against violence related to drugs in Rio de Janeiro is
proving to be a stabilizing influence, with residents saying they feel safe,
though no major drug caches have been found. 1


SERBS ATTACK UNCHECKED

Serbs continued to press their attack toward the center of a northwestern
Bosnian enclave, and although NATO sent planes over the area in retaliation,
they were apparently unable to find their target. 1

CRISIS FOR NATO

News analysis: The disagreement about Bosnia may cause the greatest strain in
the NATO alliance since the Suez crisis of 1956, with the division between the
United States and Europe becoming increasingly bitter.  7

NEW DIVISIONS IN EAST EUROPE

The cold war divisions in ideologies have been replaced in Eastern Europe with
ethnic and religious conflicts that have halted the political and economic
progress that had been anticipated. 6

SHAKIER COALITIONS IN ITALY

News analysis: The coalitions that have governed Italy since the cold war began
had a common interest in sharing power, but the current political crisis shows
that the old underpinnings no longer exist. 3

VOICE FROM THE PAST IN HANOI

Ho Chi Minh City Journal: Hanoi Hannah, whose mission during the Vietnam War was
to try to undermine American morale with her radio broadcasts, says she did it
out of patriotism. 4

SONY'S PIONEER RESIGNS

The chairman who built Sony of Japan into one of the world's most innovative
electronics companies resigned. The chairman, Akio Morita, 73, stepped down
because of health problems.  39

National 8-11

THE BUREAUCRACY OF CIVIL RIGHTS

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission is choking on bureaucracy and a
backlog of discrimination complaints from the people it is supposed to protect.
1

THE BLACK SHEEP OF THE FAMILY

The Republican who will become chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee
in the next Congress, Mark Hatfield is out of step with his party: he opposes
school prayer, a balanced budget amendment and the death penalty.  1

TOUGH STANCE ON IMMIGRATION

The Clinton Administration is considering ending a program that has let almost
200,000 Salvadorans receive temporary protection in the United States while a
civil war raged in their native land.  10

THE CORRUPTION OF POWER

The departing House minority leader, Robert Michel, warned Republicans not to
abuse their power.  11

LIFE AFTER HURRICANE ANDREW

More than two years after Hurricane Andrew, south Miami continues to recover
slowly.  8

LIKE FATHER, LIKE SON?

The youngest son of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Dexter King, has struggled with
whether he should devote his life to carrying forth his father's work and legacy
and, if so, how and to what extent.  8

Religion Journal: The nation's bishops denounce violence.  11

Metro Digest 25

PATAKI STRENGTHENS CONTROL

Governor-elect George E. Pataki moved toward consolidating his influence in
Albany when his allies in the State Senate ousted one of his chief rivals.  1

STUDY OF NEEDLE EXCHANGE

Participants in New York City's needle-exchange for addicts showed a lower
H.I.V. infection rate than other intravenous drug users.  1

DESEGREGATION PLANS LAG

A Connecticut effort to avoid court-ordered school desegregation by encouraging
voluntary measures is suffering serious setbacks.  1

Business Digest 39

Arts/Entertainment 12-20

The film director Peter Greenaway is an operatic natural.  13

Record attendance at new Sony movie multiplex.  13

Music: Montserrat Caballe.  20

New York Philharmonic 20

Sports 31-35

Basketball: St. John's breezes in debut.  31

UMass upsets Arkansas.  35

Nets' Edwards suffers in silence.  34

Columns: Rhoden on Mitchell.  31

College Football: No. 1 Nebraska wins.  31

McNair excels but team loses.  31

Hockey: Talks resume amid hurdles.  33

Racing: Apprentice hurt in fall.  33

Obituaries 30

Milton J. Shapp, ex-Governor of Pennsylvania and an industrialist.

Willem Jacob Luyten, expert on stellar motion.

Maynard L. Pennell, former Boeing executive.

Michael Somes, ballet dancer.

Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23

Editorials

Time for a budget truce.

Reject the new arms guidelines.

Angola on the brink of peace.

Battling neighbors.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Sex for sale.

Russell Baker: And he is us.

Lee Rosenbaum: Rush to auction.

Frederick Willman: My solid gold hernia.

Joan V. Schroeder: Garbage in, garbage out.

Chronicle 24

Bridge 12

Crossword 12

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              156 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Oregon's 'Out-of-Step' Senator Steps Forward

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1506 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Nov. 20


Term limits, a balanced budget amendment, school prayer -- these are "phony"
solutions to the nation's problems. The military budget needs to be cut. The
death penalty violates Christian principles. And there is nothing wrong with
being a liberal.

Senator Mark O. Hatfield of Oregon, the man espousing those post-election
heresies, is a lifelong Republican who is nearing the end of his third full
decade in the Senate. He says, proudly, that he spent most of the years under
President Reagan trying to undermine his program, and that he is the only active
senator who has never voted for a military authorization bill.

"I've been out of step most of my political life," said Mr. Hatfield, looking
down at the sweep of the Willamette River from his office here. "What else is
new?"

What's new is that the Senate Appropriations Committee will once again be in the
hands of Mr. Hatfield, who is perhaps the closest thing in Congress to a
pacifist -- or "a McGovern-nik," to use the words of House Speaker-to-be Newt
Gingrich of Georgia.

In fact, George McGovern was once Senator Hatfield's closest ally on military
matters, joining forces with him long ago to propose a legislative amendment to
end the Vietnam War.

As a young Navy officer in World War II, Mr. Hatfield was one of the first
Americans to see Hiroshima after the atomic bomb was dropped on it in 1945. The
horror lives with him, he said, and resonates in such actions as his lone vote
in the Senate against both military action and economic sanctions in the Persian
Gulf war of 1991.

At age 72, Mr. Hatfield has long been known as the politician of peace and pork
from faraway Oregon, a state where there is no better compliment than being
called a maverick.

It seems 1995 may just be Oregon's year. The Ducks, from the University of
Oregon, will start the New Year in the Rose Bowl, a West Coast football champion
for the first time since 1958. And every penny that will be spent by the Federal
Government, outside of Social Security and other so-called entitlements, will
have to pass through the committee led by a man from a state with less than 2
percent of the nation's population. Oregon's other Republican Senator, Bob
Packwood, weakened two years ago by accusations of sexual misconduct, will be
back in charge of rewriting the nation's tax laws as chairman of the Finance
Committee, which he headed in the early 1980's.

While the galloping elephants of the new Republican-controlled Congress have
been hailing the dawn of a conservative era, Mr. Hatfield has been sitting back
in Oregon, newly energized, a large grin on his face. The Clinton Administration
has certainly noticed; a day after the election, six Cabinet members called him.

"I'm prepared to work with the White House," he said. "I can't afford to be a
partisan guerrilla." Thwarting the expected attack on domestic programs and
attempt to raise military spending will require "bridge-building" with a lot of
Democrats, he said.

From 1981 to 1987, the last time Mr. Hatfield served as chairman of the
Appropriations panel, he was able to divert $100 billion that President Reagan
wanted for the Pentagon into social programs instead. He fought the proposed
"Stars Wars" missile defense system with passion, urging Democrats to join him
in opposing "this madness," as he called it.

This time around it will be much harder to accomplish such changes in spending.

"These Republicans are talking about building a fire wall between discretionary
defense and discretionary nondefense programs, meaning that if we had the votes,
we couldn't turn it over like we did in the 1980's," he said.

But that does not mean Mr. Hatfield will not try to shrink the military budget.
With the cold war over, there is no reason for spending billions on elaborate
weapons systems, he said.

"The way to do this is to point out all the redundancies in our arsenal," he
said. "They used to say, 'What about the Russians?' Well, who are the Russians
this time?"

When Iraq was mentioned, he laughed. "I don't look at Saddam Hussein as a
threat," he said. "I see diminishing oil supply as a threat, and Saddam is a
symbol of that."

He said the military budget could be cut by reducing the Pentagon's civilian
work force by 15,000 employees and by turning down new weapons systems.

Mr. Hatfield's staunchest opponents are likely to be from his own party. The
Appropriations defense subcommittee includes Republicans like Alfonse M. D'Amato
of New York, Phil Gramm of Texas and Pete V. Domenici of New Mexico, none of
them wallflowers when it comes to advocating military might. Senator Ted Stevens
of Alaska will be the chairman.

"We have voted against each other in the past," said Senator Stevens, when asked
about how he would try to steer the subcommittee around Senator Hatfield. "But
we have never had an open fight."

Mr. Stevens added: "I respect his position. It is deeply felt. But he knows how
I feel about the defense structure."

On other matters, Mr. Hatfield seems to relish being the spoiler at the
Republican garden party. He rolled his eyes when asked about Mr. Gingrich's
"Contract With America," the blueprint for the Republican Congress.

A deeply religious man who has written three books about matters of faith, Mr.
Hatfield opposes a constitutional amendment to allow officially sanctioned
prayer in public schools. He also thinks mandatory term limits for elected
officials are not needed. "Look at what happened to Tom Foley," he said of his
Northwest colleague, ousted by voters in Washington state this month after 30
years in the House. And he opposes a constitutional amendment to require a
balanced budget.

"These are all symbols, and the Republicans will beat the drums and get a lot of
pizazz going because they have fed the public a line about these things," he
said. "But to present them as if they are the answers and solutions to our
problems is just phony."

He sees parallels between the proposed amendments and President Reagan's tax
cuts in the 1980's. "The biggest increase in our deficit in history took place
in those years under a man presented as the high priest of conservatism," Mr.
Hatfield said. "It was another example of imagery versus substance."

Mr. Hatfield is not always on the liberal side; he has opposed abortion, for
example. But with all the positions he has staked out to the left of his party,
it is a wonder he is still a Republican. He said he became one in the 1940's
because he believed in civil rights and considered the Southern Democrats who
controlled so much of Congress to be racists. Among current Republican Senators,
only Strom Thurmond of South Carolina has served longer than Mr. Hatfield.

Senator Hatfield says he is proud to be called a liberal Republican. "Lincoln
was a liberal," he said.

He has struggled through some low points, being formally rebuked by the Senate
Ethics Committee in 1992 for failing to disclose gifts worth more than $43,000.

Long considered a friend of environmentalists, he said he was hurt by insults
hurled at him in the fight over Northwest forests. "They called me a pimp of the
timber industry," he said. "We have 43 wild and scenic rivers in this state,
more than two million acres of wilderness, and nobody can match my record on
these things."

But now, with the election having made Mr. Hatfield perhaps the most powerful
friend of the environment in Congress, environmentalists are coming to him on
bended knee, looking to him as the savior of public land in the Pacific
Northwest. He said he will try for no more than "fine-tuning" of the Endangered
Species Act, considered the most powerful environmental law on the books. And he
will not try to force the Forest Service to allow more timber cutting than
provided by law -- a tack he tried in the mid-1980's.

"The halo is back on Mark Hatfield," said James Moore, a professor of political
science at the University of Portland. "Even with that ethics lapse, he has been
remarkably consistent."

With two years to go in his fifth term, Mr. Hatfield was thought to be
contemplating retirement, after nearly 50 years in Oregon politics, from state
legislator to Governor to the Senate. Now, back in power and in the limelight,
he is not so sure.

"I only have $30,000 in the bank," he said. "But you know what: I've decided to
hold a fund-raiser next month."

Senator Mark O. Hatfield

BORN: July 12, 1922, in Dallas, Ore.

 EDUCATION: Salem High School; B.A., 1943, Willamette University, political
science; M.A., 1948, Stanford University, political science.

 MILITARY: As Navy lieutenant during World War II, commanded landing craft at
Iwo Jima and Okinawa.

 EARLY CAREER: Associate professor of political science and dean of students at
Willamette University, 1949-1956.

 POLITICAL CAREER: Various Oregon state offices; Governor, 1958-66. First
elected to Senate in 1966.

 FAMILY: Wife, Antoinette; four children, three grandchildren.

 HOBBIES: Rare books, Presidential history.

NAME: Mark O. Hatfield

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Mark O. Hatfield, a Republican, is proud to be called a
liberal. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. 1); Senator Mark O. Hatfield, whose
Portland office overlooks the Willamette River, was criticized by environmental
groups during a fight over logging, but they are looking for his help in the new
session. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. 10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              157 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
Hanoi Hannah Looks Back, With Few Regrets

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 869 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Not many calling cards list an alias, but even in Vietnam few people would know
this slight, elegant 65-year-old woman by her real name, Trinh Thi Ngo.

The alias -- Thu Huong -- means Autumn Fragrance, the name she first used as an
English-language radio announcer in the 1950's because it was easier for her
non-Vietnamese listeners to pronounce.

"Fewer syllables," she said in the clear, nearly accentless English that helped
her become a legend. And even that is not the name that millions of American
veterans would recognize.

For a generation of American troops at war in Indochina, Mrs. Ngo was Hanoi
Hannah, the silky-voiced announcer on North Vietnamese radio, the Voice of
Vietnam, who tried to convince American G.I.'s that the war was immoral, that
they should lay down their arms and go home.

"My work was to make the G.I.'s understand that it was not right for them to
take part in this war," she said. "I talk to them about the traditions of the
Vietnamese, to resist aggression. I want them to know the truth about this war
and to do a little bit to demoralize them so that they will refuse to fight."

It was the Americans who dubbed her Hanoi Hannah, the Vietnam War's counterpart
to Tokyo Rose.

"I only heard the name later," said Mrs. Ngo, whose propaganda broadcasts to
American troops lasted from 1965 until the Americans left in humiliation a
decade later. "Hanoi begins with an H; Hannah begins with an H," she said. "The
Americans like nicknames."

After Saigon was overrun in 1975 and renamed for Ho Chi Minh, she moved here
with her husband, a southerner who had been sympathetic to the Communists since
student days. He is a retired engineer, while she still works in broadcasting,
now at Vietnamese television.

Their home today is a simple, spotless apartment a few blocks from what used to
be South Vietnam's Presidential Palace -- the "den of the puppets," as it was
called by the North Vietnamese propagandists during the war.

Reared in Hanoi during the French occupation, Mrs. Ngo was sent to private
tutors in the early 1950's to study English, a language that Hollywood had made
her eager to learn.

"I always preferred American movies to French films," she said. "The French
talked too much. There was more action in American movies. I remember 'Gone With
the Wind' with Clark Gable and Vivien Leigh. It was so popular in Hanoi. I
remember we took bread and sausages with us to the theater because it was such a
long film."

Mrs. Ngo joined the Voice of Vietnam in 1955, the year after the Communists
under Ho Chi Minh ousted the French and took power in Hanoi after years in the
jungle. She was selected as an announcer on the radio's new English-language
shortwave service, which was beamed overseas.

"I wanted to join the Voice of Vietnam because it was a good opportunity to help
my country," she said, holding a silver-framed photograph that showed the staff
of the Voice of Vietnam at a reception in 1967 with Ho Chi Minh and Gen. Vo
Nguyen Giap, the army commander.

"I was not political. I was patriotic."

Her work did not take an anti-American turn until 1965, when the first American
ground troops landed in Vietnam and the Hanoi Government decided to begin
special broadcasts to them. Using scripts prepared by the North Vietnamese Army,
Mrs. Ngo said, she was never tempted to alter a word, no matter how strident the
tone.

"I agreed with these scripts," she said. "We were trying to make the Americans
understand that it was not right for them to be in Vietnam, that they were an
aggressor, that this was a problem for the Vietnamese to sort out."

Her 30-minute programs, which were repeated several times a day, were not known
for their subtlety. Mrs. Ngo announced the names of the American troops who died
in battle the previous month.

"We wanted to make them a little bit sad," she said.

She also read clippings from American newspapers and magazines about anti-war
demonstrations in the United States -- "we thought if we used the American
magazines, it would be more convincing" -- to remind the troops of how unpopular
the war was back home.

Mrs. Ngo said her goal was always to project a soothing, convincing voice. She
said she never felt aggression toward Americans as a people "except during the
bombing" -- the 1972 Christmas bombing of Hanoi, when she and her staff were
evacuated to a remote station 20 miles from the capital.

"When the bombs came, I did feel angry," she said. "To the Vietnamese, Hanoi is
sacred ground. But even then, when I spoke to the G.I.'s I tried always to be
calm."

And if she did once feel anger toward the United States, Mrs. Ngo insists that
she put it behind her years ago. Like many northern Vietnamese, she expresses
little but fascination today for the land of her former enemy, and she hopes
someday to visit "New York, Washington, many places."

Her enthusiasm for things American also extended to music, she said. To entice
the American troops to tune in to her show, the propaganda was intercut with
music from records and tapes taken to Hanoi by visiting anti-war protesters from
abroad.

"We had Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, and I always liked Elvis Presley," she said. "He's
'the King,' yes?"

NAME: Trinh Thi Ngo

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: For a generation of American troops in Indochina, Trinh Thi Ngo,
better known as Hanoi Hannah, was the silky-voiced North Vietnamese radio
announcer who tried to convince them that "they were an aggressor." (David
Portnoy/Black Star, for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              158 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: November 27, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 851 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    28   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 2     4   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery
           writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to
           take his place.

 3    11   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 4     2   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An
           arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in
           19th-century Russia.

 5     2   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A series
           of violent deaths.

 6    24   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 7    10   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           young girl disappears.

 8     5   A HOLIDAY OF LOVE, by Judith McNaught, Jude Deveraux,
           Arnette Lamb and Jill Barnett. (Pocket, $5.99.) Four
           romantic stories.

 9     9   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of a young boy creates a crisis.

 10    1   PRINCESS ANNIE, by Linda Lael Miller. (Pocket, $5.99.) An
           American girl's adventures with 19th-century European
           royalty.

 11   13   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           death.

 12    1   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.

 13*   9   THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to
           the 20th century.

 14   19   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A
           slow-witted man makes his way through three decades of
           American history.

 15    4   THE HOPE, by Herman Wouk. (Little, Brown, $6.99.) The story
           of Israel from the war of independence, in 1948, to the
           1967 war.

 16*  22   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly in North Vietnam.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    10   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2    46   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 3     9   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters
           reflect on their lives.

 4     5   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 5    577  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 6     5   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More
           comments on politics.

 7*    3   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR,
           by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44
           years of marriage.

 8     3   ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour"
           of an armored cavalry regiment.

 9    13   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 10    5   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 11*   2   VAMPS & TRAMPS, by Camille Paglia. (Vintage, $15.) Essays
           on subjects ranging from the Clintons to D.H. Lawrence.

 12*  11   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The
           memoirs of the radio personality.

 13*  44   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 14*  93   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 15*   9   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.

 16*  28   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     8   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2     9   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."

 3    193  THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R.
           Covey. (Fireside/S&S, $12.) Principles for success.

 4    50   WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg,
           Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.)
           Advice for parents-to-be.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 12, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              159 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7;     Page 37;     Column 1;     Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


Mark T. Sullivan, a former reporter for The San Diego Tribune and The San Diego
Union-Tribune, has written an extremely deft first novel, THE FALL LINE
(Kensington Books, 850 Third Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022; $20). Not many
investigative journalists have the sensitivity and poetry that are exhibited in
this book.

The central character is Jack Farrell, a successful investment banker in
California who represents a powerful Central American businessman. Farrell finds
himself a hunted criminal because of what his job is really all about:
laundering money for a drug cartel.

Mr. Sullivan effectively interweaves flashbacks, stream of consciousness and,
above all, exciting action. Farrell is a daredevil skier, and heads to the
mountains of Utah when he goes on the lam. He accepts a job offer from a
mysterious Frenchwoman who is making a documentary film about skiing. Meanwhile,
Government agents and drug lords are after him.

All of the characters in "The Fall Line" are believable. The reader identifies
with the flawed hero, with his wife, even with the smart, civilized drug kingpin
who sets Jack Farrell on the wrong course.


The title of Ross Thomas's latest thriller, AH, TREACHERY! (Mysterious
Press/Warner, $21.95), is adapted from Plutarch's characterization of Romulus:
"He loved treachery but hated a traitor." And treachery is what this novel is
all about. Mr. Thomas, a very skillful writer, lets us dangle for a while -- who
are the good guys and who are the bad guys? -- as he unfolds his story in
natural, free-flowing language laced with humor and sophisticated dialogue.

His protagonist is Edd Partain, a Vietnam War hero who is now a clerk in a
Wyoming gun shop. Partain is sitting on a secret that is political dynamite. A
figure from his past turns up and puts some pressure on him. Suddenly Partain
finds himself working for Millicent Altford, a smart woman who raises money for
politicians. A lot of money has been stolen from her, and she wants Partain to
help her get it back.

Things get confusing. Something very big is going on. Powerful people want
Partain out of the way. The C.I.A.'s dirty-tricks division shows up. Two
generals try to outwit each other. Unsavory politics and politicians are laid
bare.

Mr. Thomas makes some pertinent observations. He is concerned about the ethics
problem that has so many American voters convinced that their elected
representatives are puppets on the payroll of lobbyists or the special-interest
conglomerates. Millicent Altford knows what to do. This is her response to a
Congressman who has asked for advice on how to reform campaign financing:

"Simple. . . . Do away with soft money. Provide Federal financing. Establish
campaign spending limits -- proportional ones, of course -- so somebody running
for the Senate in New York can spend more than somebody running for it in South
Dakota. You know all the cures. It's just that most of you guys don't want to
take them."


We have all read a great deal about the Mafia. Now here's another crime family,
this one from East India. In Mitchell Smith's novel KARMA (Dutton, $22.95), we
are introduced to some especially nasty types.

Evan Scott, an architect in New York, is examining the skeleton of a New York
skyscraper his firm is constructing when a woman falls to her death from the
building. An accident? Murder? The police actually suspect the architect. When
he and his family find themselves in danger, he assumes the initiative. The
hunted becomes the hunter, and Scott, aided by a sweet, dignified, elderly
Indian, uses the skills he acquired as an officer in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Smith, the author of the thrillers "Daydreams" and "Stone City," is good at
depicting mounting terror. He has created a monster of a killer, an Indian giant
working for the crime family. Toward the end there is a chilling duel on the
beams of the skyscraper, and there is a final shoot-out that pushes belief a bit
too far. But no matter. "Karma" will keep you engrossed.


In IXTAPA (Donald I. Fine, $19.95), E. Howard Hunt brings back Jack Novak, now
on special assignment for the Drug Enforcement Administration in Mexico. Novak's
objective is to penetrate a drug cartel, which he does in no-words-wasted pulp
prose. Everything is predictable, but it's fun in a junky, innocent way. In
STONE DANCER (Pocket, $22), the British writer Murray Smith concocts a computer
scam that could involve the ruin of the American dollar. The Israeli Mossad, the
Sicilian Mafia and the United States Secret Service all make appearances. The
novel is unbelievable and cliche-ridden, but it's also lively and action-packed.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              160 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
The Shroud

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 42;   Column 3;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words


A GREAT SHROUD has been drawn across the mind of America to make it forget that
there is a world beyond its borders. Except when showing "Star Trek" or some
imitation, the three main television networks obsessively focus their cameras on
domestic tales and dramas, as if the end of the cold war rendered the rest of
the planet irrelevant. Their news staffs occasionally visit some massacre,
famine or shipwreck and their star anchors may parachute into Haiti or Kuwait
for a photo op, but these spasms of interest only emphasize the networks'
apparent belief that on most evenings the five billion folks out there don't
matter one whit.

Midst all the agitation about immigrants in California and Texas, have you seen
even one good report on the 23 million refugees roaming the globe? Or the
response to immigrants in Germany or, if it could be found, Canada? After all
the hype given to Charles Murray's portentous I.Q. alarm, did you catch even a
single network asking what other societies think about intelligence tests? Or
what they've learned about the relationship between talent and economic growth?

Americans who grew up with the trauma of Vietnam have heard virtually nothing
about Vietnamese society since the war or about Vietnam's discovery, like
Russia's and China's, that our vaunted market system corrupts even as it
enriches. Not a peep anywhere about the economic boomlet in India, whose
progress Americans once judged to be a challenge for democracy. Hardly a glimpse
of South Africa since Nelson Mandela's triumph, as if Americans had no
conceivable interest in black-white societies. No TV viewer keeping normal hours
could learn that Latin America has largely abandoned military rule and
repression, restructured a decade of devastating debt (to American banks!) and
elected a cast of reform-minded leaders.

Some people might argue that none of this matters now that the fear of war has
evaporated, now that no Russians compete for influence in Indonesia and no
hostile forces rule in Ethiopia. But do other peoples offer Americans only the
competitions of war and trade? Is there nothing to be learned about how the
Swedes and French care for their elderly? How Italy, the Pope's home, deals with
abortion? How Brazilians handle drug addiction?

IT TAKES NO JOURNALISTIC genius to propose these story ideas; I've culled most
of them from one week's Economist, Time and Newsweek. Telling those stories in
interesting, even dramatic, ways is no more difficult than explaining the pros
and cons of a balanced-budget amendment or of admitting DNA evidence in a
criminal trial. What's been lost at the television networks is perspective on
the world, the passion to learn, to explore, to employ the educational force of
the camera.

And money to do the job.

The Fox network seems content to operate without much national or foreign news.
It lives by the standards of its creator, Rupert Murdoch, who gives no sign in
any of his media ventures that he regards communication as a calling.

Ted Turner, who does, struggles to stretch his all-news Cable News Network
around the globe. But the journalism that he can afford is constrained by his
small share of television's audience and advertising.

So America still depends on ABC, CBS, NBC and their affiliates, which have been
draining advertising dollars from magazines and newspapers for decades without
investing nearly enough in reporting. They've killed the weekly brilliance of a
Life and other magazines and destroyed the competition that invigorated urban
dailies. And now the networks are diverting still more millions of dollars from
reporting to gossip and blather.

Obviously, the quest for mass audiences that TV advertisers demand has always
put a premium on entertainment. But the prior generation of TV moguls, who
created the networks, grudgingly acknowledged that their great power -- and the
Federal monitors of that power -- imposed an obligation to render public
service. They paid their dues with large, costly news departments and a fitful
schedule of superb documentaries.

Today, each network pretends to "cover" the world with seven or eight full-time
correspondents; none of them breathe the air of South America and few ever tour
Asia or Africa. For filler, they buy footage from foreign networks and
part-timers. To be sure, when American troops are sent abroad and when the
President sojourns at a colorful (or comfortable) foreign summit, the great
anchors -- Jennings, Rather and Brokaw -- can be found reading the nightly news
from a distant beach or rooftop. But their customarily swift return pronounces
even those foreign stories instantly dead. (Heard much from Haiti lately?)

The corporate chairmen who preside over the networks surely think of themselves
as worldly citizens. But there is no evidence that Thomas S. Murphy of Capital
Cities/ABC, John F. Welch Jr. of General Electric (NBC) and Laurence A. Tisch of
CBS have ever challenged their broadcasters to spend an extra few hours or
dollars to enlarge the perspective of their audiences. When they do give the
news division a prime-time hour -- usually after entertainment has failed to
outdraw a competing show -- they insist on a "magazine" of marginal
investigations and trivial features whose main appeal at headquarters is that it
can be produced for less than a sitcom.

ARE NEWSPAPERS any better? Not many. USA Today, which proclaims itself a model
for the future, normally devotes more space to the United States weather map
than to all foreign news. The New York Times reserves prime space for the
reports of three dozen full-time correspondents abroad; The Los Angeles Times
maintains almost as many. The Washington Post fields a foreign team of 24; so
does The Wall Street Journal (plus 60 more on the roster of its European and
Asian editions). The Christian Science Monitor and The Chicago Tribune each
still keep a dozen reporters overseas. But given the networks' modest effort,
America's picture of the planet is painted by a total of only 400 American
correspondents, including those from news magazines and wire services, plus a
few hundred foreign nationals assisting them.

That leaves too many people depending upon the eyes of too few. And what
journalism neglects, politics will inevitably ignore. A shallow understanding of
the world will damage the nation's sense of itself, its commerce and its
standard of living and may blind it to even greater threats. Will Americans end
this century more isolationist than when it began?

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              161 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Northern Ireland Hopes For a Brighter Image

BYLINE: By RICHARD W. STEVENSON

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: LONDON


BOMB-SHATTERED storefronts and British soldiers in full combat gear patrolling
blighted neighborhoods are hardly images conducive to building tourism, but they
have been the reality in Northern Ireland for decades, at least in Belfast and
other cities across the province.

But now, with the terrorist organizations on both sides of the Northern Ireland
conflict having declared cease-fires and pledged themselves to the peace
process, the British Government has high hopes for promoting a more attractive
image of Northern Ireland and stimulating a big increase in tourism.

Instead of subjecting visitors to police checkpoints, tourism officials want to
show off what they consider to be Northern Ireland's forgotten natural beauty,
its golf and other recreational activities and its charming towns and villages.

"This is a tremendous milestone in our development and a great opportunity,"
said Hugh O'Neill, head of the Northern Ireland Tourist Board. "There's a lot of
catching up for us to do."

After falling from 1.08 million visits in 1967 to 435,000 visits in 1972 as
violence flared, travel to Northern Ireland has been growing steadily in recent
years.

Officials said their main hope was to draw more tourists from mainland Britain
and the Republic of Ireland, which last year accounted for 85 percent of 1.26
million visitors to the province.

But they also have high hopes for luring more tourists from the United States,
particularly by encouraging Americans who visit the Republic of Ireland to
travel north across the border to see what the six counties of Ulster have to
offer.

Currently only 13 percent of Americans who visit Ireland travel to Northern
Ireland during their trips, and Mr. O'Neill said he would like to increase that
proportion to 50 percent.

To take advantage of the positive publicity surrounding the peace process, the
tourist board has requested an additional 3 million pounds from the British
Government, or nearly $5 million, for marketing and promotion activities between
now and April.

Those funds would be on top of the 8 million pounds, or $13.2 million, already
budgeted for the board's activities in this fiscal year, which ends in April.

The board is also putting together applications to the European Union for
financing to encourage more hotel and resort development. And Mr. O'Neill said
he was hopeful that the International Fund for Ireland, an economic development
authority financed primarily by the United States and the European Union, would
increase spending on projects to boosttourism.

Mr. O'Neill said the board would continue its advertising campaign in Britain
and Ireland, which uses the theme, "You'll never know until you go." And he said
the board would step up efforts to persuade travel agents and travel writers to
take another look at Northern Ireland.

Among other efforts, Mr. O'Neill said he was talking to American Airlines about
starting a scheduled charter service between the United States and Belfast,
which has an international airport but is not currently served by any flights to
or from the United States.

"People think we're totally unprepared for tourism, like Vietnam," Mr. O'Neill
said. "That's not the case. We have a thriving, if small, tourism trade. We have
good infrastructure, growing amounts of accommodation and plenty of attractions
for visitors."

Tourism officials said the biggest attraction in Northern Ireland is the Giant's
Causeway, a spectacular set of 40,000 stone columns created by ancient volcanic
eruptions on the north coast of Antrim. They said that the suspension of
violence would help lure more golfers to first-rate courses like Royal Portrush,
on the north coast in Portrush, and Royal County Down, near Newcastle.

For travelers looking for exhibits about the province's tangled political
history, the two-year-old Tower Museum in London derry contains what all sides
agree is an even-handed portrayal of ancient and recent history.

There is a lot riding on the tourism effort. Along with attracting new foreign
investment for factories, tourism is at the top of the list of potential job
creators for Northern Ireland, whose economy has been kept afloat through more
than two decades of strife largely through grants from the British Government. A
recent study by the Confederation of British Industry said increased tourism
could create 3,000 jobs in the short run, on top of the 10,000 that already
exist in the travel and tourism business, and that in the long run it could mean
a doubling in the number of jobs, to 20,000.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Royal Portrush course in Antrim. (Northern Ireland Tourist
Board)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              162 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RUNWAYS;
Street-Smart Fashion And $1,500 Knockoffs

BYLINE: By SUZY MENKES,   Special to The New York Times;   Suzy Menkes is the
fashion editor of The International Herald Tribune.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 67;  Column 4;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Nov. 25


The poseurs wore pink his spiky hair and her rubber corset. Another couple with
pierced bodies and bondage straps were chased by the paparazzi around the
Chinese porcelain. Rock music echoed through the august marble hall.

The party held in London at the Victoria and Albert Museum to celebrate the
opening of an exhibition called "Street Style" was an incongruous mix of the
outrageous and the establishment.

The funky, subversive underground movements that are loosely labeled "street
style" have finally landed in a museum -- a paradox that might be a sign of
their terminal decline.

Clothes that started life as expressions of anger, outrage or tribal identity
have been dissected and labeled. The subtext of the exhibition is to show the
influence of the street on high fashion, the theory that fashion trickling down
from designers to the masses has been replaced by "the bubble-up effect" from
the youth culture to the runway.

To show the link between salon and street, there beside the surfing gear is
Chanel's jacket in mermaid-scale sequins. Katharine Hamnett's velvet jacket apes
the original Teddy boy styles from the early 1960's while Dolce & Gabbana's
1990's neo-hippie look goes with a daisy-painted outfit from the 1967 Summer of
Love. A black-leather-clad Marlon Brando in "The Wild One" serves as a backcloth
to designer versions of the black leather Perfecto jacket.

Marc Jacobs's designer grunge is not included. Nor are Jean-Paul Gaultier's fake
nose rings and stick-on tattoos, which are the ultimate example of fashion
parodying the outrageous. But to prove that the relationship is longstanding,
the punk group includes a slither of silk crepe held together with punk pins
that Zandra Rhodes made in 1976, long before Gianni Versace's 1993 version of
diaper-pin chic.

The exhibition is powerful and persuasive. But it poses a question: with high
fashion on its heels, can downtown looks keep setting the pace?

Street style traces its origins to zoot suits worn by jazz musicians in the
1940's, and to this day it keeps a close affinity with music. Although the
museum show ends with a "Supermarket of Style," offering bewilderingly diverse
looks, many of the tribal identities were forged in the 1960's. The mods (sleek
disciples of minimalism), rockers (leather and heavy metal) and psychedelics
(high tech meets the drug culture) were all harbingers of fashions to come. Or
maybe, in our post-modern age, current cults just keep referring to the past.

The early movements tended to be social statements. Zoot suits were braggart
clothes of a downtrodden minority. Beatniks dressed as intellectual icons of hip
rebellion and made black the eternal uniform of the nonconformist. Hippies were
a loose group of anti-consumers, environmentalists, mind-expanders and hedonists
given a common cause by the Vietnam War and an official uniform (love beads,
ethnic dresses, afghan coats and ripped jeans).

Authenticity -- the search for the "real thing" in a world of image and surface
appearance -- is the reason designers are drawn to street style, according to
Ted Polhemus, author of the book "Street Style" (Thames & Hudson), which was
published to go with the London exhibition.

"People in our culture are desperate for authenticity," said Mr. Polhemus, a
social anthropologist reared in New Jersey who has been an observer of the
London street scene for 20 years. "But in my mind, high fashion's copy of the
real thing is a ludicrous attempt."

The best example of fashion moving from rebellion to the mainstream is the black
leather jacket. Yves Saint Laurent was the first designer to pick up on it in
haute couture for his "beatnik" collection for Dior in 1960. ("Shock! horror!"
cried the couture establishment, and young Saint Laurent was soon dismissed.)
But by the 1970's, when Claude Montana showed satin-soft blousons and Versace
showed his macho leathers, the Perfecto jacket had been transformed from a
"subcultural emblem" (bad guys on the wrong side of the tracks) to high fashion,
without losing its style or its edge.

But what about high-fashion takes on the rebellious outfits of punk, grunge or
the hip-hop style of African-Americans? From the upscale consumer's point of
view, there is something ridiculous about Chanel's take on homeboy fashion or
Versace's techno-inspired vinyl-coated silk. Potential customers must know they
are buying a short-term gimmick (so much for authenticity). Those who invented
the baggy-jean style or wear poor-boy sweaters out of necessity might feel
insulted, rather than proud, to have spawned $1,500 versions of a look.

The truth is that designer street style is a contradiction in terms. For if
street style is about tribal identity or about throwing down a gauntlet of
imagination in a drab world, recreating the look on a fashion runway and selling
it at a high price negates the original concept.

For 25 years, fashion has fed off the dressing-down images of a predominantly
white middle class. The mod looks (collarless Beatles jackets), the surfer
styles (bright T-shirts), the hippies, even the "new romantic" (Boy George's
androgynous dressing) were all styles picked up from affluent young people who
often chose to dress down. Even grunge can be seen more as don't care
campus-wear than as the clothes of no-hope rejects of society.

The point of punk was that it was a trashy, violent, sexually explicit style
designed to shock a complacent society. (Mr. Polhemus quotes a British music
magazine in 1976 that listed the major rock stars of the time under the heading
"During the Course of This Year All the People Pictured Here Will Be 30 or
Older.") But punk swiftly became just a symbol of an aggressive new generation
who routed the left-over hippies and formed a sleek, new style clique. That was
the era that ushered in Annie Lennox, Giorgio Armani and style bibles like The
Face and I. D. in England and Details, Paper and all their imitators in New
York.

Through the 1980's, high fashion was on a roll and flirted madly with street
style, embracing the philosophy of flinging everything together. Mr. Polhemus
credits this fashion anarchy to the punks, although it might equally apply to
hippies. All the original credos of fashion -- that it was about allure,
enhancing the wearer and making him or her more attractive -- were set aside. In
the search for the ultimate shock, fashion has dipped ever further into the
trash can, until "hooker chic," trailer-park tastelessness and so-called "white
trash" looks have hit the runways in the 1990's. No style has been elevated to
an art form.

But just at the moment when street style seems all-powerful, designers at
fashion's cutting edge are abandoning it as inspiration. Gaultier, John
Galliano, Alexander McQueen, Dries Van Noten and Vivienne Westwood are turning
away from the street and into the salon. They are all rethinking the idea of
elegance and fashion harmony. They are researching cut, technique and
craftsmanship, which were trashed when punks made dresses out of garbage sacks.
Across the international fashion world, it is paradoxically the young designers
who are producing elegant clothes while an older generation is trying to be
downtown and hip.

Long live genuine street style! The vibrant energy and angry statements of
individuals or outsiders will always have their places on the sidewalk. But by
the time various street styles have been dissected, labeled and put in a museum
case, the real thing has long since moved on.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gianni Versace's 1993 version of diaper-pin chic is a
direct descendant of earlier punk styles. (Corina Lecca)(pg.67); How genuine is
Chanel's take on homeboy fashion? (Dan Lecca)(pg.71)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              163 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NATO AND THE U.N. QUARREL IN BOSNIA AS SERBS PRESS ON

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 6;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1144 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, Nov. 26


The United Nations and NATO, confronted by Bosnian Serb forces occupying part of
a Muslim enclave the allies had vowed to protect, bickered today as the Serbian
assault continued.

Favoring restraint, Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose, the British commander of
United Nations forces in Bosnia, scrambled to avoid further NATO air strikes
against the Serbs. He enraged the Muslim-led Bosnian Government by blaming both
sides for the fighting in the enclave, centered around Bihac town, and insisting
that only negotiation could resolve the conflict.

United Nations officials reported almost constant artillery and
automatic-weapons fire just south of Bihac town. "The town is extremely tense,"
said Monique Tuffelli, a official for the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in the Bihac area. "It's a terrified town of people in hiding."

[In New York late Saturday, the United Nations Security Council approved a
nonbinding statement ordering the Serbs to halt their attacks on Bihac, but did
not approve any military action. Page 20.]

Manojlo Milovanovic, the Bosnian Serb general leading the attack on the enclave,
demanded that the Bosnian Army troops surrender. But there was no sign the
Government troops had any intention of yielding. The town now shelters close to
60,000 residents and refugees from outlying villages.

As fighting persisted, with Serbs occupying at least 20 percent of the Bihac
enclave, which the United Nations has declared a "safe area," about 2,000 United
States Marines headed for the Adriatic Sea off Bosnia on what the Pentagon
described as a precautionary mission.

Their dispatch reflected the possibility that close to 23,000 United Nations
peacekeepers in Bosnia may have to get out in a hurry if the military situation
suddenly worsens.  But it was also intended to add to the pressure on the
Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic.

Mr. Karadzic responded with a show of bravado. "The United States sends 2,000
Marines, then they have to send 10,000 more to save the 2,000," he declared.
"That is the best way to have another Vietnam."

Behind any posturing, it seemed that the 31-month-old war, which has already
taken more than 200,000 lives, was at a turning point.

With the military possibilities of saving Bihac virtually exhausted, it seemed
clear that if NATO now bombed the Serbs, it would have to be on a scale that
seriously damaged their ability to wage war, Western officials said.

But if NATO does nothing, despite the flagrant Serbian flouting of a United
Nations Security Council resolution last year that created the safe areas, it
appeared the United Nations and the Atlantic alliance would have scant further
credible contribution to make to the war.

General Rose today favored restraint and the pursuit of negotiations between the
Serbs and the Bosnian Government, which appeared to have ground to a halt. The
United States, supported by the NATO Secretary General, Willy Claes, argued for
the use of air power, Western officials said.

"The United Nations has not said it would defend anything," General Rose said in
an interview today with the BBC. "If one side or the other, and in this case
both sides, have chosen to go into the area to fight, then there's very little
we can do by force of arms to stop that happening."

Two senior Western officials said General Rose had effectively undermined an
aborted NATO air raid over Bihac on Friday by instructing United Nations
spotters on the ground who are supposed to guide the aircraft to their targets
to do nothing.

General Rose called for the NATO action after Serbs shelled the center of Bihac
town on Friday afternoon, but these officials said he was forced into this move
and did not want any bombing to take place. General Rose did not return a
telephone call to his office today.

Capt. Jim Mitchell, a NATO spokesman at the alliance's southern command in
Naples, said 10 fighters were dispatched to the enclave on Friday afternoon,
"but we never got a target from the guys on the ground."

"We don't know why," he added, "but it was probably because it was too dark."

Under the system in Bosnia, NATO planes are often guided to their targets by
United Nations soldiers on the ground who communicate with the pilots by radio.

During the mission on Friday, and again today, antiaircraft missiles were fired
by the Serbs at the alliance's planes. Normally this would provoke a strong
response from NATO, but it appeared that the United Nations was resisting the
launching of any new attack.

Haris Silajdzic, the Bosnian Prime Minister, today accused General Rose and the
top United Nations official here, Yasushi Akashi, of inventing negotiations that
do not exist.

"If a lot of people are killed in Bihac, it's because of them," he declared.

The Bosnian Government has not addressed the question of what responsibility, if
any, it may bear for the suffering of the 180,000 people in the Bihac pocket
through its decision last month to order the V Corps assault on the Serbs. That
assault led to the current overwhelming Serbian counterattack.

Last month the V Corps broke through Serbian lines to the east, taking about 95
square miles that it has since lost again and driving about 10,000 Bosnian Serb
civilians from their homes.

Six "safe areas," including Bihac and Sarajevo, were set up by the United
Nations after Bosnian Serb forces, supported by the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav
Army, drove hundreds of thousands of Muslim civilians from their homes in a
one-sided campaign of terror during the first phase of the war.

Since then the Serbs have closed their concentration camps and the war has
become somewhat more balanced as the Bosnian Army has have acquired more weapons
and a measure of organization.

It is this second phase of the war that General Rose himself has observed. He is
surrounded by British officers, including an influential interpreter of Serbian
descent, who seem to have found the top Bosnian Serb officials and commanders
more credible interlocutors than the Government officials.

General Rose, a 54-year-old former commander of the unconventional-warfare unit
of the British Army, the Special Air Service, has struck up a relationship of
officer-to-officer camaraderie with Gen. Ratko Mladic, the commander of the
Bosnian Serb army.

General Rose's stance has increasingly infuriated the Bosnian Government. It has
also drawn him into persistent conflict with Clinton Administration officials
who feel he is too close to the Serbs. The United States now wants the Bihac
area to be demilitarized and an ultimatum issued to the Serbs to leave, or to
face intensive air strikes.

United Nations officials said all nonessential personnel were to be withdrawn
from Serb-held territory in Croatia and Bosnia. There are more than 10,000
United Nations personnel in Serb-held areas.


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH  ; ADRIATIC SEA; BIHAC (BOSNIA);

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose, the U.N. commander in Sarajevo,
who was thrown out of talks with the Prime Minister yesterday. Page 20. (pg. 1);
Muslim girls wept yesterday as they held the Bosnian flag during a peace rally
in Zagreb, Croatia. The rally was called to protest the Serbian attacks on
Bihac, a Muslim enclave in neighboring Bosnia. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 20)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina shows the current areas of control and provides
and inset of Bihac. (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              164 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Coming Fiercely to the Defense of Social Security

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 10;  Column 5;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


A Post Office poster of the 30's, promoting the new Social Security system.
The Market Watch column on Nov. 6, "Social Security: The Issue They Chose to
Ignore," drew a large, angry response from many readers. A sampling follows:

To the Editor:

Floyd Norris contributed substantially to my own gloom and despair by suggesting
that market forces could solve the health care problem in this country. Health
care is a social and political issue: there is no good evidence that market
forces do anything but contribute to the problem. We have tried market forces
and they failed in this area where few market driven conditions exist.

Mr. Norris depresses me further by stating that Social Security is not a pension
plan. Although there is a safety net for the disabled and those at the bottom of
the wage scale, a high percentage of people receive from Social Security
according to the contributions made, provided they have worked and contributed
for a long enough period. This certainly sounds like most of the pension plans I
am familiar with.

The real problems with Social Security began in the Johnson administration when
it was included in the annual Federal discretionary budget in order to conceal
the cost of the Vietnam War. The problem was greatly exacerbated with the
pillaging of Social Security funds in the Reagan-Bush years to hide the extent
of the budget deficits and to pay for extraordinary military expenses and
incredible stupid economic policies based on the belief that not levying taxes
to pay for what one spends will somehow magically bring in more tax money.

Social Security is a well-funded program. Social Security money is "passed
through" to pay for our national debt. As such it ought to be paid the going
rate for long-term treasury bonds. If I calculate the accumulated amount I have
contributed between 1950 and 1993 at the average annual long-term bond rate,
less the amount I will withdraw with an annual 4 percent COLA, I will be 91
before I have exhausted my own monies. The calculation is similar for my wife
(who collects considerably less than I do) based only on her contributions.
Given that the life expectancy of American males and females is 72 and 79 years,
respectively, there ought to be a lot of money available to pay for most of the
unfunded things done with Social Security money.

It seems to me that the real solution is to raise taxes progressively,
specifically to pay off the national debt as fast as possible. After that all
the entitlement payments will be a piece of cake, as long as we don't continue
to lie to our ignorant, greedy and gullible electorate, having them believe that
they can have high military expenditures, subsidies of various forms, health
insurance, etc., without paying for it.

JOHN J. BRUNO
Hilton Head, S.C., Nov. 8

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              165 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Library's Historic Treasures in Tight Spaces

BYLINE: By CAROLE PAQUETTE

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 1; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1710 words


A GIFT of gold cloth reportedly from Captain Kidd, a 300-year-old Indian deed
and a 200-year-old atlas from the days when Bay Shore was called Penataquit and
Commack spelled Comac are samples of the past in three Suffolk County libraries.
But preserving the past does not come easily, especially in Smithtown, where
space and finances are concerns.

Although it has one of the oldest and most extensive collections about Long
Island history, the 87-year-old Smithtown Library has been beset with financial
problems for several years, quashing any plans for expansion and causing
complaints about the housing of its archives.

The county has 54 public libraries, but the town-owned Smithtown and the
independent East Hampton and Patchogue-Medford libraries have the best
collections of Long Island history, said Jerry Nichols, director of the Suffolk
Cooperative Library, which coordinates the libraries.

East Hampton and Patchogue-Medford keep their archives in orderly rooms with
large windows on the main floor.

But a lack of space and antiquated conditions have led Smithtown to house its
collections on overcrowded shelves and in cardboard cartons in a basement room.
Infrequently used books are stored in the "cage," a group of stacks behind
locked gates in the basement acquisition room. The archives, including a 1666
Indian deed, are in a vault behind the cage, where cartons filled with history
are piled on top of one another.

"This is no way to treat a special collection," said Vera Toman, a librarian in
charge of the Long Island Room. Pointing to cartons of books under a table, she
added: "The problem is space, space, space. We are plumb out of space. We have
been out of space since the 1970's."

"I was horrified at the conditions," said Trudy Gaus, a resident. "These
precious documents are not being kept safe." After touring the library with the
Smithtown League of Women Voters, Ms. Gaus complained to the Town Board.

"It is crowded," she said. "It is a mess. There could easily be a fire, and all
this would be gone. These historic documents are all so vulnerable."

Mr. Nichols said Smithtown had been having budget problems for years. "They
can't support the library the way they want to," he said.

The library is the sole municipal library in Suffolk dependent on the Town
Board, which appoints its trustees and sets its budget. And, with its three
branches, Smithtown has the largest tax base of any system in the county, and
its per capita expenditures are below average. According to a study by the
League of Women Voters, the library's spending ranks 34th among the 54 library
districts.

In September 1991 an attempt to make the library a special district library, a
move that would have let it set its own budget and hold public votes, was
defeated by 141 votes.

The date of that election coincided with a revote on the school budget.

The Town Board liaison to the library, Councilman Michael Fitzpatrick, said he
was concerned that a special district would just be an additional taxing agency.
'I don't think a new tax district is the panacea that people think it would be,"
Mr. Fitzpatrick said. "I think long-range planning is necessary, and that the
Town Board should work on making a long-term commitment to the place. And I
think if they put the proposition up again it should be during a November
election."

Mr. Nichols said that the Suffolk Cooperative supported the proposed district
and that it would help the dismal condition of the Long Island Room. "Our
position was that there should be a special library district," he said. "It
would clarify some of its boundary and other problems.

The formal name of the room is the Richard H. Handley Long Island History Room.
It houses publications concerning general and Long Island history. The
collection was formed in 1914 when Mrs. Handley donated her husband's collection
of 800 books and 1,200 manuscripts and pamphlets. After that it just grew, Mrs.
Toman said, and now contains over 20,000 documents and 3,000 books and pictures.

Tucked in the vault are the jewels of the collection, said Mrs. Toman, who has
worked at the library since 1979. They include what she called the pearl of the
collection, "A Brief Description of New York" by Daniel Denton, published in
1670. It is the first book written in English about New York, and much of it is
about Long Island, Mrs. Toman said. Silk grosgrain adorns the inside covers of
the leather-bound book. It is decorated with gold filigree and is in its own
leather box.

Another book, a 1774 slave inventory of the Fort Salonga estate of a Mary
(Platt) Treadwell, lists information like "one Negro girl named Priscilla in her
8th year -- $40."

The rare books, now in cardboard cartons in the vault, were to have been kept in
locked glass cases in a temperature-controlled room. The architect's rendering
shows a wall of the locked cases, extensive shelf space and a partitioned
workroom for the staff.

"What we have now is not respectable for a special collection," Mrs. Toman said.
"To add a book to the shelves in the Long Island Room we have to remove a book.
We barely have inches left."

The difference between Smithtown and the other libraries is not only in
appearance. The 1994 budget for the Smithtown Library is $5,031,463, amounting
to $2.21 for $100 of assessed valuation. Of that, $4,000 is for books for the
Long Island Room.

Patchogue-Medford and East Hampton set their own budgets, which taxpayers vote
on, and neither usually has a problem passing budgets.

"The community is all very supportive. said Judith Gibbard, director of the
Patchogue-Medford Library since 1991 and a member of the staff since 1983. "Of
course there is always a concern when times are difficult."

The library district, established in 1900, has the same boundaries as the
Patchogue-Medford School District. It passed its budget this year, despite the
school budget's being rejected two times. The library's total budget amounts to
$4.3 million. The estimated tax rate is $9.49 for $100 of evaluation, Ms.
Gibbard said. The budget for the Local History Room is $35,000 a year, including
its librarian's salary, with less than $200 for bindery and repairs.

Until about 10 years ago taxpayers in East Hampton paid 20 to 30 percent of the
library budget, said Beth Gray, director. The rest was from benefactors and
fund-raising events.

"But, today we are relying more and more on the taxpayers, and they are paying
about 50 percent," Ms. Gray said. "It makes life a lot easier and our funding
more secure."

She added that 10 percent of the budget was for the Long Island history
collection for heat, supplies and the salary of Dorothy King, assistant library
director and the main librarian for the two local-history rooms. The library
budget this year is $480,530, or $30 per homeowner, Ms. Gray said.

"We've never had a budget turned down," she said. "We only go to the taxpayer
for an increase, and it usually passes at least 2 to 1. And there is always a
large turnout."

The library is trying to raise $2 million for a two-story addition to its
83-year-old deep-roofed half-timbered Jacobean building on Main Street. The
addition would include two rooms for the history collection, one-third of which
is on shelves in a basement storage room.

The extensive Morton Pennypacker Historical Collection of the 97-year-old East
Hampton Free Library, which covers history from all over the Island, is in
glass-encased polished wood cabinets in two main-floor rooms. In a glass-topped
table case in the center of one room is a collection donated by the Gardiner
family.

It includes items dating back from a family Bible in which the patriarch, Lion
Gardiner, wrote a summary in 1635 of how he bought Gardiners Island. Also
included are an Indian Bible translated in 1685 and a gold cloth that Captain
Kidd reputedly gave to Gardiner.

One treasure, the biographical art collection of Thomas Moran, a Western
landscapist who lived on Long Island in the late 1800's, is stored in the other
room in his East Indian carved teak chest. A pine 1800's Domini clock ticks, and
an Oriental carpet covers the wood floor. On a brisk autumn day a couple from
Colorado sat in Queen Anne chairs at the library table, looking up their Long
Island genealogy.

The extensive genealogical collection attracts visitors from around the world,
Miss King said, pointing out a wall of shelves lined with old books about Long
Island families, including the Jones, Jarvis and Vail families.

Patchogue-Medford has a smaller and newer collection, said Selma Kelson, head of
the reference department. The Local History Room was created in 1981, when the
library moved into its building on Main Street, a renovated Grants variety
store. "At first," Ms. Kelson said, "a small room was set aside, but it was too
hot and we couldn't control the temperature. So the larger room was planned."

The staff of the room is headed by Sally Garrett, who along with Connie
Borntraeger, "clip, copy and file" articles. "It's very labor intensive," Ms.
Garrett said. "That's the beauty of the collection."

Books, old and new, from all over Long Island fill the shelves including
Huntington Town Records, "The History of Mattituck," "Islip's Korean and Vietnam
Families," and Genealogies of Long Island Families. A case of 16 flat drawers
contains the old maps -- census, topographical, aerial and nautical. Those in
poor condition have been laminated, so that children can use them, Ms. Garrett
said.

It is the atlas collection that is special to Patchogue-Medford. In "Asher &
Adams' Atlas of New-York" from 1869 a reader can find architects and artificial
limbs listed on the same page in a business-directory section similar to the
Yellow Pages.

Although many items are on microfilm, space is a problem for original documents.
Duplicates and publications that are infrequently requested are in compact bays
in a storage room.

Librarians note that the history room's space problem will persist. "Although
Mr. Pennypacker thought it would be nice to have a place to house writings by
everyone and from every place on Long Island," Miss King said, "there is no way
we could collect everything coming out of Long Island today."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Long Island Room at the Smithtown Library is so crowded
that Doris Halowitch sometimes stores historical material in boxes under the
table in the center of the room. (Pg. 1); Storage space is at a premium in the
Smithtown Library's Long Island Room. (Pg. 16) (Photographs by Michael Shavel
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              166 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final Correction
                                    Appended

They're in a Position to Mix Metaphors With Business

BYLINE: By MUKUL PANDYA;  Mukul Pandya is managing editor of Central New Jersey
Business, a biweekly publication based in New Brunswick, N.J.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2016 words


JOHN BARR has worked as an investment banker on Wall Street for some 23 years. A
graduate of the Harvard Business School, he managed Morgan Stanley's public
utility business until 1990, when he left to start his own firm, Barr Devlin
Associates in New York, providing financial advice to gas and electric
companies. But in January, the 51-year-old Mr. Barr will take on a position that
has seemingly nothing to do with investment banking or utilities: he will become
the next president -- and the first businessman president -- of the Poetry
Society of America, the country's oldest poetry association, with 2,500 members.

As a poet who has published two books, with a third on the way, Mr. Barr sees
close parallels between his varied enterprises.

I view both business and poetry as organizing activities that are carried out by
the self in response to a chaotic world," he said. "I see myself as someone who
wanders around the world turning what I see into money and poetry."

Mr. Barr is not wandering alone. Continuing a tradition whose most famous
representatives may be T. S. Eliot, a banker, and Wallace Stevens, an insurance
executive, he is one of a growing number of poet-bus inesspeople. They work in
industries ranging from insurance and real estate to consulting and public
relations, and they largely aim to make their poetry accessible to an audience
that includes their co-workers.

While some of these businesspeople-cum-poets have formidable literary
reputations and several books to their names, others are just beginning to
emerge from their garrets. Few actually write about their businesses, but most,
like Mr. Barr, see no conflict between corporate and poetic endeavors.

Donald Everett Axinn, a real estate developer on Long Island and published poet,
said of his dual pursuits: "Both present challenges and risks. The poem and the
office building both require structural form."

And Mr. Barr asserted: "If you make your life's work out of your passion, then
there doesn't need to be any difference between business and poetry."

Mr. Barr started writing poetry in the mid-70's, while he was helping establish
the Natural Gas Clearing House in Houston, the largest American gas marketing
concern of its kind. These days, he is putting together a similar business to
market electricity.

But most mornings, he wakes at 3 to put in a few hours on his poems, before the
phone starts to ring. At other times, he speaks fragments of ideas into a
dictaphone he carries in his briefcase, later working them into his journals. He
has published "The War Zone" (Warwick Press, 1989), with poems about the Vietnam
War (Mr. Barr is a former Navy officer), and "Natural Wonders" (Warwick, 1991);
"The Dial Painters" is due out next year.

Ted Kooser, 55, carries the creative process into his job at Nebraska's Lincoln
Benefit Life, and asserts that companies benefit from hiring poets. "Having
effective language skills," he said, "can be powerful in a corporation."

As a vice president at Lincoln Benefit, he publishes the insurance company's
newsletter, writes advertising copy and oversees some legal compliance work. But
Mr. Kooser is also a leading Midwest poet, considered by some critics to be
among the best of his generation.

Mr. Kooser has been in insurance for 30 years, but his love of poetry goes back
even further. He studied at Iowa State under the poet Karl Shapiro and has
produced seven volumes of poetry, starting with "Official Entry Blank"
(University of Nebraska) in 1969. His most recent book, "Weather Central," has
just been released by the University of Pittsburgh Press.

"I write poetry that is free of literary allusions. I'd like to reach a broader
audience, not exclusively those who read poetry," he said. After he has written
a poem, Mr. Kooser said, he often shows it to the secretaries and clerks at his
company, rewriting it if it seems unclear.  MR. KOOSER has lived all his life in
Iowa and Nebraska and most of his poems are drawn from Midwest experiences.
William Cole, a former columnist for he Saturday Review who has edited some 50
anthologies of poetry, said of Mr. Kooser: "He knows more about small-town
people" than any other poet I know; he's a truly American poet."

Publishers are beginning to recognize that poetry by business executives might
command readers. The University of Illinois Press is publishing "For a Living:
The Poetry of Work," edited by Peter Oresick, acting director of the University
of Pittsburgh Press, and Nicholas Coles, associate professor of English at
Pittsburgh. It has some 180 poems about the office, and the contributers include
Mr. Kooser and Dana Gioia, a former vice president at Kraft General Foods who is
also a poet, translator and literary critic.

"Despite what people in the arts think, the contemporary business world is full
of first-rate artistic talent," said Mr. Gioia, 44. Many, he said, "have made
careers in business because of the career uncertainties of the arts world."

Mr. Gioia studied comparative literature at Harvard before getting an M.B.A.
from Stanford. In his 15-year stint at Kraft in White Plains, N.Y., he was
involved in marketing products like Jell-O. Over the same time, however, he has
published two books of poems, "Daily Horoscope" (Graywolf Press, 1986) and "The
Gods of Winter" (Graywolf, 1991), on "the same inevitable themes as other poets
-- love, death, time, the fragility of anything human."

Mr. Gioia, who lives in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., is now a full-time writer,
though he continues to work part-time as a marketing consultant for clients like
Citicorp. Mr. Gioia sees the numbers of businesspeople writing poetry as part of
a broader renaissance of the art in American culture -- including rap -- outside
the campus.

Mr. Axinn, 65, the chairman of Donald E. Axinn Companies in Jericho, L.I.,
entered real estate in the late 1960's, going on to build more than 40 office
and industrial buildings in Long Island and New Jersey. His first book of poems,
"Flighting Down the Wind," was published by Floral Press in 1978, and another,
"The Latest Illusion," will be out next June.

"The poems are not about real estate, though you may get that impression from
the title" of his newest work, he said with a laugh. He usually writes at 5 or 6
in the morning, and frequently goes to his farm in Middlebury, Vt., looking out
at the Green Mountains as he works on his poems. An avid pilot, Mr. Axinn has
also written poems about flying, wildlife and children.

Mr. Axinn said he sees business and poetry as inseparable parts of his life.
And one has actually helped the other over time: "I once made a deal with the
chairman of a company who came to one of my poetry readings," he said. "He found
me interesting. It opened certain doors."

Gerald E. Murray, who has written on death, the relationship between love and
fear and the repercussions of memory, is among the few executives who also have
written poems about business experiences.

Mr. Murray, 48, recently left his job as executive vice president at the Chicago
office of Ruder Finn, a $28 million corporate communications company, to start
his own firm, the Murray Communications Group. Besides having worked in public
relations for 24 years, Mr. Murray has produced five volumes of poetry, the most
recent being "Walking the Blind Dog," published in 1992 by the University of
Illinois Press.

Mr. Murray's next book, "Oils of Evening," to be published next year by Lake
Shore Press, is a 150-page poem about art theft and forgery.

Inspiration sometimes visits Mr. Murray and others unexpectedly during meetings,
but Barbara Loots, 48, who writes greeting cards for Hallmark in Kansas, must
attend to the muse almost all the time. "I've been with Hallmark for 28 years,"
she said. "Hallmark has a culture that nourishes me more than an academic
culture would."

Ms. Loots, who will publish a volume of poems next year, said the discipline of
writing greeting cards has helped her poetry. She sees a difference, however,
between the two kinds of writing: "In the greeting cards, I have to say what
someone else wants to say. In my poems, I say what I want to say."

While these businesspeople-poets have all had their work published, Basil
Rouskas, 50, president of Basil Rouskas Associates, an outplacement firm in
Franklin, N.J., just recently worked up the nerve to start sending his poems to
publishers. A native of Greece, he began writing political poems nearly 30 years
ago, protesting against the military dictatorship there.

"Corporate life represses emotions," he said. "People pretend it is fine to make
up business plans, but they don't acknowledge their emotions. This is
unhealthy." Mr. Rouskas believes poetry allows him to do just that, which is why
he has decided to start publishing his work. He gets his start here, with
"Commuters' Sunset," a poem he wrote in 1978:

As the sun descends behind a hill

The lights of the radio tower start blinking.

In the distance,

a river drains the blood

from the veins of the valley.

And we, again, prepare ourselves

For another day's train ride

From work.

"Restoration"*

I love to recover the quality of things in decline. To scour stone, scale paint
from brick, to compel, with wire brush, the flourish wrought by iron. To
refinish wood, solving for forgotten grain. To give, by weeding, our stone wall
back its dignity. To left and right the borders of our lot, to square the
corners of our keep.

I have even dreamed: pushing a pushcart, I stop anywhere and start doing what
needs to be done. The first building takes time: replacing windows, curing the
roof. I know compromises must be made and make none, a floor at a time.

I work along an interstate a century after Johnny Appleseed. A modest people
makes me chief. (They, too, enjoy the hazy shine of finished work by last
light.) Storm drains relieved, brick walls relaid, a heritage of dust and
wrappers is renounced. The square square, trim trim, the town for once is like
an artist's conception of the town.  JOHN BARR

"Tom Ball's Barn"+

The loan that built the barn just wasn't big enough to buy the paint, so the
barn went bare and fell apart at the mortgaged end of twelve nail-popping,
splintering winters. Besides the Januaries, the barber says it was
five-and-a-half percent, three dry years, seven wet and two indifferent, the
banker (dead five years) and the bank (still open but deaf, or deef as it were),
and poor iron in the nails that were all to blame for the barn's collapse on
everything he owned, thus leading poor Tom's good health to diabetes and the
swollen leg that threw him off the silo, probably dead (the doctor said) before
he hit that board pile.  TED KOOSER

*Reprinted by permission of John Barr.
+Reprinted by permission of Ted Kooser.



PAINTER-PROFESSOR DISSECTS CREATIVITY

PERSONAL creativity, said Ross Webber, chairman of the management department at
the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, can be strongly tied to
business acumen.

Professor Webber -- who spends his creative energies painting -- views
management skills in terms of a three-tiered pyramid. At the lowest level, he
said, are technical and analytical skills, and in the middle, interpersonal
skills. But at the highest tier, conceptual skills are crucial.

"These skills are the closest to creativity," Professor Webber said. "Creativity
is the ability to see how things from one context fit into another.  These
abilities are crucial for management. When you look at most poetry, it is an
analogy; the best poets see parallels between a butterfly and aspects of human
behavior."

A thread that binds some bus inesspeople who are poets is their escape from
corporate life into entrepreneurship. Professor Webber compared that impulse to
the tension that painters feel between the ideas in their mind and a blank
canvas.

"Entrepreneurs talk in terms of similar tension. But for entrepreneurs, time is
their canvas."

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 11, 1994, Sunday

CORRECTION:
An article on Nov. 27 about executives who are poets misstated the title and
publisher of a 1978 book of poetry by Donald Everett Ax inn. It is "Sliding Down
the Wind" (Swallow Press).

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Barr, soon to be the first businessman to head the Poetry
Society of America, in his Manhattan office. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Vietnam Sketchbook

BYLINE: By Bruce Bawer;  Bruce Bawer's recent books include "The Aspect of
Eternity," a collection of essays on the modern novel, and "A Place at the
Table: The Gay Individual in American Society."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words



IN PHARAOH'S ARMY Memories of the Lost War. By Tobias Wolff. 221 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $23.

IN "This Boy's Life," his 1989 memoir of a strange, unsettled boyhood in the
1950's, Tobias Wolff memorably depicted not only his pre-adolescent self -- a
sympathetic scamp in the tradition of Huck Finn and Holden Caulfield -- but also
his hapless divorced mother, her lowlife loser of a boyfriend and, most notably,
his colorful con-man father (whom his older brother, Geoffrey, had already
immortalized 10 years earlier in his own highly acclaimed memoir, "The Duke of
Deception").

Five years later, Tobias Wolff has given us a follow-up volume. In 13 brief,
episodic chapters, "In Pharaoh's Army: Memories of the Lost War" recounts his
yearlong hitch in Vietnam, where, as a lieutenant in the Special Forces, he
served as adviser to a South Vietnamese Army division headquartered in My Tho on
the Mekong River. It was a relatively comfortable posting in a relatively quiet
town, and Mr. Wolff has fashioned from his recollections an elegant gallery of
small sketches in which he is almost invariably the central figure, and in which
even the Tet Offensive is relegated to the background.

Why "Pharaoh's army"? Presumably because the American presence in Indochina
seemed to Mr. Wolff as absurd and doomed as the blind charge of the Pharaoh's
chariots into the Red Sea; and also because to a soldier war is war, ever brutal
and senseless, the context and pretext unimportant, the supreme leader --
whether Pharaoh or President -- always remote and inscrutable. Why a "lost war"?
Not only because we didn't win in Vietnam, but also because the war is as
irreversibly a part of the past as, well, ancient Egypt, and can be recovered
only imperfectly in memory.

Readers who come to this memoir in search of the gritty intensity of Tim
O'Brien's Vietnam books or the sweeping, tragic vision of films like "Apocalypse
Now" and "Platoon" will be disappointed to find a protagonist who keeps mostly
to the sidelines and a book that in style and tone has much in common with the
low-key domestic minimalism of Raymond Carver and Ann Beattie. Mr. Wolff, who
demonstrated in "This Boy's Life" his gift for capturing in terse declarative
sentences a variety of discrete, elusive boyhood sensations, has done much the
same thing in his new memoir for discrete, elusive wartime sensations.

He admirably conveys, for example, the altered sense of time and space that he
and other American servicemen developed in Vietnam. "A journey down these roads
was endless until you arrived at the end," he writes. "That was the truth of
distance. The same with time. Our tour of duty was a year, but neither I nor
anyone else ever used the word. You never heard it at all. The most we dared
speak of were days, and even a day could lose you in its vast expanse, its
limits stretching outward beyond the grasp of imagination."

He is good, too, on parachute jumping: "For a time you belonged to the air,
weightless and free; then the earth took you back. You could feel it happen. One
moment you were floating, the next you were falling -- not a pleasant change.
The ground, abstractly picturesque from on high, got hard-looking and
particular. There were trees, boulders, power lines. It seemed personal, even
vengeful, the way these things rushed up at you."

There is a great deal of precise, evocative writing here. Yet on the whole, Mr.
Wolff's characteristic literary manner seems rather more suited to a book like
"This Boy's Life" than to a war memoir. Its limitations become apparent in a
passage that mentions the roadside corpses of schoolchildren killed in a bombing
raid. Mr. Wolff sees the corpses, but speaks of them only in passing; he does
not capture the experience as an experience, in the way he captures parachute
jumping. Confronted with such horrors, he is the literary counterpart of a
miniature portraitist at Guernica. Instead of engaging them fully, he gives us
poignancy and pathos.

Case in point: the anecdotes about a puppy that Mr. Wolff bought from a South
Vietnamese soldier who had begun to cook it for supper. The affecting
description of his first moments with this trembling animal, whom he named Canh
Cho ("dog stew"), makes one feel the author's humanity and care about him as
nothing else in the book does; indeed, no human being in the book elicits from
either Tobias Wolff the soldier or Tobias Wolff the memoirist as much emotion as
does Canh Cho. If the passages about this puppy are among the book's strongest,
it is because they are perfectly scaled to Mr. Wolff's distinctive pitch and
scope and depth. This is both the beauty of "In Pharaoh's Army" and its
limitation.

Mr. Wolff's earlier memoir ended with his unexpected acceptance into a New
England preparatory academy called the Hill School; his second concludes with
his equally surprising matriculation at Oxford University, no less, where he
finds himself "in a country far from my own, and even farther from the kind of
life I'd once seemed destined for." Mr. Wolff makes much of these dramatic
reversals, but does little to help us understand them -- to understand, that is,
what drew this boy of humble origins so passionately to these fancy
institutions. Was he, perhaps, motivated by the same longing for socially
impressive credentials that make his father claim (falsely) to be a Yale man?

Whatever the case, Lieutenant Wolff remains, at the end of "In Pharoah's Army,"
a bit too much the solipsistic boy, responding to the great world's cruelty much
as his younger self responded to the coarseness of his family life -- namely, by
lying low and escaping at the first opportunity into a realm of exclusivity and
privilege. How attentive Tobias Wolff the memoirist is to the moral implications
of all this isn't entirely clear.



ONE LONG MINEFIELD

I was inclined to regard every day I got through alive as a close call. I knew I
could be killed at any moment, in any number of ways, randomly in the general
mayhem or at the particular wish of the Vietcong who were everywhere around us.
. . . I was alive because they didn't consider me worth killing. I understood
that, perfectly. I also understood that they might change their minds, take it
into their heads that I mattered somehow. . . . So while it might have been
fainthearted of me to picture the days ahead as a long minefield, and the days
behind as a series of reprieves, it was also perfectly accurate. But that's not
what we mean by a close call. . . .

A close call is personal, mysterious, sometimes fantastic. A bullet enters a
man's helmet center-front and exits center-rear without putting a scratch on
him. A platoon gets ambushed and overrun, after which the enemy puts a round in
every man's head save one. A medic falls unnoticed from a pitching helicopter a
thousand yards up and lands feet first in a rice paddy, plunging to his neck in
the mud, where an American patrol rescues him, entirely by accident, the next
morning. Things like this happened every day.  From "In Pharaoh's Army."


LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:
A review on Nov. 27 about "In Pharaoh's Army," by Tobias Wolff, misstated the
location of the Hill School, which Mr. Wolff attended on a scholarship. It is in
Pottstown, Pa., not in New England.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 27, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
The Gentle Art of Creating a Family Film

BYLINE: By LISA LIEBMAN

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1402 words


THE DIRECTOR JOHN Pasquin is well aware that at some point during "The Santa
Clause," the new film that stars Tim Allen as a reluctant replacement for the
man in red, children may be bored.

"There's a definite ebb and flow in the movie in terms of attention span," he
explains. "The kids are sort of hooked all the way through the North Pole, and
then they drift, and then they come back toward the end, when Santa gets in
trouble. But the very parts of the film where they start to pull back are
exactly the points in the film where the adults start to lean forward."

Mr. Pasquin made a conscious decision to use lines and situations that would
make adults laugh. Apparently, he succeeded. Janet Maslin, writing in The New
York Times, called "The Santa Clause" "a clever, entertaining children's film
with a realistic edge and a minimum of seasonal mush." It opened to $20 million
of business the first weekend and could be considered a model "family film," one
that hooks all audiences.

In making movies that appeal to children, parents have sometimes been ignored.
John Hughes, the writer and producer of "Home Alone," suggests that Hollywood
has often interpreted family movie to mean "something for kids that's soft,
fuzzy and cuddly." This year, after a summer glut of family films and a fall
that saw the disappointing "Princess Caraboo," "Little Giants" and "Squanto: A
Warrior's Tale," most studios are avoiding the term altogether, and others have
gone out of their way to make sure that parents are kept happy, too. The problem
is, it's hard to please both children and parents.

At one time, most films could be called family films. "Ben Hur," "West Side
Story," "My Fair Lady," "The Sound of Music" and "Oliver" were made to appeal to
broad audiences (and won Oscars in the process). Then came the late 60's. Adults
got sex and violence, and, increasingly, children got pallid fare like "The Love
Bug" and "Escape to Witch Mountain."

Yet the movies that rank highest in all-time earnings have always drawn a wide
range of ages: the "Star Wars" trilogy, "E. T.: The Extraterrestrial," the
"Indiana Jones" adventure series, "Jurassic Park" and the comedies like "Big,"
"Home Alone," "Mrs. Doubtfire" and "Forrest Gump," a summer movie that with
nearly $300 million at the box office apparently happened for children as well
as adults.

"What a producer hopes for is a movie that can go from 8 to 80," says Jack
Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, "an 'E. T.,' a
'Forrest Gump.' Young kids love it, grandparents love it, and everyone in
between. Those are rarities, but you hope for them."

In retrospect, it's easy to see what makes a hit movie appealing (rule No. 1:
hire a star like Tom Hanks, Harrison Ford, Robin Williams or Tim Allen). The
problem for studios is finding the formula for the vehicle. So far this season,
early candidates like "The War" and "Miracle on 34th Street" have fallen short.

Mr. Hughes, the co-writer and producer of the remake of "Miracle on 34th
Street," may have been caught between trying to appeal to children and trying to
interest adults with his story of an encounter between Santa Claus (Richard
Attenborough) and a young girl (Mara Wilson) and her single mother (Elizabeth
Perkins), a humorless department store executive.

"Actually, what we found is that it's really an adult story, a dialogue
picture," he says. "You might think because it deals with Santa Claus it's
primarily for kids. But the main story is, can this woman break out of the
bitter shell she's carefully constructed? Can she let her child be a child and
allow herself to trust someone enough to fall in love?"

Caryn James, in the New York Times, called the remake "a dull project" and
refers to the romance as "a plot children and adults are likely to snooze
through."

JON AVNET'S FILM "THE War" stars Kevin Costner as a returning Vietnam veteran
with post-traumatic stress syndrome, and Elijah Wood as his son, who faces
battles of his own.

"I felt that this would appeal to parents very strongly as well as to quite a
large age range of kids," says Mr. Avnet. "My son is 11, and I would take him to
see it in a second." But despite good reviews for the young Mr. Wood, the film
seems to have gone over the heads of many children.

And what of other family films this season? High on the list is "Junior," in
which Arnold Schwarzenegger plays the first pregnant man, Danny DeVito is his
gynecologist and Emma Thompson is an unwitting egg donor.

"It's an entertainment that's appropriate for the entire family," Mr. Reitman
says of the comedy, which opened on Friday.

Really? "Yes," says Mr. Reitman, "with the idea that some of it may be
inappropriate for children under the age of 10. There is some profanity. And
there is a fairly frank discussion about sexuality, at least from a functional
standpoint." There is also a graphic scene of an egg being inserted through a
needle into a man's belly.

Another high-profile film this season that is being targeted to family audiences
is "Little Women," directed by Gillian Armstrong. "There's something for
children," she says, "but there's also an adult content." She notes, however,
that children "may be left behind" when the characters grow up.

But Sid Ganis, president of worldwide marketing for Columbia Pictures, the
studio releasing the film, will not even use the term family film. "We're not
calling it a family movie, we're calling it . . . " -- he gropes for a word --
"a classic movie. We're not even saying it's a story about a family. We're
saying it's the story of four sisters.

"You do have to be careful," he adds. "We live in a society that may be a little
cynical when it comes to what we refer to as family values. We don't want to be
too syrupy. 'Little Women' has edge."

Nowhere is the potential curse of describing a movie as a family film more
evident than in studio marketing departments. One movie executive representing a
forthcoming picture said that an interview request for a story about family
movies was "invidious." A cautionary tale that many movie executives remember
unhappily involves the fate of Mike Newell's PG-rated "Into the West," which
Miramax released as a family movie last year. Miramax admitted that it had made
a mistake and said that from now on "Into the West" should be considered an
"art" film.

"If you start to categorize something as a family film, you end up narrowing the
appeal," says Alan Amman, the senior vice president for publicity and promotion
of 20th Century Fox, home of "Miracle on 34th Street." "It can be a problem if
you're looking for a teen-age audience."

SO IS "MIRACLE" A FAMILY film? "I wouldn't call it a family film in that it
would only appeal to parents and kids," he says. "But on the other hand, it has
the values that a family would want to teach their children."

Disney, of course, has led the way in upping the adult quotient in its family
films like "The Santa Clause." The most successful animated film of all time,
"The Lion King," also from Disney, dealt with death, loss and a plot line from
"Hamlet." Now other animated films are trying to appeal to parents too. The
G-rated "Swan Princess" is a story of a princess who does not want to be loved
solely for her looks. "There are jokes in here that parents will appreciate and
that kids probably won't get, like the sorcerer, who's played by Jack Palance,
doing a one-arm push-up," says Matt Mazer, co-executive producer of the film. In
other words, "The Swan Princess" copied something from Disney animated films
besides the first few notes of the song "Beauty and the Beast."

But even the Disney label has its drawbacks: "There's a built-in audience
because it's Disney," says Stephen Sommers, the director of Disney's live-action
film "Rudyard Kipling's 'Jungle Book,' " which opens at Christmas. "But
sometimes teen-agers. . . . " the 34-year-old director trails off. "I remember
when I was growing up. You never wanted to see a Disney movie."

And it's not just teen-agers who shy away from films that are too saccharine.
Parents, too, sometimes find that they cannot face another family outing to a
G-rated picture.

"I think G is the kiss of death for a lot of grown-ups," says Mr. Pasquin, the
director of "The Santa Clause." "Parents look at a G rating and say 'Whoa! Let's
have the baby sitter take the kids.' "

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Model Movie -- "The Santa Clause," with Tim Allen and Paige
Tamada, manages to hold children's attention even though it offers jokes and
situations designed to please the parents. (Attila Dory/Walt Disney Pictures); A
Talkie -- "Miracle on 34th Street," with Richard Attenborough and Mara Wilson,
may lose children in a quiet story that asks "Can a woman break out of a bitter
shell she carefully constructed?" (Michael P. Weinstein/Universal)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Jersey City Weighs Effect Of Vouchers For Schools

BYLINE: By KIMBERLY J. McLARIN,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words

DATELINE: JERSEY CITY, Nov. 22


On school vouchers, the big players in New Jersey do not equivocate. For the
Governor, the Jersey City Mayor, the state teachers' union, vouchers are either
all good or all bad, apple-pie American or unconstitutional, the coming
salvation or the potential destruction of this city's flagging public schools.

But here on the ground in Jersey City, whose Mayor wants to make it a proving
ground for the state's first voucher program, the feelings are much more
ambivalent -- even among the parents of Catholic school students who might stand
to benefit financially from the plan.

To be sure, the New Jersey Catholic Conference, the public policy arm of the
state's bishops, is eager for the plan, and some Catholic school parents echo
that support. But others express skepticism and doubt about a proposal that
would give publicly financed vouchers to parents who send their children to
private schools. They wonder about many details that have yet to be settled: who
will be eligible for the vouchers, and how far they will go toward paying
tuition that at some high schools is as much as $3,500 a year.

But mostly there is this question, and the unspoken fear that underlies it:

"What's going to be the impact on the private schools?" asked one parent, Bob
Dalton, as he stood in the hallway of Hudson Catholic High School during a
recent parent-teacher night.

"When you take government money, you lose autonomy in running your operation,"
he said.

Mr. Dalton fears government regulation could undermine the mission of Catholic
schools. He wonders if the Catholic schools would be required to take on more
than they can handle effectively, like the physically and mentally disabled
children who need expensive special services and programs.

Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's proposed pilot program would give vouchers to
Jersey City parents toward tuition at private or parochial schools. The proposal
originally called for limiting the vouchers to first-grade and ninth-grade
students in the program's first year. But voucher proponents have lobbied hard
for more grades to be included, and that effort may still be reflected in the
final version of the bill, which could be introduced in the Legislature as early
as the coming week.

The amount of the vouchers has also yet to be determined. Mayor Bret Schundler,
who conceived the plan, has suggested $900 a year; others have proposed as much
as $1,300.

Of the 34 state-monitored private schools in Jersey City that would be affected
by the legislation, 26 are Catholic, according to Mr. Schundler's office. The
schools enroll about 10,000 students from the city and surrounding communities.

These students are the sons and daughters of white Catholics from Bayonne, and
the children of black families from Jersey City. More than a third of the
students in Catholic schools are Hispanic or Asian. Some are the children of
immigrants from India, Vietnam or the Philippines.

Many of their parents have worked extra hours or taken second jobs, sacrificed
vacations or given up a second car to pay the Catholic school tuition. Pedro
Bonilla, whose daughter Raylene attends St. Anthony High School, said he would
welcome the financial relief a voucher could bring.

"I think it's a great idea," said Mr. Bonilla, whose daughter's annual tuition
is $2,000. "I pay $1,400 a year for school taxes and I don't know where it goes.
It's very hard."

Mr. Bonilla said he also believes "80 or 90 percent" of the children in public
schools -- there are 30,000 in Jersey City -- would fare better in the Catholic
system.

"It's a different type of education from top to bottom," he said. "When the kids
from Catholic schools walk down the street, you can see it in their walk. They
have more respect."

But others are worried that a voucher system would alter the delicate balance
that makes their Catholic schools work -- without helping many students or
transforming the public system in the way proponents hope.

Mr. Dalton said he doubted if students who are foundering in public schools
would be helped simply by shifting them to Catholic institutions. They would
benefit more through expanded public early-childhood programs like Head Start
and by focusing on efforts to strengthen parental involvement, he said.

"The main problem is the breakdown of the family," Mr. Dalton said. "I choose to
send my kids to Catholic schools, but if my child were in public school, I'd
make sure they were learning just like I make sure now."

Senator John Stone, a Republican from Lyndhurst who strongly opposes the
Republican Governor's voucher plan, said fear of creeping government regulation
into areas such as discipline and curriculum worried many Catholic school
parents. For example, he said, will private schools be required to retain
disruptive students?

"The private schools right now, if you don't behave -- you're out," he said.
"They don't put up with it, and that's how they maintain their discipline.
Public schools can't do that."

Senator Stone said he feared that Catholic schools would become dependent on the
voucher money and be trapped.

"What will happen 10 years from now, when the government has given the school
this money and the school has become used to it, and the government suddenly
decides that you must teach what they feel you should teach?" he said. "How can
a parochial school give a health class and talk about condoms or abortion?"

Annie Felder, whose son Chris is a senior at St. Anthony, said she worried that
the parochial schools in Jersey City would be unable to handle the influx of new
students that might come with a voucher plan.

"I'm sure there are a lot of parents who would love to put their kids in private
schools, but if you do that, the schools could become just as crowded as the
public schools," she said. "To me, there are a lot of unanswered questions."

The voucher legislation also includes a provision for so-called charter schools,
an innovation that has been tried in several states. Governor Whitman wants to
allow teachers, parents or other groups to create such schools, which would
receive government funds but operate independently of local school districts.

Chris Felder is one of only 285 students at tiny St. Anthony. Its predominantly
black and Hispanic student body is drawn from some of the poorest neighborhoods
in Jersey City and Newark, and the staff deals with the full crush of urban
woes, said the acting principal, Sister Mary Alan Barszczewski. On this day a
student came to school worried because the mother he no longer lives with has
been arrested and he does not know where his younger siblings are.

"Sometimes I feel like we're a M.A.S.H. unit," she said.

For many of these students, St. Anthony is a haven from their chaotic lives. The
school is so small that somebody -- teacher, principal, counselor -- keeps watch
over the progress of every child. Walking the hall between classes, Sister
Barszczewski greeted each student she met by name. Students crowded into the
cubbyhole office of Michael McNutt, a counselor who boasts that for the past two
years every senior has gone on to college.

There are parents who worry that if St. Anthony grows too large through the
voucher program, it would lose these things that make it special.

"In Catholic school they focus on you more," said Gerald Alvaran, 17, a senior.
"I don't want to downgrade the public schools, but there the teachers treat you
like you're a student. Here, you're Gerald."

Many St. Anthony students are refugees from public schools, and their
comparisons of the two systems is harsh.

"In public school you can do whatever you want to do," said Anthony Torres, a
19-year-old senior. "The teachers don't even care if you want to learn or not
learn. They just give you the work. In Catholic school they care."

"I got kicked out of public school," he said. "But then they put me in a
Catholic grammar school and that changed me a lot. The nuns were very strict and
made me want to learn. I thought I would never graduate, but look at me now. I'm
an honor student. I can't believe it."

The students were less worried than their parents about the impact of vouchers
and more idealistic about the transforming effect of Catholic schools on the
struggling young. They said every child in Jersey City and beyond should have a
chance for the education they have enjoyed. They said the public schools needed
something to shake them up.

"It could be good because the voucher system is almost like threatening the
public schools to change," Raylene Bonilla said. "It says to the teachers, 'you
better start caring about your students more or they're all going to go to
Catholic schools.' "

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH ;

CORRECTION-DATE: November 29, 1994, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about a proposal for school vouchers in Jersey City
misstated the surname of a State Senator from Lyndhurst who opposes the idea. He
is John P. Scott, not John Stone.


                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Jersey City Weighs Effect Of Vouchers For Schools

BYLINE: By KIMBERLY J. McLARIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words

DATELINE: JERSEY CITY, Nov. 22


On school vouchers, the big players in New Jersey do not equivocate. For the
Governor, the Jersey City Mayor, the state teachers' union, vouchers are either
all good or all bad, apple-pie American or unconstitutional, the coming
salvation or the potential destruction of this city's flagging public schools.

But here on the ground in Jersey City, whose Mayor wants to make it a proving
ground for the state's first voucher program, the feelings are much more
ambivalent -- even among the parents of Catholic school students who might stand
to benefit financially from the plan.

To be sure, the New Jersey Catholic Conference, the public policy arm of the
state's bishops, is eager for the plan, and some Catholic school parents echo
that support. But others express skepticism and doubt about a proposal that
would give publicly financed vouchers to parents who send their children to
private schools. They wonder about many details that have yet to be settled: who
will be eligible for the vouchers, and how far they will go toward paying
tuition that at some high schools is as much as $3,500 a year.

But mostly there is this question, and the unspoken fear that underlies it:

"What's going to be the impact on the private schools?" asked one parent, Bob
Dalton, as he stood in the hallway of Hudson Catholic High School during a
recent parent-teacher night.

"When you take government money, you lose autonomy in running your operation,"
he said.

Mr. Dalton fears government regulation could undermine the mission of Catholic
schools. He wonders if the Catholic schools would be required to take on more
than they can handle effectively, like the physically and mentally disabled
children who need expensive special services and programs.

Gov. Christine Todd Whitman's proposed pilot program would give vouchers to
Jersey City parents toward tuition at private or parochial schools. The proposal
originally called for limiting the vouchers to first-grade and ninth-grade
students in the program's first year. But voucher proponents have lobbied hard
for more grades to be included, and that effort may still be reflected in the
final version of the bill, which could be introduced in the Legislature as early
as the coming week.

The amount of the vouchers has also yet to be determined. Mayor Bret Schundler,
who conceived the plan, has suggested $900 a year; others have proposed as much
as $1,300.

Of the 34 state-monitored private schools in Jersey City that would be affected
by the legislation, 26 are Catholic, according to Mr. Schundler's office. The
schools enroll about 10,000 students from the city and surrounding communities.

These students are the sons and daughters of white Catholics from Bayonne, and
the children of black families from Jersey City. More than a third of the
students in Catholic schools are Hispanic or Asian. Some are the children of
immigrants from India, Vietnam or the Philippines.

Many of their parents have worked extra hours or taken second jobs, sacrificed
vacations or given up a second car to pay the Catholic school tuition. Pedro
Bonilla, whose daughter Raylene attends St. Anthony High School, said he would
welcome the financial relief a voucher could bring.

"I think it's a great idea," said Mr. Bonilla, whose daughter's annual tuition
is $2,000. "I pay $1,400 a year for school taxes and I don't know where it goes.
It's very hard."

Mr. Bonilla said he also believes "80 or 90 percent" of the children in public
schools -- there are 30,000 in Jersey City -- would fare better in the Catholic
system.

"It's a different type of education from top to bottom," he said. "When the kids
from Catholic schools walk down the street, you can see it in their walk. They
have more respect."

But others are worried that a voucher system would alter the delicate balance
that makes their Catholic schools work -- without helping many students or
transforming the public system in the way proponents hope.

Mr. Dalton said he doubted if students who are foundering in public schools
would be helped simply by shifting them to Catholic institutions. They would
benefit more through expanded public early-childhood programs like Head Start
and by focusing on efforts to strengthen parental involvement, he said.

"The main problem is the breakdown of the family," Mr. Dalton said. "I choose to
send my kids to Catholic schools, but if my child were in public school, I'd
make sure they were learning just like I make sure now."

Senator John Stone, a Republican from Lyndhurst who strongly opposes the
Republican Governor's voucher plan, said fear of creeping government regulation
into areas such as discipline and curriculum worried many Catholic school
parents. For example, he said, will private schools be required to retain
disruptive students?

"The private schools right now, if you don't behave -- you're out," he said.
"They don't put up with it, and that's how they maintain their discipline.
Public schools can't do that."

Senator Stone said he feared that Catholic schools would become dependent on the
voucher money and be trapped.

"What will happen 10 years from now, when the government has given the school
this money and the school has become used to it, and the government suddenly
decides that you must teach what they feel you should teach?" he said. "How can
a parochial school give a health class and talk about condoms or abortion?"

Annie Felder, whose son Chris is a senior at St. Anthony, said she worried that
the parochial schools in Jersey City would be unable to handle the influx of new
students that might come with a voucher plan.

"I'm sure there are a lot of parents who would love to put their kids in private
schools, but if you do that, the schools could become just as crowded as the
public schools," she said. "To me, there are a lot of unanswered questions."

The voucher legislation also includes a provision for so-called charter schools,
an innovation that has been tried in several states. Governor Whitman wants to
allow teachers, parents or other groups to create such schools, which would
receive government funds but operate independently of local school districts.

Chris Felder is one of only 285 students at tiny St. Anthony. Its predominantly
black and Hispanic student body is drawn from some of the poorest neighborhoods
in Jersey City and Newark, and the staff deals with the full crush of urban
woes, said the acting principal, Sister Mary Alan Barszczewski. On this day a
student came to school worried because the mother he no longer lives with has
been arrested and he does not know where his younger siblings are.

"Sometimes I feel like we're a M.A.S.H. unit," she said.

For many of these students, St. Anthony is a haven from their chaotic lives. The
school is so small that somebody -- teacher, principal, counselor -- keeps watch
over the progress of every child. Walking the hall between classes, Sister
Barszczewski greeted each student she met by name. Students crowded into the
cubbyhole office of Michael McNutt, a counselor who boasts that for the past two
years every senior has gone on to college.

There are parents who worry that if St. Anthony grows too large through the
voucher program, it would lose these things that make it special.

"In Catholic school they focus on you more," said Gerald Alvaran, 17, a senior.
"I don't want to downgrade the public schools, but there the teachers treat you
like you're a student. Here, you're Gerald."

Many St. Anthony students are refugees from public schools, and their
comparisons of the two systems is harsh.

"In public school you can do whatever you want to do," said Anthony Torres, a
19-year-old senior. "The teachers don't even care if you want to learn or not
learn. They just give you the work. In Catholic school they care."

"I got kicked out of public school," he said. "But then they put me in a
Catholic grammar school and that changed me a lot. The nuns were very strict and
made me want to learn. I thought I would never graduate, but look at me now. I'm
an honor student. I can't believe it."

The students were less worried than their parents about the impact of vouchers
and more idealistic about the transforming effect of Catholic schools on the
struggling young. They said every child in Jersey City and beyond should have a
chance for the education they have enjoyed. They said the public schools needed
something to shake them up.

"It could be good because the voucher system is almost like threatening the
public schools to change," Raylene Bonilla said. "It says to the teachers, 'you
better start caring about your students more or they're all going to go to
Catholic schools.' "

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

As Envoy, Crowe, the Old Sailor, Navigates Rough Sea

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Nov. 27


For someone who has logged 47 years in the military and become Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff through a combination of intelligence and shrewdness,
William J. Crowe Jr., the Ambassador to Britain, would seem to be the right man
in the right place at the right time.

Ambassador Crowe took up his first diplomatic post six months ago, a time when
differences over the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina began to strain
American-British relations and raise fundamental questions about the performance
and purpose of NATO, which was deploying forces outside its treaty area for the
first time.

If anything, those strains have worsened now that the Clinton Administration,
fulfilling a commitment made to Congress, has stopped enforcing the arms embargo
against the Muslim-led Bosnian Government forces in their war with the Bosnian
Serbs. Recent NATO air strikes against Serbian targets in Bosnia and Croatia
have shown that the alliance can function operationally but have not removed the
underlying political divisions.

The unenviable task of explaining the complexities of the United States policy
to its staunchest ally has fallen to Ambassador Crowe, a large bear of a man, 69
years old, who uses his military expertise and reputation as a straight-talking
down-home Oklahoman as a shield and rapier in the diplomatic thrust and parry.
Mr. Crowe, who retired as an admiral in 1989 after four years as head of the
Joint Chiefs, is well acquainted with the Mediterranean, having served among
other incarnations as Commander in Chief of United States Naval Forces Europe
and NATO Commander in Chief for Southern Europe.

"I am not so sure I know what to do about Bosnia," he said in an interview in
his office overlooking the falling leaves of Grosvenor Square.

"There are no blinding insights. If there were, they would have come up by now
and we wouldn't have all the arguments. What we are really talking about is a
damage-limitation exercise as to what is the best answer to keep the killing
down and the controversy down while we seek for time and solutions."

The difference in views between the French and British on one side and the
United States on the other comes in part because the European countries have
troops on the ground in Bosnia as part of the United Nations peacekeeping force.
If they are seen as partisan, they would come under attack and have to be
withdrawn. But it also comes from a fundamentally different perception of the
conflict: the European countries look at the breakup of the former Yugoslavia
and see a quagmire of countries with ancient enmities committing atrocities on
all sides. Washington sees it in starker terms of right and wrong.

"I have an obligation," Ambassador Crowe said, "to try to explain what I think
the American perception of Bosnia is -- essentially that it's a European problem
but also that the Bosnian Serbs are the aggressors, that we have countries here,
no matter how fledgling they are, that have been recognized and now the
aggressors are trying to upset those boundaries and have committed a lot of
atrocities.

He continued: "Whether it is right or wrong, many Americans believe that the
embargo unduly helps the aggressor against the aggrieved, and that we would be
better off -- though it would not be a perfect answer -- if we lifted the
embargo and, in the trite phrase, made the playing field level."

At the same time, Mr. Crowe (rhymes with now) tries to be a transmission belt in
the other direction, communicating European views to Washington so that the
Clinton Administration is aware that its decisions on Bosnia can adversely
affect NATO and relations with Britain, France and Russia.

"It would be unfortunate if we make some decisions back in Washington about
Bosnia because we looked at Bosnia as just a discrete problem, and then discover
that our decisions have a much wider impact which we didn't like or desire. And
that's a possibility."

The job of go-between is not an easy one for the Ambassador to the Court of St.
James's. Sometimes, British diplomats have suggested privately, Mr. Crowe is
left hanging by his own Administration without enough timely information to
explain a policy and damp down concerns over newspaper headlines.

Two weeks ago, for example, when the report leaked in Washington that the United
States would no longer allow its ships to intercept arms shipments bound for
Bosnia under the NATO operation, the American Ambassador met with Foreign
Secretary Douglas Hurd but was not able to explain in detail how the decision
would be carried out and how it might affect intelligence-sharing.

Asked about the matter, Mr. Crowe said, "I would have preferred to have had more
advance notice."

The Ambassador won his post as a payoff for a political debt owed by President
Clinton. His endorsement of Mr. Clinton during the campaign was crucial because
his blessing, as a Chairman of the Joint Chiefs appointed by President Reagan,
helped to undercut the notion that Mr. Clinton's past as an objector to the war
in Vietnam would make him unacceptable to the military.

Though he replaced a highly popular career diplomat, Raymond Seitz, the fact
that Mr. Crowe is a political appointee carries an advantage. "He can pick up
the phone if he wants to and call the White House -- he has a direct line," said
Jon Snow, a journalist and anchor on Channel Four news. The Ambassador said he
called the President sparingly, only when a crisis demanded it.

So far, he has cut a wide swath through London, emphasizing in speeches that the
"special relationship" between London and Washington is alive and well, using
Will Rogers-type witticisms to warm up after-dinner audiences and impressing
newspaper editors with his bluntness and insight.

"He takes a bit of getting used to -- that Oklahoma style of grunting first and
speaking later," said Bill Emmott, editor of The Economist. "I've learned you
just have to be silent and then the words start coming."

NAME: William J. Crowe Jr.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William J. Crowe Jr. (Paul Conklin)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Jerry Rubin, 1960's Radical And Yippie Leader, Dies at 56

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 21;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


Jerry Rubin, the firebrand 1960's radical who used to preach distrust of "anyone
over 30," died yesterday in Los Angeles. He was 56 and lived in Los Angeles..

The cause was cardiac arrest, a hospital spokesman said. Mr. Rubin was struck by
a car on Nov. 15 in Los Angeles. Local authorities said he was hit while
jaywalking. He underwent surgery later that day, at the University of California
at Los Angeles Medical Center and subsequently was listed in critical condition
there.

Mr. Rubin was a bearded standard-bearer of the New Left in the 1960's who helped
carve himself a niche in American radical history with fey and energetic protest
gestures, though his views and style changed in subsequent decades.

Looking back years later, he called himself one of "the anticapitalistic comics
of the 1960's" who used street-theater to pursue -- without much success -- "the
radical dream of transforming the system from outside."

In 1967, he campaigned to elect a pig as President the United States and dropped
dollar bills onto the floor of the New York Stock Exchange.

Earlier in the 1960's, he became a fervent opponent of the war in Vietnam, and
he spoke proudly of that opposition in later decades.

As the 1960's went on, Mr. Rubin was involved in protest activity around the
country, and he became one of the group of radical defendants, the Chicago
Seven, who went on trial in 1969, in Chicago. They were the subjects of Federal
indictments for conspiracy to disrupt the 1968 Democratic National Convention in
that city, where the police beat and tear-gassed protesters on the streets.

The trial produced some of the most bizarre courtroom scenes in American
jurisprudence. It was raucous and rowdy, punctuated by the defendant Abbie
Hoffman's taunting of the iron-willed judge, Julius J. Hoffman, and it is widely
seen as epitomizing the contentious 1960's, with the Vietnam War in the
background and American campuses crackling with dissidence.

Mr. Rubin and Abbie Hoffman were co-founders of the quintessential 1960's
protest group, the Yippies.  At the Chicago Seven trial, in Federal District
Court, Judge Hoffman aimed sarcastic remarks and occasional tirades at the
defendants and their lawyers. The defendants chewed jelly beans at first and
later screamed insults at the prosecutors and the judge. The other courtroom
goings-on included spectators' lifting clenched fists and being thrown out by
marshals.

The trial resulted in Mr. Rubin's and his six co-defendants' being acquitted of
conspiracy, but he and four of the others were found guilty of crossing state
borders with the intent of inciting a riot. Later, those convictions were
overturned by an appeals court, which cited, among other reasons, what it called
Judge Hoffman's "antagonistic" courtroom demeanor.

In 1970, after the trial, a book of political autobiographyby Mr. Rubin came
out. Its title was "Do It! Scenarios of the Revolution," and it became a best
seller."

In 1973, Mr. Rubin was one of four men found guilty, after a trial in a Chicago
court, of contempt of court for their conduct during the Chicago Seven
conspiracy trial. Judge Edward Gignoux criticized the four for their outbursts
against, and insults of, Judge Hoffman. But Judge Gignoux decided against
imposing any jail sentences on the four, saying they had been sufficiently
punished by the contempt convictions and by earlier time they had spent in jail.

As the 1970's went on, Mr. Rubin made the rounds of what he called "the lecture
circuit." And in various forums he drew attention to himself and his evolving
ideas.

He continued writing, and his book "Growing (Up) at 37" came out in 1976, by
which time he had become clean-shaven."

In 1978, Mr. Rubin, who was the son of a Cincinnati truck driver turned union
official, was married to Mimi Leonard, an editor's daughter and former debutante
who worked for ABC-TV in New York. They made their home in a designer-decorated
apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and operated a not-for-profit
foundation called The Living Forum, created to organize "how to" events to aid
people in their daily lives.

He worked briefly for the Wall Street firm of John Muir & Company and went on to
make a new name for himself operating a business that promoted one variety of
the interpersonal communicating that by then had become known as networking.

Mr. Rubin was born on Bastille Day, 1938, in Cincinnati, attended Oberlin
College in Ohio, worked as a reporter and editor at the Cincinnati Post and
studied further at the University of Cincinnati, Hebrew University in Jerusalem
and, briefly, at the University of California at Berkeley.

Then he joined CORE, took part in anti-discrimination campaigns, and visited
Fidel Castro's Cuba. Back in California in late 1964, he became involved in
Berkeley's radical Free Speech Movement.

NAME: Jerry Rubin

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Indochinese Goat Is Imperiled by Its Year of Fame

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 589 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


As much as any animal can be, the sao la is publicity shy. For thousands of
years, small herds of these gentle, goat-like creatures munched their way
through the mountainous grasslands of Indochina, drawing so little attention
that the outside world had no hint of their existence.

But that all changed a year ago, when the sao la was suddenly thrust into the
age of celebrity, pushed in front of the television cameras and celebrated on
the pages of National Geographic and People Magazine -- overnight, a zoological
superstar.

And that is what's killing them. The sao la, the Vietnamese name given to the
first species of large mammal to become known to international science in half a
century, is threatened with extinction -- not at the hands of loggers or animal
predators, but because of the well-meaning frenzy whipped up by scientists,
environmentalists and the press.

Out of a population estimated at only 200, at least 6 of the nimble-footed,
dagger-horned creatures have died this year after encountering humans.

"Certainly we felt the need to tell the world about this discovery, but
publicity has been a very mixed blessing," said David L. Hulse, the
representative here of the World Wildlife Fund, which sponsored the research
that led to the discovery of the animal. "I didn't expect this much publicity,
not at all."

The announcement in 1992 that scientists in central Vietnam had discovered a
large, hitherto unknown bovine with antelope-like horns and a glossy coat was
described as the zoological equivalent of finding a new planet.

"Something about this story just caught people's fancy," said Mr. Hulse, whose
parents read of the discovery in their hometown paper in Iowa. "It was amazing
to me that something we were doing over here would be news in Des Moines."

Suddenly, it seemed, everybody wanted one of the creatures. Rumors spread among
poor farmers that if they could deliver a live sao la, they would be showered
with riches. And some of the rumors were apparently true.

Competing Japanese television crews roaming the border were widely reported to
have offered several thousand dollars to anyone who could produce a sao la for
the cameras, an extraordinary offer in an area where families earn the
equivalent of $200 a year.

"We try to tell the tribal people, 'Don't catch, don't touch, don't eat,' but
it's not easy," said Vo Quy, a biology professor at Hanoi University and
director of the Center for Natural Resources and Environmental Studies. "Just
the other day I got a call asking me if I wanted to buy one for $1 million. I
tell them no, we will pay nothing. The animals are more valuable in the forest."

The Government has added the sao la to its list of endangered animals, which
makes it a criminal offense to catch or kill one. But the promise of bounty is
simply too great a temptation for local farmers, and foreign environmentalists
working in central Vietnam say sao la are still being tracked down.

Two adolescent sao la were captured earlier this year and moved to a botanical
garden in Hanoi, but they died in October, apparently because of an infection
that ravaged their digestive systems. After they fell ill, frantic calls went
out to zoologists as far away as London for suggestions about how to save them.

"Even the most experienced scientists did not know what to do," said Nguyen Huy
Phon, deputy director of the Forest Inventory and Planning Institute, who helped
care for the creatures. "People were so upset. Some veterinarians cried."


LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Success Overnight, in a Sense: Vietnam's Artists Are in Vogue

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


During the Vietnam War, there was little paper and almost no canvas in North
Vietnam, and so one of the fathers of modern Vietnamese painting, Bui Xuan Phai,
was often forced to do his work on matchboxes and scraps of newsprint.

Mr. Phai, who in his lifetime never earned more than the equivalent of a few
hundred dollars from his art, had a graceful, fluid painting style that is still
much imitated by Vietnamese artists, north and south. He died in his beloved
Hanoi in 1988.

It is a sign of how the free market has begun to affect Vietnamese art that
young admirers in Hanoi have begun to copy something else of Mr. Phai's -- his
distinctive signature -- in hopes of persuading unsuspecting foreign art buyers
to pay thousands of dollars for what appears to be an original.

"There are many, many obvious fakes of Phai," said Nguyen Thi Lan Huong, the
27-year-old owner of the Gallery Saigon, one of dozens of art galleries that
have opened in Vietnam in the last two years. "By now, I do not think there are
many real Phai paintings left in the country. The foreigners have bought them
all. The foreigners seem to like our paintings very much."

Vietnamese art is suddenly a very big business, a multi-million-dollar industry
that now supports hundreds of artists who until a few years ago were united by
their desperate poverty. "The prices keep going up," said Miss Huong, whose own
jet-setting life style demonstrates just how good the money in this business can
be; after returning from a recent trip to the Indonesian resort island Bali, she
was off to Singapore for an art exhibition, followed by her first visit to the
United States.

With the fascination elsewhere in Asia for all things Vietnamese, paintings from
Vietnam are beginning to turn up in exclusive galleries in the Asian money
centers of Hong Kong and Singapore, drawing prices that start at several hundred
dollars and end in the tens of thousands. Collectors caught up in the craze for
Vietnamese art have driven up the price of a genuine Phai, which might have
fetched $500 a few years ago, to as much as $25,000. The question in Hanoi today
is whether Vietnam's artists are also being asked to sell their souls -- for a
very handsome price, mind you.

Some artists complain that the overall quality of art in Vietnam is declining as
talented painters turn out work as quickly as they can, hoping for equally quick
sales, while untalented painters flood into the market, turning out what they
hope will attract the eye of undiscerning tourists.

"That is my concern," said Nguyen Van Chung, a painter who is the director of
the National Museum of Fine Arts in Hanoi. "If our painters think too much of
money, they will be producing a market product. They will just try to satisfy
the taste of the foreigners."

Others suggest that after generations of Government-enforced poverty, the money
is precisely what Vietnamese painters need to encourage them to take the next
step: to begin producing work that challenges the political order. It may
already be happening. While little Vietnamese art is overtly political, painters
-- who for years were essentially Government employees because there was no one
else to buy their work -- have begun to produce images that once would have been
forbidden by Vietnam's prudish Government censors as counterrevolutionary.

A young, openly gay Vietnamese painter created a sensation in Hanoi in February
when he opened a show of male nudes. It was not until 1990 that the Government
allowed nudes to be shown publicly, and even today male nudes are generally
considered taboo. Nora A. Taylor, a doctoral candidate at Cornell University who
specializes in modern Vietnamese painting and speaks Vietnamese, attended the
show and was surprised, and pleased, that the police allowed it to remain open.

"Some young artists may be feeling free to paint anything," she said.

Modern Vietnamese painting had its start in the 1920's, when the French colonial
government established an art school in Hanoi, the Ecole des Beaux-Arts de
L'Indochine, which trained a generation of painters from across French
Indochina. The French influence may explain why Vietnamese art today appeals so
widely to the Western eye. Western-trained art dealers admire the technical
achievement that is usually missing from the painting produced elsewhere in
Southeast Asia.

"It's unique in this mixture of European and Asian styles," said Shirley S. Hui,
a Chinese-American art dealer who is one of the owners of the Gallery La Vong in
Hong Kong, which opened last year and deals exclusively in Vietnamese paintings.

"The first time I went to Vietnam and saw it for myself, I was overwhelmed," she
said. "I was raised with a Chinese eye, and even so, Chinese painting never
captivated me. I just feel that Vietnamese arts are just far better when it
comes to contemporary art."

Mrs. Hui represents several of Vietnam's best artists, and among them no one
brings a higher price than Do Quang Em, a 52-year-old painter whose style, Photo
Realism, follows naturally from his earlier career as a photographer. His large
oil paintings often feature his wife ("she is my only model") dressed in
traditional Vietnamese costume. And the detail is so complete that from only a
short distance, Mr. Em's paintings could pass for enlarged photographs.

While his large oil paintings sell for as much as $70,000 apiece by the time
they land in Hong Kong, Mr. Em lives modestly in a small house in Ho Chi Minh
City, the southern city formerly known as Saigon, and his dingy second floor
serves as a studio. A devout Buddhist, his only obvious luxury the pack of
imported Dunhill cigarettes at his elbow, he shrugs when asked about the money
his works attract overseas. Although he does not want to discuss his prices, he
clearly sells them to overseas dealers for a small fraction of the prices they
eventually command.

"In Hong Kong, they can offer my paintings for the prices that they like," he
says, insisting that whatever happens elsewhere in Vietnam, his work will not be
corrupted by the sudden opportunity to become rich. "I care only for the art."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Do Quang Em with a portrait of himself and his wife. Some of
his painting have sold abroad for $70,000. (David Portnoy for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Magazine Barred From Using Nude Photos of Clinton's Accuser

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A;   Page 21;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 543 words


In a case that pits the freedom of the press against an individual's claim of
privacy, a Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday ordered Penthouse magazine not
to distribute photographs of a woman who has accused President Clinton of sexual
harassment.

The magazine, which said the January 1995 issue was already on the way to
subscribers and retailers, assailed the order by Judge Peter K. Leisure. "It's
obviously unconstitutional because it constitutes prior restraint," said Bob
Guccione, the owner of Penthouse.

The photographs showing the woman, Paula C. Jones, partly nude were taken in
1987 by her boyfriend at the time, Mike Turner. Earlier this year, Ms. Jones
filed a $700,000 lawsuit against Mr. Clinton, accusing him of sexual harassment
when he was the Governor of Arkansas.

In court yesterday, Ms. Jones's lawyers argued that the photographs were meant
for Mr. Turner's eyes only, that he promised he would not give them to anyone
and that she had not given Penthouse permission to publish them.

"She didn't consent to their disclosure," said her lawyer, Joseph Cammarata of
Alexandria, Va. "It's an invasion of her privacy." Her lawsuit against the
magazine also alleged that Penthouse had violated a New York State law that
forbids the use of someone's likeness for advertising purposes without the
person's written consent.

Victor A. Kovner, a lawyer for the magazine, argued that the statute did not
apply to "illustrations of newsworthy articles" like the one in the magazine,
"The Devil in Paula Jones."

Constitutional scholars immediately questioned the ruling. "Even a temporary
restraining order is extraordinary in our history," said Laurence H. Tribe, a
professor of law at Harvard and one of the nation's best-known constitutional
experts. He cited the case of the Pentagon Papers, in which the Nixon
Administration sought to prevent The New York Times from publishing a secret
history of the Vietnam War, and The Progressive magazine case, in which the
Carter Administration sought to block publication of an article about how a
hydrogen bomb works. "This case wouldn't compare to that," he said.

Yale Kamisar, a professor of law at the University of Michigan, said: "I think
the court was wrong. Prior restraint has not held up when there have been
stronger cases than this. Measure it against national security, military
necessity or protecting a murder defendant's right to a fair trial. Those would
seem to be the most compelling cases, and even there, the effort to restrain
publication has failed."

Mr. Guccione said Ms. Jones's privacy had not been violated. "She's a public
figure," he said. "She has made a public figure of herself."

He added, "We have written testimony that she gleefully showed those pictures to
all the members of her family."

Mr. Guccione said there was no way that Penthouse could halt the distribution of
the January issue. "It's out," Mr. Guccione said. "It's already with a lot of
retailers. The wholesalers have it." He said the restraining order would have to
have been issued about two weeks ago to keep the two million copies from being
shipped.

Ms. Jones, a former Arkansas state employee, sued Mr. Clinton in May, accusing
him of making an unwanted sexual advance in 1991.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Jerry Rubin, 56, Flashy 60's Radical, Dies; 'Yippies' Founder and Chicago 7
Defendant

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section B;   Page 13;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words


Jerry Rubin, the flamboyant 1960's radical who once preached distrust of "anyone
over 30," died on Monday night in a Los Angeles hospital where he was being
treated after having been struck by a car two weeks earlier. He was 56 and lived
in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.

A hospital spokesman said the cause was cardiac arrest, but Mr. Rubin had been
unconscious and in critical condition since he was hit on the night of Nov. 14
while jaywalking across Wilshire Boulevard in the Westwood section of Los
Angeles.  His former wife, Mimi Leonard Fleischman, said that he had suffered
multiple injuries.

As a bearded standard-bearer of the 1960's counterculture and opposition to the
Vietnam War, Mr. Rubin carved himself a niche in the history of American
radicalism with his energetic and sometimes comic gestures. He was among the
founders of the Youth International Party, the Yippies, a militant but
loose-knit group with a penchant for political theater. He appeared before a
Congressional committee wearing a Revolutionary War costume, and was a center of
attention at anti-war demonstrations in his Uncle Sam hat.

Mr. Rubin was prominent in the riotous protests at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention in Chicago, which led to the famously unruly trial, in 1969 and 1970,
of him and six other radical defendants -- the group known as the Chicago Seven.
At the trial he showed up wearing judge's robes covering a blue Chicago police
shirt.

After the 1960's, Mr. Rubin wrote, lectured, sought self-improvement and then
worked in New York on Wall Street and as an entrepreneur. In the 1980's, he
became known for his promotion of "networking," bringing together ambitious
young professionals at parties at the Palladium nightclub in Manhattan.
Transformed from protester to businessman but still demonstrating a flair for
the public gesture, he held a series of public "Yippie vs. Yuppie" debates with
Abbie Hoffman, another former leader of the Yippies, who committed suicide in
1989.

Looking back years later at the 1960's, Mr. Rubin called himself one of "the
anti-capitalistic comics of the 1960's" who used street theater to pursue,
without much success, "the radical dream of transforming the system from
outside."

He once campaigned to elect a pig as President the United States, and in 1967 he
dropped dollar bills onto the floor of the New York Stock Exchange.

Though he later renounced his anti-capitalism, he defended his fervent
opposition to the Vietnam War. "Our nationwide campaign to build public
opposition to the Vietnam War succeeded, and the war ended," he wrote in an
article in 1990.

The Chicago Seven trial produced some of the most bizarre courtroom scenes in
American jurisprudence. Mr. Rubin and other defendants -- Mr. Hoffman, Tom
Hayden, Rennie Davis, David Dellinger, John Froines and Lee Weiner -- all
charged with conspiracy to disrupt the Democratic convention, taunted the
iron-willed judge, Julius J. Hoffman. The judge ordered an eighth defendant,
Bobby Seale, tried separately because he was so disruptive.

During the trial, which was in Federal District Court, Judge Hoffman aimed
sarcastic remarks and occasional tirades at the defendants and their lawyers,
including William Kunstler. The defendants chewed jelly beans at first and later
screamed insults at the prosecutors and the judge, whom Mr. Rubin denounced as
"the laughingstock of the world."

Mr. Rubin and his co-defendants were acquitted of conspiracy, but he and four of
the others were found guilty of incitement. Those convictions were overturned by
an appeals court, which cited, among other reasons, what it called Judge
Hoffman's "antagonistic" courtroom demeanor.

After the Chicago Seven trial, a best-selling autobiography by Mr. Rubin came
out. Then he went through a difficult period in the early 1970's, when his "life
came crashing down around him," as one reviewer of his writing, the television
performer Orson Bean, wrote later, after "a group of young kids publicly retired
him for being over 30" and his political movement disappeared.

After that, Mr. Rubin began what was to become a prolonged round of
self-improvement, which he was heard to call "a smorgasbord course in New
Consciousness." He tried EST, meditation, modern dance, massage, acupuncture and
hypnotism. As the 1970's went on, he lectured and did more writing.

In 1978, Mr. Rubin, a son of a Cincinnati truck driver who became an official in
the teamsters' union, married Mimi Leonard, a former debutante who worked for
ABC-TV in New York. They lived in a posh apartment on the Upper East Side of
Manhattan.

With the passage of time, Mr. Rubin became "a buttoned-down entrepreneur for the
1980's," as one cultural critic put it. A watershed of sorts came in 1980, when
he wrote that while he still had "many of the same criticisms and same values"
as in the 1960's, he had learned "that the individual who signs the check has
the ultimate power."

"I know that I can be more effective today wearing a suit and tie and working on
Wall Street than I can be dancing outside the walls of power," he said.

Indeed, he worked briefly for the Wall Street firm of John Muir & Company and
went on to make a new name for himself promoting networking.

By 1985, Mr. Rubin's soirees at the Palladium on East 14th Street were bringing
together thousands of networkers. "I don't like to use the word, but every
Yuppie in New York comes," he told an interviewer.

In 1991 he moved to Los Angeles, where his business activities included
marketing a nutritional drink named Wow! Forbes magazine reported in 1992 that
Mr. Rubin said he was making $60,000 a month as a distributor for Omnitrition
International, a Texas company that sold powdered mixes for Wow! and other
beverages.

Mr. Rubin was born on July 14, 1938 -- Bastille Day, as he liked to say -- in
Cincinnati. He attended Oberlin College, worked as a reporter and editor at The
Cincinnati Post and studied further at the University of Cincinnati, Hebrew
University in Jerusalem and, briefly, the University of California at Berkeley.

His marriage ended in divorce in 1992.

Mr. Rubin is survived by a daughter, Juliet Clifton Rubin, and a son, Adam
Winship Rubin, both of Beverly Hills, and by a brother, Gil, of Trumbull, Conn.

The funeral is to be at 10 A.M. on Thursday at Hillside Memorial Park in Los
Angeles.

NAME: Jerry Rubin

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jerry Rubin went from radical to businessman during a colorful
life. (Reuters/Bettmann, 1968; Associated Press, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Met Tries To Reinvent An Opera Classic

BYLINE: By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section C;   Page 13;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1575 words


It was, nearly, one of the most touching scenes in one of the most blindly
passionate of operas. Cio-Cio San, abandoned and nearly penniless, knelt by a
picture of her long-absent husband, urging her servant to faith with an
elaborate fantasy of Benjamin Franklin Pinkerton's return. Catherine Malfitano
made the aria "Un bel di" a wrenching revelation of Butterfly's delusion and
desperation. And yet something was missing.

Suddenly, toward the end of the aria, a man slipped alongside Ms. Malfitano,
shadowing the soprano's movements. In the final bars, he reached down and
gripped Pinkerton's portrait with trembling hands. He stepped forward. "Io con
sicura fede l'aspetto," he sang. "With unalterable faith, I wait for him."

And the moment was right.

The man was Giancarlo del Monaco, the director who has spent the last two years
planning the Metropolitan Opera's new version of "Madama Butterfly," which has
its premiere tomorrow night. Mr. del Monaco's production will replace the old
"Butterfly," a 36-year-old warhorse that predated the Met's move to Lincoln
Center, and that has already been donated and delivered to its new home at the
Kirov Opera in St. Petersburg.

For Mr. del Monaco, the temperamental, irrepressible managing director of the
Bonn Opera, and Daniele Gatti, the 33-year-old conductor who is making his
Metropolitan Opera debut, as well as for the cast and a small army of backstage
specialists, mounting a new "Butterfly" posed daunting challenges. Because it is
such a familiar and popular piece, most of them have had some experience with
the Puccini classic. Mr. del Monaco once set the opera in Vietnam. Richard
Leech, the tenor who sings Pinkerton, performed in a version 11 years ago at the
Houston Grand Opera that was set in a pre-war Japanese slum. That production
ended with Butterfly becoming a whore and the atom bomb destroying Nagasaki.

But the Metropolitan was not in the market for a one-season sensation. Joseph
Volpe, the general manager of the Met, said he first thought about staging a new
"Butterfly" eight years ago. After a number of false starts, including an
unsuccessful plan to co-produce the opera with a Japanese company, he wanted a
production that would prove as lasting as its predecessor.

"The standard bread-and-butter operas will be produced at the Met in the classic
style," Mr. Volpe vowed in an interview last week. "The production, we hope,
will last much longer than me or Giancarlo del Monaco."

But if the Met was sticking with a traditional interpretation, why bother with a
new production instead of sprucing up the old one? "What was changing were
people's expectations, not scenery," said Joseph Clark, the Met's technical
director. "The trend was toward cinematic realism, and that's what we aimed
for."

Mr. Volpe said he had not even considered doing "Butterfly" as the City Opera
did last year, when it staged the original version, which emphasizes the
differences between the Japanese and American characters. The La Scala audience
booed it off the stage in 1904.

The trick, for Mr. del Monaco, would be finding the fresh look Mr. Volpe
demanded without straying from the opera's original settings. Mr. del Monaco set
out by delving deeper into the score and libretto, drawing out the elation, hope
and turmoil that Puccini wrote into the music, and that Mr. del Monaco felt had
got lost in decades of "strike a pose and sing" opera.

Throughout the staging, Mr. del Monaco said, he saw the opera as a film in his
mind. This was hardly coincidence; his two previous operas for the Met,
Puccini's "Fanciulla del West" and Verdi's "Stiffelio," made it from stage to
television. The current project, too, will be videotaped, Mr. Volpe said on
Monday, though a broadcast date has not been set. Mr. del Monaco is also staging
a new Met production of "Simon Boccanegra" for a January premiere.

The new "Butterfly" relies on acting as much as arias for its dramatic impact.
Cio-Cio San and Pinkerton sing sideways, facing the floor, kneeling, running,
falling and lying on a rock. Mr. Leech's Pinkerton is a lusty, leering groom to
his shy, trusting bride of 15. Their son is an unusually important part of the
story, on stage for much of the second and almost all of the third act. He is
played by Alyssa Aftab, the 4-year-old daughter of Wendy White, the
mezzo-soprano who sings Suzuki, Butterfly's maid.

"Because her mother is there, we can keep her onstage longer," said Mr. del
Monaco. "I think that relationship is very important in 'Butterfly.' "

Mr. del Monaco appears to take an intuitive approach to staging, trying ideas
out and discarding them until he is satisfied with the effect, and then
fine-tuning them if they get in the way of the singing. A paper boat that he had
Cio-Cio San slip from her bosom and set in a pool of water for "Un bel di" had a
tendency to go soggy, and was replaced by a red poppy. Later, as Butterfly
prepares for hara-kiri, the music recalls the themes of her loving and
suffering. "Un bel di, remember?" Mr. del Monaco says, as he watches Suzuki lift
the poppy from the water and show it to her.

"I try to look at it differently, to squash it from the side, or enter from a
secret corner," Mr. del Monaco said, adding that an opera, like a person,
"changes a lot if you see them from another point of view." It was with such
small steps that he rediscovered the mother in Butterfly and the charming cad in
Pinkerton. "Puccini wanted that," he said.

Mr. del Monaco, a son of the celebrated Italian tenor Mario del Monaco, seems
emotionally enveloped by the project at hand. During rehearsals, as the music
builds, he jumps from his seat to stand in the aisle, his arms punching giant
commas in the air, or stays put but throws his head back and flings his arms
wide, as if breathing in the opera. Speaking half to himself, he scolds or
sympathizes with his characters as they move through their parts.

As Sharpless, the American consul at Nagasaki, advises Butterfly that perhaps
Pinkerton will never return, she carries out the son born after Pinkerton left.
"And this one, would he forget also this one?" Mr. del Monaco translates, adding
his own commentary: "That bastard, Pinkerton."

For Ms. Malfitano, who has portrayed Cio-Cio San in many different productions
over the last eight years, this "Butterfly" presents a more complex collage of
emotions. The tragedy she carries in the form of the engraved knife her father
used to commit hara-kiri is never far from Ms. Malfitano's interpretation.

Oddly, Ms. Malfitano does not see Butterfly's end as tragic, but as a final
forceful rejection of the delusion that has made her life untenable. "I think of
it as a passage for Butterfly," she said. "She is transforming the last moments
of her life to give her child flight."

Mr. del Monaco's designer of both sets and costumes, Michael Scott, spent a year
researching Cio-Cio San's garden with Japanese landscape architects; the 300
plant pieces on stage include every flower mentioned in the libretto. He found
the wedding kimono -- ivory satin embroidered with silver flowers -- in a German
antique-clothing store, and studied the colors of kimonos and placement of
sashes for the chorus of Butterfly's friends and relatives in the first act. The
kimonos were in soft pastels, hand-painted in Japan, with intricately woven
sashes.

But months of work can fizzle to nothing before opening night if the ideas
somehow don't mesh or seem likely to prove troublesome. Thus the fireflies that
burned so brightly they were mistaken for the lights of Nagasaki harbor were
ruled out at the final dress rehearsal on Monday. And the sunglasses for
Pinkerton and Sharpless, which Mr. del Monaco seemed to love on Friday morning,
disappeared on Monday by veto from Mr. Volpe.

Staging the new production seems as much a maneuver of diplomacy as of vision,
especially as the first night approaches and tensions and egos threaten to take
over. Mr. Volpe seems to relish the role of backstage strongman, the figure
ready to make the tough decisions and see them through. For example, Mr. Clark
said he had misgivings about the sunglasses, but suspected Mr. del Monaco would
not listen to his advice. So he mentioned his doubts to Mr. Volpe, who seemed to
share them.

Mr. del Monaco seems willing to compromise on minor details, for he believes his
trademark will be not in the props, but in the emotions he brings forth from the
singers. For Mr. Leech, portraying Pinkerton involved melding Mr. del Monaco's
vision of a "truck driver type" with an elegance that he believed an American
Naval officer at the turn of the century would have had.

"I think Giancarlo would perhaps like to see me be a bit more vulgar than I am,"
Mr. Leech said on Sunday, adding that his own sense of Pinkerton, untempered,
risked "looking wooden." The tenor said he trusted the instincts of Mr. del
Monaco, who went "full guns for the realism."

"Letting these characters feel the sexuality and express it goes so well with
the music Puccini wrote," Mr. Leech said. The love duet, which usually lapses
into two people facing the audience and singing, is here sung with the two
lovers apart for most of the aria, the passion building until Pinkerton falls to
his knees and gathers fistfuls of his bride's nightdress down from her
shoulders. "Now, all of a sudden," the tenor said, "it all goes together and the
audience says, 'Aaah.' "


LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Giancarlo del Monaco, seated at left, Richard Leech, Catherine
Malfitano and Daniele Gatti plotting moves at a rehearsal of "Madama Butterfly."
(Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
New York, Nostalgically

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;   Page 18;   Column 5;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 735 words


Some of the joys of growing up in New York City between the 1930's and the
1950's are on show in "Wish You Were Here," a nostalgia-marinated offering in
WLIW's "New York the Way It Was" series. Home movies, newsreels and, especially,
smiling reminiscences picture the city and its watering places as a grand fun
house for the young of all ages.

The focus is on the summertime: You could try to find a spot on the sand at
Coney Island and ride the Wonder Wheel at the Steeplechase; poppas could join
the family at a Rockaway Beach bungalow on weekends and play pinochle; a $1 bus
ride would take you to Jones Beach, remembered as "the Riviera of Long Island";
kids were sent off to rough it at sleep-away camps with Indian names; a party of
seven could make the daylong trip to the Catskills in "mountain hacks," at $3.50
a head, including a stop at a roadside joint that advertised "Eat here and get
gas," and then spend a week at hotels whose main attractions were breakfast,
lunch and dinner, with maybe a romance to settle the stomach.

When the weather turned, boys and girls could go to roller rinks in hopes of
meeting each other, and the lucky ones with cars could neck and so forth at
drive-in movies.

There are also mentions of just hanging around the block, which is what this
Bronx boy mostly remembers of the growing-up years. Time passed slowly, but you
didn't have to worry about being shot, and in our ignorance, we could spend what
change we managed to get on hot dogs and ice cream without either guilt or
indigestion.

"Wish You Were Here" is not a fancily produced program, but it is as stuffed as
Mom's cabbage with warm feelings and goes down more easily. One woman says
people were sweeter then and more innocent. Maybe so. But the main, wistful
appeal of this sort of remembrance of pleasures past is, of course, that we were
a lot younger.


'Dateline'
'Round Up'
 NBC, tonight at 9.

Tonight's "Dateline" tells of what it calls the World War II kidnapping of
thousands of Latin Americans of German, Japanese and Italian descent on United
States orders. Recently declassified files reveal that there was evidence of
spying against only 140 of them, but all, says Lea Thompson, who delivers this
high-pitched, cliche-dotted, metaphor-mixing report, were rousted from their
homes in 1942 ("tagged like baggage and taken away as pawns in a political war
game"), and shipped to camps in the United States. About half of them were later
exchanged for American citizens trapped behind Axis lines.

It sounds bad, another instance of Washington overreaching in the throes of war,
similar to the shameful internment of Japanese-Americans and definitely worth
investigating. But the reporter relies mainly on a few of the people who were
rounded up, and their accounts do not seem to have been challenged. No official
who had anything to do with the episode or any historian who has looked into it
is heard from. Instead, there is loaded language and the ominous mood-setting
photography favored by news magazines. The program's virtuous intentions would
have been better served by more productive reporting.


'American Justice'
'Riot: The Chicago
Conspiracy Trial'

Arts & Entertainment, tonight at 9.

People acquainted with California politics or the romantic life of Jane Fonda
may recognize the name Tom Hayden, but you have to be of a certain age to
remember much about Jerry Rubin, Abby Hoffman, David Dellinger or Bobby Seale.
All were prominent in the anti-Vietnam War demonstrations that incited what was
described as a police riot during the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago and
became even more famous as defendants and performers in a raucous 1969
conspiracy trial.

This disorderly chapter in American history is recalled tonight mainly through
vivid newsreels and interviews with some of the principals, including a
respectable looking Mr. Hayden and William M. Kunstler, who added color to the
trial as a lawyer for the defense. If you think the political situation can't
get any worse than it is today, tune in and be reassured.


NEW YORK THE WAY IT WAS
Wish You Were Here
Channel 21, tonight at 8.

Produced by Roman Brygider; directed by Fred Fischer and Mr. Brygider; Roy
Hammond, executive producer; Mr. Fischer, senior producer; Ron Rudaitis,
associate producer; Lisa Maya Knauer, consulting producer. Narrated by Barrett
Clark.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 1, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

W. E. Arnow, Judge in Antiwar Trial, Dies at 83

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section D;  Page 28;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 530 words


Judge Winston Eugene Arnow, who shared the national limelight when he presided
over the monthlong trial of the antiwar Gainesville Eight, died on Monday at
West Florida Hospital in Pensacola. He was 83.

Judge Arnow, a resident of Pensacola, died after a long illness, his family
said.

At his death, he was a senior judge of the Federal District Court in Pensacola.
He was known for his tight courtroom regimen and strict constitutional views, at
times exasperating lawyers on both sides.

He handled a number of significant civil rights and desegregation cases. Among
his cases were ones involving the United States Air Force and the government,
schools and jails of Escambia County, of which Pensacola is the county seat.

But it was the conspiracy trial of the Gainesville Eight that made daily
headlines from coast to coast. The defendants were seven combat veterans of the
Vietnam War, most of them decorated, and one supporter of the Vietnam Veterans
Against the War. All were charged with having planned an assault on the 1972
Republican National Convention in Miami Beach. The attack was not carried out.

Paid Government informers and an undercover police officer testified about
bombs, bullets, slingshots and crossbows and the plot that the defendants were
said to have been hatched in Gainesville. During the trial, there was a brief
imbroglio when two agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were discovered
in a broom closet, laden with telephone and electronic gear, near the courtroom.
Defense lawyers contended that the agents were trying to bug their
conversations, but the bureau said the agents were making sure that the agency's
telephone lines were not tapped.

At one point during pretrial hearings Judge Arnow threatened CBS News with a
contempt-of-court action after drawings of the court proceedings were broadcast.
He also brushed aside defense efforts to bring up the defendants' political
views because, he said repeatedly, "The Government is not on trial here."

In the end, the defense called only one witness and rested "on what the
prosecution has called its case." The jurors spent little time before acquitting
the eight.

Judge Arnow was born in Micanopy, outside Gainesville. He was a business
graduate of the University of Florida, where he also earned his law degree in
1933, and practiced with firms in Gainesville.

He was a municipal judge in 1968 when President Lyndon B. Johnson named him to
the District of Northern Florida. He was the court's chief judge when he assumed
senior status in 1981.

He ordered the Escambia school system desegregated in 1969. In 1978 he drew up a
special district to assure that the county commission would have at least one
black member.

In 1981 he sealed a settlement in a discrimination case, requiring the Air Force
to establish a $2 million fund and Eglin Air Force Base to hire 100 black
workers for its civilian labor force and promote others already on the payroll.

Judge Arnow is survived by his wife, Frances Day Arnow; a daughter, Ann Moulton
of Pensacola; a brother, Dr. L. Earle, of Convent Station, N.J.; a stepsister,
Marian M. Jelks of Maitland, Fla., and a grandson.


NAME: Winston Eugene Arnow

LOAD-DATE: December 1, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Winston E. Arnow. (Associated Press, 1973)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Pepsi Escalates Brazil's Cola War

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 4;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 602 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Dec. 1


Firing a broadside in a cola war over South America's largest market, Pepsi-Cola
said today that it was spending $400 million through next June to triple its
share of the market in Brazil.

Christopher A. Sinclair, president of Pepsi-Cola International, called the
investment "the single largest business ramp-up in Pepsi's history." He
predicted at a news conference here that Brazil's cola market would soon
outstrip those of Mexico and Germany to become the second-largest in the world,
after the United States.

Pepsi has been in Brazil since 1953, but its heavy new investment here is part
of a broader strategy to boost international sales by moving aggressively into
developing countries with relatively youthful populations. In Mexico, the
company is in the middle of a five-year, $750 million investment. Pepsi won
permission this year to build 10 new plants in China, doubling bottling capacity
there. And Pepsi resumed bottling its cola in Vietnam and in South Africa.

Over all, Pepsi's overseas operations will generate $3 billion in revenue this
year, triple the level of five years ago, Mr. Sinclair said.

Even so, Pepsi still lags behind Coca-Cola around the world, where Coke outsells
Pepsi by almost 3 to 1. In Brazil, Pepsi holds only 6 percent of the market,
compared with 54 percent for Coca-Cola.

Next year, Brazil's soft drink market is expected to expand by 8 percent. Sales
have been so strong that both Pepsi and Coca-Cola are importing cans from the
United States to meet demand.

Pepsi's heavy new investment in Brazil, which actually started early this year,
is funneled through a joint venture with Baesa, a bottler based in Buenos Aires
that operates in Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica and Puerto Rico. Baesa plans to
operate 12 bottling plants in southern South America and to control a
distribution system serving 400,000 retailers, including stores, restaurants and
bars.

"Our long-term goal is to build the Brazilian market to the Mexican level," said
Baesa's chairman, Charles H. Beach, referring to Mexico's consumption of soft
drinks, which runs three times that of Brazil on a per-capita basis.

The Baesa plants will quadruple Pepsi's bottling capacity in southern Brazil, an
area that accounts for two-thirds of the country's soft drink consumption.

In a bid to attract more customers, Pepsi is sponsoring a New Year's Eve concert
here by the rock singer Rod Stewart. The mayor's office is predicting that the
outdoor concert will attract four million people -- roughly half of the city's
population -- to Copacabana beach.

Coca-Cola, an official sponsor of the Brazilian soccer team, is already spending
$500 million in Brazil this year and next. Most of its money is going for
marketing, including a February tour of Rio de Janeiro, and Sao Paulo by the
Rolling Stones.

While one Pepsi official today declared an "immediate and vast assault" on
Coca-Cola, there seems to be room for everyone in the rapidly expanding market.
This year, RC Cola, the world's third-largest soft drink brand began selling its
beverages in Sao Paulo supermarkets.

To provide more cans for the cola war, Alcan Aluminio do Brasil. S.A, announced
last week that it planned to invest $150 million to triple its aluminum sheet
production by 1997. In turn, Reynolds Latasa, the nation's only maker of
aluminum beverage cans, is investing $80 million to build its third factory in
Brazil.

"The consensus around the world is that Brazil is now poised to realize its true
potential," Mr. Sinclair said. The company's slogan here, he said, would be, "A
New Pepsi for a New Brazil."

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pepsi-Cola is spending $400 million to bolster sales in Brazil.
Its announcement today featured giant inflated cans on Copacabana beach. (John
Maier Jr. for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Born to Be Wild. Scratch That. Born to Be Mild.

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 746 words


JERRY RUBIN'S death last week must have reminded the generation that came of age
in the 1960's not only of its own mortality, but also of the distance that some
of its members have traveled from the shining ideals they once professed.

Mr. Rubin was the antic, self-appointed revolutionary of the 1960's, who with
his Yippie sidekick Abbie Hoffman pricked the pomposity of more than a few
American institutions, showering the floor of the New York Stock Exchange with
dollar bills and campaigning to elect a pig president. But by middle age, Mr.
Rubin was promoting networking parties for young professionals and a powdered
beverage called Wow. He even worked briefly on Wall Street.

His death at the age of 56 was the result of the mildest of rebellions: he had
been jaywalking on Wilshire Boulevard in Los Angeles when a car struck him.

Mr. Rubin was one more icon of the 1960's whose later life as a member of the
bourgeoisie clashed with the defiant, maverick spirit of the age. Sonny Bono
became a Republican and last month was elected to Congress from Palm Springs.
Jane Fonda, who infuriated patriots by traveling to Hanoi and married the
threadbare radical Tom Hayden, is now the wife of Ted Turner, one of the world's
richest men.

Mick Jagger is a grandfather, and his former exuberant displays seem as out of
sync with the 50-something crowd as Blanche DuBois' flirtatiousness. Two weeks
ago, David Crosby of Crosby, Stills and Nash underwent a liver transplant
because, his publicist said, his liver had succumbed to years of heroin and
cocaine abuse. Mr. Crosby had taken the Marrakesh Express once too often.

Life catches up with everyone one way or another. It's not just the realities of
reading glasses and arthritis. When some of the 1960's generation left the
Shangri-La of the campus, they learned that, as a philosophy of life, "tune in,
turn on, drop out" would not endear them to employers and that "mellow" was not
the disposition valued by corporate law firms.

A Zelig for His Time

Later they began to worry about good schools for their children, even if that
meant abandoning city public schools where children from different backgrounds
come together. They worried about once-despised concepts like property values
now that their hard-earned savings were tied up in homes. When he died, Jerry
Rubin was living in the affluent Los Angeles enclave of Brentwood.

Still, only a cynic would say the path Jerry Rubin took from nihilism to
networking was emblematic of a generation. Todd Gitlin, a sociology professor at
the University of California at Berkeley who wrote "The Sixties: Years of Hope,
Days of Rage" (Bantam 1987), said even as a revolutionary Mr. Rubin was
emblematic only of a "reckless and truculent" strand of the 1960's.

"He learned how to play the media, which found him appealing as an emblem of
what they thought he was representative of," Mr. Gitlin said.

His genius was always more about marketing and publicity than politics. In the
late 1960's, protest against the Vietnam War grew more popular, and Mr. Rubin
and Mr. Hoffman seized on that with some inventive comic gestures, risking far
less than contemporaries who resisted the draft.

Mr. Rubin was at heart a Zelig of his times, adapting his personality and
principles with each shift in the popular culture. With the war no longer a
cause, he turned to the 1970's mantra of self-improvement, immersing himself in
meditation and est-like rehabilitation. By the 1980's, networking seemed ripe
for exploiting, and he did it with charming elan.

But most of the more rebellious youth of the 1960's fought the war, Jim Crow and
poverty far away from the spotlight. And unlike Mr. Rubin, they never lost what
Barbara Tischler calls an "imperative of social action."

"It would be a mistake to say the entire generation went into corporate law,"
said Ms. Tischler, who teaches a courses on the 1960's at Columbia and Barnard.
"There are a lot of people who gave their lives to teaching or even coaching
Little League or just giving something back to somebody. They understood that
you're not just your own universe, but you're part of a larger universe."

In middle age, Mr. Rubin perhaps concluded that he could be more effective
within the walls of power than without. After all, only someone with the
arrogance of youth would have preached "Don't trust anyone over 30," not
imagining that one day, inevitably, he, too, would be over 30.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jerry Rubin, Yippie, in 1969. (Reuters); Mr. Rubin's children
at his grave. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Secrets Illuminate the Cold War

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COOPER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 28;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., Dec. 3


During the cold war, one of the Central Intelligence Agency's most important
jobs was to estimate the Soviet Union's military strength and strategy and share
the findings in top-secret reports to the President and selected policy makers.

The reports, known as National Intelligence Estimates, are milestones of the
arms race, snapshots that chronicled the buildup of nuclear arms as the two
superpowers sought peace through ever bigger and more destructive weapons. But
with the country they analyzed no longer in existence and the C.I.A.
experimenting with a policy of more openness, 80 of those reports from the
1950's through the 1980's were declassified this weekend at Harvard University
here during a conference of spies and scholars.

As conference participants discussed and debated the estimates, which influenced
American decisions on military spending, foreign policy and arms negotiations,
even the people who read and produced them questioned their accuracy and the
extent to which they were colored by political considerations.

Adm. Stansfield Turner, who was the director of the C.I.A. under President Jimmy
Carter, said that the reports should not have accepted the notion that an
escalating arms race would deter nuclear war.

"Our estimate, in my view, in spite of having a great deal of very good
information, was not a help to the President," he said. "What it should have
said to him, in my view, was simply two words: too much. We and the Soviets both
had too much nuclear firepower to need any more. At some point, threatening more
damage is meaningless for deterrence."

One of Mr. Turner's successors, Robert M. Gates, who began the declassification
process in 1992, took a brighter view of the estimates. He said they contained
very accurate information about Soviet military forces but sometimes ran into
trouble in their efforts to predict the Soviets' future course.

"The reality is, we got the basic current assessments right most of the time,"
Mr. Gates said. "But three things happened with our forecasts for the future:
sometimes we overestimated, sometimes we underestimated, and sometimes we were
right on the mark."

Several speakers said that a problem with the estimates, which were compiled by
the C.I.A. from other Government intelligence agencies, was that the agencies
were in competition for pieces of the military budget, which was at least partly
determined by the findings in the intelligence estimates.

That may have led individual departments to emphasize the Soviet threat in their
particular fields. The Air Force, for example, wanted more money for its missile
systems. It wrote dissenting footnotes in some estimates suggesting that the
Soviet Union had greater missile power than the official report indicated. The
Navy's dissenting footnotes, meanwhile, suggested that the Soviets had less
missile power.

McGeorge Bundy, the special assistant to the Presidents John F. Kennedy and
Lyndon B. Johnson for national security affairs, spoke this morning about the
problem of getting an accurate, dispassionate estimate from the C.I.A.

"The agency had a double world: the estimating world and the operating world,"
Mr. Bundy said. "And the operating world was a hard-boiled, activist,
give-us-the-job, anti-Communist agency which believed that confrontation was the
name of the game and that it was the nature of the adversary. And so did most of
the rest of us in one degree or another. But it meant that you could not expect
from the agency a detached assessment where the agency was involved. The most
extraordinary, important example of that is Vietnam."

In the long run, the estimates were just that: estimates. And, over time, they
were subject to revision. The earliest contained a great deal of educated
guesswork, some of which, like the prediction in October 1954 that the Soviets
would try to develop long-range missiles, proved to be correct. But they
included little hard evidence. In the jargon of analysts, these first estimates
were long on "poetry" but short on "plumbing."

Technological advances gave later estimates more authority. U-2 spy planes, for
example, photographed miles of Soviet railroad tracks in search of military
installations. Satellites, which succeeded the spy planes, were able to cover
even more ground. The C.I.A. did use information from agents, but officials at
the conference said intelligence estimates relied most heavily on technological
evidence.

Technology certainly played a role in correcting one early flaw in the
estimates, which predicted in the late 1950's that the United States would soon
trail the Soviet Union in the development of long-range missiles. The so-called
missile gap became an issue in the 1960 Presidential campaign. But the notion
was disproved in 1961 by satellite photographs.

"New information, providing a firmer base for estimates on Soviet long-range
ballistic missiles, has caused a sharp downward revision in our estimate of
present Soviet ICBM strength but strongly supports our estimate of medium-range
missile strength," an estimate from September 1961 concluded.

Brian Latell, the director of the C.I.A.'s Center for the Study of Intelligence,
which publishes a classified journal, said the newly released documents were "80
of the most sensitive national intelligence estimates ever done."

The current C.I.A. director, R. James Woolsey, has pledged to continue
declassifying documents "warts and all."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Sunday;
Expert Advice: Mr. Cheap On the Prowl

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 45;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk;   Second Front

LENGTH: 752 words


WE caught up with Mr. Cheap in Washington, where he's cataloguing what's cheap
there besides talk. Bargain guidance was urgently needed for holiday shopping.
Mr. Cheap, whose previous books include "Mr. Cheap's New York," at first started
raving about some "gorgeous buys" in five-year-old hotel suite furniture he
unexpectedly found being auctioned by the Ritz-Carlton at a Beltway warehouse:
"You should see the four-poster beds!"

Hold on, Mr. Cheap, we're not talking tax-and-spenders-slept-here sort of
bargains. We're talking strictly New York, stocking stuffer, memorable but
CHEAP.

It turns out that the "seemingly harmless hand mirror that emits a piercing
scream" when you look at your reflection will do at $12 from Dapy's gift shop on
West Broadway. Mr. Cheap never lets us down, even if he's gone megalopolis
lately, a hungry actor suddenly become best-seller writer who has a research
assistant now in his ever-widening bargain hunts.

HE locks into a city for six weeks of research. Everything from new appliances
to used clothing, free movies to cheap poetry cafes, low-priced pets to
second-hand pianos. He talks of "a certain predatory thrill" in bargain hunting,
and 100,000 shoppers agree, having bought Mr. Cheap books on five cities.

In New York, he knows that the Frick collection "rivals the Met at half the
price," and a great cheap lunch is a loaf of bread from Zito's on Bleecker
Street with cheese next door from Murray's. His book cherishes neighborhoods:
eat Greek in Astoria at Uncle George's; buy tonight's steak wholesale at
Basior-Schwartz in the West Village meat district; sample one of the city's
oldest bargains, the almost-free speeches at Cooper Union.

"There's no other way to do this but pounding the pavement," says Mr. Cheap, who
in his heart of hearts is the 33-year-old professional actor known as Mark
Waldstein from Verona, N.J. He traffics well enough in cheap candor to admit to
occasional ennui if not outright heartburn at such self-imposed limits as
hunting down restaurant meals for under $10.

"It does reach a point where you walk into your 500th falafel joint and what
more is there really to say?" he asked in Washington. He quickly recovered from
such gratuitous plaintiveness, however, and cited "a great Vietnam soup house,
Pho 75 in Arlington, 15 delicious varieties of stew, $4.95 for a big bowl you
can't finish." Or the Federal cafeterias, most impressively the Library of
Congress's Montpelier Room: $8.50 for a buffet with linen tablecloths and a view
of the Capitol, the nation's Pols "R" Us megastore, where nostalgia items like
trickle-down economics are endlessly hawked.

MR. CHEAP hasn't been spoiled by success; he stays at the Quality Inn Iwo Jima.
This is economically well west of ritzier Washington precincts where the art of
tax write-offs for business visits like Mr. Cheap's was invented, never mind
endlessly indulged in one of the all-time, all-American business bargains.

But Mr. Cheap's authenticity is his fortune. "I'm not comfortable with $100
dinners," he said, implicitly dismissing much of the work ethic of "The
McLaughlin Group." "I've always had to get by in dives and greasy spoons, which
is why I'm well suited to be Mr. Cheap."

He began in Boston having to eat, rent and generally survive at as close to
wholesale as he could get between stage roles and occasional writing jobs for
radio and community newspapers. He finally wrote a book about his favorite cheap
discoveries, and now his publisher, Bob Adams, has him turning them out like
cheap bodice-rippers. There has been Mr. Cheap's Boston, Chicago, Atlanta, San
Francisco and New York, at 350 pages per of waxing cheap.  Washington, then
Seattle are next, with Dallas and Minneapolis-St. Paul on the horizon, fast as
Mr. Cheap can clear head, gazetteer and gullet.

"Washington is among the more expensive cities," he said. "New York has both
extremes. They'll gladly take your money there, of course, but there are great
prices to be found in really interesting neighborhoods."

In general, Mr. Cheap loves cities. The only thing that interests him about
suburbs are failed shopping malls that he watches for signs of metamorphosis
into bargain outlets.

"The stores are getting crazy here," Mr. Cheap said of his Washington
researches. "Too crowded. Special Christmas sales," he complained of seasonal
prices that skew his year-round data. "I'll have to go home for a couple of
weeks," he said, wishing one and all a happy and cheap holiday.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR: 1994

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 65;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 16423 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1993. The list suggests only high points in the main fields of
reader interest, and it does not include titles chosen by the editors of the
Book Review as the Best Books of 1994. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings. Biographies and memoirs of people known for their
contributions in fields other than literature and history are listed in
appropriate categories.

Art, Music & Popular Culture

AS SEEN ON TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s. By Karal Ann
Marling. (Harvard University, $24.95.) Themes of the mythic decade --
Disneyland, tail fins, Elvis and others -- shrewdly observed by a witty, rompish
historian.

BRANDO: Songs My Mother Taught Me. By Marlon Brando with Robert Lindsey. (Random
House, $25.) Mr. Brando at 70 (can this be?) spares some living people but is
amply tough on himself in this vulgar, funny, revealing memoir.

CIGARETTES ARE SUBLIME. By Richard Klein. (Duke University, $21.95.) People
smoke them because they are dangerous, and for a lot of other reasons as well,
according to this polemical, analytical, lit-critical, theoretical, political
ode to deathweed by an up-to-date professor of French.

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF HAROLD CLURMAN: Six Decades of Commentary on Theater,
Dance, Music, Film, Arts and Letters. Edited by Marjorie Loggia and Glenn Young.
(Applause Books, $49.95.) Fully a third of the journalism of the theater's
distinguished gadfly and cheerleader over a long, long time.

THE COMIC STRIP ART OF LYONEL FEININ GER. Edited by Bill Blackbeard. (Kitchen
Sink Press, $24.95.) This book of Feininger's 51 color strips, reproduced from
the rare original Sunday pages from 1906 and 1907, shows that one of the
founders of the Bauhaus was also a master of lyrical comics.

THE COMPLETE LYRICS OF IRA GERSHWIN. Edited by Robert Kimball. (Knopf, $45.)
More than 700 lyrics displaying the inventive rhymes, supple phrasing,
intelligence and wit that made Gershwin a lyricist nobody can read for one
minute without humming.

ELLA FITZGERALD: A Biography of the First Lady of Jazz. By Stuart Nicholson.
(Scribners, $23.) A British critic's life of a distinguished interpreter, born
in wretched circumstances, whose performances reveal only that she loves to
sing. A big discography comes with it.

FEELING THE SPIRIT: Searching the World for the People of Africa. By Chester
Higgins Jr. (Bantam, $50.) Wonderfully evocative images of Africans and their
descendants everywhere, by a staff photographer at The New York Times.

IMAGES: My Life in Film. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $27.95.) At 75, the great
Swedish film maker confronts and reveals himself as artist and man in this
evocation of his career, based on a fresh viewing of all his movies.

JOE PAPP: An American Life. By Helen Epstein. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) This
biography of the fabulously energetic, effective theatrical producer depicts a
New Yorker whose street-fighting skills lent authority to his art.

JOSEPHINE: The Hungry Heart. By Jean-Claude Baker and Chris Chase. (Random
House, $27.50.) Prodigious research and outstanding narrative fluency mark this
biography of Josephine Baker (1906-75), the irresistible American institution of
French revues, cabaret and film.

LAST TRAIN TO MEMPHIS: The Rise of Elvis Presley. By Peter Guralnick. (Little,
Brown, $24.95.) A meticulous marshaling of the facts about the ascendant career
of a "real decent, fine boy" whose rise to the top (10 million singles for RCA
in 11 months in 1955-56; he was 21) startled him as much as it did the rest of
the country.

THE LATE SHIFT: Letterman, Leno, and the Network Battle for the Night. By Bill
Carter. (Hyperion, $24.95.) It wasn't as easy as offering Mr. Letterman $1
zillion, as this detailed, gripping account by a Times reporter shows.

MARK ROTHKO: A Biography. By James E. B. Breslin. (University of Chicago,
$39.95.) This account of the tormented artist's life, by a professor of English,
is well researched, well written and carefully thought out.

MASTERS OF AMERICAN SCULPTURE: The Figurative Tradition From the American
Renaissance to the Millennium. By Donald Martin Reynolds. (Abbeville, $67.50.) A
clear, readable guide, handsomely illustrated, to modern American figurative
sculpture.

MINE EYES HAVE SEEN THE GLORY: The Civil War in Art. By Harold Holzer and Mark
E. Neely Jr. (Orion, $60.) The art that recorded and remembered the war,
explored for its intentions, its effects at the time and its uses in a struggle
to control the collective memory of Americans.

ON THE REAL SIDE: Laughing, Lying, and Signifying -- The Underground Tradition
of African-American Humor That Transformed American Culture, From Slavery to
Richard Pryor. By Mel Watkins. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) The creative dealings
of black folk with the paradox of life in a land professing equality; by a
former editor at the Times Book Review.

SEDUCTIVE CINEMA: The Art of Silent Film. By James Card. (Knopf, $35.) A film
collector and historian leads readers on a quirky and crotchety yet fascinating
tour of the era of silent films, which he considers the glory period of cinema.

SEX AND SUITS. By Anne Hollander. (Knopf, $25.) An art historian endorses
fashion's claim to be an art, concentrating on the development of the tailored
suit as an aspect of modernism.

SIT! The Dog Portraits of Thierry Poncelet. With text by Bruce McCall. (Workman,
$19.95.) Seventy "aristochiens," 19th-century portraits, each overpainted with a
suitable dog's head, accompanied by thumbnail biographies.

TURKISH TRADITIONAL ART TODAY. By Henry Glassie. (Indiana University, $65.) The
modernizing Turkish republic of this century cared nothing for the nation's
traditional arts, but they survived and prospered regardless, as witness this
splendid, richly illustrated examination by a distinguished folklorist.

UNDERSTANDING COMICS. Written and illustrated by Scott McCloud. (Kitchen Sink
Press/Harper Perennial, paper, $20.) Beginning with the idea that the language
of comics is rich, complex and subtle, Mr. McCloud, like a practiced modernist,
deconstructs the comic code with both pictures and words.

VERDI: A Biography. By Mary Jane Phillips-Matz. (Oxford University, $45.) This
portrait of the composer, an important account that alters accepted
understanding on matters large and small, portrays him as a brutal and
self-indulgent man with a remarkable capacity for lust, love, anger and
compassion.

WALT IN WONDERLAND: The Silent Films of Walt Disney. By Russell Merritt and J.
B. Kaufman. (Giornate del Cinema Muto/Johns Hopkins University, $39.95.) Part
studio history, part oral history, part film critique, this entertaining and
scholarly book, illustrated with animation drawings, storyboards and rare
photos, covers Disney's crucially formative period in silent animation, before
the Mickey Mouse era.

WINCHELL: Gossip, Power and the Culture of Celebrity. By Neal Gabler. (Knopf,
$30.) The life of Walter Winchell, inventor of the modern gossip column, who
reached two-thirds of adult Americans in the 1940's and left behind him a
national habit of confusing notoriety with news.

WISHING ON THE MOON: The Life and Times of Billie Holiday. By Donald Clarke.
(Viking, $24.95.) Mr. Clarke's thorough and valuable biography of this doomed
artist conveys a vivid sense of the forces that shaped her character and made it
inseparable from her music.

Biography, Autobiography & Memoir

THE ANTI-EGOTIST: Kingsley Amis, Man of Letters. By Paul Fussell. (Oxford
University, $23.) The old devil analyzed and explicated not only as the author
of "Lucky Jim" but also as poet, literary critic, anthologist and moral satirist
on the order of Pope and Swift.

AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A FACE. By Lucy Grealy. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A poet's
memoir of a truly harrowing childhood: attacked at 9 by a bone cancer that
consumed her face, she spent 18 years in surgical reconstruction; her moral and
psychic survival is miraculous.

BRECHT AND COMPANY: Sex, Politics, and the Making of the Modern Drama. By John
Fuegi. (Grove, $32.50.) The founder of the International Brecht Society gives us
telling evidence that Brecht was a bully all his life, trading sex for text and
making his collaborators think they were working for the cause of world
revolution.

A BUNDLE FROM BRITAIN. By Alistair Horne. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $23.95.) A
generous chronicle of loyalty and gratitude to the Americans who sheltered a
British boy during World War II, sparing him both the blitz and the agonies
normally inflicted in upper-class schools.

CAPONE: The Man and the Era. By Laurence Bergreen. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A
massive, thoroughly researched examination of the most celebrated mobster of the
Prohibition era, who attained dominance in his field at the age of 28.

THE CATCHER WAS A SPY: The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg. By Nicholas Dawidoff.
(Pantheon, $24.) Berg's legend as ballplayer, spy, linguist and universal genius
loomed far larger than Berg's reality; Mr. Da widoff's painstaking research
reveals the intelligent, ingenious charmer who cast so great an image.

CHRISTINA STEAD: A Biography. By Hazel Rowley. (Holt, $37.50.) The difficult
life of a fine and strangely mimetic novelist; Australian born, she had no real
home but her writing captured whatever environment she occupied.

COLORED PEOPLE: A Memoir. By Henry Louis Gates Jr. (Knopf, $22.) A distinguished
American scholar's intricate, captivating account of the rich family and
community life of black people in Piedmont, W.Va., on the eve of desegregation.

DAISY BATES IN THE DESERT. By Julia Blackburn. (Pantheon, $22.) A bold biography
whose author risks identifying with the consciousness of her subject, an
adventurer, a self-taught anthropologist who studied the Australian aborigines,
and a liar who invented her past anew at every turning of her life.

D. H. LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage. By Brenda Maddox. (Simon & Schuster,
$30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him
20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.

DR. JOHNSON & MR. SAVAGE. By Richard Holmes. (Pantheon, $23.) Mr. Holmes
re-creates Johnson's pre-Boswellian existence as a sort of belated adolescent,
an impoverished bohemian wandering the streets of London with his friend, the
barely tolerable Savage, whose biography became Johnson's first great work in
prose.

A DRINKING LIFE: A Memoir. By Pete Hamill. (Little, Brown, $21.95.) Mr. Hamill's
brutally honest account of his drinking (and his father's) is the organizing
theme for the 37 years covered here, but the more fundamental matter is a fine
portrait of the emerging artist, boy and man, in a New York that is no more.

EDITH WHARTON: An Extraordinary Life. By Eleanor Dwight. (Abrams, $39.95.) This
life of the novelist in whose work architecture serves virtually as a language
lays special emphasis on the houses and gardens Wharton inhabited and carefully
made her own; copious illustrations.

ELDEST SON: Zhou Enlai and the Making of Modern China, 1898-1976. By Han Suyin.
(Hill & Wang, $27.50.) An affectionate and persuasive portrait of the man who
was China's prime minister for 27 years and whose role in history was to ride
the tiger of Mao Zedong.

E. M. FORSTER: A Biography. By Nicola Beauman. (Knopf, $30.) What every general
reader should know about Forster and his generally shackled life, occasionally
punctuated by little bursts of liberation.

EXCURSIONS IN THE REAL WORLD: Memoirs. By William Trevor. (Knopf, $23.) Not an
autobiography but a series of sketches from the life of the marvelous Irish
short-story writer; well mannered, persuasive, showing exceptional powers both
of re-creation and forgiveness.

FAMILY. By Ian Frazier. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) An extraordinary history
of an ordinary family, in which the author plays the roles of gossip, pedant and
loyal member, yielding a reunion strangers are welcome -- and fortunate -- to
attend.

THE FAMILY HEART: A Memoir of When Our Son Came Out. By Robb Forman Dew.
(Addison-Wesley, $22.) The author, a National Book Award-winning novelist,
describes the repercussions in her family when her son revealed his
homosexuality.

FATHERALONG: A Meditation on Fathers and Sons, Race and Society. By John Edgar
Wideman. (Pantheon, $21.) An illuminating book-length essay that concerns many
things, chief among them the author's struggle to bridge the gulf between
himself and his father.

FIFTY DAYS OF SOLITUDE. By Doris Grumbach. (Beacon, $15.) The record of a
self-inflicted isolation in a Maine winter, taken by a distinguished writer as a
test of character and a quest for "that mysterious inner place."

GAL: A True Life. By Ruthie Bolton. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) The true story,
transcribed from tapes, of a South Carolina woman's triumph over intimidation
and abuse.

GEORGE WALLACE: American Populist. By Stephan Lesher. (William
Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $29.95.) Governor Wallace presented as above all a
populist protest politician, articulating the complaints of "average" people.

GOEBBELS. By Ralf Georg Reuth. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) How a cunning,
hardworking and fanatical political operative had the good sense to attach
himself to Hitler's rising star.

HARRIET BEECHER STOWE: A Life. By Joan D. Hedrick. (Oxford University, $35.) A
substantive, scrupulously researched life of the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin,"
with cogent analyses of the book and the moral universe that gave rise to it and
to other controversial works by Stowe.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War. By Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

JAMES BEARD: A Biography. By Robert Clark. (HarperCollins, $27.50.) A
painstaking, admirably unvarnished life of the great cooking teacher and food
writer whose career, occasionally embarrassed by tinges of greed and cynicism,
spanned the postwar era of American infatuation with food as an art form.

JUSTICE LEWIS F. POWELL JR. By John C. Jeffries Jr. (Scribners, $30.) An
illuminating biography of a pivotal Justice of the Supreme Court whose
instinctive conservatism was always tempered by his respect for the rule of law
and his willingness to listen hard.

KAY BOYLE: Author of Herself. By Joan Mellen. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) A
fervent telling of the turbulent and unexamined life of a modernist author whose
popularity peaked in the 1940's.

KNIGHT'S CROSS: A Life of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel. By David Fraser.
(HarperCollins, $30.) A thoughtful, most readable life of a remarkable soldier,
by a senior British general.

THE LAUREL AND THE IVY: The Story of Charles Stewart Parnell and Irish
Nationalism. By Robert Kee. (Hamish Hamilton/Viking, $29.95.) An intelligent,
shrewd examination of Ireland's pre-eminent nationalist of the 1880's and of the
absurd domestic drama that brought him down.

LEARNED HAND: The Man and the Judge. By Gerald Gunther. (Knopf, $35.)
Penetrating and delicate, this study of a judiciary eminence known for his
self-restraint and fortitude explores the inner tensions and doubts that shaped
Hand's character.

LEAVING HOME: A Memoir. By Art Buchwald. (Putnam, $22.95.) What he's really
trying to do with his humor, Mr. Buchwald says, is get even for a dark,
poverty-stricken childhood. Most readers would agree his revenge is complete.

LENIN: A New Biography. By Dmitri Volkogonov. (Free Press, $30.) The wrath of a
former believer runneth over in this polemic by a Russian archivist who has
discovered enough smoking-gun documents to argue that every disaster of the
Soviet Union was the fault of its founder.

LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War
Zones. By Peter Arnett. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A lean, engrossing memoir of
reporters and war by a correspondent who was among the first to arrive and the
last to leave in Vietnam, and virtually the only voice from Baghdad during the
gulf war.

LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell. By Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This
approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and
diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and
generals hints at restlessness with his own art.

NIXON: A Life. By Jonathan Aitken. (Regnery, $28.) A Member of Parliament argues
that Nixon was the century's most innovative foreign-policy President and was
wrongly condemned for Watergate and the 1972 Christmas bombing of North Vietnam.

NO ORDINARY TIME. Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The Home Front in World War
II. By Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) Prodigious research lies
behind this engrossing, colorful view of a changing nation as experienced by
White House dwellers and habitues.

OLEANDER, JACARANDA. A Childhood Perceived: A Memoir. By Penelope Lively.
(HarperCollins, $20.) The British novelist's reflective, lyrical account of her
childhood in Egypt before and during World War II.

PARALLEL TIME: Growing Up in Black and White. By Brent Staples. (Pantheon, $23.)
This memoir by an editorial writer for The New York Times is a complex work of
vivid self-scrutiny, a portrait of the worldly education of a young black man
who made it, haunted by the specter of a brother whose life was ended at 22 by
gunshots.

A PASSAGE TO EGYPT: The Life of Lucie Duff Gordon. By Katherine Frank. (Houghton
Mifflin, $27.50.) An engaging life of a clever valetudinarian from Britain's
upper crust, whose letters from Egypt in 1865 were instrumental in the creation
of Britain's interest in that country.

THE PRIVATE LIFE OF CHAIRMAN MAO: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician. By Li
Zhisui. (Random House, $30.) A detailed recounting of Mao Zedong's prodigious
hankerings for fatty pork, young women and sleeping pills.

RAGE AND FIRE. A Life of Louise Colet: Pioneer Feminist, Literary Star,
Flaubert's Muse. By Francine du Plessix Gray. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A
well-documented and spirited biography of the beautiful, impetuous and
indiscreet Parisian poet with whom Flaubert had a stormy affair while working on
"Madame Bovary."

A REBEL IN DEFENSE OF TRADITION: The Life and Politics of Dwight Macdonald. By
Michael Wreszin. (Basic Books, $30.) An enthusiast of Macdonald describes the
intellectual journalist's peripatetic path through American letters and American
politics.

RED AZALEA. By Anchee Min. (Pantheon, $22.) In this memoir of growing up in
China during the Cultural Revolution, sexual freedom becomes a powerful
political as well as literary statement.

ROALD DAHL: A Biography. By Jeremy Tre glown. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
This deft, revealing unauthorized biography of the bullying author of children's
books serves as an antidote to Dahl's own sparky but none-too-truthful image of
himself.

ROOMMATES: My Grandfather's Story. By Max Apple. (Warner, $19.95.) An
enthralling novelistic memoir of the infinitely durable Herman (Rocky)
Goodstein, who at 93 accompanied Mr. Apple to college and proved, in the long
run, to be worth all the trouble he caused.

SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton. By Linda
Gray Sexton. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An intimate account of growing up the
daughter of a mad, child-abusing, suicidal, brilliant poet, and of resolving
such an upbringing from the inside out.

THE SHADOW OF THE PANTHER: Huey Newton and the Price of Black Power in America.
By Hugh Pearson. (Addison-Wesley, $24.) A de romanticized portrait of the
celebrated Black Panther Party leader, with attention both to his brilliance at
organizing and to his reliance on criminal brutality.

SHOT IN THE HEART. By Mikal Gilmore. (Doubleday, $24.95.) This highly personal
family memoir, by the youngest of Gary Gilmore's brothers, is also a tale of the
author's exclusion from his violent family.

THE SILENT WOMAN: Sylvia Plath & Ted Hughes. By Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $23.) In
the course of a contrarian approach to the Plath myth (genius-housewife crushed
by odious male poet), Ms. Malcolm raises pages of provocative questions about
the values, and value, of biographers.

SPLENDOURS AND MISERIES: A Life of Sacheverell Sitwell. By Sarah Bradford.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) Ms. Bradford, an expert biographer, illuminates
the Sitwell era and the remarkable success of Osbert, Edith and Sachie at being
taken at their own valuation.

THE SWEETER THE JUICE. By Shirlee Taylor Haizlip. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) This
history of the author's many-colored family provides not only a portrait of the
life of the black bourgeoisie and a glimpse into her heart, but a meditation on
the meaning of race in America.

THIS YEAR IN JERUSALEM. By Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $23.) An engaging
novelist's report on his youth as a Zionist and his travels in Israel, ventures
that leave him content to be a Canadian.

TRUE NORTH: A Memoir. By Jill Ker Conway. (Knopf, $23.) The sequel to "The Road
From Coorain" begins with the author's arrival in the United States from her
native Australia for graduate school and concludes as she becomes president of
Smith College in 1975.

UNDER MY SKIN: Volume One of My Autobiography, to 1949. By Doris Lessing.
(HarperCollins, $25.) A remarkable life in a remarkable place -- the declining
British Empire in Africa -- told by a novelist who for three-quarters of a
century has conceded nothing to political, psychological or literary fashion.

A WHOLE NEW LIFE. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $20.) The record of a
distinguished writer, struck with an agonizing and paralyzing cancer at 51, who
learned in the hardest possible way who he was and who he had to become.

Business & Economics

INSANELY GREAT: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed
Everything. By Steven Levy. (Viking, $20.95.) An unabashed fan of the Macintosh
gives an enthusiastic account of how a bunch of freewheeling thinkers developed
the first friendly computer.

JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES. Volume 2: The Economist as Saviour 1920-1937. By Robert
Skidelsky. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $37.50.) How Keynes reshaped the world's
economy, made a lot of money and married a ballerina, by an economics professor
whose mastery of many subjects seems to match Keynes's own.

A JOURNEY THROUGH ECONOMIC TIME: A Firsthand View. By John Kenneth Galbraith.
(Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Born in 1908, the preternaturally lucid and
articulate Mr. Galbraith has kept his eyes open ever since and seen a great deal
he didn't care for.

LEAN AND MEAN: The Changing Landscape of Corporate Power in the Age of
Flexibility. By Bennett Harrison. (Basic Books, $25.) An economist's polemic
against analysts who see small, efficient businesses as the models for social
organization in a world of rapid change.

LOOKING AT THE SUN: The Rise of the New East Asian Economic and Political
System. By James Fallows. (Pantheon, $25.) Firsthand insights into 11 nations
are expanded into the argument that the United States has misunderstood East
Asia's growth because its own laissez-faire economic traditions do not fit the
Asian experience.

LORDS OF THE REALM: The Real History of Baseball. By John Helyar. (Villard,
$24.) A financial journalist traces the history of the baseball business and
marvels at the owners' behavior.

MASTER OF THE GAME: Steve Ross and the Creation of Time Warner. By Connie Bruck.
(Simon & Schuster, $25.) The inner truth of this amazing entrepreneur may not be
within human grasp, but Ms. Bruck, a staff writer for The New Yorker, makes
known what seems knowable.

PEDDLING PROSPERITY: Economic Sense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished
Expectations. By Paul Krugman. (Norton, $22.) In a wide ranging and lucid
compendium of acute observations about economic thinking, a superstar of the
economic world deplores the "age of the policy entrepreneur: the economist who
tells politicians what they want to hear," extracting larger lessons about the
tension between academically correct and politically useful ideas.

A PIECE OF THE ACTION: How the Middle Class Joined the Money Class. By Joseph
Nocera. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) The story, told with flair and insight, of
mutual funds, credit cards, certificates of deposit and the other instruments
that have transformed the finances and the lives of millions of Americans.

RECKLESS DISREGARD: Corporate Greed, Government Indifference, and the Kentucky
School Bus Crash. By James S. Kunen. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Twenty-four
children and three adults died. Who killed them -- a drunken driver or the Ford
Motor Company?

Children's Books

CITY DOG. Written and illustrated by Karla Kuskin. (Clarion, $14.95.) A city dog
gets a dream holiday in the country, and the reader gets a verbal and visual
romp. (Ages 5 to 8)

FLIP-FLOP GIRL. By Katherine Paterson. (Lodestar/Dutton, $13.99.) Vinnie and
Lupe, two girls whose lives are in tatters, find friendship and ways of coping
in this fine and moving novel. (Ages 8 to 12)

FLOUR BABIES. By Anne Fine. (Little, Brown, $14.95.) A dismal class of
14-year-old boys must treat six-pound bags of flour like babies for three weeks,
with results that are both moral and comic. (Ages 10 and up)

MY BROTHER, MY SISTER, AND I. By Yoko Kawashima Watkins. (Bradbury, $16.95.)
This powerful sequel to "So Far From the Bamboo Groves" describes three brave
siblings and their difficult years in Japan after the end of World War II. (Ages
11 and up)

MY HOUSE. Written and illustrated by Lisa Desimini. (Holt, $15.95.) With a crazy
patchwork of paint, collage and photography, the author evokes a child's
wonderful view of home. (Ages 2 to 5)

PINK AND SAY. Written and illustrated by Patricia Polacco. (Philomel, $15.95.)
The author tells the true and powerful story of her great-great-grandfather, a
flag bearer in the Union Army who was rescued on a bloody battlefield by a young
black soldier. (Ages 5 to 9)

A TEENY TINY BABY. Written and illustrated by Amy Schwartz. (Orchard, $15.95.)
This memoir of an egocentric infant who takes charge of his two adoring,
moderately anxious adults is at once hilarious and poignant. (Ages 2 to 6)

THE THREE GOLDEN KEYS. Written and illustrated by Peter Sis. (Doubleday, $19.95
until Dec. 31; $22.50 thereafter.) This exquisite homage to the magical,
mysterious city of Prague is cast as a fairy tale. (All ages)

TIME FLIES. Written and illustrated by Eric Rohmann. (Crown, $15.) One dark and
stormy twilight, a bird flies into what seems to be an old museum filled with
the skeletons of prehistoric creatures, and they are, for a while, magically
transformed. (Ages 4 to 7)

TUTANKHAMEN'S GIFT. Written and illustrated by Robert Sabuda. (Atheneum,
$15.95.) In this appealing, boldly illustrated story, a meek and shy boy becomes
a pharaoh and honors the Egyptian gods. (Ages 6 to 9)

Crime

BLACK BETTY. By Walter Mosley. (Norton, $19.95.) In Mr. Mosley's fourth novel
about the black Los Angeles private detective Easy Rawlins, Easy agrees to track
down Black Betty, "a great shark of a woman" who figured conspicuously in his
own earlier life.

THE CAVEMAN'S VALENTINE. By George Dawes Green. (Warner, $19.95.) Romulus
Ledbetter, Mr. Green's protagonist, is a homeless, black, paranoid private eye
who can be roused to propriety only by a case as interesting as the one Mr.
Green has dreamed up for his first novel.

DIRTY WHITE BOYS. By Stephen Hunter. (Random House, $21.) In this violent,
blood-soaked story about three convicts who break out of jail and cut a
murderous swath across Texas and Oklahoma, the most monstrous death is the death
of the American family.

DOGS OF GOD. By Pinckney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) There are
forces so malevolent in this lyrical, violent existential thriller about a
mountain man named Tannhauser and a simple knight named Goody that one fears for
the sanity of the storyteller.

THE FLANDERS PANEL. By Arturo Perez-Reverte. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A sleek,
sophisticated, madly clever chamber mystery about chess, life and art.

14 PECK SLIP. By Ed Dee. (Warner, $19.95.) In this punchy, drop-dead novel by a
former cop, a stakeout at the Fulton Fish Mark leads two policemen to dredge up
a barrel out of the East River. What they find is not the mob burial they
expected.

A LONG LINE OF DEAD MEN. By Lawrence Block. (Morrow, $20.) The tone is autumnal,
the humor is dark, the veteran detective Matthew Scudder is sober and the case
concerns the soaring death rate in a private men's club.

MENACED ASSASSIN. By Joe Gores. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95.) A gutsy,
inventive novel in which the head of San Francisco's police task force against
organized crime deals with a maniacal killer and a nerdy paleoanthropolgist.

MUCHO MOJO. By Joe R. Lansdale. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $19.95). The discovery
of a child's skeleton sets two unlikely detectives on the path of a murderer in
a tough east Texas town.

ONE FOR THE MONEY. By Janet Evanovich. (Scribners, $20.) A Jersey girl with
Spandex bike shorts and turquoise eye shadow sashays into the business of
crime-busting when she's laid off from her job as a discount lingerie buyer.

A SUPERIOR DEATH. By Nevada Barr. (Putnam, $19.95.) A sternly beautiful novel,
in which Anna Pigeon, the rugged heroine of "Track of the Cat," takes an
assignment in Lake Superior's Isle Royale National Park and finds herself
surrounded by weirdos and fears of the deep.

THERE WAS A LITTLE GIRL. By Ed McBain. (Warner, $21.95.) Mr. McBain's latest
three-ring circus of a mystery begins with a bang and sets out to solve the
riddle of why the lawyer-sleuth Matthew Hope is lying comatose in a Florida
hospital.

WILD HORSES. By Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) Once again Dick Francis, the
former jockey, gives us a clear view of the beauties and squalors of the racing
world.

THE YELLOW ROOM CONSPIRACY. By Peter Dickinson. (Mysterious Press/Warner,
$18.95.) A violent death in an English country home uncovers a great scandal in
this intellectual shell game whose resolution is delightfully disorienting.

Essays, Criticism & Letters

BEYOND DESPAIR: Three Lectures and a Conversation With Philip Roth. By Aharon
Appelfeld. (Fromm, $17.50.) The Israeli novelist argues that literature can and
must deal with the Holocaust or give up its pretensions to be a vehicle of
spiritual apprehension.

THE COLUMBIA HISTORY OF AMERICAN POETRY. Edited by Jay Parini. (Columbia
University, $59.95.) Essays by 31 scholars, many of them quirky, opinionated and
authoritative; revaluations and reverberations abound.

THE CORRESPONDENCE OF WALTER BENJAMIN, 1910-1940. Edited by Gershom Scholem and
Theodor W. Adorno. (University of Chicago, $45.) Selected letters of an
international icon of high culture whose foreshortened life lent glamour to his
notoriously difficult thought.

A CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK. By Irving Howe. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.) The book Howe was
working on at his death last year, a collection of freestanding essays on the
art of fiction, is mainly a record of the pleasures of thinking, and thinking
acutely, about novels.

IN TOUCH: The Letters of Paul Bowles. Edited by Jeffrey Miller. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $30.) Selections from the "out" box of the enigmatic writer, composer
and Tangerine; often forthright and withdrawn at once, some of them contain
passages as brilliant as any in his printed work.

JOURNALS. By Bertolt Brecht. (Routledge, $39.95.) Twenty years after their
publication in German, these journals offer a fascinating document of the years
between 1938 and 1953 as seen first by Brecht as a comfortable exile from
Hitler's Germany, then as a prestigious beneficiary of the East German state.

MAKING MALCOLM: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X. By Michael Eric Dyson.
(Oxford University, $19.95.) Malcolm X is the thread that stitches together
these eloquent, freewheeling essays on hip-hop culture, black films and the
tragic lives of poor black men.

MEA CUBA. By Guillermo Cabrera Infante. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) In these
irritable, catty, irreverent essays, written between 1965 and 1992, the Cuban
novelist grapples mostly with the exquisite travails and martyrdoms of
intellectuals under Casto's regime.

ONE ART: Letters. By Elizabeth Bishop, edited by Robert Giroux. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A handsome collection of letters from a poet whose output was so
small, and so good, that her every opinion and observation is more than welcome.

THE WESTERN CANON: The Books and School of the Ages. By Harold Bloom. (Harcourt
Brace, $29.95.) A brave, formidably learned and often very sad response to the
current state of the humanities, with 36 pages of appendix identifying the real
canon as the author sees it.

WITCHES AND JESUITS: Shakespeare's "Macbeth." By Garry Wills. (Oxford
University, $25.) In his imaginative engagement with this notoriously unlucky
play, Mr. Wills tries to claim its lost historical dimension.

Fiction

THE AFTERLIFE: And Other Stories. By John Updike. (Knopf, $24.) Mr. Updike's
11th collection of short stories, unashamedly autobiographical, returns to
eastern Pennsylvania, its motherly wives, its minute realities, its occasional
moments of grace.

THE ALIENIST. By Caleb Carr. (Random House, $22.) A fast-paced novel set in
turn-of-the-century Manhattan about a psychologist and a New York Times reporter
on the trail of a serial killer.

ANCESTRAL TRUTHS. By Sara Maitland. (John Macrae/Holt, $22.50.) Ms. Maitland's
splendid novel is formally a book-length family reunion at which everyone is
peculiar, each in a different way; her prime focus is on a woman trying to
remember whether she killed her male traveling companion (she certainly wanted
him dead).

THE ANNUNCIATION. By David Plante. (Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) A widowed art
historian, her pregnant daughter and a rootless young editor join forces in Mr.
Plante's latest novel. Ostensibly in search of a lost Baroque painting, they
find themselves acknowledging more spiritual goals.

AS MAX SAW IT. By Louis Begley. (Knopf, $21.) A short, powerful AIDS novel that,
with Jamesian obliquity, never mentions AIDS, and underscores the failure of
human beings to acknowledge their responsibility to one another.

BILLY. By Albert French. (Viking, $19.) A racial incident turns into
hair-raising tragedy in a classical mode when a black boy kills a white girl in
this novel of rural Mississippi in 1937.

THE BINGO PALACE. By Louise Erdrich. (HarperCollins, $23.) Three decent people
look for love on a windblown prairie in this novel whose daily life is enriched
by supernatural events and the presence of Indian spirits.

THE BIRD ARTIST. By Howard Norman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) An adulterous
affair and a murder propel this tragic novel of a hamlet in Newfoundland, where
everybody knows everybody and the weather is unspeakable.

THE BIRTHDAY BOYS. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Carroll & Graf, $18.95.) A lively,
subversive historical novel that penetrates the stoic official heroes of Scott's
Antarctic expedition of 1912 to discover the individual silly boys within.

BONE BY BONE: Stories. By Gary Krist. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Without cliche
or trickery, Mr. Krist manages in these 13 stories to make ordinary worlds new
and disturbing.

THE BOOK OF HRABAL. By Peter Esterhazy. (Northwestern University, $22.50.) A
Hungarian novelist ponders his idol, the Czech writer Bohumil Hrabal, as well as
the tangled delights of language, love and jazz.

THE BOOK OF INTIMATE GRAMMAR. By David Grossman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.)
A dark and stunning Israeli novel whose protagonist, a post-Freudian little boy,
forestalls the treasons and corruptions of adulthood by ceasing to grow at the
age of 11.

CALLED OUT. By A. G. Mojtabai. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $22.) An abstract,
intelligent novel, ostensibly about a jet crash in a small town, that renders
the reactions of the witnesses to a random disaster in beautiful, somber prose.

THE CHILDREN IN THE WOODS: New and Selected Stories. By Frederick Busch.
(Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) A culling from 20 years' worth of short fiction that
explores the reciprocal failure of parents and children and the curious, almost
arbitrary cement of love.

THE CITY BELOW. By James Carroll. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Class and race
provide the tension in Mr. Carroll's evocation of Boston over the past few
decades, a novel that substantiates an Irish chestnut: every lie is a truth
somewhere in time.

CLOSING TIME. By Joseph Heller. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Yossarian lives! But
not forever. The soldiers are old now; gravity and joking are inseparable in
this sequel to "Catch-22," and a vision of hell in Manhattan is joined to
elegies for Coney Island yesteryears.

CODA. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) In a shopping mall in northern
Australia, the spirited, eccentric heroine of Ms. Astley's 13th novel, a kind of
female Lear, contemplates her past and articulates her wrath at age and
abandonment.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By Grace Paley. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $27.50.) Three
previous collections are combined in this volume that records, with a bright
unsentimental eye and distinctive evocations of New York speech, the striving of
Americans (mostly American women) for a better world.

CORELLI'S MANDOLIN. By Louis de Bernieres. (Pantheon, $24.) A high-spirited
historical romance about events on a Greek island, mostly during World War II,
when Italians and Germans occupy the place and try to control it.

THE CROSSING. By Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $23.) In the second
language-ensorcelled volume of a projected trilogy, a youthful hero, the
custodian of an untamed wolf, crosses from Texas into the inconsolable landscape
of Mexico to perform an impossible quest.

CROSSING THE RIVER. By Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $22.) A novel, covering two and a
half centuries, that presents a brilliantly coherent mythified vision of the
irreversible African diaspora.

DANCER WITH BRUISED KNEES. By Lynne McFall. (Chronicle, $18.95.) A delightful
(honestly!) novel that examines the nature of depression with a
straight-shooting voice; its protagonist, Sarah Blight, never succumbs to
self-pity even when drunk and blubbering.

DARKTOWN STRUTTERS. By Wesley Brown. (Cane Hill, paper, $11.95.) A vivid,
disturbing historical novel that makes freewheeling use of the facts to focus on
the personal identities of blacks and whites in 19th-century America.

THE DIVINE CHILD: A Novel of Prenatal Rebellion. By Pascal Bruckner. (Little,
Brown, $21.95.) A wonderfully appalling story by a French novelist about a
monster in utero.

EATING PAVLOVA. By D. M. Thomas. (Carroll & Graf, $21.) A harrowing, funny,
outrageous novel that purports to be a memoir of the last days of Sigmund Freud.

THE END OF THE HUNT. By Thomas Flanagan. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $24.95.) This
splendid novel, last of a trilogy, brings Ireland's tragic history down to the
civil war of the 1920's. Analogies will be drawn with the present.

THE EYE IN THE DOOR. By Pat Barker. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $20.95.) Ms.
Barker's sequel to her 1992 novel, "Regeneration," follows the British
psychiatrist William Rivers -- and one of his patients -- further into the
horrors of World War I.

THE FAVOURITE. By Meredith Daneman. (Knopf, $19.) Humming with rare humor and
moral intelligence, Ms. Daneman's fourth novel is told in alternating time
frames -- that of a girl growing up painfully in the 1950's and that of the
rueful wife and mother she becomes in the 1970's.

THE FOLLOWING STORY. By Cees Noote boom. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace,
$14.95.) An insignificant man who has experienced transformation by imagination
awaits his turn at death in this "Eurofable" by a Dutch novelist.

FORDING THE STREAM OF CONSCIOUSNESS. By Dubravka Ugresic. (Northwestern
University, paper, $14.95.) A teeming politico-literary satire by a Croatian
(written in 1988, before the breakup) in which delegates from various East bloc
nations suffer the insults of history.

FROM THE TEETH OF ANGELS. By Jonathan Carroll. (Doubleday, $22.) A stark,
cunning novel, a parable about death and the courage to face it, by a literate,
witty secular moralist who deserves more attention than he gets.

GOING NATIVE. By Stephen Wright. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) A road novel
that explodes the conventions of the genre as a weird, dangerous shape-shifting
protagonist remakes his identity on the way to California.

THE GOOD HUSBAND. By Gail Godwin. (Bal lantine, $22.95.) Magda Danvers, the
brilliant scholar at the center of Ms. Godwin's novel, is dying of cancer. To
her devoted husband and a married couple who have recently suffered their own
loss, her legacy is a sometimes painful consideration of how life ought to be
lived.

THE GRANDMOTHER'S TALE: And Selected Stories. By R. K. Narayan. (Viking,
$24.95.) The title story (1992) and a selection of old favorites show the
humanism that makes Mr. Narayan's most poignant stories comedies of suffering
rather than tragedies of laughter.

HENRY AND CLARA. By Thomas Mallon. (Ticknor & Fields, $22.95.) A historical
novel about the young couple who shared the Presidential box with the Lincolns
at Ford's Theater on the evening of Good Friday, 1865.

HIMMELFARB. By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $18.50.) An unsettling first-person
novel, the confession of an 80-year-old German ethnologist whose reputation
depends entirely on research he appropriated from a Jew from 1939 to 1941.

HOUSE OF SPLENDID ISOLATION. By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.)
Ms. O'Brien's novel anatomizes the human aspects of recent Irish history,
exploring the relationship of an Irish Republican Army terrorist and the elderly
Irish woman who becomes his hostage.

HOUSE WORK. By Kristina McGrath. (Bridge Works, $19.95.) In this moving and
lyrical first novel, a Pittsburgh housewife tries to save herself and her family
through her devoted domesticity.

IN THE TENNESSEE COUNTRY. By Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $21.) In mellow, elegant
prose, this fine novel follows the quest of an academic hustler and failed
artist to pin down a cousin who escaped from history a generation after the
Civil War.

KISS OF THE WOLF. By Jim Shepard. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A hit-and-run
accident lies at the center of this terror-filled novel set in an Italian
Catholic community in Connecticut.

LAST GO ROUND. By Ken Kesey with Ken Babbs. (Viking, $21.95.) It's circa 1911 in
this ruc tious neo-dime western, a novel that dares to be as phony as the real
thing, its prairie-flat characters ornamented with episodic plot, inflated
atmosphere and impossible prowess.

THE LAST KNOWN RESIDENCE OF MICKEY ACUNA. By Dagoberto Gilb. (Grove, $21.) Set
in El Paso, the border town to end all border towns, Mr. Gilb's first novel is a
bleak fable of a low-rent outlaw on the lam from someone who may be himself.

LIFE ESTATES. By Shelby Hearon. (Knopf, $22.) In Ms. Hearon's 13th novel, two
women who have been friends since childhood discover that widowhood derails the
seemingly parallel courses of their lives.

LOUISIANA POWER & LIGHT. By John Dufresne. (Norton, $22.) Mr. Dufresne's first
novel, replete with funny lines and plot twists that always lead somewhere,
concerns an orphan's efforts to escape a family curse. Lots of luck, orphan!

MAKE ME WORK. By Ralph Lombreglia. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Short stories
that fizz with humor and hipness explore the lives of happy underachievers and
the women patiently waiting for them to grow up.

MARBLE SKIN. By Slavenka Drakulic. (Norton, $20.) A finely wrought novel that
explores the relationship between a mother and daughter with such a simple but
volatile mixture of revulsion, eroticism and intimacy that by the novel's end
the reader knows an entire array of women through this single pair.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG. By J. M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

MERRY MEN. By Carolyn Chute. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) In her third rendition of
the tar-paper town portrayed in "The Beans of Egypt, Maine," Ms. Chute adds blue
bloods to her characters and continues to mix choppy concreteness with
idiosyncratic elegance in her prose.

MESHUGAH. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) The third
(so far) posthumously published novel by Singer is set in the early 1950's; its
characters, despite their high spirits and unstoppable gab, are haunted by
stories that can't be forgotten and can't be told.

MILLROY THE MAGICIAN. By Paul Theroux. (Random House, $24.) Mr. Theroux's 20th
work of fiction is a dark satire of our national obsession with trim bodies and
religious television, embodied in a single eccentric prestidigitator.

THE MORTICIAN'S APPRENTICE. By Rick DeMarinis. (Norton, $21.) A comic
coming-of-age novel, set in mid-1950's California, in which the hero's marriage
prospects could involve some unsavory fringe benefits.

MOSES SUPPOSES. By Ellen Currie. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) A distinguished first
collection of Ms. Currie's short stories, new and old; in relationships gone
wrong, in everyday objects, she discerns hints of large meanings and glimmers of
submerged mysteries.

MR. VERTIGO. By Paul Auster. (Viking, $21.95.) A badly abused 9-year-old boy is
taught to fly by a mysterious Master Yehudi in this fanciful novel of an
education for death or for art, controlled by the metaphorical meanings of
flight.

MY GOLDEN TRADES. By Ivan Klima. (Scribners, $22.) Stories placed in
Czechoslovakia during the decay of Communist rule; the hero-narrator, an
unpolitical man of many occupations (the "trades" of the title), has a keen
sense of the satisfactions of everyday life.

NONE TO ACCOMPANY ME. By Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) Ms.
Gordimer's 11th novel, whose central figure is a progressive white woman in the
new South Africa, shows again that the true focus of social concern is on the
particular lives of individuals.

NORTHERN BORDERS. By Howard Frank Mosher. (Doubleday, $22.95.) An old-fashioned
coming-of-age novel, set in northern Vermont from the late 1940's onward.

ONE SWEET QUARREL. By Deirdre McNamer. (HarperCollins, $22.) A historical novel
that meanders back and forth in time, working its way toward the day in 1923
when Jack Dempsey, the heavyweight champion of the world, came to the tiny town
of Shelby, Mont., to fight a local hero for the title.

ONE TRUE THING. By Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) This second novel by a
Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The New York Times concerns a talented
journalist, the lingering death of her mother and the emotional changes and
reflections forced upon her.

OPAL ON DRY GROUND. By Sandra Scofield. (Villard, $20.) A gentle, compassionate
novel about a west Texas woman who's trying, without much success, to perfect
the role of family matriarch.

PADDY CLARKE HA HA HA. By Roddy Doyle. (Viking, $20.95.) This luminously written
Irish novel, winner of the 1993 Booker Prize in Britain, is about the life force
incarnate in its narrator, an unforgettable 10-year-old boy in the brilliantly
realized world of 1960's Dublin.

THE PALACE THIEF. By Ethan Canin. (Random House, $21.) Four long stories in
which four men, of various ages and circumstances, inspect their past lives in
hopes of future redemption.

THE PARTISAN. By Benjamin Cheever. (Atheneum, $21.) Families are made, not born,
in Mr. Cheever's funny, sad second novel, whose college-boyish hero is
pervasively and fortuitously intruded upon by a preposterously handsome and
sophisticated writer.

THE PATRON SAINT OF UNMARRIED WOMEN. By Karl Ackerman. (St. Martin's, $20.95.) A
comic first novel in which an opera-loving jock tries to adjust to life on his
own -- even as he uses all his wiles to effect a reconciliation with the woman
of his dreams.

A PLAGUE OF DREAMERS: Three Novellas. By Steve Stern. (Scribners, $20.) Fables
spiced with magic realism -- and the magic of sheer survival -- set in Mr.
Stern's familiar territory, the history-defying Jewish community called the
Pinch, a backwater Memphis version of the Pale.

POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES. By James Finn Garner. (Macmillan, $8.95.)
Thirteen previously unenlightened fairy tales, hilariously purged of their
racist, sexist and monocultural bias.

PROFANE FRIENDSHIP. By Harold Brodkey. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) The story
line of Mr. Brodkey's second novel is strong and simple, but the story is far
less the point than is the fact that Mr. Brodkey's principals become, as figures
in good fiction always do, a part of our own active memory.

QUICKSAND. By Junichiro Tanizaki. (Knopf, $22.) A novel about a woman who casts
such a spell on her lesbian lover and the lover's husband that they long to die
for her, by a writer whose constant themes were self-destructive sexuality and
the double image of woman as goddess and demon; first published in Japan in
1928-30.

RARE & ENDANGERED SPECIES: A Novella & Stories. By Richard Bausch. (Seymour
Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Mr. Bausch's third fiction collection
faithfully explores the territory he knows best: long marriages, old grudges,
unforgotten injuries.

THE REPUBLIC OF WHORES: A Fragment From the Time of the Cults. By Josef
Skvorecky. (Ecco, $21.) Published in Czech in 1971, this keen comic novel
concerns a Warsaw Pact tank commander and his men, who hate their allies far
more than their prospective American enemies.

THE RIFLES. By William T. Vollmann. (Viking, $22.95.) The hyperactive dream
logic of this third book in a projected meganovel of North America conflates
Franklin's fatal Arctic expedition of 1845 with a novelist's adventures in 1989.

THE RUSSIAN GIRL. By Kingsley Amis. (Viking, $22.95.) Sex, booze and the
intrigues of Russian poets drive the mordant plot of Mr. Amis's latest novel,
which is set in contemporary London.

SCHOOL FOR THE BLIND. By Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A deft,
affecting novel whose aging protagonist retires in the vain hope that he can
plan the outcome of life and decline slowly, affably toward its end.

SECOND NATURE. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $22.95.) In Ms. Hoffman's 10th novel,
a young man raised by wolves is transformed, thanks to the unlikely
ministrations of a single mother with more than enough problems of her own, from
an object of curiosity to a touchstone of human values.

SELECTED STORIES. By Adolfo Bioy Casares. (New Directions, $21.95.) An
appealing, provocative assortment of stories, many about men who share a hopeful
and befuddling machismo, from the Argentine collaborator and protege of Jorge
Luis Borges.

SHEAR. By Tim Parks. (Grove, $21.) An eerie, engrossing suspense novel about
responsibility; its hero, a smug geological consultant, tragically complicates
his life through sexual adventure.

SHELTER. By Jayne Anne Phillips. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.)
Ms. Phillips's second novel blends regionalism and symbolism in a spiritually
charged parable of innocence too young betrayed in a backwoods summer camp for
girls in 1963.

SNOW FALLING ON CEDARS. By David Gut erson. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A
handsomely constructed, densely packed first novel whose characters are those
who suffered and those who profited from the internment of Japanese-Americans in
World War II, called upon by a criminal trial to act decently later on.

A SON OF THE CIRCUS. By John Irving. (Random House, $25.) Three rings could
hardly contain all the plots and subplots that are juggled in Mr. Irving's
latest novel, which draws its characters from the many intersecting worlds of
Bombay, India.

SOULS RAISED FROM THE DEAD. By Doris Betts. (Knopf, $23.) The main event in Ms.
Betts's first novel in 13 years is the death of a child; out of it is spun a
deep understanding of grief, of the pungency of Southern small-town life and of
the inevitable injuries reality inflicts.

THE STONE DIARIES. By Carol Shields. (Viking, $21.95.) A panorama of
20th-century life is revealed in a diary-shaped novel that probes the most
delicate layers of consciousness in tracing one woman's existence from birth to
grave.

STONES FROM THE RIVER. By Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $23.) Resignation is the
highest virtue in this historical novel about small-town Germany from 1915 to
1952; its moral center is Trudi, a clever dwarf with a tenacious memory.

THE STORIES OF STEPHEN DIXON. By Stephen Dixon. (Holt, $25.) Selected from 30
years of Mr. Dixon's work, these stories play unsettling variations on several
grand themes: relations between the sexes, the plight of the individual in a
hostile society, the instability of truth.

A STRANGER IN THIS WORLD. By Kevin Canty. (Doubleday, $20.) A debut collection
of sharp, smart short stories about people caught at the intersection between
what they know they should do and what they can't help doing.

THE SUMMER HOUSE: A Trilogy. By Alice Thomas Ellis. (Penguin, paper, $9.95.)
Edgy, bright, subversive fictions about women's inner lives and experiences,
each narrated by an Englishwoman whose existence is under revision.

SUNDAY'S CHILDREN. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $16.95.) In his second
autobiographical novel, the Swedish director revisits childhood in beautifully
realized set pieces through which the psychological drama is developed.

TAFT. By Ann Patchett. (Richard Todd/ Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) This generous
novel concerns abandonment, dislocation and the recovery of community in a
Memphis bar whose owner is a surrogate parent to two displaced teen-agers.

TEN TALES TALL & TRUE. By Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $19.95.) Stories of
zany boldness, by a weirdly talented multimedia artist, that dramatize symbioses
of oppression between willing victims and victimizers.

THANK YOU FOR SMOKING. By Christopher Buckley. (Random House, $22.) A comic
novel that succeeds in enlisting the reader on the side of the devils,
represented by an implausible hero: Nick Naylor, an energetic, unscrupulous
lobbyist for the cigarette industry.

THESE SAME LONG BONES. By Gwendolyn M. Parker. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) With
an unusual combination of lush metaphor and narrative restraint, this first
novel spins a tale of race and power as a black businessman struggles to
transcend his daughter's death.

THE TIME: NIGHT. By Ludmilla Petrushev skaya. (Pantheon, $20.) An unflinching
stream-of-consciousness novel in which a destitute Russian poet bemoans the
state of her family and her nation.

THE TRACK OF REAL DESIRES. By Beverly Lowry. (Knopf, $21.) At the center of this
comic, spirited novel are a terrific dinner party and a story of loss, malice,
ruin, envy and, finally, trust.

UNDER THE FROG: A Black Comedy. By Tibor Fischer. (New Press, $17.) An
energetic, naughty novel of Hungary behind the Iron Curtain, rendered in wild
scenarios (like streaking the Interior Ministry), ending with the 1956 rising.

VARIOUS ANTIDOTES: Stories. By Joanna Scott. (Holt, $20.) The obsessive
characters in Ms. Scott's first collection move through several centuries in the
history of science, but all seem to feel equally the power of dreams.

THE WATERWORKS. By E. L. Doctorow. (Random House, $23.) An intellectual ripping
yarn in which a grim, smoke-stained New York City of 1871 is the principal
character; the novel's poetic flow of myth gracefully sustains its burden of
ideas, of which there are plenty.

WHAT A PIECE OF WORK I AM: (A Confabulation). By Eric Kraft. (Crown, $22.) The
latest novel in the continuing saga of Peter Leroy proposes an imaginary adult
life for the imaginary sister of Peter's imaginary boyhood friend.

WHAT I LIVED FOR. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $23.95.) Ms.
Oates shrewdly dissects the national myths of manhood and success in a novel
whose easily confused hero understands less than the reader does of what passes
through his own mind.

WHAT IS TOLD. By Askold Melnyczuk. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) In a narrative
presided over by presences from the spirit world, this genially pessimistic
first novel follows the fortunes of three generations of cosmopolitan
Ukrainian-Americans from places like Paris and Berchtesgaden to places like Free
Fall, N.J.

WHITE MAN'S GRAVE. By Richard Dooling. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.)
Revitalizing the traditional comic novel of colonialism, Mr. Dooling contrasts
the Sierra Leone bush with suburban Indiana, home of a Peace Corps volunteer who
has gone missing in Africa.

WHO WILL RUN THE FROG HOSPITAL? By Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $20.) A sad, witty,
disillusioned fairy tale whose heroine, approaching 40, recalls the illusion of
limitless possibility she felt when she was actually young.

WITHOUT A HERO: Stories. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Boyle's
unaverted gaze, caustic sensibility and attraction to everything queasy are all
evident in his fourth collection of short stories.

History

AFRICAN AMERICANS AT MARS BLUFF, SOUTH CAROLINA. By Amelia Wallace Vernon.
(Louisiana State University, $29.95.) What was a community of black rice growers
doing 60 miles from the sea in the heart of cotton country? This important and
surprising book transcends the domain of local history.

BOND OF IRON: Master and Slave at Buffalo Forge. By Charles B. Dew. (Norton,
$27.50.) A historian of the American South studies an industrialist and the
black labor force he and his heirs employed for a half-century in antebellum,
Civil War and Reconstruction Virginia.

THE CIVILIZATION OF EUROPE IN THE RENAISSANCE. By John Hale. (Atheneum, $35.) On
the canvas of a whole continent, a distinguished historian portrays the
expanding, reforming, self-consciously new Europe that led to where we live now.

THE COLD WAR: A History. By Martin Walker. (John Macrae/Holt, $30.) A veteran
British journalist offers a broad and lively summary of 50 years of history.

D-DAY, JUNE 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II. By Stephen E.
Ambrose. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) Drawing on 1,200 oral histories of veterans,
Mr. Ambrose evokes the daring and the horror of individual ordeals played out
along the bloody beaches of the Calvados coastline of Normandy.

DIPLOMACY. By Henry Kissinger. (Simon & Schuster, $35.) Mr. Kissinger's "great
man" history of diplomacy focuses on individuals, not trends or forces, and
shows his reverence for cool thinkers who employ both power and analysis.

FRAUEN: German Women Recall the Third Reich. By Alison Owings. (Rutgers
University, $24.95.) Ms. Owings hoped, by interviewing German women 70 and
older, to find they had been nobler than German men in the Nazi era. They
weren't, but the excursion is fascinating.

GAY NEW YORK: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World,
1890-1940. By George Chauncey. (Basic Books, $25.) A historian's enormously
informative study of 50 years during which a flourishing gay culture carved out
public and private space for itself.

A HISTORY OF THE ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICT. By Mark Tessler. (Indiana
University, cloth, $57.50; paper, $27.50.) A thoughtful and resolutely
fair-minded history of a dispute in which there has never been enough
thoughtfulness and fair-mindedness.

IN EUROPE'S NAME: Germany and the Divided Continent. By Timothy Garton Ash.
(Random House, $27.50.) This sober major study in recent international history
examines West Germany's conciliatory Ostpolitik: did it help or hinder the
collapse of Communism? A hard question, approached with respect for its
ambiguity.

LOCAL PEOPLE: The Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi. By John Dittmer.
(University of Illinois, $29.95.) A historian looks at the civil rights movement
of the 1960's from below, giving us a gripping account of courageous individuals
facing violence and murder in Mississippi.

THE MASSACRE AT EL MOZOTE: A Parable of the Cold War. By Mark Danner. (Vintage,
paper, $12.) A journalist recounts a 1981 atrocity in El Salvador and the ways
in which the story got distorted and covered up in both El Salvador and the
United States.

A NEW WORLD: An Epic of Colonial America From the Founding of Jamestown to the
Fall of Quebec. By Arthur Quinn. (Faber & Faber, $35.) A Hobbesian history in
which the hopes of utopian colonists are crushed by man and nature.

OF LONG MEMORY: Mississippi and the Murder of Medgar Evers. By Adam Nossiter.
(Addison-Wesley, $22.) Mr. Nossiter has written a dual portrait of a civil
rights leader and the man who murdered him, as well as a narrative of the
decades-long effort to force the state of Mississippi to confront its moral and
legal duties.

PAUL REVERE'S RIDE. By David Hackett Fischer. (Oxford University, $27.50.) No
rehash of Longfellow but a historian's careful account of the ride and the
surrounding events, emphasizing the broad-based, communal nature of the
Revolutionary movement in New England.

THE RAPE OF EUROPA: The Fate of Europe's Treasures in the Third Reich and the
Second World War. By Lynn H. Nicholas. (Knopf, $27.50.) A hair-raising account
of the Nazis' megalomaniac looting of Europe's artistic treasures, the perils
undergone by the artworks themselves, and the Allies' strivings to find the
stuff, save it and bring it back.

RUSSIA UNDER THE BOLSHEVIK REGIME. By Richard Pipes. (Knopf, $35.) This
painstaking, literate final volume of a trilogy begun 20 years ago reflects its
author's long involvement with Soviet policy and scholarship and, like its
predecessors, does not withhold moral judgment.

SAME-SEX UNIONS IN PREMODERN EUROPE. By John Boswell. (Villard, $25.) A Yale
historian's learned, knotty study of male love (whose exact nature isn't clear)
and the ceremonies that he conjectures were used to solemnize it from the 11th
to 16th centuries.

SISTERS OF FORTUNE. By Nancy Coffey Heffernan and Ann Page Stecker. (University
Press of New England, cloth, $40; paper, $15.95.) The letters of three New
Hampshire girls over 11 years to their father, who left them for the gold of
California in 1850, testify to the status of women and the dominance of hope
over experience.

THE SOVIET TRAGEDY: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991. By Martin
Malia. (Free Press, $24.95.) Not a work of research but of interpretation, this
study aims to reassert the primacy of ideology and politics over social and
economic forces in explaining what happened.

SOWING THE SEEDS OF DEMOCRACY IN CHINA: Political Reform in the Deng Xiaoping
Era. By Merle Goldman. (Harvard University, $39.95.) A Western expert on China's
intellectual dissidents turns to the latest decade and the misfortunes of the
educated democratic elite.

SPECIAL TASKS: The Memoirs of an Unwanted Witness -- A Soviet Spymaster. By
Pavel Sudoplatov and Anatoly Sudoplatov with Jerrold L. Schecter and Leona P.
Schecter. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A valuable book about Stalin's terror
apparatus by a man who served it, written with the help of his son and two
journalists.

STORIES OF SCOTTSBORO. By James Goodman. (Pantheon, $27.50.) A well-written and
kaleidoscopic account of the 1931 Alabama rape case that grew to become a symbol
of the oppression faced by black Americans in a region where white supremacy was
an uncontested fact of life.

TRANSFORMING WOMEN'S WORK: New England Lives in the Industrial Revolution. By
Thomas Dublin. (Cornell University, $35.) This valuable addition to the
scholar's shelf provides much-needed detail on women and work, and the
independence work brought women, in 19th-century industrial America.

THE UNQUIET GHOST: Russians Remember Stalin. By Adam Hochschild. (Viking,
$22.95.) Through interviews with survivors of the gulag, prison camp guards and
the children of both, the author effectively places Stalinism in a modern
context.

THE VIRGINIA ADVENTURE. Roanoke to James Towne: An Archaeological and Historical
Odyssey. By Ivor Noel Hume. (Knopf, $35.) With careful handling, the frail
remains of the earliest colonial past yield to archeologists truths not
recoverable from written sources (including a few unsuspected crimes and
blunders).

THE WAGES OF GUILT: Memories of War in Germany and Japan. By Ian Buruma.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) An examination, by an impressively informed and
empathetic journalist, of the ways in which the cataclysms of our century have
shaped national identity.

WAR IN ITALY, 1943-1945: A Brutal Story. By Richard Lamb. (St. Martin's,
$23.95.) The painful story of Italy after the fall of Mussolini, a land
characterized for two years by enslavement, betrayal and mass murder, ravaged by
Fascist thugs, the Germans and the Allied armies.

WHEN CHINA RULED THE SEAS: The Treasure Fleet of the Dragon Throne, 1405-1433.
By Louise Levathes. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The historical lacuna filled by
this meticulously researched book is the story of the Chinese expeditions west
across the Indian Ocean, led by the imperial eunuch Zheng He.

WOMEN'S WORK. The First 20,000 Years: Women, Cloth, and Society in Early Times.
By Elizabeth Wayland Barber. (Norton, $23.) A fascinating history and prehistory
of the making of textiles, a craft, exclusive to women (including queens and
goddesses), that preceded and made possible civilization itself.

Medicine & Psychology

THE COMING PLAGUE: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World Out of Balance. By Laurie
Garrett. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) A disturbing, meticulously researched
medical alarm, by a Newsday reporter, about the menace of fast-spreading,
terrifying new diseases and genetically remodeled old ones.

THE CORRESPONDENCE OF SIGMUND FREUD AND SANDOR FERENCZI: Volume 1, 1908-1914.
Edited by Eva Brabant, Ernst Falzeder and Patrizia Giampieri-Deutsch under the
supervision of Andre Haynal. (Belknap/Harvard University, $39.95.) These letters
between the commanding Freud and an influential, mercurial disciple promise a
major contribution to the exploration of psychoanalysis in the making.

THE HOT ZONE. By Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) A dramatic reconstruction
of what happened when Ebola virus broke out in a monkey quarantine in a commuter
town near Washington, threatening to spark an epidemic.

HOW WE DIE: Reflections on Life's Final Chapter. By Sherwin B. Nuland. (Knopf,
$24.) The author, a physician, surgeon and teacher for 35 years, offers a wise,
humane and cultivated examination of what happens to people when they die,
omitting none of the clinical detail. Winner of the National Book Award for
nonfiction.

KAREN HORNEY: A Psychoanalyst's Search for Self-Understanding. By Bernard J.
Paris. (Yale University, $30.) Avoiding the hagiographic impulse, the founder of
the International Karen Horney Society gives a valuable and vivid portrait of an
early psychoanalyst that reveals her powers of exploration and the connection
between her ideas and her inner world.

LISTENING. By Hannah Merker. (HarperCollins, $20.) A prolonged lyrical
meditation, wise and instructive, on the importance of sound in the lives of the
creatures of this planet, by a writer, editor and former librarian who lost most
of her hearing when she was 39 years old.

LIVING IN THE SHADOW OF DEATH: Tuberculosis and the Social Experience of Illness
in American History. By Sheila M. Rothman. (Basic Books, $25.) A social history
of tuberculosis using the "illness narratives" of patients to chart a disease
from the unscientific perspective of the patients.

MOTHERLESS DAUGHTERS: The Legacy of Loss. By Hope Edelman. (Addison-Wesley,
$23.) In this moving and valuable treatment of a neglected subject, Ms. Edelman
mingles her own denial and anger and yearning at the death of her mother with
the stories of nearly 200 women who have lost theirs.

MY OWN COUNTRY: A Doctor's Story of a Town and Its People in the Age of AIDS. By
Abraham Verghese. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An eloquent personal memoir of a
foreign-born doctor's experience in Tennessee, where he arrived just in time to
encounter and treat men returning home with the AIDS they caught in the big
city.

9 HIGHLAND ROAD. By Michael Winerip. (Pantheon, $25.) An unobtrusive,
nonjudgmental illumination of two years in the lives of the mentally ill in a
group home on Long Island, by a reporter for The New York Times.

ON FLIRTATION. By Adam Phillips. (Harvard University, $19.95.) This collection
of essays, lectures and book reviews captures the thoughts of a lucid
psychoanalyst, contemplating what he likes and what he misses in Freudian
theory.

RAISING THE DEAD. By Richard Selzer. (Whittle Books/Viking, $17.50.) The author,
a former surgeon unusually sensitive to the contingency of life, describes his
own near-death experience, an ordeal in which the only comfort was his survival.

REMEMBERING SATAN. By Lawrence Wright. (Knopf, $22.) This story about the perils
of recovered memory concerns a man who, charged by his daughters with sexual
abuse, proceeded to summon up what he assumed were blocked memories of the
events.

SEX IN AMERICA: A Definitive Survey. By Robert T. Michael, John H. Gagnon,
Edward O. Laumann and Gina Kolata. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A compact, less
statistically demanding summary of the findings of "The Social Organization of
Sexuality," a survey of American sexual practices.

THE SOCIAL ORGANIZATION OF SEXUALITY: Sexual Practices in the United States. By
Edward O. Laumann, John H. Gagnon, Robert T. Michael and Stuart Michaels.
(University of Chicago, $49.95.) The most important survey of American sexual
behavior since Kinsey's reports of 1948 and 1953.

SUGGESTIONS OF ABUSE: True and False Memories of Childhood Sexual Trauma. By
Michael D. Yapko. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A simple explanation from an expert
on hypnosis about why recovered memories, dredged up with the help of abuse
therapists, are so unreliable.

SURGERY: An Illustrated History. By Ira M. Rutkow. (Mosby-Year Book/Norman
Publishing, $99.) A large, attractive volume by a surgeon, chronicling the art
of wounding to heal from prehistory to the present, with 368 handsome (and
non-sick-making) illustrations.

TRAIN GO SORRY: Inside a Deaf World. By Leah Hager Cohen. (Houghton Mifflin,
$22.95.) Ms. Cohen's personal journey through a school for the deaf (she hears
normally, but grew up there because her father is its superintendent) is also an
introduction to an exceptional society that is still deciding how it should
live.

UNCHAINED MEMORIES: True Stories of Traumatic Memories, Lost and Found. By
Lenore Terr. (Basic Books, $22.) A psychiatrist relays tales of lost memories,
including that of a woman who recovered the memory of her father murdering her
childhood friend 20 years before.

Poetry

AND THE STARS WERE SHINING. By John Ashbery. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.) Mr.
Ashbery's 16th poetry collection offers 58 shining new lyrics, supple,
skeptical, conscious of mortality but never oppressed by gloom.

BREAKDOWN LANE: Poems. By Robert Phillips. (Johns Hopkins University, cloth,
$30; paper, $12.95.) Mr. Phillips is an eloquent poet of rancor and gall,
spleen-ridden, a master of despair, with a healthy sense of humor and
self-disregard.

COLLECTED POEMS. By Thom Gunn. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $35.) The classical
clarity of finely honed meter and incisive rhymes marks the work of this British
poet who has lived in this country for 40 years. He brings Augustan assurance to
demotic, often gay, experience.

CROSSROADS. By David R. Slavitt. (Louisiana State University, cloth, $15.95;
paper, $8.95.) Perhaps best known for his verse translations of Latin poetry,
Mr. Slavitt is an adept formal poet with a sharp eye for the hard and fine lives
of ordinary people. He is also a wicked satirist and can be wildly funny.

EARTHLY MEASURES. By Edward Hirsch. (Knopf, $20.) In our secular time it comes
as a jolt when a poet makes it clear the search for God comes first. These are
poems of immense wonder, rigor and eloquence, filled with generosity and
heartbreaking longing.

GARBAGE. By A. R. Ammons. (Norton, $17.95.) A long poem of rueful grandeur and
splendid oddity in which what's left over is transmuted; winner of last year's
National Book Award.

HINGE & SIGN: Poems, 1968-1993. By Heather McHugh. (Wesleyan
University/University Press of New England, cloth, $35; paper, $14.95.) A
retrospective gathering of old and new work by a poet who is our laureate of
physical love, whose poems about sex are poems of poetic vocation.

OUT OF DANGER. By James Fenton. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) This British
poet's works are direct, artless and entertaining. This ragbag of love songs and
political ballads shows that Mr. Fenton's poetry lives in discord, and he has a
rough compassion for the lies of language.

A SILENCE OPENS. By Amy Clampitt. (Knopf, $20.) Amy Clampitt, who died this
year, always delivered the sheer richness of the observed world, but for all her
sometimes dizzily elevated language she was a poet of history and politics, and
these poems are the shrewdest she wrote.

WHEN TIME FOLDS UP. By Kathleen Fraser. (Chax Press, paper, $11.) One of the
most distinguished poetic nonconformists in the country uses a collage-like
syntax and playful "errors" to create poems that directly reflect how we think.
Her poems are playful, sometimes astonishing, always enormously stimulating.

Politics & Current Affairs

THE AGENDA: Inside the Clinton White House. By Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster,
$24.) In this journalist's account of the tortured twists and turns in the
making of the Clinton economic plan, the President's problems mostly stem from
his unwillingness to disagree with anyone.

ALL'S FAIR: Love, War, and Running for President. By Mary Matalin and James
Carville with Peter Knobler. (Random House and Simon & Schuster, $24.) They were
in love. She was political director of the Bush campaign in 1992. He was manager
of Bill Clinton's. This is their story. Hepburn and Tracy were never such fun.

ARROGANT CAPITAL: Washington, Wall Street, and the Frustration of American
Politics. By Kevin Phillips. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A prescient analyst of
election trends makes a convincing case that voters see Washington as the enemy
because they can't crack the interlock between interest-group power and the
political system.

BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir. By Barbara Bush. (Lisa Drew/Scribners, $25.) This swan
of a First Lady, one of the most popular in modern history, gives the reader a
tour through her life story and the parallel universe of the political spouse,
where the watchword is relentless loyalty.

THE BELL CURVE: Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. By Richard J.
Herrnstein and Charles Murray. (Free Press, $30.) The evidence the authors see
indicates to them that society is layered in rough accordance with I.Q. and that
I.Q. is largely heritable, findings they believe society needs to take note of.

BITTER WINDS: A Memoir of My Years in China's Gulag. By Harry Wu and Carolyn
Wakeman. (Robert L. Bernstein/Wiley, $22.95.) Mr. Wu's memoir of 19 years in
labor camps is grimly familiar as to abuse and deprivation but grotesque and
surreal in its account of acting out each new political rectification campaign
right in the heart of the prison system.

BLOOD AND BELONGING: Journeys Into the New Nationalism. By Michael Ignatieff.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) The author travels to such places as Croatia,
Kurdistan and Northern Ireland to offer vivid vignettes of contemporary
nationalists and to issue somber warnings about their threat to liberal
cosmopolitanism.

BREAKUP: The Coming End of Canada and the Stakes for America. By Lansing Lamont.
(Norton, $25.) An admonitory speculation by a well-informed American journalist:
if Quebec secedes, Canada will disintegrate; American involvement will be
unavoidable and embarrassing.

CERTAIN TRUMPETS: The Call of Leaders. By Garry Wills. (Simon & Schuster, $23.)
A popular historian and journalist seeks to analyze leadership, and finds that
the leader and the led must be mutually indebted and must have the same goal.

CHILDREN FIRST: What Our Society Must Do -- and Is Not Doing -- for Our Children
Today. By Penelope Leach. (Knopf, $22.) No amount of advice to parents suffices,
an outstanding advice giver concludes; she proposes social programs that would
cost plenty, in money and in effort.

CHINA WAKES: The Struggle for the Soul of a Rising Power. By Nicholas D. Kristof
and Sheryl WuDunn. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) Two correspondents for The
Times report from a nation whose ruling classes, having chucked Communism, seem
to run on sheer meanness.

CITY ON A HILL: Testing the American Dream at City College. By James Traub.
(William Patrick/Addison-Wesley, $25.) The transformative mission of a public
institution that tried to do its duty first by elitism, later by inclusion.

CIVIL WARS: From L.A. to Bosnia. By Hans Magnus Enzensberger. (New Press, $18.)
Three cheerless essays about nihilistic violence, recurrent chaos and the debate
in Germany over immigration and asylum, by a leading German poet, dramatist and
philosopher.

THE CONFIRMATION MESS: Cleaning Up the Federal Appointments Process. By Stephen
L. Carter. (Basic Books, $21.) A law professor argues cogently that the Federal
confirmation process has become a monster, grotesquely unfair to nominees of
both right and left.

CONFRONTING AUTHORITY: Reflections of an Ardent Protester. By Derrick Bell.
(Beacon, $20.) A former professor at Harvard Law School has harsh words for the
institution and for legal education in general.

DEAD RIGHT. By David Frum. (New Republic/Basic Books, $23.) A fierce
conservative chides his fellows, including the Reaganites, for abandoning the
true economic doctrine in favor of rhetoric about social values and concessions
to the recipients of Government entitlements.

DICTATORSHIP OF VIRTUE: Multiculturalism and the Battle for America's Future. By
Richard Bernstein. (Knopf, $25.) The author, a cultural correspondent for The
New York Times, has written a study of cultural panic, in which demands for
diversity produce uniformity and incorrect speech is summarily punished.

DOGMATIC WISDOM: How the Culture Wars Divert Education and Distract America. By
Russell Jacoby. (Doubleday, $29.95.) A punchy and effective effort at taking the
tired culture wars onto different ground, noting, among other things, that in
most colleges the question of which books are essential to a liberal education
is moot: very little literature, history or philosophy is taught.

DREAM CITY: Race, Power, and the Decline of Washington, D.C. By Harry S. Jaffe
and Tom Sherwood. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) The sad story of the rise and fall of
Marion Barry, and the sadder tale of how the once placid, middle-class city of
Washington has been allowed to descend into addiction and despair.

THE HALDEMAN DIARIES: Inside the Nixon White House. By H. R. Haldeman. (Putnam,
$27.50.) In this posthumously published diary of his White House years, Richard
M. Nixon's chief of staff exposes the petty side of the P (as he calls his boss)
and his men more thoroughly than ever before.

THE HEART THAT BLEEDS: Latin America Now. By Alma Guillermoprieto. (Knopf, $24.)
An experienced reporter's essays on Latin American realities as they are lived
and felt as the region copes with urbanization and market economics.

THE HOMELESS. By Christopher Jencks. (Harvard University, $17.95.) Mr. Jencks's
careful review of the large body of accumulated research on the homeless
contradicts the received wisdom of both liberals and conservatives; he proposes
sensible discussion and incremental remedies.

I AM ROE: My Life, Roe v. Wade, and Freedom of Choice. By Norma McCorvey with
Andy Meisler. (HarperCollins, $23.) Norma McCorvey's powerful account of her
difficult journey from private woman to public symbol underscores the gulf
between myth and reality in American politics.

IMPERIUM. By Ryszard Kapuscinski. (Knopf, $24.) Poland's pre-eminent foreign
correspondent looks close to home and loses his detachment, rendering Russia and
its inhabitants as ignorant, joyless, servile and unlikely to come to any good.

THE IMPOSSIBLE COUNTRY: A Journey Through the Last Days of Yugoslavia. By Brian
Hall. (Godine, $23.95.) This intelligent, witty travel account, reporting on a
journey taken in 1991, is a guide to the minds of the peoples of what was once
Yugoslavia, and so a manual of xenophobia.

LEADING WITH MY HEART. By Virginia Kelley with James Morgan. (Simon & Schuster,
$22.50.) This intimate, posthumously published memoir throbs with the vitality
of its gregarious, gambling, hard-drinking author, who was also the President's
mother.

LIBERTY AND SEXUALITY: The Right to Privacy and the Making of Roe v. Wade. By
David J. Garrow. (Lisa Drew/Macmillan, $28.) A monumental, insightful account of
the profound transformation in American attitudes about sexuality that
culminated in the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a
constitutional right.

LIVING A POLITICAL LIFE. By Madeleine Kunin. (Knopf, $25.) Ms. Kunin tells how
she came to be a three-term Governor of Vermont and develops the thesis that a
"woman's political culture," with the power to transform politics benignly, has
arisen and is growing in this country.

MANDATE OF HEAVEN: A New Generation of Entrepreneurs, Dissidents, Bohemians, and
Technocrats Lays Claim to China's Future. By Orville Schell. (Simon & Schuster,
$25.) Graceful analysis and unobtrusive reporting of developments since the
Tiananmen Square massacre five years ago.

ON THE EDGE: The Clinton Presidency. By Elizabeth Drew. (Simon & Schuster, $24.)
Through interviews with the White House staff, Ms. Drew has put together a
devastating picture of bumbling incompetence.

A PLACE AT THE TABLE: The Gay Individual in American Society. By Bruce Bawer.
(Poseidon, $21.) A sharply argued polemic by a conservative homosexual, full of
autobiographical detail and debates the author has had with himself and his
critics.

THE RAGE OF A PRIVILEGED CLASS. By Ellis Cose. (HarperCollins, $20.) The class
in question is the black middle class, and Mr. Cose's account leaves little
doubt that the people who belong to it are daily humiliated by white people, and
don't like it a bit.

REBELLIONS, PERVERSITIES, AND MAIN EVENTS. By Murray Kempton. (Times Books/
Random House, $27.50.) Pieces long and short by a journalist whose abiding
fidelity to the radical impulse and the baroque style has made him as inimitable
as he is indispensable.

SARAJEVO: A War Journal. By Zlatko Diz darevic. (Fromm, $19.95.) A lament for
Bosnia and for civilization, by a newspaper editor who celebrates the endurance
and heroism of ordinary people caught in an insane conflict.

SCHOOLGIRLS: Young Women, Self-Esteem, and the Confidence Gap. By Peggy
Orenstein in association with the American Association of University Women.
(Doubleday, $23.50.) Using the association's research, Ms. Orenstein, a skilled
reporter, talked to real young women and shows them losing confidence as they
mature.

STANDING FIRM: A Vice-Presidential Memoir. By Dan Quayle.
(HarperCollins/Zondervan, $25.) In this account of his life and times, the
former Vice President and apparent 1996 candidate takes on his potential rivals,
developing a new style in campaign books: the political memoir as intraparty
cluster bomb.

STRANGE JUSTICE: The Selling of Clarence Thomas. By Jane Mayer and Jill
Abramson. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A fine, rational work providing chapter
and verse about how the religious right helped secure the nomination of Clarence
Thomas.

THE STRUGGLE FOR RUSSIA. By Boris Yeltsin. (Belka Publishing/Times Books/Random
House, $25.) Russia's first democratically elected leader shows himself more
thoughtful, more observant, more sensitive to nuances of other people's behavior
than at first he appeared.

WASHINGTON THROUGH A PURPLE VEIL: Memoirs of a Southern Woman. By Lindy Boggs
with Katherine Hatch. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) An engrossing narrative of the
life of a former Congresswoman, whose large share of family tragedy has been
offset by the comfort and power of her big, gregarious family.

WHO WE ARE: A Portrait of America Based on the Latest U.S. Census. By Sam
Roberts. (Times Books/Random House, $18.) The urban affairs columnist for The
New York Times breaks down the 1990 census into thematic chunks, looks at the
numbers every which way and makes it all accessible.

Religion & Philosophy

THE DEATH OF THE MESSIAH. From Gethsemane to the Grave: A Commentary on the
Passion Narratives in the Four Gospels. By Raymond E. Brown. (Anchor Bible
Reference Library/Doubleday, 2 vols., $37.50 each; boxed set, $75.) A 1,600-page
treatment by a distinguished scholar; meant for experts, readable by any
interested person.

FIRE FROM HEAVEN: The Rise of Pentecostal Spirituality and the Reshaping of
Religion in the Twenty-first Century. By Harvey Cox. (Addison-Wesley, $24.) With
a sympathetic eye, Mr. Cox explores the Christian movement that distinguishes
itself from others with the belief that "speaking in tongues" is evidence of the
Holy Spirit.

THE KNIGHTS OF MALTA. By H. J. A. Sire. (Yale University, $45.) A splendidly
illustrated history of a colorful, aristocratic religious order, founded in
1113, that has survived numerous historical disasters and always discovered good
works to do; at present its members care for the sick and run the smallest
sovereign state in the world.

MARPINGEN: Apparitions of the Virgin Mary in Nineteenth-Century Germany. By
David Blackbourn. (Knopf, $35.) A beautifully balanced account of how a vision
of the Virgin that appeared to three little girls rocked a small German village.

MARY MAGDALEN: Myth and Metaphor. By Susan Haskins. (Harcourt Brace, $27.95.)
The fascinating story of how Mary Magdalene became a symbol for womankind and an
object of devotion for Christians.

THE THERAPY OF DESIRE: Theory and Practice in Hellenistic Ethics. By Martha C.
Nussbaum. (Princeton University, $29.95.) A philosopher looks at the Stoics,
Epicureans and Skeptics as mental health practitioners -- practical philosophers
concerned with anger, love and death.

Science

THE BEAK OF THE FINCH: A Story of Evolution in Our Time. By Jonathan Weiner.
(Knopf, $25.) A fascinating look over the shoulders of biologists who watched
natural selection in motion over some 20 years in finch populations.

BLACK HOLES AND TIME WARPS: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy. By Kip S. Thorne.
(Norton, $30.) A physicist proposes that modified, limited time travel is
possible, clarifying his arguments for lay folk with illustrations and
anecdotes.

BY THE GRACE OF GUILE: The Role of Deception in Natural History and Human
Affairs. By Loyal Rue. (Oxford University, $27.50.) A professor of religion and
philosophy argues that deceit, including self-deceit, is evolution's way of
keeping us going in a universe that doesn't give a hoot.

THE CHEMISTRY OF CONSCIOUS STATES: How the Brain Changes Its Mind. By J. Allan
Hobson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) With the patience of a wise and experienced
guide, a Harvard psychiatrist sums up what he has learned in a lifetime of
studying dreaming, sleeping and the brain, introducing the concept of the
indivisible "brain-mind."

THE EVOLUTION OF RACISM: Human Differences and the Use and Abuse of Science. By
Pat Shipman. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A thoughtful study of how evolutionary
theory was enlisted to abet or oppose racism; not all the bad guys meant ill,
and the good guys sometimes fought dirty.

THE HUBBLE WARS: Astrophysics Meets Astropolitics in the Two-Billion-Dollar
Struggle Over the Hubble Space Telescope. By Eric J. Chaisson. (HarperCollins,
$27.50.) An insider's absorbing history, a technological thriller and an expose
of the space project that has burned a huge hole in the nation's pocket.

HYPERSPACE: A Scientific Odyssey Through Parallel Universes, Time Warps, and the
Tenth Dimension. By Michio Kaku. (Oxford University, $25.) Everything would make
better sense, a physicist maintains, if there were 10 dimensions instead of 4;
it remains to find the absconded dimensions, which are probably awfully small.

LYSENKO AND THE TRAGEDY OF SOVIET SCIENCE. By Valery Soyfer. (Rutgers
University, $39.95.) In this passionate book, written by a Russian emigre, the
life of Trofim Lysenko, the notorious Russian agronomist who forced modern
biology and genetics underground, becomes a complex morality play.

THE MAKING OF MEMORY: From Molecules to Mind. By Steven Rose. (Anchor/Doubleday,
paper, $12.95.) By studying memory, a neurobiologist seeks to bridge the gap
between chemistry and consciousness, supporting his argument with experimental
results.

A MAN ON THE MOON: The Voyages of the Apollo Astronauts. By Andrew Chaikin.
(Viking, $27.95.) The 25th anniversary of the Apollo 11 landing is marked by
this detailed and candid account of man's race to the moon, an event now
enshrined in contemporary American mythology.

THE PHYSICS OF IMMORTALITY: Modern Cosmology, God and the Resurrection of the
Dead. By Frank J. Tipler. (Doubleday, $24.95.) Life is eternal, says a
mathematical physicist, given the nature of this universe; a 123-page
mathematical appendix is offered for skeptics.

THE RED QUEEN: Sex and the Evolution of Human Nature. By Matt Ridley.
(Macmillan, $25.) A thoughtful work about sociobiology, arguing that species
evolve not to win the struggle for survival but to avoid losing it.

THE SCIENCE OF DESIRE: The Search for the Gay Gene and the Biology of Behavior.
By Dean Hamer and Peter Copeland. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A readable, cautious
account, by a scientist and a journalist, of an investigation into whether
homosexuality is genetically determined.

A SCIENTIST IN THE CITY. By James Trefil. (Doubleday, $23.95.) The author, who
has written books that deal with the Creation and the seashore, has a fine sense
of what lay folk don't understand; his rendition of the city's potential and the
constraints on it is fascinating.

SHADOWS OF THE MIND: A Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness. By Roger
Penrose. (Oxford University, $25.) Mr. Penrose's assertion that only a new
physics will explain mental life has been questioned, but he produces a fine
introduction to quantum mechanics and what he thinks is wrong with it.

TALKING FROM 9 TO 5: How Women's and Men's Conversational Styles Affect Who Gets
Heard, Who Gets Credit, and What Gets Done at Work. By Deborah Tannen. (Morrow,
$23.) A lively sociolinguist explores what her subtitle specifies.

VOYAGE TO THE GREAT ATTRACTOR: Exploring Intergalactic Space. By Alan Dressler.
(Knopf, $25.) How seven astronomers (including Mr. Dressler) made a vexing
discovery; more important, an inside story that reads like a novel about modern
cosmology.

WRINKLES IN TIME. By George Smoot and Keay Davidson. (Morrow, $25.) An
astrophysicist (Mr. Smoot) and a science writer relate an adventure yarn
(exciting outdoor experiments go blooey) that is also an entree to modern
cosmology.

Science Fiction

THE BREATH OF SUSPENSION. By Alexander Jablokov. (Arkham House, $20.95.) Ten
varied and accomplished short stories by one of science fiction's most inventive
new writers.

CALDE OF THE LONG SUN. By Gene Wolfe. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $22.95.) The third
volume of "The Book of the Long Sun," a multivolume series, is a satisfying
blend of religious allegory and densely plotted science fiction that features
Patera Silk, one of Mr. Wolfe's best realized characters.

GREEN MARS. By Kim Stanley Robinson. (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $22.95; paper,
$12.95.) In this generously conceived, meticulously detailed sequel to "Red
Mars," a disputatious band of scientists dabbles in utopian politics and
literally rebuilds the planet by "terraforming" -- transforming Mars into
something like Earth.

HEAVY WEATHER. By Bruce Sterling. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) Led by a maverick
mathematician whose brilliant brother may be the most dangerous man in the
world, an engaging group of high-tech "tornado freaks" chases a monster twister
across the West Texas plains.

THE IRON DRAGON'S DAUGHTER. By Michael Swanwick. (Avonova/Morrow, $23.) At the
heart of this fantasy is the relationship between Jane, a feisty human
changeling, and Melanchthon, a factory-built dragon bent on destroying the
"techno mancers" who created him and then abandoned him.

MYSTERIUM. By Robert Charles Wilson. (Spectra/Bantam, paper, $11.95.) What
happens when a man of forceful intellect but inchoate feelings gets exactly what
he wishes for? This thoughtful page-turner puts sympathetic characters at risk
in a world not quite beyond their imagining.

PARABLE OF THE SOWER. By Octavia E. Butler. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $19.95.)
A gripping account of the gospel according to 15-year-old Lauren Oya Olamina,
who not only survives the unraveling of law and order in 21st-century California
but becomes the prophet of a new religion based on a sober revelation: "The only
lasting truth is Change. God is Change."

QUEEN CITY JAZZ. By Kathleen Ann Goonan. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $23.95) With an
almost self-destructive exuberance, this dizzying first novel explores the
fearsome potential of nanotechnology, the science that gives imperfect humans a
chance to remake the world in their own image.

Spies & Thrillers

AH, TREACHERY! By Ross Thomas. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $21.95.) The title is
taken from Plutarch, the prose is free-flowing and funny, and the central
character is a Vietnam veteran who works in a Wyoming gun shop and happens to be
sitting on a hot political secret.

ALL FALL DOWN. By Lee Gruenfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) A smooth novel by a pilot, in
which a disturbed genius learns to infiltrate the navigation systems of
America's commercial planes.

THE FALL LINE. By Mark T. Sullivan. (Kensington Books, $20.) Interweaving
flashbacks, stream of consciousness and action, this deft first novel is about a
daredevil skier hunted by drug lords and Government agents.

OPERATION REMISSION. By Paul Johnson. (Nefyn & Shaw, paper, $12.95.) A timely
and remarkable novel about an unconventional ex-soldier who was one of the
Americans exposed to radiation after World War II and decides to get revenge by
releasing radioactive gas into Congress.

RED INK. By Greg Dinallo. (Pocket Books, $22.) In this lively novel, a
journalist in post-Red Russia investigates the murder of a bureaucrat and ends
up working with a female American spy.

TRINITIES. By Nick Tosches. (Doubleday, $23.95.) In tough, rough prose, the
author of biographies of Jerry Lee Lewis and Dean Martin tells the tale of
several restless octogenarian capos from Brooklyn who take back what they once
owned, including the world's heroin industry.

Sports

COBB: A Biography. By Al Stump. (Algonquin, $24.95.) On his second go-round with
the life of Ty Cobb, Mr. Stump provides the most revealing account we'll ever
have of this hot-headed and magnificently talented baseball player.

THE CURSE OF ROCKY COLAVITO: A Loving Look at a Thirty-Year Slump. By Terry
Pluto. (Simon & Schuster, $22.50.) A hilarious but penetrating examination of
the Cleveland Indians' miserable history, written by a veteran sportswriter and
long-suffering Tribe fan.

DON'T LOOK BACK: Satchel Paige in the Shadows of Baseball. By Mark Ribowsky.
(Simon & Schuster, $23.) A carefully researched biography tells the life of one
of the greatest pitchers and personalities in baseball history.

THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams. By Darcy Frey. (Richard
Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr. Frey examines the myth of deliverance
through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to
be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional
sports.

THE POLITICS OF GLORY: How Baseball's Hall of Fame Really Works. By Bill James.
(Macmillan, $25.) The celebrated sabermetrician uses statistical analysis to try
to determine who belongs in baseball's Hall of Fame, and who doesn't.

Travel, Nature & Adventure

AGUIRRE: The Re-Creation of a Sixteenth-Century Journey Across South America. By
Stephen Minta (Holt, $20.) In 1560, a Spanish expedition traveled east from Peru
and disappeared into the Amazonian interior. This captivating book attempts to
retrace its doomed, infamous route in search of El Dorado.

ANIMAL HAPPINESS. By Vicki Hearne. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of "Adam's
Task" investigates, in these essays, what pleases animals; she finds, in many
cases, that though creature comforts are important, what really tickles the
beasts is the sense of a job well done.

A CHEF'S TALE: A Memoir of Food, France and America. By Pierre Franey with
Richard Flaste and Bryan Miller. (Knopf, $25.) Assisted by two former colleagues
at The New York Times, Mr. Franey covers some 70 years of gustation in two
countries in this mouthwatering memoir.

HENRY JAMES: COLLECTED TRAVEL WRITINGS. Edited by Richard Howard. (Library of
America, 2 vols., $35 each.) Close to 1,700 pages, in the aggregate, densely but
never coarsely packed with the observations abroad (for abroad he usually was)
of one upon whom nothing (as his own aspiration had put it) was lost.

IN THE CITIES AND JUNGLES OF BRAZIL. By Paul Rambali. (Holt, $23.) A savvy,
vivid montage of Brazilian culture, high and low, as seen from the late 1980's
onward.

JOHN JAMES AUDUBON: The Watercolors for "The Birds of America." Edited by
Annette Blaugrund and Theodore E. Stebbins Jr. (New-York Historical
Society/Villard, $75.) The originals for the great engravings, handsomely
reproduced, illuminated by helpful essays.

LONDON. By John Russell. (Abrams, $45.) Not a guide but a personal survey and
celebration by a fine critic who seems to know his hometown as much through
osmosis as through industry.

OKAVANGO: Africa's Last Eden. By Frans Lanting. (Chronicle, $45.) These moody
photographs of the vast green wetlands in the center of the Kalahari Desert
create a sense of unease, mystery and loneliness, and bear witness to our moral
obligation to the land.

TRANSYLVANIA AND BEYOND: A Travel Memoir. By Dervla Murphy. (Overlook, $21.95.)
An indomitable Irish travel writer, a self-described "political zombie," treks
through Romania shortly after the 1989 revolution.

THE WAY TO XANADU. By Caroline Alexander. (Knopf, $23.) Inspired by Coleridge's
"Kubla Khan," Ms. Alexander seeks out sites -- from Mongolia to northern Florida
-- that may have inspired the poem's imagery.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              187 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

EDITOR'S CHOICE

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2183 words


Two novels, a volume of short stories, a memoir, two histories, two biographies
and two treatises on science for lay readers are among this year's roster of
Best Books -- along with an extended meditation on the colonial quest, its
origins and consequences that the publisher called a novel but the author did
not, a kind of freedom-of-choice entry. Of course, the list is not that neat,
anyway; one biography is a foray in the continuing intellectual struggle over
American history, and the memoir is a commentary on the same science taken up in
the two scientific books.

The science is, broadly, evolutionary biology or, specifically, sociobiology,
which, once it gets into your brain, can really spook you about genetics. For
instance, once the list was alphabetized, it suddenly became apparent that the
principal subjects of the first two books were both short, loquacious and
bowlegged men. More ominously, the alphabet clumped the three books on
sociobiology together in the list. There are other patterns here, but perhaps
they will not bear thinking about. The writers of the books chose their subjects
and titles, and the editors of the Book Review chose the Best Books; none of
this was done by a pool of genes.

These Best Books were chosen by 11 editors from a list of 33 titles originally
nominated -- in a dozen weekly discussions that were, for once, disconcertingly
uncombative. The number of books on the list and the number of editors are
unrelated; each book chosen received a majority vote.

Certain categories of books, like diaries and letters, are not eligible. Had
they been, letters might have been stiff competitors this year, which saw
publication of a translation of the splendid "Correspondence of Walter Benjamin,
1910-40," edited by Gershom Scholem and Theodor Adorno; collections of letters
by two poets, Elizabeth Bishop and Philip Larkin; the first volume of the
letters exchanged by Freud and Sandor Ferenczi; and a cache of enchanting
letters written by the composer Leos Janacek when he was old to a young, and
married, woman he had fallen in love with.

The Best Books are selected from among those reviewed here since last year's
Christmas books issue and the descriptions of them below are drawn from the
reviews; they are not included among the Notable Books of the Year, which are
listed beginning on page 65.

BALZAC
A Life.
By Graham Robb.
W.W. Norton & Company.

"I am not deep," said Honore de Balzac, "but very wide." Graham Robb, as chatty
and urbane as his subject, confidently negotiates the vast expanses of Balzac's
life in an unusually witty biography that reads somewhat like a detective story
as Mr. Robb tracks down the connections between the life and the work of the
greatest novelist of the 19th century. Balzac regarded dissipation as an
investment in friends and patrons, but also in the tumult of personal experience
he poured into his novels ("The Human Comedy" alone has more than 2,000 acutely
realized characters). Few literary lives are as exciting; Balzac amazes and
exhausts one as he tosses in financial rapids, skirts suicide, gambles, smokes
opium, seduces women, fathers bastards and creates in prodigious outbursts of
writing a world almost as turbulent as he was himself.

CONQUEST
Montezuma, Cortes, and the Fall of Old Mexico.
By Hugh Thomas.
Simon & Schuster.

Amazingly, Hugh Thomas has located archival treasures in Spain that were missed
by scholars for centuries, and he has written an encyclopedic history that
supplants William H. Prescott's legendary "History of the Conquest of Mexico,"
published 141 years ago. Lord Thomas eloquently conjures up the grandeur, fury,
mystery and tragedy of this epic story; and his sensitivity to the personalities
of the principal figures, and to their voices, which he evokes from his
documents, makes it all new. "Conquest" does not offer the comforts of heroes
and villains, but it greatly deepens our understanding of the terrible -- and
probably unfathomable -- moment when two peoples, each believing itself the
chosen, met in blood and fire to give birth to a new world.

A FROLIC OF HIS OWN
By William Gaddis.
Poseidon Press.

Even if the reader has to pay close attention to the continuous, minimally
punctuated speech of dozens of characters that makes up the entire narrative of
this exceptionally rich novel, the payoff is worth it. In this misanthropic and
often hilarious comedy, William Gaddis holds up the legal profession, its
minions and dupes, to mockery, and then extends the ridicule to a wide spectrum
of contemporary American culture -- presented with Swiftian glee as an unholy
stew of greed, ignorance, illiteracy, corruption and childish folly. His powers
of mimicry allow him to flesh out the distinct, often appalling, personalities
of his characters through nothing more than their spates of words, and readers
who laugh their way right through to the end may find it impossible to get the
rhythms and sounds of those voices out of their imaginations.

IN THE LAKE OF THE WOODS
By Tim O'Brien.
Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin.

On the surface this novel is a mystery story about a woman who disappears after
her husband's political career collapses when his great secret -- as a soldier
he had been at the My Lai massacre in Vietnam -- is exposed. But, like Tim
O'Brien's other novels, it traces the line between a literal but unknowable
truth and a truth whose only evidence is the story containing it. Here he turns
his concerns about truth, time and responsibility inward, letting them weigh on
one character, the husband, whose inner architecture is more emblematic than
personal. There are sections of conventional narrative; others that collect
evidence on the case from interviews and excerpts from books or public records;
and others obsessively puzzling over what really might have happened. At bottom,
this is a tale about the moral effects of suppressing a true story, about the
abuse of history, about what happens to you when you pretend there is no
history.

THE LANGUAGE INSTINCT
By Steven Pinker.
William Morrow & Company.

Steven Pinker gathers data from many fields -- including cognitive neuroscience,
developmental psychology and speech therapy -- to demonstrate that the roots of
language are in our genes. He firmly places the wiring of the brain for language
in the framework of Darwinian natural selection in a well-written, witty book
that makes even the most difficult material accessible to average readers. His
argument may raise hackles -- as it already has done among some psychologists
and anthropologists -- because it seems to doom the liberal notion that human
behavior can be made better by improvements in culture and environment. But Mr.
Pinker argues, with a fascinating array of evidence, that in fact the diversity
of the world's cultures is superficial and that the most human trait, language,
is produced by evolution; we are born with it, in all its complex grammatical
elaboration.

THE MORAL ANIMAL
Evolutionary Psychology and Everyday Life.
By Robert Wright.
Pantheon Books.

If the argument that language is genetic is tough to swallow, look at Robert
Wright's thesis: the source of human morality is genetic. Genes account for the
battle of the sexes, friendship, hypocrisy, generosity, selfishness, the whole
kit and kaboodle. As Mr. Wright reports on how the science of evolutionary
psychology has developed, he wants to upend received wisdom about our sense of
right and wrong in general, arguing with consistent and good-humored irreverence
that in the wake of Darwin we have to reconstruct morality from the ground up.
The thinking of this excellent journalist is provocative, challenging and
illuminating; as he develops his own arguments he precisely outlines the world
of sociobiology and lets us see where the contending forces shaping it fit in.
Many arguments in his book are debatable, but none are facile; this fiercely
intelligent book is a feast of clear thinking.

NATURALIST
By Edward O. Wilson.
Shearwater Books/Island Press.

In a wise personal memoir, Edward O. Wilson -- a giant in contemporary biology,
a pioneer in evolutionary biology, a world authority on ants and one of the
founders of sociobiology -- recalls a life which, from the outset, was
captivated by a compulsion for close observation of living things and a passion
to synthesize what we know about them. Its readers will learn much about the
risks, the long labor, and the moral and intellectual intensity of a life
devoted to science, and about the harrowing ordeal this gentle scientist went
through when many academics in other disciplines created a political furor over
his seminal 1975 book "Sociobiology," which they contended would be an
instrument of cultural determinism and racism. A mixture of loneliness,
amusement, curiosity and intellectual rigor makes the voice of this thoughtful
man unforgettable.

OPEN SECRETS
Stories.
By Alice Munro.
Alfred A. Knopf.

All the stories in this collection are lessons. And it is no mere coincidence
that the time frame of almost all of them is an entire life; but they draw on
the complexity of a mature and vigilant sensibility. Alice Munro's daring
adventure is to try to apprehend the mystery of existence in time, the unique
quality of a person's fate. Since delving into mystery starts with language,
people in her stories are constantly telling stories or struggling to understand
them -- in confessions, rumors, letters, conversations, newspapers. But often
they do not know the meaning of their own stories. In any case, there are always
puzzles of love, time, death, spirit that cannot be apprehended through
language; they are the open secrets that cannot be talked into clarity, but
which Ms. Munro patiently prods and turns and pokes until, in story after story,
they yield lessons -- partial, ambiguous and momentous.

STALIN AND THE BOMB
The Soviet Union
and Atomic Energy,
1939-1956.
By David Holloway.
Yale University Press.

Using once-secret Russian archives, David Holloway examines nuclear weapons in
the Soviet Union with an eye to the part their development played in starting
the cold war. His hardheaded study gives little comfort to liberals and none to
revisionist historians. The first Russian atomic bomb was indeed developed with
the help of espionage, but even without it the Russians would have built a bomb
a few years later, and their hydrogen bomb was entirely their invention. Could
the cold war have been short-circuited if American leaders had told Stalin about
work on our atomic bomb early on? No. Stalin saw immediately that if anyone else
had the weapon and he did not the Soviet Union was lost. What makes this book so
readable is Mr. Holloway's capacity to evoke the character of so many Russian
scientists and political leaders, and to make them understandable without ever
being naive about them. As a result we get a more complete story of Russian
nuclear weapons than we have had yet about our own.

A WAY IN THE WORLD
By V. S. Naipaul.
Alfred A. Knopf.

Pursuing his lifelong obsessions -- what it means to become a writer and what
happens in postcolonial societies when foreign power recedes, leaving behind
chaos and cruelty -- V. S. Naipaul fashions this book out of nine linked
narratives: some personal, some historical, some novelistic. The American
publisher calls it a novel, the author does not. Whatever it is, it is a
disturbing meditation on the relationships among personal, national and world
histories and on inheritance and immortality. That it is an archeology of the
colonial impulse becomes clear in tales of Christopher Columbus (1451-1506), Sir
Walter Raleigh (1554-1618) and the failed Venezuelan revolutionary Francisco
Miranda (1750-1816), each adrift in the Gulf of Desolation, between Trinidad and
Venezuela, as his life nears its close. Driving them all is a simple urge to
create themselves anew. It is the human urge, to make ourselves up as we go
along -- sometimes with dramatic consequences for the world.

W. E. B. DU BOIS
Biography of a Race,
1868-1919.
By David Levering Lewis.
A John Macrae Book/
Henry Holt & Company.

The subtitle of this first volume of David Levering Lewis's life of Du Bois is
the key to it: during the first half of his life, Du Bois -- as he developed
into a pioneering historian, the leading crusader for black rights, and finally
the father of Pan-Africanism and a founder of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People -- became totally identified with the struggle of
the black race, and gave it a magnificent voice. Mr. Lewis gives us an enormous
amount of information as he explores Du Bois's academic achievements, his
political growth and, above all, the growth of Du Bois's powerful sense of self.
That made him the leader he was and, as Mr. Lewis makes clear, it made him often
unbearable to others. Mr. Lewis tells a well-known story in such rich detail and
with so many fresh insights that one ends this volume eager to see the next.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHRISTMAS BOOKS '94;
Photography

BYLINE: By Andy Grundberg;    Andy Grundberg is the director of the Friends of
Photography in San Francisco and the author of "Crisis of the Real," a
collection of criticism.

SECTION: Section 7;   Page 40;   Column 1;   Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2961 words


IF photography as we have long known it is about to be replaced by a limp
electronic gerund, "imaging," why do publishers continue to satisfy our cravings
for pictures with a multitude of finely printed volumes ranging from delicate to
disturbing? This season's harvest suggests not only that the recession in
photography book publishing is over, but also that the ballyhooed electronic
revolution remains a gleam in the distance. The most promoted electronic title
having to do with photography, a CD-ROM planned to accompany the book "Passage
to Vietnam" (Against All Odds Productions/Melcher Media/Publishers Group West),
is now optimistically promised for February, four months after the book's
publication date. Museums may be busy digitizing their collections of
photographs, but few of these electronic archives have the makings of a best
seller.

The books that fit on traditional holiday coffee tables are sufficient
consolation for anyone searching for new ways to look at photographs, however.
Major collections of the lifetime work of Robert Frank and Andre Kertesz are
complemented by visual anthologies of the human figure, self-portraiture and the
dead and deformed ("The Body," "The Camera I" and "Harms Way"). Fashion takes an
impressive turn on the runway with "Toni Frissell: Photographs 1933-1967"
(Doubleday), "William Klein: In and Out of Fashion" (Random House) and Albert
Watson's "Cyclops" (Bulfinch/ Little, Brown). And edging in the direction of
multimedia is "Talking Pictures" (Chronicle), a Chaucerian diversion in which 70
people, from Joan Rivers to Mister Rogers, elaborate on the image that has meant
the most to them. Unfortunately, one has to go to the touring exhibition of the
same title to hear the actual sound of their voices.

What's missing here besides CD-ROM's? There is nothing in the way of a newly
discovered talent (although Nick Waplington, a new talent earlier in the 1990's,
is back with a second book, from Aperture). And, except for the catalogue to the
Metropolitan Museum's sterling show of Edouard Baldus's 19th-century views,
there is remarkably little that could be called valuable new scholarship.
Despite a growing interest in revising the canon of photography as it was
constituted more than 50 years ago, publishers, editors and museum curators
still find it hard to resist following in photography's equivalent of Good King
Wenceslas's footsteps.

ROBERT FRANK: Moving Out. By Sarah Green ough and Philip Brookman, with essays
by W. S. Di Piero, Martin Gasser and John Hanhardt. (National
Gallery/Scalo/Distributed Art Publishers, $60.) Robert Frank's peculiar charms
as a photographer of intense nihilism and purposefully casual technique are
captured with remarkable success by this survey of his career, which accompanies
an exhibition that will tour other cities after it leaves the National Gallery
of Art in Washington at the end of the year. While the pictures in Mr. Frank's
widely influential book "The Americans" (1959) justly constitute the core of his
achievement, there are scores of other images, taken before and after his trip
across the United States in the mid-1950's, that either have become classics or
deserve to be. Most of all, "Robert Frank: Moving Out" convinces us that "The
Americans" was not a fluke. Like Willie Mays, whose golden moment came with his
World Series catch, Mr. Frank honed his skills for years beforehand and stayed
in the major leagues long afterward.

Still, the book makes clear that the photographer's work has gradually,
inexorably darkened from its relatively sunny beginnings in his native
Switzerland. The lyric charm of a sequence of images of folding chairs in Paris,
taken in 1949 and 1950, puts one in mind of Henri Cartier-Bresson and Robert
Doisneau. By the time Mr. Frank photographed in London in 1952 and 1953,
however, the skies had literally filled with clouds. After making the somber
photographs in "The Americans," Mr. Frank switched his focus to films, returning
to still photography only in the early 70's. Sarah Greenough, the curator of
photography at the National Gallery, writes that "little in Frank's earlier
still photographs prepares us for the raw and unrefined nature of 'Mabou,' " one
of the first of these more recent, typically collaged images. But by the time we
get to a dispirited 1985 assemblage called "Home Improvements," little in the
way of surprise remains.

While curators and guest essayists detail the substance of the photographer's
career, they play second fiddle to Mr. Frank's own commentary, which is
interspersed among the excellent reproductions. He is not his own best critic
(one section begins, "Whenever I look at these pictures I think that I ought to
be able to say something about the way I felt when I took them"), but his
creative spontaneity and his despair about his inability to communicate his
feelings fully come across in visceral fashion. An artist who fundamentally
redirected the course of photography at mid-century, Mr. Frank wears his hair
shirt with surprising grace and few pretensions.

ANDRE KERTESZ: His Life and Work. By Pierre Borhan, with essays by Pierre
Borhan, Laszlo Beke, Dominique Baque and Jane Livingston. (Bulfinch/Little,
Brown, $65.) Almost a decade has passed since the last in-depth look at Andre
Kertesz's career, an American-organized exhibition and book called "Andre
Kertesz of Paris and New York" that appeared in 1985, the year of Kertesz's
death. Besides having the benefit of time, "Andre Kertesz: His Life and Work," a
new retrospective volume, has the distinction of being a French production based
on the collection of Kertesz's photographic negatives and correspondence
deposited with the Mission du Patrimoine Photographique (stiffly translated in
the book as the Association for the Diffusion of the Photographic Patrimony) in
Paris.

Both Paris and New York claim Kertesz as their own, even though he was born and
raised in Hungary and began photographing there. Some of his most memorable
pictures date from the late teens and early 20's, depicting the everyday life of
the Hungarian countryside and his hometown of Esztergom. Still, the pictures he
took during his years in Paris, from 1925 to 1936, are generally considered the
foundation of his rank as one of the major figures of photography in this
century. After 1936 he lived and photographed in New York until his death --
mostly unhappily, Mr. Borhan, the head of the Kertesz archive, points out more
than once in his text. Unfortunately, Mr. Borhan's main thesis -- that Kertesz
therefore really belongs to France -- is neither germane to art history nor
especially eloquent in this uncredited English translation. What is one to think
of a historian capable of a sentence like this: "The Hungarians going into exile
were so numerous that Admiral Miklos Horthy, an anti-Semite, inaugurated a
dictatorship"?

What redeems "Andre Kertesz: His Life and Work" is the many pictures that have
seldom or never been reproduced. Some of them help put together the many pieces
of the photographer's career, like a bird's-eye winter view of a Paris garden,
taken in 1929, that resembles his pictures of Washington Square Park taken some
30 years later. Others are just simply wonderful pictures. Hungarian, French,
American -- Kertesz was above all a consistently fine photographer.

THE PHOTOGRAPHS OF EDOUARD BALDUS. By Malcolm Daniel, with an essay by Barry
Bergdoll. (Metropolitan Museum of Art/Canadian Center for Architecture/Abrams,
$65.) Given the scholarly attention photography has
received in recent years, it is rare to find a photographer of genius whose work
has never received the attention it deserves. Edouard Baldus (1813-89) is the
real thing, a mediocre painter of the 1840's who in the 1850's made some of the
most impressive, seemingly modern photographs of the 19th century. Baldus, a
Prussian emigre who in his mid-20's settled permanently in Paris, adopted the
"English" paper-negative process invented by William Henry Fox Talbot and
parlayed his technical and visual prowess into a career as a recorder of
France's churches, monuments, cities, railroads and official buildings during
the reign of Napoleon III.

Baldus may have thought of himself as an artist working with a camera, but his
primary patron, the French Government, often used him as a photojournalist. He
was there to document the route of Queen Victoria's 1855 journey to Paris by
train, the construction of the "New Louvre," the aftermath of the flooding of
the Rhone in Lyons and Avignon in 1856. And while his initial fame rested on
large-scale pictures of Roman-era ruins and medieval cathedrals, the pictures he
took along the routes of France's newly built rail lines show him to have had a
knack for capturing the dawn of an industrial, urban age. "The Photographs of
Edouard Baldus" accompanies an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art
(through Dec. 31) and contains 86 fine reproductions, a comprehensive account of
Baldus's career written by Malcolm Daniel, an assistant curator of photography
at the museum, and an essay on the architectural ambitions of the Second Empire
by the art historian Barry Bergdoll.

WILLIAM GARNETT: Aerial Photographs. Introduction by Martha A. Sandweiss.
(University of California, $45.) For more than 40 years William Garnett has been
taking aerial photographs of California and the American West, reducing land
forms to patterns and moving conventional scenic photography into territory at
once abstract and beautiful. This elegantly designed and produced tribute to his
career, printed in Spain, contains 73 examples of his work and reveals why he
has been considered an important exponent, along with Aaron Siskind, of the
relevance of abstraction to modern photography.

A typical Garnett photograph uses light to redefine the shape, line and texture
of the land and, in several cases, the sea. Shadows become the armatures on
which his pictures hang, the marks of plows, rivers and eroded hills conspiring
to create a kind of gestural drawing familiar to those acquainted with postwar
art. One of the limitations of this genre, to which Mr. Garnett has been
devoted, is that it too much resembles the products of paintbrush and pen, and
as a result strikes a minor key. But there is no doubting the artist's integrity
of eye and intent, or his ability to make us rephrase our stock replies to the
question of what photography is supposed to tell us about the world.

THE BODY: Photographs of the Human Form. By William A. Ewing. (Chronicle,
$29.95.) Diminutive in page size but large in intention, "The Body" navigates
the shoals and rapids of an esthetically and politically loaded topic, and
manages not only to survive the journey but also to shed substantial light on
how photographers have used the human figure for a variety of pictorial purposes
through more than 150 years. Some of these purposes have been prurient and
oppressive, as in a German photograph from 1900 of a naked Tunisian woman
kneeling on a plank with her hands and legs bound with rope, and some have been
at least primarily artistic, like the elegant modernist nudes of Imogen
Cunningham, Alfred Stieglitz and Edward Weston.

"The Body" approaches its subject across a spectrum of such intentions and
purposes, dividing itself into chapters called "Fragments," "Figures," "Probes,"
"Flesh," "Prowess," "Eros" and the like. The "Probes" chapter is the most
fascinating, focusing on medical and scientific images of the body, from
photomicrographs of bone tissue to Harold Edgerton's stuttering stop-motion
depiction of a golf swing. William A. Ewing does a creditable job of balancing
art-historical information with references to present-day debates about
pornography and about the control of the representation of one's own body.
Robert Mapplethorpe, Chuck Close, Lucas Samaras and Lorna Simpson are among the
many men and women artists who make this subway-sized Baedeker entertaining and
educational.

THE CAMERA I: Photographic Self-Portraits from the Audrey and Sydney Irmas
Collection. By Robert A. Sobieszek and Deborah Irmas. (Los Angeles County Museum
of Art/Abrams, $49.50.) Accompanying an exhibition of photographs from a Los
Angeles collection, "The Camera I" reveals the faces of 135 photographers who
turned the lens back on themselves. It also suggests a great deal about the
artistic self-image of photographers since the middle of the last century.
Encountered early on are Roger Fenton and Francis Frith, two of Britain's great
19th-century photographers, both dressed as exotic Zouaves. At the turn of the
century one finds Edward Steichen holding a painter's brush and palette and
Edward Sheriff Curtis, the photographer of Indians, looking like a buffalo
soldier. Closer to the present are Diane Arbus, reflected in a mirror and
wearing only underpants, and Andy Warhol, bow-tied, seen in a strip of
photo-machine prints. What makes this book so fascinating, however, is not its
celebrity factor; these self-portraits register the ambitions of their time,
whether the soft-focus estheticism of the pictorialist period, the radical
angles and extreme close-ups of European modernism, or the shifting, dress-up
disguises that distinguish post modernism. Photographers, we are led to believe,
not only adopt styles, they become them.

HARMS WAY: Lust & Madness, Murder & Mayhem. By Joel-Peter Witkin. (Twin
Palms/Ingram, $60.) The camera's obsession with death, sex and pathology is
recorded here through a sly and creepy collection of images that are as far
removed from the realm of everyday museum photography as this book is from
everyday publishing. "Harms Way," originally reviewed in these pages on Sept. 11
of this year, is really an archive of four disturbing collections: police
photographs of murder victims, medical photographs of deformities and ugly
growths, pictures from the Kinsey Institute dealing with unconventional
expressions of sexuality, and images of mental patients taken by Dr. Hugh W.
Diamond in the 1850's. As interesting and stomach-turning as some of the
photographs are, the essays by Eugenia Parry Janis, Stanley B. Burns and James
Crump give the project intellectual weight, collectively noting that photography
was enlisted in each case to provide a means to categorize, comprehend and
ultimately control human behavior. As is usual with this publisher, the
reproductions are rendered with cae and the design and production quality are
peerless.

THOMAS STRUTH: Strangers and Friends, Photographs 1986-1992. Essay by Richard
Sennett. (MIT, $39.95.) Thomas Struth is one of the most promising of a young
generation of German photographer-artists influenced by Hilla and Bernd Becher,
whose putatively objective approach to putatively mundane subject matter elicits
surprisingly emotional results. Mr. Struth has absorbed the complex lessons of
the Bechers and applied them to a variety of subjects; while he is best known
for his clotted views of overbuilt city spaces and for museum interiors in which
visitors stare intently at masterpieces, he also has essayed portraits of
individuals and family groups and images of single buildings. In this volume,
which mixes these subjects together seemingly arbitrarily, his diverse
attentions do not clearly add up, but the absolute sureness of his eye is
unmistakable. Mr. Struth deserves all the attention he has been getting.

FAREWELL TO BOSNIA. By Gilles Peress. (Scalo/Distributed Art Publishers, $60.)
In reaction to the oversimplifying tendencies of much magazine and newspaper
photojournalism, Gilles Peress has set himself the task of explicitly rendering
exactly how confusing and disorienting it is to be in the midst of a far-off,
fast-breaking and inevitably dangerous news story. He also means to show us, as
he did in a previous volume, "Telex Iran" (1984), that the events occasioning
the news are more of a riddle than we would assume. In "Farewell to Bosnia," an
unrelenting book of edge-to-edge pictures taken between March and September of
last year, the messages of "Telex Iran" are repeated in more graphic fashion.
Mr. Peress visits hospitals that care for the victims of shelling attacks, as
well as the barricades where sniper fire leaves bodies and trails of blood. He
also focuses on families surviving hardships and the loss of their own. But in
the end something seems missing; perhaps it is the customary assurance that even
in the face of overwhelming despair, photographs offer the consolation of their
own provisional meanings.

LISTENING TO THE RIVER: Seasons in the American West. By Robert Adams. Poems by
William Stafford. (Aperture, $45.) "Listening to the River" is one of two books
published this year by Robert Adams, who is perhaps America's most thoughtful
and eloquent living photographer-writer. (The other is a book of essays, "Why
People Photograph," also published by Aperture.) It contains Adams's recent
black-and-white photographs of fields and farms and the sides of roads, pictures
that seem utterly unprepossessing at first glance but that, like the previously
published poems by William Stafford accompanying them, reward close attention.
In some pictures, streaks of light in the sky invade the land below the horizon,
suggesting a moment of revelation; elsewhere, clouds seem to hover like silent
observers. Laid out two and three to a page, the images form small sequences
that chart the passage of time as crops grow and are harvested, and as trees
flower, mature and wither. The meditative quality that marks Mr. Adams's best
work is very much in evidence here, and while the reproductions do little to
make any of the images stand out individually, they do permit the sum to exceed
its parts.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Wandering Violinist, Abony, Hungary, 1921." (FROM "ANDRE
KERTESZ")(pg. 44); "Link and Thom With Night Flash Equipment, March 16, 1956."
(O. WINSTON LINK/FROM "THE CAMERA I")(pg. 49); "New York City, 1955," by Robert
Frank. (FROM "ROBERT FRANK")(pg. 42)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Freshman, 46, Makes Football Team

BYLINE: By DOUG SCANCARELLA

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 9A;  Column 4;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: KUTZTOWN, PA.


CHUCK ROSEBERRY walked into the football office at Kutztown University to ask
the head coach, Al Leonzi, if he could try out for the team.

Mr. Leonzi, sitting behind a desk cluttered with film clips and scouting
reports, began asking the questions he usually asks walk-on candidates: "Do you
have a tape? Do you have any films? Do you have any references from your high
school football coaches?"

The coach recalled that he was so busy at the time that he barely glanced across
the desk. When all the answers came back "no," he started to say, "Listen, kid .
. . ," but then stopped in disbelief.

Standing in front of him was not exactly the typical college student. In fact,
Mr. Roseberry is 46 years old and a veteran of two wars, Vietnam and the Persian
Gulf.

"I thought he was joking," the coach said. "I told him that he was in the wrong
office. He must have been looking for the admissions office; this was the
football office."

But Mr. Roseberry, a former New Jersey police officer in West Morris and Warren
Hills and also a former New Jersey prison guard, has been wanting to play
college football since graduating from Washington High School in Warren Hills in
1966.

"A lot of people thought I was crazy," he said. "I just always wanted to play
college ball. I didn't get a chance when I was younger, so I wanted to take
advantage of this opportunity."

Mr. Roseberry didn't get a chance to play college football in the 1960's because
he didn't have a very good academic record. Though he received recruitment
letters from college football powers like the University of California in Los
Angeles, Texas and Kansas, all those schools were turned off by his subpar
grade-point average.

"I thought I was stupid," he said. "My teachers in Jersey used to tell me I
wasn't trying, but I knew I was. I was an academic mess, and I didn't know why.
I just knew I couldn't get into college with my grades."

It wasn't until 1991 -- a quarter of a century since his high school graduation
-- that Mr. Roseberry, by then an Army Reserve private, was sent to Kuwait,
realized why he had suffered academically all those years before.

During a seemingly endless night in Kuwait, he became involved in what he
describes as a "shoulda, woulda, coulda conversation" with an Army pal, Dan
Guzie.

"I was telling him how I wished that I went to college," Mr. Roseberry
explained. "When he asked me why I didn't, I told him that I couldn't read, that
I always saw things wrong. I couldn't spell, read or see numbers correctly. He
told me that it sounded like I had dyslexia.

"I had never even heard of dyslexia before. When I got myself checked out, I
found out I had it. It was like a huge weight was taken off my shoulders. All of
those years I thought I was just dumb. Now, I realized I wasn't."

When Mr. Roseberry and Mr. Leonzi finally got around to talking about football
again, Mr. Roseberry explained that he was a linebacker on Washington's 1965
squad, which finished 8-1 in the highly competitive New Jersey North-West
Conference.

Impressed enough with Mr. Roseberry's desire to fulfill his lifelong dream, the
coach invited him to try out. After a full month of two-a-day practices, Mr.
Roseberry made the team.

"From the beginning, I knew a 46-year old wouldn't help us win," the coach said.
"I felt, however, that he would be an inspiration to the rest of the team.
Here's a 46-year-old guy with dyslexia that has time for football and still
manages a 3.0 grade-point average. He's a great example for the younger guys."

Mr. Roseberry, a freshman, is majoring in psychology and works part-time for the
campus police. His goal is to teach grade-school youths with learning
disabilities.

Mike Flood, who coached Mr. Roseberry at Washington High School before becoming
the head coach at Lehigh, said of his former pupil: "I was skeptical, but I
admired him for it. Having played Division I ball at Villanova, I knew it wasn't
easy. And for a 46-year-old, it certainly wouldn't be any easier."

Kutztown, a Division III team that has produced National Football League stars
like Andre Reed of the Buffalo Bills and Bruce Harper of the New York Jets, had
a 5-5 record going into the final game of the season. Though Mr. Roseberry, a
third-string lineman, has yet to see action on the field, his spirits have not
been dampened.

"I didn't expect to be a starter," he said. "I just wanted to be a part of it
and help in anyway I can. If that means being a practice-player, than that's
fine."

"I love mixing it up with guys, the competition," he added. "We push, shove and
fight during practice. Afterward, we walk off the field and laugh it up in the
locker room. That's football. You're enemies on the field, friends off of it.
That's how it was in the 60's. That's how it is now."

After practice, Mr. Roseberry usually parts ways with his teammates and goes to
his apartment to study.

"The last thing college kids want to do is go out on a weekend with a correction
officer," he said. "If I was them, I wouldn't want to hang out with someone as
old as my mother and father."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Realizing his dream of playing college football, Chuck
Roseberry, 46, has made the Kutztown (Pa.) University team. (Kutztown
University)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tanks Take On New Role as Artificial Reefs to Attract Fish

BYLINE: By JENNIFER WEITZMAN

SECTION: Section 13NJ;  Page 14;  Column 1;  New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: MANASQUAN


NEW JERSEY is participating in a nationwide cooperative program between the
Department of Defense, the National Guard and Federal and state environmental
groups by taking outdated Army tanks and dumping them into coastal waters to
form artificial reefs to create habitats for fish.

The program of using old war materiel is called Reef-Ex (for Reef Exercise), and
officials say it will improve and extend the life of artificial reefs and
rebuild the environment and economy of coastal states.

New Jersey's recreational fishing industry, with 125 miles of coast, is second
only to that of Florida, with 1,100 miles of coast.

On a recent morning, four miles off Manasquan Inlet, a group of Army officials
and environmentalists watched in awe from a charter boat as six M-60 main battle
tanks, which saw extensive service in Vietnam, were pushed one by one by a
bulldozer off a barge. They plunged with a huge splash into the water and sank
65 feet, coming to rest on the Axel Carlson and Sea Girt reef sites. They were
the first of about 100 tanks destined for New Jersey.

Officials said that by the next day, small marine organisms like mussels and
barnacles would find the tanks to be a good place to hide and would attach
themselves to the steel plates inside and outside the open vehicles. These
creatures will become food for the dozen species of fish the program hopes to
attract, including sea bass, blackfish and lobsters.

The tanks are also expected to provide a safe breeding ground for juvenile fish
to grow and survive, which in turn would attract more sports fisherman and
divers to the area. Officials said they hoped that by this time next year,
fishing boats would find the waters rich with fish.

The 40-ton tanks are certified to be environmentally safe by the Army Corps of
Engineers and Federal and state environmental agencies. Army and Navy
reservists, performing their two weeks of annual active-duty training, prepared
the tanks by draining all fluids, removing transmissions, engines and hydraulic
systems and steam-cleaning the tanks.

"We are pretty hopeful these will be good reefs for divers and will provide
better access for people fishing," said Bruce Halgren, maritime fishery
administrator of the New Jersey Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife. Mr. Halgren
said that because the hulls of the tanks were so thick, about 12 inches of
steel, they would last 50 to 100 years as reefs before dissolving in the salt
water.

That compares with the 5-to-10-year life span of thinner items like old cars and
ships used before.

Capt. William Higgins of the Defense Logistics Agency Headquarters Reserve Unit
in Washington said he came up with the idea of creating artificial reefs from
the excess tanks. The Department of Defense was faced with the task of getting
rid of 3,500 tanks from its Anniston, Ala., Storage Depot. Rather than cut the
tanks up for scrap and remove their firing power, which was initially estimated
to cost $10,000 each, Captain Higgins decided it would be cost effective to have
the tanks removed intact and dropped into the ocean.

With the advice of the Environmental Protection Agency and the National Marine
Fisheries Service, Captain Higgins said, the best solution, both environmentally
and economically, was to use the tanks as artificial reefs to stimulate fish
growth.

"By taking obsolete but environmentally safe tanks, we can recycle them and
improve our existing artificial reefs," said Maj. Gen. Paul J. Glazar, the
Adjutant General for New Jersey. For each tank sunk, he said, New Jersey will
generate tens of thousands of dollars during the life span of the tanks from
increased fishing and diving.

New Jersey is expecting about 100 tanks to be distributed along the coast by
next year. It is estimated that the entire program will generate $7 million in
economic activity for New Jersey over the next half-century.

"We need to maximize the reefs because the fish need to be protected," General
Glazar said. "We don't have the coral reefs other states and islands have, so we
have been creating artificial reefs using chained tires filled with concrete,
automobiles and excess rubble along the coast of New Jersey for several years."

"Also, the openings throughout the tanks will provide the fish with more places
to hide and give scuba divers more interesting places to visit," General Glazar
added.

Captain Higgins said the program would be run at minimal cost to New Jersey, as
it is one of the nation's testing states. The Army, the Navy and the Coast Guard
will use funds for training reserves to pick up the tab for moving the tanks,
and the program will seek donations from local businesses and grants and funds
from the Federal Government and the states involved to cover the cost of the
barge.

William Figley, reef coordinator for the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, said that fishing is a multimillion-dollar industry for the state
and that its resources "can be there forever if we take care of it."

The fish population over the last few years has dwindled 30 to 50 percent
throughout the North Atlantic, as determined by the National Marine Fisheries
Service. There are more fishermen using better technology, resulting in an
excessive amount of adult fish being caught. Housing developments in wetland
areas and the pollution of rivers add to the depletion of the fish population.

Now the trend is to rebuild marine life by regulating how many fish can be
caught and by developing new reef habitats. "The goal of the Reef-Ex program is
to create enough habitats for the 12 species known in New Jersey," Mr. Figley
said.

He added that the tanks were a small portion of the artificial reef project and
that the project would take several years before a significant change could be
detected.

The deliberate creation of artificial reefs in New Jersey first started in 1935
through the efforts of party boat and charter boat volunteers. Artificial reefs
have historically developed along the Eastern Seaboard from natural disasters
and shipwrecks.

The Reef-Ex program was instituted in Alabama this year when 100 tanks were
dropped throughout the summer to create two major artificial reefs. Steve Heath,
marine biologist with the Marine Resources Division of the Alabama Department of
Conservation and Natural Resources, reported in The Mobile Register that a
"tremendous number of fish" were seen around the first six tanks dropped in
June.

He said, "The program has lived up to all our expectations, and we expect it to
get better as the food web grows."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In a program to expand artificial reefs as habitats for fish,
six old Army tanks were recently pushed off a barge near Manasquan Inlet. About
100 tanks are planned for the program. (Photographs by Kevin P. Coughlin for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 4, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ADAM WALINSKY, PRIVATE LOBBYIST FOR PUBLIC SAFETY

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 18;   Column 5;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 233 words


As a New York City police officer (lieutenant) with a law degree and an M.A. in
psychology, I support Adam Walinsky's desire for better-educated police officers
("Private Lobbyist for Public Safety," by Elizabeth Kolbert, Oct. 30). However,
his concept of requiring college graduates who receive Government grants for
tuition to serve four years in a Police Corps is utterly impractical.

When I joined the New York City Police Department, in 1973, I was a college
graduate who had served in the Army and in Vietnam. I was almost 30 and I was
married, with a child. It took me about three years to feel as if I were a
productive cop. Walinsky's apparent lack of respect for experienced police
officers is surprising, considering his extensive experience with police
officials around the country.

After the four years of service, what happens then? Do we really want to lose
cops who have finally begun to grasp the complexities of the social and legal
services needed in the communities they police? What makes Walinsky think
college grads will be immune to racism, greed, alcoholism, drug abuse and every
other problem that plagues police departments?

As Lawrence Sherman, the president of the Crime Control Institute in Washington,
states, we do need better-educated cops, but we also need older, more
experienced cops -- really professional cops.

MICHAEL J. GORMAN
New York

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 985 words



International A3-13

GINGRICH URGES BOSNIA ACTION

Newt Gingrich, the next Speaker of the House, urged arming Bosnia's Muslims and
warning Serbs of an air attack, but Democrats said such a plan could involve
thousands of American soldiers. A1


RETHINKING ISRAELI PACT

Israel is rethinking the pact to lead to self-rule in the West Bank in light of
the difficulty of protecting Israeli settlers there, as Israel resumes
negotiations with Palestinians on the next phase of self-rule. A1

HEADING HOME TO VIETNAM

Many young Vietnamese whose families fled the war to the United States are
returning, some to do business and others to stay despite objections of older
refugees to dealing with the Communists. A1

MANY ISSUES ON EUROPE

The Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe will have many unresolved
issues for its meeting this week, ranging from Bosnia to NATO membership to how
the group should strengthen itself. A13

PEACEKEEPING FAILING

The experiences of United Nations peacekeeping in Bosnia and Somalia is causing
the organization to face the fact that it is faltering in one of its most
crucial tasks and there is nobody else to do it. A12

President Clinton supported Bosnia's territorial integrity. A12

SHORT HONEYMOON WITH CUBA

Hopes for improved United States-Cuban relations, so high three months ago, are
fading with the election of a Republican Congress and with the little action
toward broad reform in Cuba. A3

RWANDA'S LOOSE CANNONS

A story from Rwanda in which soldiers said they were paid by a business rival to
kill a man points out the danger of troops, not paid by a cash-strapped
Government, looking for a way to survive. A7

An attack by gunmen on a Stockholm disco. A5

New Delhi Journal: Turning a prison into an opportunity. A4

National A14-17, A20, B9

STEMMING A TIDE OF COURT CASES

A panel of Federal judges is proposing new limits on access to Federal courts as
part of a plan to cope with delays and huge increases in caseloads.  A1

A BIG STICK LOSES HEFT

As U.S. growth continues 10 months after the Federal Reserve began trying to
slow it, more economists believe that its all-purpose tool, the shifting of
interest rates, may not be as effective as it used to be. A1

A BUYING FRENZY, AGAIN

Another holiday-season case of missing Morphins? It was not supposed be this
way. The toymaker says it is shipping 10 times as many Mighty Morphin Power
Ranger toys as it did last Christmas.  A1

COMMEMORATION OF FREE SPEECH

The alumni of the Free Speech Movement, which brought the First Amendment to
Berkeley, reunited for their 30th anniversary.  A14

F.B.I. RELEASES CRIME NUMBERS

The number of serious crimes reported to law-enforcement agencies nationwide
fell 3 percent in the first half of 1994, the Federal Bureau of Investigation
announced.  A14

GINGRICH LEVELS DRUG ACCUSATION

Representative Newt Gingrich said up to a quarter of White House staff members
may have used illegal drugs in the four or five years before they began their
jobs.  A17

MIAMI'S CHANCE AT THE SPOTLIGHT

With the first Western Hemisphere summit conference in 30 years a few days away,
officials are trying to position Miami as a center of international commerce.
A16

A DEATH IN PHILADELPHIA

Three weeks after a 16-year-old boy was killed, the focus is shifting from how
it happened to how a more efficient 911 emergency system might have prevented
it.  A16

QUESTIONS LINGER IN G.M. CASE

News analysis: Though a settlement means that General Motors will not have to
recall its trucks, questions over safety and the weighing of money and lives
remain.  A16

INDICTMENT SEEN IN TRAVEL CASE

A lawyer for the former head of the White House travel office, Billy Dale, said
he expects Federal prosecutors to seek an embezzlement indictment against his
client.  A17

CLUE TO RARE FORM OF EPILEPSY

A rare form of epilepsy, unresponsive to treatments, may be caused by abnormal
activity in the immune system, a report says.  A20

Puerto Rico's voucher plans for students was struck down.  A14

A former Surgeon General now plans to tackle obesity.  A20

Metro Digest B1

PUBLIC TO PRIVATE

The Giuliani administration has, without fanfare, begun turning over to private
companies an array of services now handled by municipal employees -- from
replacing traffic signs to stuffing envelopes to keeping city buildings clean.
A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-20

Kennedy Center Honors.  C11

Marcel Carne on the eve of a cinematic anniversary.  C11

Theater: "Hapgood." C11

Music: Green Day.  C12

I Musici di San Cassiano.  C14

Josh Redman at Town Hall.  C16

"Christmas at Rainbow Corner." C20

Dance: National Dance Theater Company of Jamaica.  C14

Ballet Hispanico.  C18

Books: "Cobb." C15

TV: "Wuthering Heights." C18

Sports C1-10

Basketball: Starks responds.  C3

Columns: Anderson on Jets.  C8

Football: Giants jar Browns.  C1

Jets fall to Patriots.  C1

A paralyzed Frier roots for his Seahawks.  C9

Cowboys thwart Eagles.  C7

Hockey: Gretzky and friends playing in Europe.  C2

Sports People: C5

Obituaries B10

Elizabeth Glaser, AIDS activist.

Ronald Edwards, one of the Great Train Robbers in Britain in 1963.

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Keeping score on the budget.

The obesity gene.

Restrain those prior restraints.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Jefferson still lives.

William Safire: And then there were two.

Will Marshall: A mainstream contract.

Daniel Cantor and Juliet Schor: A populist manifesto.

Neediest Cases B7

Chronicle B9

Bridge C15

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Exodus of Refugees Reaches Its Last Stage

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 434 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The final months of the 20-year exodus of refugees from Vietnam are a jumble of
departures and returns as some of the last unfinished business of the Vietnam
War is completed.

Planeloads of families heading for America are crossing paths with returning
Vietnamese-American entrepreneurs as well as with boat people rejected for
asylum who are flying home from refugee camps.

Within little more than a year, the refugee era will be over, and Vietnamese
will enter the United States not as refugees but as immigrants, mostly for
family reunification, like the citizens of other nations at peace.

A State Department official said that about 64,000 Vietnamese had already
returned from Asian refugee camps since 1989 and that about 40,000 remained in
the camps. This unluckiest group of returnees reached camps in Hong Kong and
Southeast Asia but were refused resettlement in the West because they were
judged to be economic migrants, not genuine refugees fleeing political
repression.

The State Department official said that the major camps were scheduled to be
shut down by the end of 1995 and that the United States expected to take in only
1,000 or so more of these boat people before that time.

In addition, the organized program in which the United States accepts Amerasian
refugees -- the offspring of American servicemen -- directly from Vietnam is
essentially complete, with about 20,000 Amerasians and 60,000 of their family
members resettled.

The final formal refugee program, involving about 35,000 former political
prisoners and about 110,000 family members, is scheduled to be completed by the
end of next year or soon after.

The paths of some of these various groups quite literally cross, as Camilla Ngo,
a successful Vietnamese-American lawyer, discovered when she left Vietnam on a
brilliantly sunny morning at the end of a three-week visit. She found her
aircraft crowded with former prisoners and their families, each wearing a red
plastic-covered name tag, following the refugee route she had taken two decades
before to the United States.

Among the refugees was Hue Nguyen, a former captain in the South Vietnamese Army
who spent six years in a labor camp and much of the time since then in the
effective exile of a remote farming region. At the age of 52, he was making one
last try at beginning his life anew.

With him and his wife were their two daughters, ages 7 and 9, who were leaving
their homes and playmates, as Ms. Ngo had done many years before, to become
Americans. Mr. Nguyen said he hoped they would study hard and perhaps, one day,
return to Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Prospects for U.S.-Cuba Thaw Now Are Fading

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Dec. 4


Three months after an agreement between the United States and Cuba to stop a
flood of refugees raised expectations of a thaw in the countries' relationship,
the prospects for quick, significant change are fading.

Cuba's hopes for a weakening of political support for Washington's tough
economic sanctions against the island were shattered by the sweeping Republican
victories in the Congressional elections.

The hopes of American officials that new free markets for farm products and
other items in Cuba might portend broader changes by President Fidel Castro are
starting to dissolve in the absence of steps toward political reform.

The dialogue between Havana and Washington, having turned almost cordial after
their migration agreement on Sept. 9, is growing harsher in tone, and and
American officials say they expect tensions to increase.

"Things probably will get nastier before they get better," one Clinton
Administration official said. "You cannot say what would have happened if the
Republicans hadn't won so big, but there's no question that the picture has
changed."

In a move that Cuban officials have warned could jeopardize the migration
accord, the Clinton Administration confirmed on Friday that it would drop its
policy of denying direct entry into the United States to the nearly 32,000
refugees detained at the American military bases in Panama and Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.

As many as 8,000 children and parents who had formerly been required to return
to Havana to apply to emigrate will now be considered for asylum on what
Washington says are humanitarian grounds.

American officials, who reversed themselves after Cuban-American groups
threatened embarrassing protests during the hemispheric summit meeting that
begins in Miami on Dec. 9, say they are confident that Cuba will not retaliate
by unleashing a new flood of refugees. Casting the parole of families as an
exception, they say they will begin to build more permanent housing for refugees
at Guantanamo Bay.

But Cuban officials appear to be reading the shift as a sign that the political
distance established between the Democratic Administration and conservative
Cuban-Americans by the migration pact is narrowing once again.

Under the immigration deal, Cuba agreed to stop the exodus of refugees in return
for a promise of at least 20,000 visas each year for Cubans wanting to emigrate
to the United States.

The agreement was widely seen as favoring the Clinton Administration, which
resolved its immigration problem while refusing even to discuss lifting the
United States economic embargo against Cuba, which Cuba's Government blames for
the exodus.

Senior Cuban officials acknowledged that the pact would satisfy only a fraction
of the people who might wish to leave. They said they accepted it in the hope
that by ending the three-decade American policy of automatically admitting Cuban
refugees, it would discourage those tempted to flee on highjacked boats or
homemade rafts.

By normalizing one aspect of their relationship with the United States, the
officials added, a precedent might be set for improvement in other areas.

The strategy was a return to the kind of incremental approach that Cuba took
years earlier in trying to end American pressure directed at policies ranging
from Cuba's ties to the Soviet Union to its support for Latin American
guerrillas.

It also seemed to jibe with the policy articulated by the Clinton Administration
at the height of the refugee crisis. If Mr. Castro moved to open up the island's
politics and economy, officials said, the United States would respond with
"carefully calibrated" steps.

But before, during and since the talks, Cuban leaders have insisted that they
will never change their political system to meet conditions that the United
States chooses not to set on its relationships with Communist countries like
China and Vietnam. To many analysts of United States-Cuba relations, that made
it even more likely that improvement would depend on small steps, not big ones.

A first such step came when Cuba dropped its longstanding insistence on a high
surcharge for collect telephone calls and the Federal Communications Commission
authorized American companies last month to begin direct-dial telephone service
to the island.

In another move to increase the flow of information, Clinton Administration
officials said they might soon authorize American news organizations to set up
bureaus in Cuba and allow Cuban reporters to work in the United States.

Cuban officials have not said whether they would welcome American reporters. But
they have long said such access would depend on the reciprocal treatment of
Cuban journalists.

Despite having tightened restrictions on Cuban-Americans wishing to travel or
send money to relatives in Cuba, Clinton Administration officials say they are
considering moves to ease travel to the island by American students and
academics, and to improve mail service between the countries. Officials say
there is some support in the Administration for talks with Cuba on issues like
cooperation against drug trafficking and the renewal of a treaty on hijackings.

But the same officials say such measures may now depend even more now on the
political climates of Washington and Florida.

Until last month, a small but growing number in Congress from both parties were
calling for a reconsideration of American policy. Now, the louder voice and
closer scrutiny are likely to come from conservatives like Jesse Helms, the
North Carolina Republican who is expected to take over as chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee next month.

Similarly, as Gov. Lawton Chiles of Florida grappled over the summer with the
exodus of refugees, he weighed the political power of the state's
Cuban-Americans against a new and potentially stronger constituency: voters
opposed to rising immigration. But while Mr. Chiles won re-election with little
Cuban-American help, the Democrats' hold on the state is precarious enough to
give pause.

"There is only one Democratic governor in the eight largest states in the
country, and that's in Florida, so I don't think Clinton is going to do anything
about Cuba that could get him on the wrong side of the Florida Democratic
Party," said Peter Hakim, the president of Inter-American Dialogue, a policy
research organization in Washington. "He may have to worry about getting the
nomination now."

Some American officials say there is still a chance that the Administration
might respond to economic changes in Cuba, depending on how far they go. They
speculate about a possible backlash against Cuban-American groups, which have
remained bitterly critical of Administration policy despite winning a series of
concessions. Other officials say any real shift in policy hinges on political
moves that Cuban officials have shown no readiness to make.

"The missing piece there is any kind of movement forward in terms of democracy
and human rights," one State Department official said. "Our position is that
Fidel has to take the first step now."

Cuban officials say they remain confident that pressure for change in American
policy will build in the longer term.

They note that only Israel stood with the United States in October as more than
100 countries voted in the United Nations to condemn the American embargo. They
have also begun to more aggressively court American business executives as a
political counterweight to Cuban-Americans, telling them that the embargo is
allowing Canadian, Mexican and European businesses to snap up the best
investments in Cuba.

But at the same time they seem to have put aside the optimism with which they
announced the migration accord in September.

"Those agreements are not enough for us to begin talking about a solution to the
problems in the relationship of the United States with Cuba," the vice president
of Cuba's Council of Ministers, Carlos Lage, said recently. Referring to the
embargo, he added, "They are not even enough to conclude that this is the
beginning of the end."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Clinton Administration says it will consider many Cuban
refugee families for asylum instead of requiring them to return to Cuba and
apply for emigration. Before the policy change, Mario Faraminon, 34, an
electrician from Havana, waved goodbye on Nov. 22 after swimming to Cuban soil
from the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay, where he had been detained. He
was later picked up by the Cuban authorities. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reversing an Exodus -- A special report.;
Former Refugees See Opportunity in Vietnam

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LENGTH: 2090 words

DATELINE: DA LAT, Vietnam


She couldn't stop sampling the tropical fruits, the steamed snails, the candied
plums. She was enthralled by the children, with their red scarves, trooping
along the dirt paths to school. Almost every conversation seemed to end in
laughter; she was home, and she was happy. "This is where I want to raise my
family," she exclaimed.

Nearly 20 years after she fled the fall of Saigon with her parents, Camellia
Ngo, now a thoroughly American 28-year-old lawyer, has decided to return to
Vietnam. And she is not alone. As one of the most dramatic refugee tides in
modern times draws to a close, a new generation of Vietnamese raised in the
United States is heading home in small but growing numbers to do business and
sometimes, like Ms. Ngo, to stay on.

With the lifting of the American trade embargo in February, as many as 10,000
Vietnamese a month are returning for visits to a country hungry for their cash
but often suspicious of their western ways. They are greeted by frequent
inefficiency, red tape and primitive working conditions, even while fending off
a continuing backlash at home among many older refugees who oppose contacts with
the Communist nation they fled.

These homeward journeys, coming near the end of an exodus of some 800,000 people
to the United States, are a crossroads in Vietnamese-American relations. By the
end of next year, officials in Washington said, organized refugee departures
from Vietnam should at last be over, and the largest refugee camps in Hong Kong
and Southeast Asia will be shut down, with the final stragglers sent back to
Vietnam.

The refugees left this country in distinct waves: first high-ranking officers
and Government officials; then desperate boat people; then, under separate
agreements with Hanoi, the Amerasian offspring of United States servicemen, and
now, planeloads of aging and mostly broken former political prisoners and their
families.

In contrast, although there are no official estimates, Ms. Ngo is a member of an
emerging new group, young Vietnamese-American professionals who see Vietnam as a
land of business opportunity as well as roots: the first optimistic generation
of refugees, without the scars of war and loss their parents carry.

"I know the image of Vietnam is always associated with war, but I was too young
for those memories," said Ms. Ngo. "All I remember about my country is how
beautiful it is. I remember playing hopscotch with my friends and using things
like banana peels and stones. I remember running down the street and hiding
under a tree when the rain came. I miss my classmates and the games that we
played."

Last month Ms. Ngo was on her second visit to Vietnam, negotiating projects for
her Oakland law firm, the Miller Group, which is acting as a middleman for
foreign investors.  She was also preparing to take up residence here next year
as her company's representative, along with her Vietnamese-American husband,
Michael Nguyen, a mechanical engineer.

"We want to do business here, but business is mainly our means of getting here,"
she said as she sat at a tiny outdoor food stall in the small mountain city of
Da Lat, surrounded by the bustle and banter of the marketplace, eating a grilled
banana sweetened with coconut milk. "This is why Michael and I want to come back
to Vietnam, to live the simpler life our parents lived. We want our children to
grow up in a place where they know their neighbors."

Ms. Ngo's fascination with the land her parents fled makes them a little uneasy,
but unlike the parents of some of her Vietnamese-American friends, her father
never threatened to disown her if she returned. And unlike some Vietnamese
entrepreneurs in emigre enclaves like Little Saigon, just south of Los Angeles,
she has not suffered the pressures of emigre politics. The firebombings and
killings of Vietnamese who advocated contacts with Communist Vietnam appear to
have stopped now, but prominent Vietnamese-American businessmen who travel to
Hanoi can still face death threats and angry demonstrations in the United
States.

"Sometimes I hear my father joking with his colleagues: 'This is my daughter;
she's an attorney, and now she's working with the Communists,' " Ms. Ngo said.
"I always laugh and I just leave the old-timers to themselves."

The New Enterprises
From Hamburgers To Condominiums

From consulting firms to car rental companies to boutiques and restaurants like
Ca-li-pho-nia Ham-bu-ga in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, the enterprises
of overseas Vietnamese are appearing on the business scene in an increasingly
hustling Vietnam.

There are no firm figures on the number of refugees who are returning to stay,
known as "Viet kieu." But their businesses are a growing part of an infusion of
hard currency from Vietnamese in the United States that the Hanoi Government
says totals more than $600 million a year.

Some less affluent emigres bring a few thousand dollars to help their families
establish small enterprises like guest houses, tailor shops or motorcycle repair
shops. Wealthier individuals or groups are negotiating to build hospitals or
finance condominiums and beach resorts.

The smaller enterprises mostly fly below the radar of Government interference
and red tape. Like other ethnic Vietnamese, Ms. Ngo benefits from family
connections -- an aunt in this Government office, an in-law in that one -- that
she said can at least help steer her through the bureaucracy.

She also makes full use of family ties to address the mutual mistrust that can
make business negotiations here a delicate minuet. Suspicion on the Vietnamese
side has been furthered by foreign entrepreneurs who have taken advantage of the
Vietnamese's innocence in the marketplace. In addition, an underclass of
Vietnamese-American con men have engaged in financial scams and bogus marriages
that have made many local people wary.

On the other side of the coin, foreign entrepreneurs face a morass of vague and
shifting investment laws and a business culture in which local enterprises seem
happy to sign exclusive contracts with more than one foreign firm. And there are
mixed feelings here toward the Viet kieu, people who left their country at a
time of hardship and returned prosperous.

The New Arrivals
'I Do Not Know Where I Belong'

In addition to these uncertainties, returning Vietnamese can find themselves
uncomfortably suspended between two worlds.

Khuong Ho is a 31-year-old lawyer who came to the United States at the age of
12, graduated from Yale and the University of Connecticut law school, and now
lives in Plainville, Conn. He has returned to Vietnam "seven or eight times" as
a consultant on investment ventures.

"You feel like somehow magically you are able to go back to a time of your
youth, except that you are older and more mature and know what the world is
about," he said. He has revisited the villa his family was forced to abandon in
1975 and made friends with its new occupant, the former Communist mayor of Ho
Chi Minh City.

Giang Tran, 30, the son of a parliamentary leader in the former South Vietnamese
Government, fled the country by boat in 1979 but returned 10 years later
because, he said, he was restless in America. Active in business here, he has
organized two Vietnamese trade fairs for American companies, but said he still
felt restless.

"I was in the United States a few weeks ago, and I have homes in Saigon and
Hanoi," he said, "but I do not know where I belong."

One of the more recent arrivals is Lan Vu, 27, the Vietnam representative of the
Sika Group, a Swiss chemical company. She, too, said she found herself "sort of
caught in the middle" between the two cultures, learning to tread the narrow
path between being an outsider and a native.

"After 20 years in the States, well, I am American," said Ms. Vu, who grew up in
Portland, Ore. "But the more time I spend here, the more I love it and the more
I feel at home.  Probably intellectually I'm American, but the emotional part of
me is Vietnamese."

But she added: "I am very much a Northwest person. I can't wait to go back and
go skiing. I miss mountain biking. I miss the winter."

In addition to young and hopeful returnees like Ms. Vu and Ms. Ngo, there is
another generation that has been returning for some time to their homeland:
elderly people who were unable to adapt to life in the United States.

Among these are Ms. Ngo's maternal grandparents, who joined the family in San
Francisco in 1989 after a 10-year wait for visas, but stayed just nine months
before giving up.  "They returned to their village, and they bought a new home,"
Ms. Ngo said, but they too remained restless.  "They are home, but now they miss
their children."

Ms. Ngo's grandmother has fallen ill, and the older generation is concerned that
relatives from America be present for a proper Buddhist funeral.

"Now my grandfather calls my mother every single week," Ms. Ngo said. "He tells
us to keep the telephone clear at a certain hour every day in case grandmother
passes away so someone could come quickly to pay their respects at her funeral."


The Family
Home in Vietnam, But as a Stranger

The flight to freedom in the United States was the start of a long climb up for
Camellia Ngo's family in San Francisco. A former professor at the Vietnamese
military academy in Da Lat, and the deputy general secretary of the Ministry of
Education at the time of the Communist victory, her father performed janitorial
jobs and studied engineering when he first arrived. He saved enough to buy a
small Chinese restaurant where Ms. Ngo and her two older siblings cleared
tables, wrapped won tons and did their homework at a booth in the back. The
family now owns and manages a large commercial dry cleaning plant that services
hotels in San Francisco.

It was not until she was in college that Ms. Ngo became interested in her roots,
seeking out Vietnamese friends, listening to Vietnamese music and finding
opportunities to speak the language. She graduated from the University of
California at Berkeley and the Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco, and
soon afterward went to work in the law firm of Thomas R. Miller, which was
exploring investment opportunities in Vietnam.

Once back in Vietnam, Ms. Ngo found herself both at home and a stranger in the
house of her 79-year-old grandfather, Ngo Ngoc Kiem.

The photographs on the family altar were of her grandmother and
great-grandmother; the round-faced child in the montage of family pictures on
the wall was Ms. Ngo herself. But Americans are exotic creatures here, and a
sense of wonder surrounded her visit last month with her extended family.

"This is my table, whenever I come," she said, standing in a small bedroom at
the back of the house in the coastal city of Da Nang, where American troops
first landed in 1965 and where the Vietnamese now are eager for American
investment. "I have my light. They put out sweets for me, and my grandfather
picks me fresh flowers every morning from the garden. Every night my aunt comes
in and makes sure they hang the mosquito net correctly for me because if I get a
bite, in the morning she'll get yelled at."

In the morning, briefcase in hand, Ms. Ngo was power-dressed in smart culottes,
ready to negotiate a deal to import beer from a brewery in Da Nang. But first,
following her grandfather's instructions, she lit sticks of incense and fell to
her knees before the family altar to pray to the souls of her ancestors. On her
last trip, she said, she had prayed for help in passing the California bar
examination; now she needed to offer a prayer of thanks.

"I wonder who I would be or what I would be doing if Saigon never fell or if we
had stayed," she said later.  "I would have grown up in a narrower world, and I
don't know if I would have been quite so inquisitive. And definitely, I have had
more chance to realize my potential as a woman.I'm sure I'm a much better person
for having grown up an American."

The paradoxical good fortune of having been a refugee sometimes embarrasses Ms.
Ngo. "People always ask you, 'What do you do in the States?' " she said. "I
always skirt the question, because my success is hurtful for people who stayed
behind."

She is the same age as her cousin, Bui Thuc Quan, who sells cloth in the
marketplace, and the two young women sometimes see each other as mirror images.
"We were both born in 1966, the Year of the Horse," Ms. Ngo said. "She always
says, 'We are the same age, but one horse got fed and the other didn't."'

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Camellia Ngo, a 28-year-old American lawyer, center, at the
marketplace in Da Lat, Vietnam, last month. At right is her cousin, Tran Minh
An, who is helping her as she negotiates projects for her California law firm.
(Seth Mydans/The New York Times)(pg. A1); Camellia Ngo, left, is part of a new
generation of Vietnamese who were raised in the United States but are returning
to Vietnam. Last month, she visited in Da Lat with her grandfather, Ngo Ngoc
Kiem, at the family altar, and her aunt, Ngo Thi Ngoc Lan. (Seth Mydans/The New
York Times)(pg. A8)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 5, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Restrain Those Prior Restraints

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 413 words


It has been 23 years since the courts, responding to the most urgent pleas of
the Federal Government, temporarily enjoined publication of the Pentagon Papers,
a Vietnam War history. That temporary prior restraint on publication was thought
necessary to let the Supreme Court examine the Government's dire warnings of
peril to national security -- which the Court dismissed after inspecting the
documents.

That experience should have taught judges to deny out of hand virtually any
request to restrain publication, even temporarily. Yet over the years judges,
almost casually and on flimsy one-sided pleadings, often issue those restraints.
Judge Peter Leisure of New York's Federal court acted in that silly tradition
the other day, ordering a halt to the distribution of Penthouse magazine's
January issue.

For what purpose? To hold a solemn inquiry into whether Penthouse was misusing
partially nude photographs of Paula Jones, who is the plaintiff in a lawsuit in
another court charging President Clinton with sexual misconduct. She said that
the pictures, taken in 1987 by a former boyfriend, were being used to cash in on
her notoriety, a violation of New York law against commercializing private
citizens' lives without their consent.

Obviously the character and conduct of Paula Jones does not match the Vietnam
War controversy in importance. By the same token, legal attempts to squelch news
of Ms. Jones must be weightier than her pleadings to the court -- especially
when she remains free to press her suit for money damages after publication.

Upon sober reflection, two days after issuing his restraint Judge Leisure found
that the pictures serve a journalistic purpose, a defense against illegal
commercialization under New York law, because they are related to an
accompanying article of public interest. Indeed they do, since the article
challenges the credibility of her claims that Mr. Clinton harassed her in 1991.

All this should have been obvious from a few moments' glance at Ms. Jones's
pleadings, yet without even consulting the magazine's lawyer the judge issued
the restraining order and called for a hearing. Meanwhile 400,000 copies of the
magazine headed for subscribers and distributors.

Judge Leisure's ultimate ruling was correct, but his casual issuance of a
restraining order will disquiet everyone who thinks judges are ill equipped for
such judgments and ought to feel the restraint of the First Amendment from
making them.

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News;
Ascendance of an Improbable Leader -- Richard Keith Armey

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 5


Here is how Newt Gingrich says someone can tell that a "revolution" is truly at
hand. When he and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas had to leave an important meeting
of Republicans on Friday, they left Representative Dick Armey and Senator Trent
Lott of Mississippi in charge.

Mr. Gingrich of Georgia, the next Speaker of the House, told this anecdote to a
gathering of conservatives here, and the audience cheered wildly.

Mr. Armey, a 54-year-old former economics professor from Texas, is widely
perceived as farther right and more hot-headed than Mr. Gingrich -- and as an
improbable leader. He used to sleep in the House gym to save money; he has
implied that Hillary Rodham Clinton was a Marxist, and, upon meeting her, he
said, "The reports on your charm are overstated, and the reports on your wit are
understated."

But today, Mr. Armey, whom the Almanac of American Politics dismissed as "hardly
likely to be a power in the House," was crowned during a jubilant ceremony on
Capitol Hill as the first Republican majority leader in 40 years.

Like Mr. Gingrich, Mr. Armey is eager to rise above his Dennis-the-Menace
reputation and show that he can be constructive.

"We didn't win power; we gained responsibility," Mr. Armey told the sixth annual
Conservative Leadership Conference on Saturday night. "We do not view ourselves
as a temporary strike force. We view ourselves as a permanent presence."

Whether Republicans maintain that presence will depend in part on how Mr. Armey,
who is beginning his sixth term in the House, conducts himself in the 104th
Congress.

In an interview in his Capitol Hill office, Mr. Armey, a former marathon runner
with a 6-foot-3-inch frame and a sunny demeanor, volunteered that his days of
defiance were over.

Being a member of a "repressed minority" -- House Republicans -- had forced him
to be uncharacteristically confrontational, he said. Those were the bad old
days, when he did things like acidly hiss on the House floor to Democrats that
"your President is just not important to us," a remark that disturbed even his
fellow Republicans.

"I was just trying to fight for some turf to stand on," he explained.

Then he smiled. "Now I own the playing field."

As majority leader, he will serve as Mr. Gingrich's commander in the field. His
first duty: within 100 days, to engineer votes on the 10 items in the "Contract
With America," the Republican's campaign agenda, including a balanced budget
amendment and term limits.

He calls the contract merely the "shakedown cruise of the counter-revolution,"
predicting a far more drastic paring down of Government once the Republican ship
is under full sail.

He and Mr. Gingrich are expected to work well together. They are not personally
close, but they share a similar background and many goals. Earlier this year,
they fused their considerable powers of positive thinking to convert the
Republican "minority mentality" into a "majority mentality." They forged the
contract together -- sharing a deep commitment to such items as eliminating
welfare payments to unwed teen-age mothers -- and helped usher in the new order
on Nov. 8.

"They have managed to put aside two pretty formidable egos to form a very good
working relationship," said Ed Gillespie, a spokesman for the House Republicans.
"As Newt says, 'Armey put aside my ego, and I put aside Armey's.' "

As a public speaker, Mr. Armey appears less grandiose and less polished than Mr.
Gingrich, but is more of an ideologue. And while Mr. Gingrich likes to theorize
about the big picture -- renewing civilization, the future of the solar system
-- Mr. Armey tends more toward the here and now. But their construct is the
same: to transform the welfare state into what they call an opportunity society.

Although he is a central figure now in his party's establishment and was
unchallenged for majority leader, Mr. Armey first came to Washington 10 years
ago with the air of the citizen-legislator that the Republican contract
promotes. Chairman of the economics department at North Texas State University
in Denton, Tex., he was watching the House proceedings on C-Span one night in
1984 when he turned to his wife and said, "Honey, these people sound like a
bunch of darn fools." She said, "Yeah, you could do that."

Beating the incumbent Democrat in his suburban Dallas district, Mr. Armey made
news during his first term by sleeping on a cot in the House gym to save money.
When evicted, he repaired to his office couch.

He now rents a house in Maryland, where he lives with his second wife, Susan.
They have five grown children from previous marriages. He will use the limousine
and driver that come with the job of majority leader only to get around
Washington; to and from work, he will continue to drive his red pickup truck,
which sports a "Jimmy Buffet for President" bumper sticker. He is an avid
fisherman; among his angling companions is Supreme Court Justice Clarence
Thomas. Mr. Thomas's wife, Virginia, is on Mr. Armey's staff.

The son of a grain dealer, Richard Keith Armey was born on July 7, 1940, and
grew up in Cando, N.D. He was the first in his family to attend college,
graduating from Jamestown College in Jamestown, N.D., and went on to earn an
M.A. from the University of North Dakota and a Ph.D. in economics at the
University of Oklahoma. He was raised in the Church of the Brethren and later
became a Presbyterian. Today, he said, "I am officially Presbyterian, but I
probably enjoy the Baptist Church more."

Like Mr. Gingrich, also a Baptist, he did not serve in the military. "I slotted
in between Korea and Vietnam," Mr. Armey said. "I turned 18 in 1958 and
registered in a small rural county in North Dakota. I never applied for a
student deferment, but I ended up getting one. By the time I was 24, I had a
wife and baby, and that was 1964. By that time, I think I was effectively out of
the pool."

To Mr. Armey, America's chief problem is big government.

"Government is too big and in its excessive size does too much of the wrong
thing in the wrong way," he said. "Fat weakens muscle." His most notable
achievement as a legislator was writing a bill that depoliticized the process of
shutting down obsolete military bases.

Although his role as majority leader requires him to represent his party, he
makes no secret of his own conservative agenda.

During his first campaign in 1984, Mr. Armey pledged to phase out Social
Security, still a long-term goal. And he wants to repeal the ban on assault
weapons enacted as part of this year's crime bill, and the Brady law, which
imposes a five-day delay on handgun purchases.

A strong opponent of abortion, he argued against including abortion coverage in
any health care plan, saying, "Are we going to be so fem-centric that we're
going to condone the self-indulgent conduct of the body of a woman who has
already demonstrated" that she was "damned careless with it in the first place?"

He also favors amending the Constitution to allow for voluntary school prayer.
In underscoring that prayer be voluntary, he said, "No child should be made to
pray -- any more than a child should be made to sit through class with condom
instruction."

He added, "We would like to experiment with prayer in schools now that we've had
30 years of your experiment with condom distribution."

Addressing the conservative meeting in Washington, Mr. Armey told the story of
Charlie, a janitor he knew who was mentally retarded but kept his building clean
and safe. When Congress increased the minimum wage "to make Charlie better off,"
Mr. Armey said, he was fired because his employer could not afford the higher
wage. When Mr. Armey next saw him, Charlie was on welfare and using food stamps.

"That kind of compassion that beguiled the country into accepting a minimum wage
and denied this man his dignity, his freedom and his fundamental, God-given
right to work at a job commensurate with his abilities is very painful to
watch," Mr. Armey said. "And I do not intend to watch that kind of misguided
compassion during a Republican majority."

NAME: Richard Keith Armey

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Dick Armey, who is the first Republican majority
leader in 40 years, before giving a speech. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cocaine Found Smuggled Inside a Dog

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


To get their goods into this country, drug traffickers have tried just about
everything, from hiding cocaine or heroin in hollowed-out coconuts and bowling
balls to swallowing condoms stuffed with the drugs.

But even hardened United States customs officials were surprised to find nearly
five pounds of cocaine surgically implanted in the abdomen of a female Old
English sheepdog that had been shipped from Colombia to Kennedy International
Airport.

The drugs, tightly packed in 10 condoms, each about the size of an orange, were
discovered by a veterinarian who X-rayed the dog for customs inspectors last
Thursday. The agents had become suspicious after finding the dog, emaciated and
lethargic, during a routine inspection of the freight on an Avianca flight from
Bogota, Colombia.

The dog, which the authorities said had been legally shipped as cargo on the
flight, had not been fed for at least two weeks and suffered from a
life-threatening inflammation of the abdomen because the smugglers had not
sterilized the condoms before implanting them. But the dog survived the surgery
to remove the drugs, and on Saturday, a suspect was arrested when he came to the
airport to pick her up.

"As far as we know, this is the first instance where drugs were surgically
concealed in the body of an animal," said Janet Rapaport, a spokeswoman for the
Customs Service.

She said the wholesale value of the cocaine was about $50,000, but other
officials said the ultimate retail value on the street would be significantly
more, depending on its purity.

The suspect was identified as John Erik Roa, 22, of Paterson, N.J. Court papers
filed by the United States Attorney's office at Mr. Roa's arraignment last night
in Federal District Court in Brooklyn said Mr. Roa "admitted that he knew the
dog's abdomen was laden with cocaine."

Mr. Roa was charged with drug trafficking and ordered held without bail pending
further court proceedings. His court-appointed lawyer, Abraham L. Clott,
declined to comment about the case.

Customs officials estimated that the drugs had been implanted in the dog at
least two weeks before she arrived on Avianca's Flight 020. Ms. Rapaport said
that she could not provide any other information about the smuggling scheme, but
that the authorities were trying to determine who had shipped the dog and who
else was involved.

As for the sheepdog, Dr. Steven Weinstein, the veterinarian from Queens who
removed the drugs, said, "She really made a miraculous recovery." When the dog
was found, he said, she weighed about 40 pounds, well under the 65 or so she
should have weighed.

"She hadn't eaten in about two weeks," he said. "She was in poor condition. She
was weak, depressed, emaciated -- skin and bone."

And with the bacterial infection caused by the unsterilized condoms, he said, "I
think she would have died in a few days had no one taken this out of her." He
estimated that the dog was 4 years old.

Dr. Weinstein's practice is in Howard Beach, Queens, and he also runs the Vet
Port at Kennedy, which handles problems with animals shipped through the
airport. He said the X-rays showed "numerous oval-shaped foreign bodies that
didn't belong there, so I said, 'Let's open her up surgically and take a
look-see.' "

Fortunately for the dog, which is gray and white and about two feet high, none
of the condoms had ruptured, which he said would have been fatal.

Federal prosecutors said yesterday that they did not know of any
cruelty-to-animals provision of Federal law that could also be used in
prosecuting Mr. Roa or anyone else who might be arrested in the case. The charge
lodged against him at the arraignment last night was attempting to possess and
intending to distribute cocaine.

Mr. Roa's brother, Andre, reached at the family home in Paterson last night,
said that his brother had worked in a pizza parlor until about two months ago,
when he moved out of the house. He said the family had a dog of its own, a
German shepherd, which he described as a "family dog who has nothing to do with
drugs."

Federal law-enforcement officials yesterday described other cases in which
traffickers had used drastic methods over the years to smuggle or attempt to
smuggle narcotics into the country. John Dowd, a spokesman for the Drug
Enforcement Administration, recalled a conspiracy during the Vietnam War to
smuggle heroin from Southeast Asia into the United States in the cadavers and
coffins of American servicemen killed in the war.

As for implanting drugs in a dog, Mr. Dowd said that in his 25 years with his
agency he had not heard of that method before. But he said he was not surprised.
"I think there are constantly new methods being used," he said.

Ms. Rapaport said the dog would remain under medical supervision in the custody
of the Customs Service. She said it was possible that a member of the agency
would adopt the dog or that she could be trained as part of the Customs Service
canine squad that searches for drugs in international shipments. In any case,
she said, it will be "a while until further information will be available about
the dog's future."

In the short run, however, Dr. Weinstein has given it a name.

"I named the dog Coke," he said. "As a joke," he quickly added.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mike Moloney, a Customs Service inspector, suspected trouble
with a dog and found smuggled drugs. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)(pg. B3);
Dr. Steven Weinstein, a veterinarian, with a dog that arrived at Kennedy
International Airport from Colombia last week with cocaine-filled condoms
implanted in its abdomen. The condoms are visible as oval shapes in an X-ray.
(Photographs by Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)(pg. B1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Companies Rediscovering Indonesia

BYLINE: By ANDREW POLLACK,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1420 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


General Motors is back in Indonesia, selling the Opel Vectra sedan made at its
new assembly plant outside Jakarta, the first G.M. plant in Southeast Asia.

G.M. is one of many American companies that have discovered or rediscovered
Indonesia, lured by the prospect of its 5 to 7 percent economic growth, abundant
natural resources and a population of 200 million, the world's fourth largest.

The company first entered what is now Indonesia in 1930 and by the early 1960's
controlled more than 40 percent of its modest automobile market. Then, in 1964,
as Indonesia swung politically leftward, the auto maker and other American
companies were forced to leave the country. Now it is starting over in a nation
in which about 90 percent of the vehicles are Japanese.

"It's very easy to give up market share, but you pay in blood to get it back,"
said Leonard L. Brownfield, the president of the General Motors Indonesian
venture. But he said G.M. had no choice but to come back. "It's not hard to see
where all the hot economies are," he said.

Indonesia's commercial prospects were highlighted when President Clinton and
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown, here to attend an Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation meeting, announced on Nov. 16 the signing of 17 agreements involving
about $40 billion worth of business for American companies in Indonesia. The
United States Government has also designated Indonesia as one of 10 big emerging
markets for promoting American exports.

Big energy projects and the development of transportation and communications
represent particular short-term opportunities for investors. In the largest
agreement announced during President Clinton's visit, Exxon will join Pertamina,
the Indonesian national oil company, in developing a huge offshore natural gas
field. Exxon's investment could exceed $35 billion.

Other American companies are aiming at Indonesia's emerging middle class of
consumers. While they represent only 10 percent of the population, that is still
more people than live in Australia.

Citibank recently opened the first drive-up automated teller machine in
Indonesia. Amway has begun to peddle perfume and honey-glycerine soap. A crowded
McDonald's in central Jakarta operates 24 hours a day. Procter & Gamble, Avon
and Levi Strauss are also doing business here.

Indonesia, once chary of foreign investment, is now worried about losing out to
China, Vietnam and other countries. So the Government has been gradually
liberalizing laws that severely restricted foreign investment and imports. In
June, it allowed foreign companies to own 100 percent of their businesses in
Indonesia for the first 15 years. Previously, most foreign ventures required an
Indonesian partner.

The list of other activities closed to foreigners is shrinking. In June, foreign
companies were finally allowed to engage in the business of providing roads,
telecommunications networks, ports and other public works. Still, enough
restrictions remain to make Indonesia a daunting place to do business. For
example, foreigners are not allowed to own retail stores. And Amway is hampered
by a law that requires police permits for any gathering of five or more people.
The company holds 1,200 such meetings a month with distributors and customers

Corruption is also said to be commonplace in Indonesia. Some American business
executives say the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act passed by Congress, which
prohibits American companies from paying bribes, has put them at a disadvantage
in winning contracts. During Secretary Brown's visit, an American lawyer said he
was involved in three cases in which American telecommunications companies had
to pass up joining multinational consortiums because of the act's restrictions.

Indonesia's economy was dominated until recently by the petroleum industry, in
which American companies like Mobil, Atlantic Richfield and Caltex, a joint
venture of Chevron and Texaco, have long been active. And since 1967, Freeport-
McMoran of New Orleans has extracted copper and gold from one of the world's
largest mining operations in Irian Jaya.

But outside natural resources, American businesses have not been that active in
Indonesia, though the ban on their activities here was lifted in 1967 after
President Suharto took power.

"Indonesia for some reason has not been discovered by the American public and
the business community," said Louis A. Clinton, president of the American
Chamber of Commerce in Indonesia and head of Freeport-McMoran's activities here.

Japan has been the most active investor in the manufacturing and consumer
sectors. Indonesia is the largest recipient of Japanese foreign aid, receiving
$1.15 billion in 1993. Much of that is thought to go toward contracts with
Japanese companies. By contrast, American foreign aid to Indonesia amounted to
only $94 million last year.

From 1967 through 1993, Indonesia's Government approved a total of $13.6 billion
in direct foreign investment by Japanese companies. The next largest investor
was Hong Kong, at $5.5 billion. Total investment approved from American
companies was $3.3 billion.

These statistics from Indonesia's Investment Coordinating Board, however, do not
reveal the extent of American investments because they omit sectors like oil and
natural gas or banking. Moreover, analysts say only about 30 percent of approved
investments are actually made.

But American investment in Indonesia is rising. Approved investment rose from
$154 million in 1990 to $922 million in 1992 before falling back to $445 million
last year.

Major opportunities lie in road building, electric power and telecommunications
and other projects. Indonesia plans to spend more than $50 billion on these
projects by the end of the decade.

The General Electric Company and Mission Energy, an affiliate of the SCE
Corporation, are among the partners in a company that will build Indonesia's
first privately owned power plant. California Energy will build, own and operate
a geothermal energy power plant.

In telecommunications, AT&T already makes digital switches in Indonesia. Nynex,
Bell Atlantic, Motorola and GM Hughes Electronics are working on other deals
ranging from wireless to more conventional telephone services. With fewer than 2
phone lines per 100 people, one of the lowest ratios in Southeast Asia,
Indonesia expects to install millions of lines by the end of the decade.

The public works projects and other expansion also provide opportunities for
construction companies like Fluor Daniel Inc. of Irvine, Calif., which has been
in Indonesia for nearly 25 years. And Indonesia has become a low-cost
manufacturing base for shoemakers like Reebok and for the toy maker Mattel.

American banks and other financial institutions can benefit from the huge need
for the financing of such projects. Maarten J. Hulshoff, chief executive and
general manager of Citibank Indonesia, said all his bank's customers were
"seriously planning to at least double capacity in the next three years -- you
can understand what that means for the banking business."

In the automobile industry, car imports, which were banned until 1992, are now
allowed, but with tariffs of 200 percent. An assembly plant is required for auto
makers to compete in Indonesia, so they have set up 16 automobile plants to
serve a market that can afford about 300,000 vehicles, an amount that one plant
could produce.

And various Indonesian taxes, like import duties and luxury taxes, keep prices
high. The Opel Vectra that General Motors began selling last week has a base
price of about $45,000, twice its price in Europe.

Americans doing business here warn that Indonesia's commercial laws are not yet
fully in place, which makes lobbying and personal contacts essential.

Sometimes those relationship reach up to the top. President Suharto's children
control vast business empires that win many big Government contracts. American
companies often end up with these companies as partners. Waste Management Inc.
operates a chemical waste treatment and disposal site in partnership with
Bimantara, a company controlled by one of the President's sons. General Motors'
partner is the President's half brother.

"The legal system does not protect the businessman as they expect in the United
States," said Harvey Goldstein, chairman of Harvest International, a company
that advises on doing business in Indonesia. "The three most important factors
in doing business are relationships, relationships, relationships."

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "A New Welcome" shows total approved foreign direct investment
from 1989 to 1994, cumulative approved foreign direct investment and total
approved direct investment from the U.S. from 1989 to 1995 for Indonesia.
(Source: Indonesian Investment Coordinating Board)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 6, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Man. A Woman. Just a Movie. Not a Polemic.

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1135 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Dec. 5


The fact that Hollywood's first high-profile film about sexual harassment
involves a woman harassing a man leaves its creators and stars uneasy and a bit
defensive.

"We're making a movie, not an issue," said Michael Douglas, a star of
"Disclosure," the adaptation of the Michael Crichton suspense thriller about
corporate intrigue and sexual politics, which will open on Friday. "It's really
about the use of harassment as a tool for power. And it's very effective in
terms of allowing people to look at the issue from the other side."

"Disclosure," which is directed by Barry Levinson, also stars Demi Moore as an
ambitious and venal corporate executive on the rise and Donald Sutherland as her
boss in a cutting-edge computer company.

The plot involves a married Seattle executive, played by Mr. Douglas, whose
expectation of a promotion is shattered when he's passed over in favor of a
cool, smart and ferociously ambitious executive (played by Ms. Moore) from the
company's Silicon Valley headquarters. Ten years earlier, the two had an affair.

When the Moore character aggressively seeks to resume the affair, and is
rejected, she promptly charges him with sexual harassment and seeks to destroy
him. The film was adapted by Paul Attanasio, the screenwriter for "Quiz Show,"
who has turned it into a high-tech suspense thriller, complete with a
virtual-reality sequence.

For Mr. Levinson, the Academy Award-winning director (for "Rain Man,"), the film
is clearly an effort to take on a commercial, star-driven venture and get his
career back on track after such prominent recent flops as "Toys" and "Jimmy
Hollywood." For Mr. Douglas, the movie presents yet one more role in a highly
successful career in which he depicts ordinary men in extraordinary situations.
("Actually I did some of this role in 'Fatal Attraction,' " he said. "But that
was 10 years ago.")

And for Ms. Moore, the role of Meredith Johnson in "Disclosure" serves as a
potential breakthrough into the top echelon of movie stars. Ms. Moore got the
part after Annette Bening became pregnant and dropped out.

"In truth, I was terrified," said Ms. Moore in an interview. "Her nature is so
different than mine," she said of the character she plays.  "I didn't want to
make her stereotypical. I didn't want to fall into the obvious trap of evil
seductress. It's such a rich part: the complexities are endless. And in the end,
she's probably a lot smarter than most of the people around her and I think
really good at her job."

"We all know women and men like this," Ms. Moore continued. "Manipulative.
Dishonest. She enjoys pushing buttons and watching people's discomfort. She's
not out to hurt anybody as long as nothing gets in her way."

Ms. Moore said the sexual harassment issue, and the male-female reversal in the
movie, deepened the film's high-speed plot. "This is a dynamic way of dealing
with a volatile issue," she said. "The fact that the roles are switched provides
us, I think, with a certain heightened sensitivity and awareness of this issue."

"Disclosure" is hardly the first film to deal with harassment and sexual
politics; last month, for instance, David Mamet's "Oleanna" was released. But it
is the first high-profile movie with big stars to try to tackle the issue.

Mr. Levinson said over breakfast one morning recently that the male-female
reversal fascinated him. "Somehow if you flip the roles, you have to pay
attention," he said. "The film was a way to look at all of this in a fresh light
and see how difficult it is for anybody to say, 'I have a problem; this is what
happened.' And knowing how dangerous it is for your life and reputation."

Acknowledging that "Disclosure" had become more of a thriller than an
exploration of sexual politics, he said: "It's not a polemic; it's not the
definitive film on sexual harassment. If that's what someone wants, they'll have
to look elsewhere."

The film is considered to have some of the best women's roles in years, however,
including the performance of a New York-based actress, Roma Maffia, as Mr.
Douglas's lawyer.

As to Ms. Moore's character, Mr. Levinson said: "Some people look on her as a
villain-villain. And I thought, Wait a minute. If this was a movie about a man
harassing a woman, we'd never look on the guy in the same way. He wouldn't be
such a villain. There are some cutthroat business executives out there. The fact
that a woman does it makes her even more villainous."

The often tangled relations between men and women have been central to most of
Mr. Levinson's films, which included "Diner," "Tin Men," "Good Morning Vietnam"
and "Bugsy."

"The whole struggle between men and women, the struggle to understand one
another, the frustration we have with one another have been themes in pretty
much everything I've ever done," Mr. Levinson said.

With its marquee names and sexy plot, "Disclosure" is not the sort of movie one
immediately identifies with Mr. Levinson. His early autobiographical films
earned him a place of respect in Hollywood, which was further enhanced by the
Oscar-winning "Rain Man," a film with big stars but not an obviously commercial
story line. But the director, fully aware that he needs a hit after two
consecutive failures, was delighted to take on this movie, he said, and he
seemed pleased with the results.

"In today's marketplace, it just gets harder and harder to make personal films,"
he said. "It's getting worse. Even after you go through the agonies of making
one, then you have to face the people at studios who say: 'We can't sell it. We
can't market it. We don't know what to do with it.' "

Mr. Levinson recently moved to Northern California with his family, partly to
escape the hothouse atmosphere of the film business, he said, and partly to send
his two young children to good public schools. Of his recent failures, he said
simply: "It's always disappointing. Sometimes movies are neither mainstream nor
art house. They fall into a no-man's land. You do what you have to do."

He shrugged. "I'd be most upset if I were afraid to make those kinds of movies,"
he said. "That would scare me more than anything."

As to Mr. Douglas, the role of Tom Sanders in "Disclosure" is one more part in
which the actor plays a more-or-less average man caught up with beautiful,
dangerous women, from Glenn Close ("Fatal Attraction") to Sharon Stone ("Basic
Instinct") to Ms. Moore. Tough work, but somebody's got to be the victim. "The
part was pretty close to me," he said in a telephone interview. "I could be that
person. I didn't have to put on a mask."

What appealed to him about making the movie? Mr. Douglas paused. Working with a
director like Mr. Levinson, he said. And finding a highly polished script.
"Besides," he said with a laugh. "It's a good ride."

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The director Barry Levinson, center, with Demi Moore and Michael
Douglas, the stars of "Disclosure." (Karin Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Team in Place, Gingrich Comes Out Slugging

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 6


Sometimes ebullient, sometimes combative and sometimes both, Representative Newt
Gingrich held a news conference today to introduce the new members of the House
Republican leadership, defend his ideas on orphanages and welfare, and take a
hard poke at the press.

Mr. Gingrich, who will be Speaker in the new House, called the news conference,
at a House office building next to the Capitol, largely to hail decisions by the
new Republican majority to prune the House bureaucracy.

But he was quickly drawn into a discussion of some of his recent public
statements, including his suggestion that orphanages may be preferable to the
arrangement the current welfare system makes for some displaced children, and
his contention on Sunday that a top Federal law-enforcement official told him
that a quarter of the White House staff were recent drug users.

Mr. Gingrich said those and other statements were part of a political style that
he said was preferable to the "old-style, smoke-filled room" approach of
traditional politicians.

He was most voluble about his position on orphanages, which he said had been the
victim of "grotesque distortion" by the news media and the White House.

In extended remarks, Mr. Gingrich said he proposed that states be allowed to
experiment with varying ways of tending to displaced and abused children --
including, he said, orphanages or youth hostels -- in contrast to a welfare
system that encourages that children be placed with their parents or in foster
homes.

Mr. Gingrich said that he had adopted the idea from William Bennett, the
conservative scholar and former Education Secretary, and that he believed it
might be preferable to a system that now emphasized keeping young people in
environments that are breeding grounds for crime and social problems.

"The White House distorts it into Dickens revisited, as if their alternative was
straight out of Norman Rockwell," he complained, adding that he was only saying
that "in a city like Washington, where babies are abandoned in dumpsters, should
there be an organized alternative" to existing practices?

He was supported by Representative Susan Molinari, a Staten Island Republican,
who said New York City's problems with abandoned and displaced children were
proof that the welfare system was bust. "What we envision is not to make these
decisions from Washington," she said.

Mr. Gingrich also said he never claimed that anyone in the White House was a
recent drug user, as was widely reported after his appearance on a network
interview program on Sunday, but that he merely relayed the views of a senior
law-enforcement official, whom he did not identify.

The charge had brought a rebuke from Leon E. Panetta, the White House chief of
staff, who said Mr. Gingrich was acting irresponsibly. But today Mr. Gingrich
said that was in the past. "I saw Leon at a Christmas party last night," he
said. "He was fine."

Mr. Gingrich said later that he believed that distortions of his views on that
and other topics were the creations of the news media. "From Vietnam and
Watergate," he said, "the press is in a long cycle in which scandal-mongering
and personal attacks have replaced policy debate" in a way that was unthinkable
a few decades ago.

Asked whether his own crusades might not have contributed to that cycle,
responded:

"Isn't it a fact that you bear some responsibility, too? Isn't it? Answer me.
Yes or no?"

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Newt Gingrich, right, the House Speaker-to-be, yesterday brought
out some of the Republicans who will play big roles in the new Congress. Among
them were Susan Molinari of Staten Island, who supported Mr. Gingrich's position
on orphanages, saying that in some cases they might be an alternative to
existing practices. Bill Paxon of upstate New York will head the Republican
political arm in the House. (Amy Toensing for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B;     Page 2;     Column 5;     Style Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


DONALD GRATZ is a metal fabricator who worked with PHILIP JOHNSON when he
designed the Four Seasons restaurant. So when his wife, ROBERTA BRANDES GRATZ,
decided to give him a party on Tuesday, she booked two rooms off the Grill Room.
That gave the 65 guests -- among them Maya Lin, the designer of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial; Laurie Beckelman, the former chairwoman of the Landmarks
Preservation Commission, and James Stewart Polshek, the architect -- another
chance to admire his tables, chairs and serving carts.

The occasion was billed as "100 Years of Donald Gratz," but, no, Mr. Gratz is
not 100. He turned 60 on Wednesday, and the remaining 40 years signify his
career with his family's company, Treitel-Gratz.

Perched in a child-size Barcelona chair that Mr. Gratz had made for his
daughter, Mr. Johnson delivered this toast: "When I was 60, I was just at the
beginning of my career. It's ridiculous to talk about being 60."   NADINE BROZAN

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Message to Bosnians;
Allied Talk of a U.N. Withdrawal Warns The Combatants They Risk All-Out War

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia, Dec. 9


The highly publicized plans for a big NATO operation to withdraw United Nations
troops from Bosnia carry a blunt message to the belligerents: Stop fighting a
buffered, low-level war or risk an all-out war.

But any withdrawal of the more than 24,000 United Nations troops in Bosnia is
almost certainly several months away. "The watershed will be next spring,"
Yasushi Akashi, the top United Nations official in the Balkans, said today.

Thus, rather than an announcement of an imminent withdrawal, the short-term goal
of American and French statements this week about having tens of thousands of
boys in green tanks ready to rescue the boys in white tanks has been to focus
the minds of the nationalist politicians who destroyed Yugoslavia and took their
people to war.

The presence of the United Nations force has almost certainly contributed to
extending the Bosnian war. It has done so by keeping movements of front lines to
a minimum, providing basic sustenance and offering Balkan politicians an
instrument to maneuver beneath the avid gaze of the world's networks and
newspapers.

The United Nations force account for 6 percent of the Croatian economy and most
of the virtually nonexistent Bosnian economy. Remove the more than 35,000 United
Nations personnel in Bosnia and Croatia, and the area's politicians may have a
different agenda. To begin with, they will have to feed people.

The question now is: What calculations will these politicians bring to bear on
the virtual ultimatum that has been presented?

The Serbs do not want NATO to come into Bosnia to help the evacuation of the
peacekeepers. They fear that to get United Nations troops out of the protected
eastern Muslim enclaves of Zepa, Srebrenica and Gorazde, the NATO forces would
have to carve out corridors, possibly with assistance from United States troops.
Those corridors would come from Serb-held land. NATO might not be in hurry to
give them back.

"If NATO or the United States want to assist the United Nations, then they
should not approach Serbian territory," Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
leader, said today in an interview with Reuters. "We would not attack them, but
if they approach Serb territory and are hostile to us, there would be a big war
between us. There will be another Vietnam."

The Serbs are also concerned that they would also be more exposed to a NATO
attack if they could no longer use peacekeepers as a shield.

To stop NATO from coming, the Serbs would therefore seem more likely to seek a
minimum understanding with the United Nations forces. United Nations hostages
are likely to be released; many have been already, and 67 more were freed today.
The Serbs also allowed an aid convoy to reach Bihac for the first time in nine
weeks.

At the same time, the Serbs may well maneuver to secure a permanent cease-fire
and reopen talks on carving up Bosnia. They have 70 percent now and are said to
be prepared to settle for about 50 percent, provided the map offered by the
five-nation "contact group" is redrawn.

The Muslim-led Bosnian Government has mixed feelings about the departure of
United Nations forces. On the one hand, they fear that a withdrawal would expose
them to Serb attack. On the other, they would welcome NATO troops, provided they
come to stay for a while and not merely to evacuate the United Nations troops.

Despite Bosnian hopes, Defense Secretary William J. Perry stressed today that
the United States remained determined to avoid entanglement in the war. The
Bosnian Government is aware of this. It also knows, as Mr. Perry said, that
without the peacekeepers on the ground, "there would be more flexibility in the
future for applying military leverage."

But the Bosnian Government would also pay a heavy price for a United Nations
departure.

The eastern enclaves and Sarajevo would be acutely vulnerable. The Government
has scant resources to feed its people. The army would put up a strong fight but
would still face, at least initially, a huge Serbian superiority in tanks and
artillery.

That is why the Bosnian Prime Minister, Haris Silajdzic, said this week, "We
asked the United Nations force to come, and we want them to stay." The statement
was a victory of analysis over anger: the reluctance of United Nations
commanders to call in NATO air power has repeatedly enraged the Bosnian
Government.

But with NATO waiting in the wings, and the politics of the Republican
Congressional leaders Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich offering not-too-distant hope,
is the Bosnian Government worried enough about a United Nations departure to
compromise?

Mr. Akashi hopes the answer is yes. But the compromises would be formidable.

The Government would have to accept the reopening of negotiations on the
"contact group" map, the virtual independence of a Serbian entity within Bosnia,
and the abandonment of its desire to inflict a battlefield defeat on Mr.
Karadzic, who sent his militias to kill and evict several hundred thousand
Muslims.

It is widely expected that there will now be great pressure on the Government
from the United States to accept such compromises: financial incentives,
promises of military support for the peace, and so on. Croatia, Bosnia's conduit
for arms but its ally only up to a point in fighting the Serbs, is also seen as
likely to push for a settlement.

Such pressure may carry the day. But it appears just as likely that the
Muslim-led Bosnian forces will want to fight on. If so, the time will come when
the United Nations threats, and the NATO plans, will have to be executed.

What then? "If we leave," Mr. Akashi said, "the suffering of civilians,
particularly in the Muslim enclaves and in Sarajevo, may be of such tragic
proportions that there would be a cry for a reintroduction of an international
force, whether dressed in green or white."

He continued: "The conflict would sharpen and may spill out of Bosnia. Cleavages
between the United States and Russia would be exacerbated. There would be a
major destabilization of Europe."

A grim warning. But the slow agony of Bosnian over the last 32 months has also
been grim and has suggested, increasingly, that if the United Nations stays, a
half-hearted war may drag on for decades.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina (pg. 7)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 24;  Column 1;  Style Desk

LENGTH: 193 words


Not all Democrats and Republicans are at loggerheads in Washington. Senator JOHN
F. KERRY, Democrat of Massachusetts, and TERESA HEINZ, the widow of the late
Senator H. John Heinz 3d, Republican of Pennsylvania, announced yesterday that
they are engaged to be married.

According to a statement issued by Senator Kerry's office, the couple began
seeing each other when they attended the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in June
1992.

Mrs. Heinz, 56, is the steward of the Heinz Philanthropies and is estimated to
have inherited $600 million from her late husband, the heir to the Heinz food
company fortune. Senator Heinz was killed when his chartered plane collided with
a helicopter in the air over Lower Merion Township, Pa., in 1991.

After his death, Mrs. Heinz considered running as a Republican for his unexpired
term but decided instead to devote herself to philanthropic and civic pursuits.
She has three sons.

Senator Kerry, whose 51st birthday is tomorrow, is a highly decorated Vietnam
War veteran. He is in his second term in the Senate. He has two daughters from
his first marriage to Julia Thorne, an author, which ended in divorce.

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Vietnam Strains to Meet The Demands of Tourism

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 609 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


IT is the first time in 1,000 years of history that the Vietnamese have welcomed
foreign invaders. And they are pouring in, travelers who want to experience
Vietnam, one of the last great adventure destinations in Southeast Asia.

The problem for the Vietnamese is that this is also one of the poorest and
least-developed nations on earth, and the nation's tourism industry is
struggling to keep up with the sudden crush.

The Government tourism agency forecasts one million visitors this year, up from
670,000 in 1993, an increase of 50 percent, and early bookings for next year
suggest that tourism will continue to grow dramatically.

The Government is expecting the number to reach three million visitors a year by
the year 2000.

Many of the newly arriving travelers are Americans who had held off traveling to
Vietnam while an American trade embargo, imposed on Vietnam in 1975 at the end
of the war, remained in place. President Clinton lifted the embargo in February,
which eased travel for Americans by allowing them to use credit cards in
Vietnam, and by allowing American tour agencies to do business here.  (In the
final years of the embargo, Americans were allowed to visit Vietnam, but because
of the credit-card restrictions, they usually had to bring in thick wads of
American dollars, which are used in Vietnam as a second currency.)

While Vietnam and the United States are still without full diplomatic ties, a
handful of American diplomats are now stationed in Hanoi, the Vietnamese
capital, and can help American travelers with lost passports and other
emergencies.

In welcoming foreign travelers, Vietnam's most impressive accomplishment may be
the overhaul of its flag carrier, Vietnam Airlines, which has leased new Boeing
and Airbus jets to replace a fleet of aging Russian planes. Many foreign
business people working in Vietnam had refused to fly on the Russian planes
because of what appeared to be justifiable concerns about safety.

While some of the Russian planes are still being used on domestic routes,
Western jets now fly on the most heavily traveled route, between Hanoi and
Vietnam's biggest city, Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

The European Airbus jets are leased from Air France and painted in Vietnam
Airlines colors, and they are flown by pilots on assignment from the French
carrier.

The Boeings are flown by pilots from Australia.

The big problem facing foreign travelers to Vietnam is the lack of hotel room of
an international standard -- and the high rooms rates at the hotels that exist.
With the opening of several new hotels in Ho Chi Minh City, the situation there
has eased slightly, but room rates are still world class. The newly opened New
World Hotel Saigon, the most luxurious hotel in the city, has rates beginning at
$175 a night. But in Hanoi and several other cities, there is a desperate
shortage of hotel rooms.

Hanoi has only one luxury hotel, the Sofitel Metropole, and there are not nearly
enough other hotel rooms of any standard.

The general manager of the lovingly restored 109-room Metropole, Ricardo Perran,
faces a predicament that other hotel managers can only dream of: a 98.5 percent
occupancy rate year-round.

The scarcity of hotel rooms in Hanoi will probably get worse. No new large
hotels are expected to open until 1996. The Metropole is adding a wing of 135
rooms, but it will not open until the spring of 1996. Mr. Perran and his staff
are often put in the awkward position of turning away those who fail to book
weeks ahead.

They can make exceptions only for the most important visitors. "We won't turn
down a Prime Minister," Mr. Perran said.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vendors in a market in Hanoi. (Peter Stone/Black Star)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At Work;
Harvesting a New Crop of Advice

BYLINE: By Barbara Presley Noble

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 23;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words


SOMETIMES empathy fails and you just can't put yourself in the other person's
shoes. What possessed Hillary Rodham Clinton to wear an inverted-salad-bowl hat
to her husband's inauguration? During rehearsals of the Rob Lowe-Snow White duet
at the 1989 Academy Awards show, didn't anyone stop and say, hey, do we really
want to do this? And what exactly was going through the mind of Miami Dolphin
kicker Garo Yepremian when he grabbed the ball after one of his kicks was
blocked during the 1973 Super Bowl and threw it -- right into the arms of a
Redskins defender?

These inexplicabilities pale beside the mystery of why people spend months, even
years, of their lives writing books about management, which have about as much
chance of nailing the best seller list as the average schoolboy basketball
player has of jumping from his mean streets to the N.B.A. Hoops, books,
everybody needs a dream. Enough make it to keep hope alive. These are among the
management book dreams of recent months:

"Upsizing the Individual in the Downsized Organization," by Robert Johansen and
Rob Swigart (Addison-Wesley, $24). This not uninteresting book shares a trait
with Principal Skinner of "The Simpsons": it flashes back at odd moments to
Vietnam. During a breeze through recent American history, for example, it
theorizes that the debacle in Vietnam was caused in part by the failure of the
armed services to work as a team. The war, in other words, was not a total
quality operation. The authors keen briefly over the passing of hierarchical
organization and propose an alternative vision: the fishnet. Think of a net on a
dock. Pick up a node of it and you get a temporary hierarchy, pick up another
node and the hierarchy remolds itself. Put the net down and the hierarchy
disappears. The authors seem to grasp -- as many companies do not -- that it
takes a lot of skilled fishermen to handle nets.

"The Personal Efficiency Program: How to Get Organized to Do More Work in Less
Time," by Kerry Gleeson (John Wiley & Sons, $14.95). The world has many
influential religions, but as slackers of all ages know there is only one true
faith: procrastination. Sometimes all it takes to break the procrastinatory
cycle is to hear Mr. Gleeson's principal message -- "Do it now!" -- but people
who can be cured that easily probably don't need this book. For them, Alan
Lakein's classic "How to Get Control of Your Time and Your Life" would be just
as useful, and it's smaller and cheaper (Signet, $4.99). On the other hand, many
people will kvell over the program the author maps out and think, "I know I can
follow it this time." That's always the hitch. You gotta do it. If perfect
organization came in a bottle, everyone would have it.

"The B<2> Chronicles" (Pfeiffer, $16.95) is Robert Townsend's attempt to slip a
work ethic to, as he calls it, the Beavis and Butt-head Generation. Nominally a
"funky and futuristic" -- say, do you like the rock 'n' roll, kids? -- story
about a company called QuoVadoTron, "B<2>" actually reveals that the
best-selling author of "Up the Organization" must have spent some time watching
"Kung Fu" while he was leading Avis back from the brink. A sampling of
aphorisms: "Hard to imagine living without all our things, which really own us."
"Used to be women's work; now it's a job for the whole fam damily." "You don't
make friends, you recognize them." "We can do worse than start life at 37 with a
nice pension."

NONE of these seems quite up to "The unexamined life isn't worth living," but
then people who believe that anymore are as rare as people who have faith that
one day Nancy Sinatra will follow up on "These Boots Are Made for Walking." In
one way, Mr. Townsend's book should be a lesson to other authors. You will find
no dense texts here. He conveys his message graphically, and what a relief it
is! Let's face it, that's why George Eliot never sold very well. Not enough
graphics.

Judging by what comes over the transom, even the diet book genre must be smaller
than the "total quality" category in publishing. If Susan Powter ever writes
about TQM, it's mayday for "The Celestine Prophecy."

Arbitrarily, these two books are declared the final word on teams and so-called
high-performance organizations: "Inside Teams: How 20 World-Class Organizations
Are Winning Through Teamwork," by Richard Wellins, William Byham and George
Dixon (Jossey-Bass, $25), and "Touchstones: 10 New Ideas Revolutionizing
Business," by William Band (John Wiley, $24.95).

"Inside Teams" is full of examples, "Touchstones" full of principles -- what
else do you need? They are a two-volume guide through the current revolution in
management approaches. Neither sings, as they say, but the books are clear,
concise and complementary. They are the only team/quality books anyone will ever
need, so stop writing, management authors.

The only weakness -- admittedly a small one -- of Mr. Band's book is that he
succumbs to the typical business author impulse to mine Bartlett's Quotations
for heft. Does Pliny the Elder really speak more loudly to us than modern
non-Bartlett voices like, well, Robert Townsend, or Ashleigh Brilliant, the
greeting card philosophe, out of whose mind popped this enduring wisdom: "I can
live with disappointment but I'd rather live with you" and "There really are
only three alternatives: life, death and Los Angeles." So true, and somehow so
much more salient than Pliny's "When the building is about to fall down, the
mice desert it."

Like, why dis mice?

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: By the book: some of the ever-abundant offerings of counsel on
management issues. (Naum Kazhdan/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Poachers 'n' Tigers 'n' Bears

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


IN the wretchedness of the Cau Mong animal market in Vietnam's largest city,
another band of smiling foreign tourists has arrived. The boisterous tour group
from Taiwan is not here simply to browse among the dingy, foul-smelling cages
crammed with exotic wildlife -- baby chimps and doe-eyed gibbons, sea turtles
and tangles of lime-green jungle snakes, scaly anteater-like pangolins and
squawking birds with plumage in every color. The Taiwanese are here to buy.

"If you can wait a couple of weeks, we can also get you a tiger cub or a bear,"
said one of the Vietnamese merchants.

"The Taiwanese people like Vietnam because they know that there are still many
animals in the forest here," said the merchant, who knew better than to give his
name. "Sometimes they buy these animals to eat them, sometimes for medicine.
This is a very good business for us."

Vietnam has much to be thankful for in the newfound prosperity of its ethnic
Chinese neighbors -- Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and China itself. The
Taiwanese and Hong Kong Chinese are the largest foreign investors in Vietnam's
newly free market, and they are helping Vietnam emerge from generations of
poverty.

But what delights many Vietnamese is alarming environmentalists. They see the
Chinese rush into Vietnam and other undeveloped, wildlife-rich Asian nations as
a threat to some of the world's rarest, most beautiful animals -- creatures that
in traditional Chinese culture are more valuable in the cooking pot or in the
pharmacy than in the wild.




Rhino Broth, Anyone?

"The prognosis is not very bright," said Steven Broad, director of the Southeast
Asia office of the environmental group Traffic. "This view of animals is very
deeply rooted in Chinese culture." The fate of Asia's exotic wildlife "is going
to come down to whether Chinese societies can see biodiversity as a priority,"
he said.

For decades, Africa provided the bulk of animals and animal products for the
vast Asian market for traditional medicine. But in the 1970's and 1980's,
several African nations moved to save what remained of their wildlife. And so
traders and smugglers turned to Asia, especially to Vietnam, then opening its
economy to the world.

For some species in Vietnam, it is already too late. Tigers and rhinos, once
plentiful, are near extinction as smugglers roam the countryside for the bone,
flesh and horn that are sought in Taipei and Hong Kong.

In the reductionist view of Chinese medical practitioners, you are what you eat.
Tiger eyes are said to improve vision; a tiger penis boiled in soup brings
virility; crushed tiger bone is believed to cure everything from impotence to
ulcers, while rhino horn dissolved in broth is a treatment for high blood
pressure and stroke. The succulent meat of a bear's paw is said to give
strength. Snakes are treasured for the tonic made from their blood.

Under international pressure, the governments of Taiwan, Hong Kong, China and
Singapore -- as well as South Korea and Japan, where folk medicine is also
popular -- have all announced crackdowns on animal trafficking.

But the pull of tradition is proving too strong. Many Chinese exposed to modern
medicine are still convinced that their physical and spiritual well-being
depends on the consumption of exotic animals. And they can pay for it; hundreds
of millions of ethnic Chinese now have the income to buy what once were
unimaginable luxuries.

The belief in traditional medicine is nowhere more potent than in Taiwan, widely
seen as the epicenter of the illegal animal trade. In April, the Clinton
Administration imposed sanctions on Taiwan for its failure to halt the use of
tiger and rhino products. While protesting the sanctions as unnecessary, Taiwan
did toughen its laws. The legislature voted in October to raise the maximum fine
for trading in rare animals to $93,000, up from $1,800, and raised the prison
term from five to seven years.




Big Taiwanese Appetites

But the new laws may simply encourage more Taiwanese to travel abroad to find
what they want. The Government commissioned a conservation group earlier this
year to send investigators to Vietnam to see who was buying up exotic wildlife.

"In the trade of bear's paws, tiger's penis and bones, Taiwanese sadly play a
major role among consumers," the group said. Many travel to villages in
Vietnam's central highlands to restaurants renowned for their broiled tiger,
roasted anteater and fresh bear paws. The bears are kept caged outside the
restaurants to convince guests of the meat's freshness, with each paw selling
for the equivalent of about $40.

While its animal-protection laws are relatively strict, Vietnam is at a loss to
stem the animal trade. Forest rangers earn roughly 50 cents a day, leaving them
susceptible to bribes, and there are not nearly enough to patrol thousands of
square miles of jungle.

The situation is much the same in other nations rich in animal life, notably
Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Thailand and Myanmar, formerly known as Burma.

"It has become very hard for us to protect our animals," said Le Duc Thuan, a
wildlife officer in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon. "In the 1970's, we had
3,000 tigers, and now maybe we have 200. We had 300 rhinos in the 1975; now we
have between 10 and 25. There are now so many smugglers. And the problem is
getting worse, not better, because the demand from mainland China is growing,
because China is getting rich."

Along Vietnam's northern border, there is a brisk one-way trade in exotic
animals, all headed to the markets of China. At the crossing known as the
Friendship Pass, thousands of Vietnamese traders gather every day to cross the
border, many carrying wriggling burlap sacks meant for China's newly prosperous
millions.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnam's wildlife is bottled and sold to prosperous Asians who
practice traditional medicine. At a Saigon market, some animal parts have been
preserved in wine. (David Portnoy for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Praise of the Counterculture

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


Generational bonding experiences have always been important in American life.
Civil War veterans kept meeting until time scythed down the last of them. The
Depression shaped the economic dreams, and fears, of millions of young couples
and their children. People who fought in World War II have moved through history
with a fortifying set of common memories. So have the children born to them
during and shortly after that war.

This last group profoundly altered the way Americans think about their inner
lives, their fellow citizens, the earth upon which we live and the process by
which older citizens in Washington decide when and where young Americans die in
combat.

Now, in an excess of Republican triumphalism, the party's new leaders have
decided to make "counterculture" into a pejorative. What flapdoodle. Only a few
periods in American history have seen such a rich fulfillment of the informing
ideals of personal freedom and creativity that lie at the heart of the American
intellectual tradition. Like many of his elders, Representative Newt Gingrich
may prefer a stricter regimen of social conformity and religious observance.

But the millions of Americans who incorporated the cultural ideals of the
Sixties and the decade's healthy spirit of political activism are foolish to
abandon the high ground because of his post-election slanging. Certainly the
excesses of the decade are easy to parody, and its summery, hedonistic ethos
then and now reduced modern puritans to fits of twisting discomfort. America is
still close enough to the frontier experience of relentless work and danger to
view any kind of fun with suspicion.

No true historian, however, can believe that it is possible to repudiate so
large a cultural event in a nation's history, or to dismiss its seminal
political events as a "McGovern-nik" aberration.

The 60's spawned a new morality-based politics that emphasized the individual's
responsibility to speak out against injustice and corruption. It was this
renewed sense of responsibility that led enough people to raise their voices to
end America's most disastrous foreign military adventure, the Vietnam War. On
this level, the Sixties saw an exercise in mass sanity in which a nation's
previously voiceless citizens -- its young -- overturned a war policy that was,
in fact, deranged.

The spirit of the age, like the tactics of the antiwar movement, was shaped by
the civil rights movement. Its lessons of citizen empowerment, to use the 90's
term, led to the progress of the environmental, women's and gay rights
movements. The counterculture, in sum, produced a renewal of the Thoreauvian
ideal of the clear, defiant voice of the dissenting citizen.

There was another empowering aspect of the counterculture's confrontation with
the Washington monolith. Those days produced the sad wisdom, now indispensable
in American politics, that the Government will lie to protect its interests and
that constant vigilance is necessary to keep it honest.

The influence of 60's individualism was not limited to politics. It fostered a
psychological movement that, while it burdened our shelves with tomes of
psychobabble, also enabled people in emotional torment to ask for help without
being stigmatized. It gave people in dead or abusive relationships permission to
break out.

Would many Americans truly like to imagine a society returned to the
dictatorship of the majority culture? Would they like to go back to the days of
blatant, sanctioned discrimination against African-Americans and women, to a
world deprived of all the 60's ingredients that still simmer in the cultural
stew, including an American music that has become a global language?

We think not. For one thing, there are too many Republicans who are also
Grateful Dead fans or, for that matter, divorced, ex-potheads and opponents of
state-regulated prayer and abortion.

At its essence, the counterculture was about one of conservatives' favorite
words: values. It was a repudiation of the blind obedience and reflexive
cynicism of politics as usual. It was about exposing hypocrisy, whether personal
or political, and standing up to irrational authority. As in any large movement,
it accommodated its share of charlatans and sociopaths. But it is part of us, a
legacy around which Americans can now unite, rather than allow themselves to be
divided.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lesson for Mr. Gingrich

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words


To the Editor:

"Gingrich Is Urging a Tougher Policy on Bosnia's Serbs" (front page, Dec. 5)
correctly reports remarks by Newt Gingrich, the incoming House Speaker, on "Meet
the Press" Dec. 4. He did advocate serving an ultimatum on the Serbs,
threatening to use air power to "paralyze your capacity to function as a
society."

However, you omit that after advocating this aggressive bombing, he exclaimed,
"Haven't we learned anything from Vietnam?"

Mr. Gingrich claims to be a student of history. If so, one cannot account for
his reasoning. If Vietnam taught us anything, it is that air power does not cow
a people imbued with nationalism. It only leads to a no-win situation, with the
use of troops when bombing fails. Professor Gingrich, that is the lesson of
Vietnam.

BERNARD F. ERLANGER
New York, Dec. 6, 1994

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 11, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  25   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      1  41   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      3   8   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 4      5  15   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 5      4   2   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 6      6   5   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 7     10  122  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 8*     7  10   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 9      8   3   GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A 1981
                novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist
                from Texas.

 10     9   3   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 11    12  20   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit
                to a small town changes many lives.

 12    11  12   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

 13    14   2   STAR TREK GENERATIONS, by J.M. Dillard. (Pocket, $20.) Capt.
                Jean-Luc Picard and Capt. James T. Kirk must track down a
                scientist at large with a dangerous weapon; plus an account of
                the filming of the movie.

 14        22   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 15*       10   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   6   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 2      2  10   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 3      3  14   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 4      4  11   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales.

 5      6  13   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady's life.

 6      9   9   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 7      5   6   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 8      8  51   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 9      7   9   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 10    13  40   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 11    16  10   BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An
                illustrated history of the game.

 12    12   7   ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic
                Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like
                overpopulation, famine and plague.

 13         8   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 14    10   6   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

 15    15   2   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 16*   14   3   STRANGE JUSTICE, by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson. (Houghton
                Mifflin, $24.95.) The nomination and confirmation of Clarence
                Thomas.


          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  81   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2      2  33   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      3  11   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.

 4      4   2   THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO. COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.)
                Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by
                Forrest Gump.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Nov. 26, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen
stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately
concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very
recently produced America's ruling class.

D.H. LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage, by Brenda Maddox. (Simon & Schuster,
$30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him
20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.

THE DIVINE CHILD: A Novel of Prenatal Rebellion, by Pascal Bruckner. (Little,
Brown, $21.95.) A wonderfully appalling story by a French novelist about a
monster in utero.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard
Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr. Frey examines the myth of deliverance
through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to
be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional
sports.

LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This
approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and
diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and
generals hints at restlessness with his own art.

MAKING MALCOLM: The Myth and Meaning of Malcolm X, by Michael Eric Dyson.
(Oxford University, $19.95.) Malcolm X is the thread that stitches together
these eloquent, freewheeling essays on hip-hop culture, black films and the
tragic lives of poor black men.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

THE PRIVATE LIFE OF CHAIRMAN MAO: The Memoirs of Mao's Personal Physician, by Li
Zhisui. (Random House, $30.) A detailed recounting of Mao Zedong's prodigious
hankerings for fatty pork, young women and sleeping pills.

SEARCHING FOR MERCY STREET: My Journey Back to My Mother, Anne Sexton, by Linda
Gray Sexton. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An intimate account of growing up the
daughter of a mad, child-abusing, suicidal, brilliant poet, and of resolving
such an upbringing from the inside out.

TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of
the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat,
incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              212 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NORTHERN BROOKLYN;
It's Only a Movie: Looking Around Brooklyn, and Seeing Saigon

BYLINE: By JENNIFER STEINHAUER

SECTION: Section 13;  Page 12;  Column 3;  The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 436 words


A walk through Brooklyn Heights conjures many times and places -- colonial
America, gothic Europe, the antebellum South -- but perhaps only Roger French
has looked at the neighborhood through the lens of a camera and seen Saigon.

Mr. French, who is 31 years old, is shooting his first feature film, "Soul
Vietnam," the story of a family of Amerasian children who come to live with
their father in Brooklyn. While most of the story takes place in modern-day East
Flatbush, where he will begin shooting the first of the year, he chose Brooklyn
Heights for his opening montage of postwar Vietnam.

"Well, for one thing, we didn't have the money to go to Vietnam," Mr. French
said during a walk around the Heights on an icy day last week. "But also, there
is so much culture and diversity in Brooklyn that I thought it would work."

The streets of Saigon, renamed Ho Chi Minh City after the war, were at that time
largely vacant. Many businesses were confiscated, and the fear of imprisonment
kept people inside. Storefronts were boarded up, and a majority of the
windowless cement buildings were left ramshackle and covered with communist
propaganda.

Mr. French accomplished this look largely through tight shots of his actors
against backdrops of areas that his friend and technical consultant, Dat Trieu,
a native of Vietnam, suggested would work.

At Julio's Place, a burned-out bar on the corner of State and Court Streets,
plywood covers the front of the store, and the entrance is closed off by a
rusted accordion gate, popular on impoverished Ho Chi Minh City streets, he
said. Ripped-up political fliers cover the wood. In the film, this will be the
exterior of a Vietnamese home.

Just around the corner is a blackened concrete wall, the kind one might walk by
a thousand times and not notice. During the fall, a vine crawled its way to the
top of the wall, where the blackness met a bit of color from the days when the
building was in full use. The view was shot as another street scene. "Sometimes,
walls are universal," Mr. French explained.

A block away at 51 Sidney Place, it was decided that a wooden fence that
surrounds a private home resembled bamboo, and Mr. French used it to represent
the more prosperous and lush areas of the country. "Dat saw this and said, 'This
is going to work. I can see this is Saigon,' " Mr. French said.

Mr. French, who was born in Trinidad and raised in East Flatbush, said his
interest in Vietnam had been sparked by an article about black Amerasians
several years ago in Ebony magazine. "This film is like an educational process,"
he said.   J.S.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The filmmaker Roger French on Court Street, a stand-in for
Saigon. (Linda Rosier for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOMBING IN NEW JERSEY: THE VICTIM;
Executive Had Vaulted To No. 2 Post at Agency

BYLINE: By STUART ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


On Dec. 1, Thomas J. Mosser was promoted to a position that was likely to be the
pinnacle of his 25-year career in public relations and advertising. Nine days
later, he was dead, the victim of a powerful mail bomb that exploded in his home
in North Caldwell, N.J.

Since early this year, Mr. Mosser, 50, had served as executive vice president at
Young & Rubicam, the giant worldwide advertising and communications company
based in New York, as well as a member of its powerful operations committee. His
duties included corporate projects and initiatives for clients including the
Philip Morris Companies, the nation's second-largest advertiser. With his recent
promotion he also became the general manager of Y.& R.

Before that, Mr. Mosser spent almost a quarter century at Burson-Marsteller, Y.&
R.'s wholly owned public relations subsidiary.

Colleagues and competitors remembered Mr. Mosser yesterday as someone who was
far different from the stereotype of the glad-handing, smooth-talking public
relations practitioner. Rather, they described him as a low-key, thoughtful,
deliberate man, more of a counselor than a hail-fellow-well-met.

A former co-worker of Mr. Mosser's at Burson-Marsteller, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity because of concerns about the bombing, described Mr.
Mosser as the type of person who, "when he spoke, everyone listened; he was more
pensive, erudite."

Robert L. Dilenschneider, chief executive at the Dilenschneider Group, a New
York public relations agency, said: "I've known him on and off for 20 years. He
was a very fair, honest, ethical competitor, a real all-American."

Mr. Mosser "wasn't the kind of person who lit up the room," Mr. Dilenschneider
said, "but he was the kind of person you could always count on, a very solid
guy."

Neighbors on the hilly cul-de-sac where Mr. Mosser lived with his wife, Susan,
and daughters Kim, 13, and Kelly, 15 months, said they did not know him very
well, because of the long hours he spent at his job.

Neighbors said he also had a daughter and son, both college age, from a previous
marriage. The son lives in Maryland, and the daughter lives in New Jersey, they
said.

Mr. Mosser built the house, at 15 Aspen Drive, about four years ago, said Donald
McKay, who lives nearby. Mr. Mosser and his family lived there about a year, Mr.
McKay said, then moved to London, and had only been living in the house again
for about a year.

Yesterday, windows on one side of the first floor of the house were covered with
cardboard, and glass was strewn across the yard.

Some neighbors said yesterday that it was only luck that others were not injured
by the bomb. Mr. McKay said that he held a party for the neighborhood on Friday
night and that several children wandered from the party to the Mossers' house.

"They had half a dozen kids there with the bomb sitting on the table," Mr. McKay
said. "His wife signed for the package on Friday and left it on the table."

Robin Sommese, 13, stayed over for the night and was in the house with the
Mossers and their daughters when the explosion occurred. She said she took the
Mossers' daughter Kelly next door after the blast.

A former newsman in the Philadelphia bureau of The Associated Press, Mr. Mosser
had also served in the Navy during the Vietnam War. He graduated with a
journalism degree from St. Bonaventure University in Olean, N.Y.

NAME: Thomas J. Mosser

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Thomas J. Mosser (James Hamilton/Young & Rubicam Inc.); The
house at 15 Aspen Drive in North Caldwell, N.J., where an advertising executive,
Thomas J. Mosser, was killed by a mail bomb on Saturday. He was about to become
the No. 2 executive at Young & Rubicam. (Dith Pran/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Storm Warning?

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 11


Russia's armed invasion of Chechnya, the small, fierce Caucasian state that
declared independence three years ago, will make this week's visits to Moscow of
Vice President Al Gore and Defense Secretary William Perry that much more
difficult and delicate.

Mr. Gore and Mr. Perry will inevitably try to restore a sense of comity and
momentum to a Russian-American relationship that to Washington, at least,
suddenly seems to have lost its spark. Similarly, Secretary of State Warren
Christopher plans a separate meeting with Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev to
"clear the air" after sharp Russian opposition last week to American policy on
issues like NATO enlargement, Bosnia and Iraq.

But the air now smells of gunfire and smoke. The Russian invasion of Chechnya,
and the manner in which it was done, will hardly help the Clinton
Administration's efforts to preserve its aid-Russia policy with the new
Republican Congress.

Chechnya, a mountainous and obstreperous state of only 1.3 million people and
seemingly as many feuding clans, is a part of Russia, and Moscow has never
accepted its independence. The United States has taken the position that unlike
the cases of Azerbaijan or Ukraine, what happens in Chechnya is "an internal
Russian affair" and no business of any outside power. But Washington can hardly
ignore what seems to be a new aggressiveness on the part of a Russia, with which
it was talking of close partnership only a year ago.

The way the Russian Government of President Boris N. Yeltsin has moved to
subvert the Chechen leadership, with the establishment and financing of a
"liberation force" and a nominally secret, though poorly hidden, military
intervention, has all the ring of the old Soviet style in Africa and the third
world.

It seemed to be taken straight from old Soviet textbooks on destabilization,
said Oleg Kalugin, a former K.G.B. general, and it is an indication of how much
Mr. Yeltsin seems, these days, to be depending on the "power ministries" he
controls -- the military and the intelligence services -- and paying less
attention to either public or parliamentary opinion.

"It's done in the old style, and it's a disaster, which the democrats and the
intelligentsia cannot support," said Mr. Kalugin, who broke with the K.G.B. and
considers himself a liberal. He pointed to the immediate opposition to the
invasion expressed by former Prime Minister Yegor T. Gaidar, who has been
reluctant to break with Mr. Yeltsin on any other issue. "It's a clear sign of
the growing, if not overwhelming influence of the security people on Mr.
Yeltsin," Mr. Kalugin said.

It is also a sign of a Mr. Yeltsin who has made a different set of alliances.
Three years ago, when he was the hero of the Russian democrats and was in the
process of destroying the Soviet Union, Mr. Yeltsin listened to his former Vice
President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, and tried to crush the Chechen rebellion.

But the Chechens resisted, and the Russian Parliament ordered him to pull the
troops back. He complied. But it is unlikely that he would do so today.

It is not just that Mr. Yeltsin has moved to the center, seeking support from
nationalists and not just from democrats like Mr. Gaidar, who have not proven
especially popular.

To fail twice in Chechnya would destroy Mr. Yeltsin's authority, and it would
also underline the weakness of the Russian central Government, which has been
signally unsuccessful at getting the regions to pay the taxes they owe.

The battle against Chechnya can be portrayed as a fight for Russian unity and
against chaos and crime, given the prominence of Chechens in the so-called mafia
that bedevils and corrupts all of Russia. And if Mr. Yeltsin is lucky, a Chechen
population tired of three years of poverty and confusion under its current
leaders will not strongly resist a Russian intervention on the side of more
"reasonable" Chechens.

But the Russian invasion is more likely to create a stronger Chechen patriotism
in a region that was only conquered by the czars in 1878, after a long and nasty
guerrilla war. And the Chechens have the capacity, should they choose, to bring
the war home to Moscow, creating terrorist incidents in the capital.

Nearly every Russian knows the Tolstoy story, Hadji Murat, about the betrayal of
the honorable Chechen leader by scheming and indifferent Russian generals.
Nearly every Russian knows some fragment of the Lermontov poem about the "evil
Chechen" who crawls along the riverbank, "sharpening his long knife."

More concretely, Russia is now faced with the traditional military problem,
well-known to American troops in Vietnam or Somalia. It's easy to get in and
hard to get out, especially if the population proves stubborn, aggressive or
somehow immune to the blandishments of a great power.

Mr. Yeltsin is in the hospital, recovering from a conveniently timed operation
to his nose, apparently damaged in a childhood scrap, and it is probable that he
will be unable to see Mr. Gore. It will also be interesting to see whom Mr.
Perry gets to see, given the open opposition of some high-ranking military
officers, including the conservative Deputy Defense Minister, Gen. Boris Gromov,
to the Chechnya invasion.

The Americans are almost condemned to find a new basis for continued partnership
with Russia, which is too important to be "lost," especially by a Clinton
Administration in so much difficulty elsewhere.

However, in Moscow, relations with Washington have seemed strained for a long
time now. There is disappointment over the West's reluctance to trust Russia,
give it enough aid or grant it the status Moscow thinks it deserves. The reason,
and the result, has been a growing nationalist tone here and sharp differences
with America over Bosnia, Iraq and NATO enlargement that long predate Mr.
Yeltsin's warning last week of a "cold peace."

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A protester held a sign during a demonstration in Pushkin Square
in Moscow yesterday against the Russian crackdown on Chechen rebels. (Agence
France-Presse)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CD-ROM Review;
Disks for PC: From Ameslan To 3 Simpsons

BYLINE: By STEPHEN MANES

SECTION: Section C;   Page 14;   Column 2;   Science Desk

LENGTH: 1976 words


There is no reason to suspect that multimedia titles will have a higher success
rate than their counterparts in arts, letters and entertainment. Like movies and
pay television, CD-ROM software cannot easily be looked at before it is
purchased. Since it is typically quite expensive, it should be bought with an
unconditional money-back guarantee.

Still, interesting and useful multimedia works are increasingly available, and
some of them are reviewed here. Unless otherwise noted, they run only on
Windows.

Just when you begin to wonder if multimedia can emerge from its Berle Age, along
comes The American Sign Language Dictionary on CD-ROM (HarperCollins
Interactive, Windows and Macintosh, about $50). This is the work for which the
medium might have been invented.

No book could be as effective in showing real people using these highly
animated, metaphoric and visual words (including my favorite, the M-shaped
arches that signify McDonald's). No videotape accepts commands in five
languages, or replay each word again and again at any speed desired, or keep
track of who has used the dictionary and which words they have seen.

Sound is not essential in the sign-language disk, but it is available. The disk
includes a brief written history of the language, "the third or fourth most
commonly used" language in the United States today. Despite occasional glitches,
this is precisely the kind of work that makes you want to rush out and buy a
whole CD-ROM library.

GENERAL REFERENCE

Once encyclopedias were ordered largely by librarians and occasionally by
teachers. Now they are given away with computers and multimedia kits and include
things door-to-door salesmen never dreamed of. The flashiest are Microsoft
Encarta '95 (Microsoft Corporation, about $100; Windows now, Macintosh in
January) and Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia 1995 edition (Compton's Newmedia
Inc., ) about $80, Windows now; Macintosh in January). In addition to the usual
text (where Compton's generally has the edge), each includes a dictionary, an
atlas, lots of pictures and music, a little bit of video and easy ways for
children to copy material to their word processors.

Encarta adds a thesaurus, a game and a half-dozen charming "Interactivities,"
covering subjects like fractal geometry, nutrition, musical instruments and
immigration. Compton's "Explain" button brings up audio or video of Patrick
Stewart, its "editing room" lets children produce their own multimedia
extravaganzas from the material on the disk, and its "Infopilot" occasionally
succeeds at linking concepts with one another.

Still, more effort goes into the gravy than the meat. In Encarta, Abner
Doubleday gets a photo and is mentioned five times. Four of these references
strongly imply that he had something to do with the invention of baseball. Only
in the "baseball" entry do we learn the truth: "there is little support for this
story." Compton's Doubleday biography is more accurate, but its Hall of Fame
entry unequivocally calls Abner the inventor. Foul!

ENTERTAINMENT AND SPORTS

Cinemania '95 (Microsoft Corporation, about $60, Windows now, Macintosh in
January) includes reviews from Roger Ebert, Pauline Kael and Leonard Maltin,
text from other sources, a huge number of stills and portraits, hundreds of
dialogue and music clips and just 20 film selections. Coverage of foreign and
silent film is scant, and only some of the text has been indexed, a common
failing in Microsoft reference works. But this is that rare title good enough to
invite quibbles; as I write, Dooley Wilson is singing "As Time Goes By" from the
speakers of my computer.

Microsoft Complete N.B.A. Basketball, 1994-95 edition, (about $50) contains full
statistics from the entire history of the National Basketball Association (Alaa
Abdelnaby to Fred Zollner), histories of other pro leagues, and even the
official rules. Improving on Microsoft Complete Baseball '94 (about $50), it
adds a handy list of audio and video clips and presents many statistics in a way
that makes them manipulable with spreadsheet or word processor. But since it too
lacks full searchability, I discovered the New York Hakoahs and a photo of one
Stretch Meehan in plaid shorts only by happy chance. Optional daily updates via
modem cost $1.25 per day.

Extreme Sports (Medio Multimedia, about $40) contains much information (video,
photos, text) about 20 genteel pastimes like ice climbing, sky surfing, and
iditabike racing (the bike of Alaska's Iditarod). And then there is base
jumping; base, one learns, stands for "building, antenna tower, span, earth."
Keep this one away from the children.

SCIENCE

Redshift (Maris Multimedia Ltd., about $65; Windows and Macintosh), still the
ultimate astronomy title, lets you view almost anything in the solar system from
almost anywhere else. Want a thrill? Watch the umbra and penumbra of a solar
eclipse travel across Earth from a vantage point on the Moon. Maps of Earth,
Mars and the Moon, hundreds of full-color astronomical and satellite photos and
the Penguin Dictionary of Astronomy round out an exceptional package whose user
interface can be difficult to fathom.

Although not particularly well organized, Expert Astronomer for CD-ROM (Expert
Software Inc., about $35) supplements a star chart program with stunning
atronomical photos and space exploration footage. The space shuttle's night view
of the United States, complete with lightning storms and a spectacular fireball
of a meteorite, is striking enough to elicit gasps.

CULTURE

People: 20 Years of Pop Culture (Voyager, about $25, Windows and Macintosh),
includes every cover and cover story from the first 20 years of People Magazine.
It also includes things the print media cannot include, like video (editors
discussing top stories), audio (the notorious "Squidgy" conversation between
Princess Di and an admirer) and searchability (type in "Simpson," and you get
five covers: three O. J., one Bart, and one Wallis). Highly amusing as a record
of changes in fashion and the rise of celebrity journalism.

More far-reaching is The Playboy Interview, Three Decades (I.B.M. Multimedia
Publishing Studio, about $40), which includes 360 complete and fully indexed
interviews, plus introductions, photos and far too few audio clips. O. J. is
included here, too, but so are Ansel Adams, Malcolm X and Vladimir Nabokov.

Music is a particularly compelling component of multimedia, and one whose
possibilities are only beginning to be explored. Particularly creative are the
games that require the Virtual Guitar hardware reviewed in these pages Nov. 8.
Edward Rothstein surveyed the excellent world of classical music multimedia in
The New York Times Book Review on Dec. 4.

HISTORY

Programmed primarily in Russia, like "Redshift," Warplanes: Modern Fighting
Aircraft (Maris, about $55; Windows and Macintosh) elegantly presents the
mind-numbing details of more than 530 planes and 275 weapons from 1976 until the
present, plus lots of pinup photos of these instruments of destruction. There
are also elaborate slide and video histories of the Arab-Israeli and Gulf Wars
and Soviet military aviation, along with three flight simulators.  Five more
volumes are planned.

Jets (Medio, about $40) offers plenty of video, text, and simulations concerning
experimental aircraft, including interviews with test pilots. Vietnam (Medio,
about $40) brings together a great deal of material on the war and its
background.

GAMES

Shoot-'em-ups are everywhere, but the phenomenal popular success of Myst
Broderbund, about $40, Windows and Macintosh) proves that the biggest omission
from today's game titles is the expression of a unique sensibility.

Flash Traffic: City of Angels (Time-Warner Interactive, about $35, DOS only), an
interactive movie on three disks, makes you an F.B.I. agent tracking down
nuclear terrorists. The rather grainy video is shot from the player's point of
view in an action-movie style stronger on acting and dialogue than on plot.
Interaction is limited to picking from three-choice lists at opportune moments.
Although you can master the interface in seconds, it is vaguely unsatisfying,
particularly since some choices do not seem to change the outcome of the story.
Placed in my careful hands, Los Angeles was repeatedly vaporized.

Under a Killing Moon (Access Software Inc., about $70, DOS only), a futuristic
four-disk detective story, features Brian Keith, Margot Kidder and the voice of
James Earl Jones. It also features arch dialogue, leaden acting, poorly
integrated video, a maddeningly complicated user interface and a modified
adventure-game collection of "pick up the stamp, put it on the letter" commands
that would work better if you could simply type them in. The successful element
here is a remarkable series of computer-generated worlds that, unlike those of
"Myst," you can explore minutely at will. The sets, in other words, greatly
outclass the rest of the production.

CHILDREN

The programs known as Living Books wisely make no attempt to disguise their
picture-book origins. By portraying each screen as a separate page, they may
sacrifice a bit of interactivity, but they gain a focus and narrative drive that
many interactive titles lack.

A narrator reads the text in English or a second language, usually Spanish.
After that, you can click on a word to hear it or click items in the picture to
make funny things happen. Select an animal, tree or chimney, and it may dance,
sing or take a pratfall.

This style has been imitated but not equaled. Here the gags are funnier, the
sound effects are goofier, and the producers are not afraid to stoop to
slapstick or let an occasional gag go over some children's heads. With the help
of banana peels, the sound of a flushing toilet and a chicken crossing the road,
even an old chestnut like "The Tortoise and the Hare" is made fresh. "Arthur's
Birthday" and "Arthur's Teacher Trouble," based on books by Marc Brown, are
particularly noteworthy titles. "Little Monster at School," based on a book by
Mercer Mayer and the least successful entry, adds educational games but lacks a
compelling story. (Living Books, about $40, Windows and Macintosh)

Humongous Entertainment Inc. has successfully developed new characters along
with finely-tuned animation and standout backgrounds. Its most extravagant
production so far is Freddi Fish and the Case of the Missing Kelp Seeds (about
$40), a wide-ranging undersea adventure game in which Freddi and her pal Luther
have to solve problems to bring home the seeds. An utterly extraneous
math-problem game and two mindlessly malevolent sharks are among the few false
notes, and the work is mercifully far less cute than its title would suggest.

The surreal click-gags seem slightly out of place in Humongous's otherwise
rather realistic The Farm (about $40), an interactive animated setting that
children can roam through. Animals, plants, and tools are all explained
(occasionally inadequately) in a dictionary that Buzzy the Knowledge Bug will be
happy to recite to nonreaders.

Older children should enjoy Firefighter! (Simon & Schuster Interactive , about
$20, Windows and Macintosh), which turns the viewer into a probationary
employee. The video clips present the life and work of firefighters without a
shred of the condescension so common in children's media, but the experience
would be even better if the clips were not extremely tiny and if some of the
firefighters happened to be women.

A good rule of thumb for children's software: If your children enjoy one title
from a particular company, they will probably like others. Indeed, they will
probably get encouragement from the company, which is likely to install
"previews" of its wares automatically. Parents want to delete or hide them.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Evening With Castro: 36 Years and No Regrets

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN and LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1730 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, Dec. 12


The Summit of the Americas had just ended in Miami, and President Clinton and
his counterparts from 33 other countries were heading triumphantly home. At a
long table in the Palace of the Revolution in Havana, the man not invited, Fidel
Castro, argued that Cuba's exclusion had been their loss, not his.

"If the summit of Miami was a great show, it would have been a better show if I
had been there," he said, grinning through the beard. "We are the last rebels,"
he said of his Communist Government. "That was no meeting for rebels."

Three weeks before the Cuban revolution is to celebrate its 36th anniversary,
Mr. Castro, 68, was looking a little older and perhaps feeling a little more
isolated than he was willing to let on. But if that worried him, he was making
an accomplished effort not to let it show.

Yes, he acknowledged during a four-hour dinner conversation in Spanish with
representatives of The New York Times, he had real reservations about the
market-oriented reforms his Government has undertaken to save an economy
devastated by the collapse of the Soviet bloc. It pained him to sign some of
those contracts for joint ventures with foreign companies.

But if he is not willing to turn Cuba into a Western-style democracy, he said,
he recognizes that the world economy has changed.

"I am not a great fan of capitalism," he said. "But I am a realist."

To hear him tell it, Mr. Castro was more worried about Bill Clinton.

How is it that American voters had shown so little mercy toward their President
last month, he wanted to know early in the conversation; the young Democrat had
seemed to have such an attractive social agenda as a candidate. Now, so quickly,
the Republicans and their traditional antagonism toward Cuba seemed to be back,
and strong.

Mr. Castro skipped past the fact that even as a candidate, Mr. Clinton ardently
supported a tightening of the longstanding embargo against Cuba. Nor did he say
much about the further sanctions that Mr. Clinton imposed in angry reprisal for
the flood of more than 30,000 refugees whom Mr. Castro let go after political
tensions rose here this summer.

"The Chinese wanted Bush to win," he recalled. "The Russians wanted Bush to win.
The Mexicans wanted Bush to win." Cuba's political isolation, Mr. Castro
suggested, goes so far as to include rooting for Mr. Clinton.

"We hope that he will be successful," he said.

What counsel Mr. Castro might have taken on this subject was probably present in
the cavernous dining room, with its black marble floors and bright green ferns.

To his right sat his good friend, the Colombian novelist Gabriel Garcia Marquez,
who one night at the height of the refugee crisis had spent an evening in
Martha's Vineyard talking politics, Faulkner and Cuba with Mr. Clinton.

Across the table at one end was Ricardo Alarcon, Cuba's lead negotiator in the
talks that produced an agreement with the Clinton Administration to stop the
exodus. At the other was Jose Antonio Arbesu, the Communist Party's chief expert
on United States affairs and Mr. Alarcon's senior deputy in his talks.

Covering their bets, Mr. Castro and his aides also asked after the new Speaker
of the House. Where was it that Mr. Gingrich had gone to college? And what about
the political future of the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen.
Colin L. Powell?

A Watchful Eye On U.S. Politics

Mr. Castro made no effort to disguise his real concern. He seemed troubled by
the Republicans' sweeping victory in the Nov. 8 election, less out of any
affinity for Mr. Clinton than from a fear that the victory might delay the end
of the United States embargo even more.

The refugees who fled Cuba in homemade rafts over the summer did not leave for
political reasons, he insisted once again: They were driven out by the embargo
and the economic turmoil it had wrought. And whatever pain the embargo had
inflicted on Cubans and their Government, he promised, it would never force the
sort of political opening that has been its stated goal.

"We are not going to negotiate the normalization of our relations on the basis
of concessions," he said. "The United States did not blockade South Africa. It
does not blockade Saudi Arabia, where few rich families own all of the wealth.
The United States does not dictate political conditions to China. It does not
dictate political conditions to Vietnam. Why does it have to dictate political
conditions to us?"

Sipping a gin martini before the meal -- he usually prefers rum and red
vermouth, he said -- Mr. Castro warmly recalled an early stay in the United
States in 1948, telling of the basement apartment he had rented in a brownstone
on West 82d Street in Manhattan. Later on, as a young conspirator against the
Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista, he said, he sneaked across the Rio Grande into
Texas to meet with a prospective financier.

"I probably still have a debt with American justice," he said, smiling.

Mr. Castro did not wait to be reminded of the great political mileage he has
gotten out of the embargo over the years.

"Some people ask why they do not lift the embargo, because it serves us as a
pretext," he said. "The day that American businessmen want to come and do
business here, it would be a great headache for us. But we are ready to face
that challenge.

"Will they corrupt us? Will we fall sick with a terrible infection of
capitalism? We are willing to see.

"It is absolutely false that the blockade serves us as a political instrument to
keep the people united."

No Loneliness At Cuba's Top

The Cuban leader is said not to subscribe to the belief of his friend Mr. Garcia
Marquez, the author of "Autumn of the Patriarch" and "The General in His
Labyrinth," about the solitude of power. Mr. Castro takes pride in telling of
his travels around the island, his meetings with the workers, the "people's
assemblies" at which he says they decide the country's course.

Looking around a table of eight people much younger than himself, as waiters in
white coats glided from place to place with trays of simply prepared chicken and
potatoes, he spoke of the revolution's being regenerated, producing able new
cadres who deserve the responsibilities he has increasingly given them. They
could be trusted, he added, not to "overthrow us or put us before the firing
squad."

What could be glimpsed at dinner suggested that Mr. Castro's authority remains
paramount, even forbidding. Speaking about the summer exodus, one of his more
senior aides regaled the table with an account of a television news story in
which a Cuban interviewed at sea had staunchly defended the "Comandante" even as
the refugee floated toward Florida. Another aide spoke at length of university
students who demanded to endure economic sacrifices that even the Government was
reluctant to impose.

When asked, senior officials almost invariably dismiss the notion of ideological
divisions within the Government over the changes made. Yet Mr. Castro was candid
in admitting qualms about such steps as the wide opening to foreign investment,
the advent of a flourishing parallel economy for Cubans with access to dollars,
and the establishment this fall of free markets for some farm and factory goods.

"I sympathize more with some and less with others," he said of the changes. "But
I have supported all of them because I think they are part of a coherent,
necessary strategy and they have been taken by consensus. With every one of
those joint ventures, they come to me for signatures -- and I sign."

Just last Friday, he noted, the Government completed arrangements for its first
joint venture with a foreign real estate firm, leasing a historic building in
Old Havana to Argentaria, a Spanish company, for office space. He said he had
done so "painfully."

Enduring Suspicions About Free Markets

Eight years after he abolished a first experiment in free markets for peasant
farmers, Mr. Castro was particularly open about his reservations in allowing all
Cubans who grow vegetables, raise livestock or make handicrafts to sell their
surpluses at prices set by supply and demand.

"I was never a supporter of the peasant markets we had," he said. Noting that
the new markets are wider in scope and more carefully regulated, he described
them as more promising than in the first experiment. But he was quick to add
that he saw "negative aspects" as well, and that part of the value of the
markets was in creating a greater appreciation among Cubans for the subsidized
goods they buy from the state.

"I say that the agricultural markets teach more about capitalism and socialism
that a thousand schools of political instruction," he said.

The challenge of rescuing Cuba's economy, Mr. Castro suggested, was
psychological as well as ideological.

If he was not sanctioning the enrichment of his people, as the Chinese leader
Deng Xiaoping has done, Mr. Castro said his Government was allowing at least
some Cubans to accumulate some wealth. It was permitting farmers to hire
laborers, he said, and he hinted that it might eventually ease restrictions and
allow other Cubans to hire one another.

Making His Mark With U.S. Dollars

As if to show that he had begun to reconcile himself to the presence of American
dollars, at one point Mr. Castro asked to examine two bills and then signed them
for his visitors.

Reflecting on the summit talks in Miami that he had missed, Mr. Castro
maintained that his fellow Latin American leaders were selling off their assets
too cheaply to private investors in a headlong rush to restructure their once
heavily protected economies and gain freer trade with the United States.

Had he gotten time on the floor in Miami, he said, he would have warned of
social needs left unmet, of economic development gone out of control, of a poor
country being swallowed up in the big arms of the United States.

But as he bid his guests farewell, Mr. Castro seemed to yearn for a bit of that
embrace.

Standing atop the front steps of the vast palace, he finally asked his American
visitors to convey his best wishes to Mr. Gingrich and Bob Dole, the Republican
leader of the Senate. Then he paused for a moment and remembered that a
conservative Republican would soon head the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

"And also to Jesse Helms," he added. "Why not?"

NAME: Fidel Castro

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Reconciled to the presence of dollars, he said, signing a few
for guests at dinner. (The New York Times) (pg. A1); Thousands of refugees from
Fidel Castro's Cuba who fled in small boats over the summer are being held at
the U.S. base at Guantanamo Bay. Despite sometimes harsh conditions, these
refugees found time for song. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. A12)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BOMBING IN NEW JERSEY: THE VICTIM;
His Friends Are Asking: Why Thomas Mosser?

BYLINE: By STUART ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section B;   Page 8;   Column 5;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 747 words


Co-workers, competitors and friends of Thomas J. Mosser spent yesterday puzzling
over his life, and the few details of his death, wondering what might have made
him the target of a mail bomb.

"We're all perplexed," said Kathy Hyett, a senior vice president for marketing
at the Hill & Knowlton public relations agency in New York, who worked with Mr.
Mosser at the Burson-Marsteller public relations agency from 1983 to 1991. "Why?
Why?"

Early this year, Mr. Mosser (pronounced MOE-ser) left Burson-Marsteller, the
world's largest public relations agency, after nearly 25 years. He joined
Burson-Marsteller's parent, the giant Young & Rubicam advertising and
communications company, as an executive vice president. On Dec. 1, nine days
before he died in the explosion at his home in North Caldwell, N.J., Mr. Mosser
was promoted to general manager at Y.& R., the world's sixth largest advertising
agency.

Speculation continued yesterday about whether any of the clients or accounts for
which Mr. Mosser worked at Burson-Marsteller or at Y.& R. might have attracted
the attention of the same bomber whose past attacks included people associated
with airlines, the computer industry and academia.

One of Mr. Mosser's specialties at Burson-Marsteller was crisis communications,
counseling corporations at times of particular ferment, danger or controversy.

He was "very much a voice of calm in chaos," Ms. Hyett said, "so he was able to
provide structure and sense in crisis situations." He also worked for clients
like AT&T, managing a promotion during the 1984 Summer Olympics called the AT&T
Olympic Torch Relay, and Black & Decker, helping that company successfully
absorb the housewares division of the General Electric Company.

For the last four years, the "New York Public Relations Directory," published by
the J. R. O'Dwyer Company lists no airline clients for Burson-Marsteller. Y.& R.
has had no airline advertising client in this country since October 1990, when
it resigned the Trans World Airlines account, although the agency handles
advertising overseas for Lufthansa, the German airline.

Ms. Hyett said she recalled that the Digital Equipment Corporation and the
International Business Machines Corporation were among Burson-Marsteller's
clients during Mr. Mosser's years there; I.B.M. continues as a client, according
to the O'Dwyer directory.

Although unsure whether Mr. Mosser had worked directly on those accounts, Ms.
Hyett said, "When you're a very senior person in a huge agency, you have your
hand in a little bit of everything."

Y.& R. was awarded Digital's personal computer business unit advertising account
in November 1993; late last month, days before Mr. Mosser's promotion, two Y.&
R. subsidiaries in London and Zurich were awarded the unit's advertising account
in Europe.

Richard McGowan, senior vice president and corporate communications director for
Y.& R. in New York, who is serving as the agency's spokesman, said that there
was no suggestion the mail bomb was related to Mr. Mosser's work at Y.& R. or to
any agency clients.

But Jim Freeman, the F.B.I. agent in charge of the investigation in San
Francisco, said that a link between the bombing and the agency had not been
ruled out.

Jack O'Dwyer, the publisher of the directory that bears his name, praised Mr.
Mosser as "a standup man, upfront, on the level, always straight, who didn't
give you the Madison Avenue mumbo jumbo."

"His Navy background was written all over him," Mr. O'Dwyer said, referring to
Mr. Mosser's four years of service as a Naval officer during the Vietnam War.
"He always impressed me as an archetypal top executive, very bright,
above-board, which Y.& R. no doubt saw.

"Y.& R.'s gain was a huge loss for Burson-Marsteller," Mr. O'Dwyer said. "Now
it's a huge loss for everyone."

And Anthony Cardinale, who attended St. Bonaventure University with Mr. Mosser,
graduating in 1964, a year ahead of Mr. Mosser, said, "I suppose Madison Avenue
is a symbol of the 'establishment' as much as the computer industry or Academe."

"He had great leadership qualities from the very beginning," Mr. Cardinale said.
"And he always maintained his integrity over the years."

Another former St. Bonaventure student, John Hanchette, a national correspondent
for the Gannett News Service in Arlington, Va., said: "The idea of Tom's death
this way is so foreign to me that I thought, 'It must be another Tom Mosser.' "

"Nobody could be angry at that guy."

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas J. Mosser (Burson-Marsteller, 1990)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Caterpillar in Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;   Page 17;   Column 4;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 71 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 12


Caterpillar Inc. said today that it had formed an official dealership venture,
V-TRAC, in Hanoi. The majority shareholder of V-TRAC is Anthony Salzman, an
American businessman who went to Vietnam in 1992, when Caterpillar was barred
from doing business here under a United States economic embargo lifted in
February. Caterpillar holds an undisclosed equity interest in V-TRAC, which is
100 percent United States owned.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Embargo of Cuba Defies All Reason

SECTION: Section A;   Page 28;   Column 4;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 388 words


To the Editor:

How ironic that while you report on Vietnamese-Americans who are returning to
open businesses in Vietnam (front page, Dec. 5), you also write about the bleak
prospects for lifting of the United States embargo on Cuba (news article, Dec.
5).

Now that the United States embargo on Vietnam has been lifted, American
citizens, including Vietnamese-Americans, are free to travel and trade with
Vietnam. But United States law prohibits Cuban-Americans from even visiting
their families or sending them financial assistance, and it bans United States
businesses from investing in Cuba.

Why the continued ban on Cuba trade when we trade with other Communist
countries? It is not because of Cuba's human rights record. Didn't we just see
Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown in Indonesia -- a country with a terrible
human rights record -- saying the way to bring about democracy is "commercial
engagement"?

Didn't President Clinton separate human rights concerns from financial dealings
with China?

The United States has cozy trade relations with corrupt governments from Saudi
Arabia to Guatemala and Zaire.

Yet we continue a Cuba policy that keeps milk from children and medicines from
sick people. We continue a policy that thwarts economic and political reform by
keeping the Cuban Government under siege.

We continue a policy that denies the constitutional rights of United States
citizens by prohibiting us from traveling there.

We continue a policy that hurts United States businesses, because the best
financial deals are being gobbled up by Canadians, Mexicans and Europeans.

The United States embargo of Cuba is old, hackneyed, inconsistent and cruel. It
might fit in with the crusty character of Jesse Helms, the next Senate Foreign
Relations Committee chairman, but it is not a policy worthy of a great country.
It's time for Cuban-Americans, like their Vietnamese counterparts, to have the
right not only to travel to Cuba and send money to their relatives, but to
invest in Cuba as well.

Lifting the trade embargo will be good for United States businesses and good for
the Cuban people, who are suffering from severe shortages. As with Vietnam,
let's bury the hatchet and get on with the normalization process.

MEDEA BENJAMIN
Director, Global Exchange
San Francisco, Dec. 7, 1994

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

ORANGE COUNTY BANKRUPTCY: THE JUDGE;
Overseer of the Case: Tough and Experienced

BYLINE: By ANDREA ADELSON,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;   Page 7;   Column 5;   Financial Desk

LENGTH: 590 words

DATELINE: SANTA ANA, Calif., Dec. 12


There is little, if any, precedent for the battle shaping up among bankrupt
Orange County, Calif., the local government units that invested in its
loss-plagued fund and a battery of Wall Street brokerage firms. But that should
not prove overwhelming for John E. Ryan, the tough and experienced Federal
bankruptcy judge who will oversee the case.

"No one is going to intimidate him," said Ronald Rus, an Irvine, Calif.,
bankruptcy lawyer whose firm represents some of the more than 180 public
entities with investments in Orange County's badly soured investment fund. "He
did two tours of duty in Vietnam," Mr. Rus said, citing Mr. Ryan's experience as
a former Navy fighter pilot.

Lawyers who have presented cases before Judge Ryan and colleagues say he will
not lose sight of the enormity of the case or be troubled by lack of legal
precedents for proceedings in Chapter 9 of the Federal Bankruptcy Code.

"You look at the law and try to figure out how to apply it," said Judge Barry
Russell, who sits in the Federal Bankruptcy Court's Los Angeles branch.

Judge Russell said Judge Ryan was well suited for a case that has the potential
to carom into new crises if cities and other local government units that
invested in the fund become insolvent. "You can't mull it over," he said. "He is
quick and decisive."

Since his appointment in 1986 to the Federal Bankruptcy Court's Santa Ana
branch, Judge Ryan has earned a reputation for strictly interpreting the law and
being a prolific writer of opinions.

"He doesn't want to make a gut ruling from the bench," said Steven J. Katzman, a
Federal prosecutor in Los Angeles who worked as Judge Ryan's clerk in 1987.

Mr. Katzman recalled two occasions when Judge Ryan boiled over. Once, he ordered
an unethical lawyer to return fees. Another lawyer was interrupted by the judge
and ordered to leave the courtroom to get rid of his gum.

Outside the courtroom, Judge Ryan consciously sheds his sober air for a
livelier, friendly tone. He favors French dip sandwiches and green beer on St.
Patrick's Day. He helped organize the Orange County Bankruptcy Forum, an
educational professional group. He is an enthusiastic speaker, particularly
about his pet peeve: needless cross-examination of witnesses.

Judge Ryan, 53, who declined today through a spokeswoman to comment for this
article, has presided over several local high-profile cases. Among them are the
1992 liquidation of RB Furniture, a big Southern California retail chain, and
the reorganization of the military contractor Helionetics Inc. in 1989. In 1988,
he supervised the complex untangling of the estate of Michael Goodwin, a former
business partner of a slain promotor of auto races, Mickey Thompson.

Judge Ryan; his wife, Terri, and three daughters live in rural Escondido, in
northern San Diego County. Some speculate that he was selected to preside over
the case because he owned no property in Orange County and would therefore avoid
any conflict of interest.

Mr. Ryan was born in Boston. He graduated from the Naval Academy in 1963 and
became a fighter pilot. In 1972 he graduated from Georgetown University Law
School and practiced law at Hale & Dorr in Boston. He moved to California in
1976 and became general counsel at Oak Industries of San Diego, a satellite
television company that suffered huge losses and a regulatory inquiry during the
1980's. After that, he went into private practice in San Diego; he was appointed
to the bankruptcy bench from the law firm of Jennings, Enstrand & Hendrickson.

NAME: John E. Ryan

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 14, 1994, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A picture in Business Day yesterday with an article about John E. Ryan, the
Federal judge who will oversee the Orange County bankruptcy suit, was published
in error. It showed John E. Ryan, deputy and acting chief executive of the
Resolution Trust Corporation, the Government agency responsible for disposing of
the assets of failed savings institutions.


GRAPHIC: Photo: John E. Ryan, the Federal judge who will oversee the Orange
County bankruptcy case. (Reuters)

TYPE: Biography ;

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Mourning 'a Real Class Act';
Bomb Victim Recalled as Man in Love With Work and Play

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1206 words


The smooth contours of the life of Thomas J. Mosser were hardly the kind that
might have foretold a violent death: his Roman Catholic boyhood, his rise in
business, his commitment to his alma mater, his apparently happy suburban life.

As friends tell it, Mr. Mosser was a good man: a successful son, selfless mentor
and devoted father, who made a ritual out of taking his eldest daughter to
Sardi's and the theater every year around Christmas.

At the height of his career, he would take time to counsel students from his old
college, to critique their resumes, to help find jobs for some of them in his
company and to drop occasional notes of praise.

He was an enthusiastic, if less than brilliant, weekend golfer, an amateur cook
who took pride in his spaghetti sauce, a globe-trotting executive who quietly
swallowed his fear of flying.

"You know how you can be passionate but quiet, selfless but ambitious?" said
James H. Dowling, Mr. Mosser's boss for 12 years. "He felt really strongly about
a lot of things, but he never took it out on people."

Mr. Mosser died on Saturday at age 50 in the kitchen of his home in North
Caldwell, N.J., the victim of a mail bomb believed to have been sent by a bomber
thought to be responsible for 14 similar attacks.

Mr. Mosser had been promoted on Dec. 1 to general manager of Young & Rubicam,
the advertising and communications giant, after spending most of his career at
Burson-Marsteller, the world's largest public-relations firm.

Associates have speculated that one of Mr. Mosser's high-profile clients might
have piqued the interest of the bomber, who is believed to have been behind past
attacks on airlines, the computer industry and academia.

There appears to be little in his life beyond his work that might have won him
enemies. In interviews yesterday, friends and acquaintances over and over
described him with the same words: committed, loyal, solid, nice.

"He was a very, very gentle man," said Leslie C. Quick 3d, a New York City
stockbroker and vice chairman of the board of St. Bonaventure University, Mr.
Mosser's alma mater. "For a guy who's way up there, he was just a real class
act."

Several years ago Mr. Quick tried to persuade Mr. Mosser to join St.
Bonaventure's board. He said Mr. Mosser turned him down because the job would
have involved flying in a small plane to the only airport near the college in
Olean, N.Y.

"He was not a great flier," said Mr. Dowling, Mr. Mosser's former boss. "But
when he was asked to take on responsibilities that were global, he sucked it up.
I flew back from Europe with him in the Concorde one time and his arms never hit
the arm rests. Very tense."

And Mr. Mosser was not without a sense of humor, friends said.

One cool October day in the early 1960's, on the anniversary of Martin Luther's
posting of his 95 theses on the cathedral door at Wittenberg, Mr. Mosser and a
handful of other undergraduates tacked their own list of 95 grievances on the
chapel door at St. Bonaventure.

As Dennis Shaw, a former classmate, remembers it, the list called for, among
other things, an improved male-female ratio on campus. "We thought reformation
would be a rallying cry," Mr. Shaw said. "The most insulting thing they did was
ignore us."

Carol Schumacher, 38, another St. Bonaventure graduate, who Mr. Mosser inspired
to go into public relations, recalled having lunch with him when she was being
considered for a job at Burson-Marsteller and ordering a screwdriver because
friends had advised her that drinking beer wouldn't look good.

"Halfway through, Tom said, 'Well, I was ready to hire you but I can't because I
realize you drink screwdrivers instead of beer and all Bonaventure people like
beer,' " Ms. Schumacher recalled. "He had ordered beer. I said, 'I was dying for
a beer.' "

Thomas Joseph Mosser grew up in the 1950's in Scotch Plains, N.J., and was
educated in Catholic schools -- first at the St. Bartholomew the Apostle School,
which was connected to his parish church, then at Seton Hall Prep in West
Orange, a college preparatory school for boys.

His activities there were extensive: glee club, bowling league, current affairs,
Latin and Italian clubs. He was a class officer and played intramural sports,
making the long trek by car or bus back to Scotch Plains with a few other
students.

"He was a very bright guy, very outgoing," said the New Jersey State Senate
President, Don DiFrancesco, who grew up around the corner from the Mossers' Cape
Cod-style house on Cedar Grove Terrace and was a grammar-school classmate. "It
was a typical suburban Catholic family."

In 1961, Mr. Mosser went on to St. Bonaventure, a tiny, Catholic, liberal-arts
university in the shadow of the Allegheny Mountains in southwestern New York, at
a time when every dormitory floor had a resident priest as a prefect and
students were expected to sign in and out.

Mr. Mosser majored in journalism and worked on the college's weekly newspaper,
The Bona Venture, under the guidance of a charismatic department chairman,
Russell J. Jandoli, who, his students say, inspired a lasting sense of shared
mission and community.

Mr. Shaw, who was editorial-page editor when Mr. Mosser was editor in chief,
said Mr. Mosser already displayed "people smarts," deftly balancing the
interests of students and the desires of an administration that viewed itself as
parental.

"It served him well and it was no surprise that he made it big in a very
competitive world," said Mr. Shaw, director of operations for Maryland Homeless
Veterans, a social-service agency in Baltimore. "That world of corporate P.R.
and advertising is a difficult place to thrive and he thrived there for a long
time."

Mr. Mosser graduated in 1965 and went on to spend four years in the Navy,
including a stint in Vietnam. Then he worked briefly as a reporter for The
Associated Press before joining Burson-Marsteller in 1970.

Mr. Mosser had two children by his first marriage, Abigail, now 21, and Timmy,
now in his late teens. He was divorced and in 1980, he married a colleague from
Burson-Marsteller in a ceremony at Tavern on the Green. He and his second wife,
Susan, had a daughter Kimberly, now 13. Last year, they had another daughter,
Kelly, now 15 months.

"What a surprise," Mr. Dowling said, recalling his friend's reaction. Yet, Mr.
Dowling said, Mr. Mosser "absolutely loved it." Others said that in his 40's,
Mr. Mosser had begun to take more time out from his work to be with his
children.

He was an avid golfer and made an annual pilgrimage to Florida to play in a
charity tournament, the Walt Disney Classic. Mr. Dowling said Mr. Mosser became
something of a family patriarch, helping organize a reunion and, in the past,
taking responsibility for his aging parents.

He remained in close contact with St. Bonaventure and its journalism department,
arranging internships for students and helping them find jobs. In 1989,
Burson-Marsteller donated $10,000 to the journalism and communications
department for an endowed scholarship in public relations in Mr. Mosser's name.

"This guy was amazing," said George P. Evans, the current department chairman. "
He was a man of his word. Whatever he told a kid, he would deliver on it."

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Thomas J. Mosser (pg. B1); Thomas J. Mosser, center, posed with
other members of the Press Club for a photograph in the 1963 yearbook of St.
Bonaventure University. (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Richard Patrick Critchfield, 63, Writer on Life in Third World

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


Richard Patrick Critchfield, an author and journalist who lived and worked among
villagers of the third world to tell their story to Western readers, died on
Saturday at George Washington Hospital in Washington. He was 63 and lived in
Berkeley, Calif.

He suffered a stroke the week before in Washington, where he had gone to attend
a publication party for his latest book, "Villagers," said his agent in New
York, Stuart Krichevsky.

During his career, Mr. Critchfield spent long periods working and living with
the peasants of Asia, Africa and Latin America about whom he wrote.

For many years he reported on rural development for The Economist, and he also
contributed op-ed articles and book reviews to The New York Times, The
Washington Post and The Asian Wall Street Journal, among others.

Born in Minneapolis, he graduated from the University of Washington and earned a
master's degree at Columbia University.

Over the years, Mr. Critchfield reported for various publications on Asia,
Washington, the White House, the China-India conflict of 1962, the Vietnam War
and the India-Pakistan war of 1965. In 1981, he received a MacArthur Fellowship,
totaling $244,000, which he used to continue studying cultural change in the
rural third world.

His books included "The Long Charade: Political Subversion in the Vietnam War"
(Harcourt, 1968); "The Golden Bowl Be Broken: Peasant Life in Four Cultures"
(Indiana University Press, 1974); "Shahhat: An Egyptian" (Syracuse University
Press, 1978), and "Villages" (Doubleday, 1980). "Villagers: Changed Values,
Altered Lives: The Closing of the Urban-Rural Gap" was published by Doubleday
last month.

In a different vein, "Those Days: An America Album" (Doubleday, 1984) was a
family memoir that covered, as a reviewer wrote, "an amazing chunk of American
history." Another work, "An American Looks at Britain" (Doubleday, 1990), argued
that Britain's ruling class had lost faith in just about everything between the
world wars but refused to move over and let others govern.

Mr. Critchfield is survived by a brother, James of Delaplane, Va., and a sister,
Margaret N. Moffett of Berkeley.

NAME: Richard Patrick Critchfield

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Patrick Critchfield (1986)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Add a Huge Hit Movie To a Data Base, and Stir

BYLINE: By MOLLY O'NEILL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 526 words


OVER the last 30 years, a cookbook writer's persona has steadily become more
important than his or her recipes. Now a persona has "written" a cookbook. "The
Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. Cookbook," a collection of recipes and reflections from
Forrest Gump, was probably inevitable.

The Gump character, an intellectually challenged individual from Alabama who
served in the Vietnam War and eventually opened a shrimp fishing company, has
been like a teddy bear to Americans since his portrayal by Tom Hanks in a movie
that has grossed almost $300 million.

In "Forrest Gump," the title character occasionally grew wistful for home-cooked
shrimp dishes. The Bubba book ($14.95) is a fantasy of what those dishes might
have been, and on Dec. 4 it hit the New York Times best-seller list.

Mr. Gump's effort diverges sharply from the old-school practice by which a cook
toiled to perfect original recipes for the reading and cooking public. The 75
recipes in the Bubba book were culled from a database of "thousands and
thousands" that have appeared in Southern Living magazine, said Dianne Mooney,
who served as Mr. Gump's ghostwriter and editor.

"We have a gold mine of data," continued Ms. Mooney, who is the director of
custom publishing at Oxmoor House, a unit of Time Inc. Ventures in Birmingham,
Ala., which owns Southern Living. She believes that re-using previously
published recipes is both contemporary and socially conscious. "Recycling," she
said. "It's very 90's."

Does she see a trend toward data-base books with imaginary authors? "From a
business point of view, I hope so," she said.

Already, Time Inc. Ventures has reached an agreement with Viacom Inc. -- which
owns Paramount Pictures, which released the Gump film -- to publish "Forrest
Gump's Favorite Chocolate Recipes" in time for Mother's Day. And just as
Meridian Products Inc., a seafood company in Santa Fe Springs, Calif., received
a license to use the Bubba Gump name on a line of fresh, frozen and cooked
shrimp, there is the possibility, Ms. Mooney said, "that a major chocolate
company will roll out a Gump product, too."

Published in October, "The Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. Cookbook" has sold nearly
700,000 copies -- not bad for a first-time virtual author.

Exactly how did the editor decide which recipes Mr. Gump, if he were real, would
have committed to a cookbook? "We weren't strict," Ms. Mooney said. "People are
buying the book for the Gumpisms, all his cute little sayings that are in the
margins, not so much for the recipes."

The recipes, she continued, are excellent. But she added, "If we'd brought out a
shrimp book for a real shrimp company, we wouldn't be looking at the sort of
numbers we're looking at now."

Fantasy, of course, isn't new to dining. From haute cuisine to food that is
self-consciously homey, the success of any meal is partly based on how well it
satisfies a longing that is deeper than physical appetite. What yearning, then,
does the appetite for Gump signal?

"Spiritual," Ms. Mooney said. "He is so real, so human, so decent."

Such a veritable antidote, this virtual cookbook writer, to our impersonal,
data-driven times.


LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: From Forrest Gump's company, real recipes.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 157 words



CALTEX PETROLEUM CORP., Dallas, a unit of Chevron Corp. and Texaco Inc., opened
new offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City to promote its products and develop
and evaluate investment projects in Vietnam.

CUC INTERNATIONAL INC., Stamford, Conn., a membership services company, will
acquire Essex Corp., New York, a marketer of financial products for banks, for
$27 million in cash and future payments.



FEDERATED DEPARTMENT STORES INC., Cincinnati, said it expected its planned
merger with R. H. Macy & Co. to close next Monday.

RAYTHEON CO., Lexington, Mass., has received a $34.8 million order to design and
manufacture equipment for a new satellite telephone network called Globalstar.

WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP., Pittsburgh, sold its majority stake in Royal
International Optical Inc., a retailer with more than 600 stores in 45 states,
for about $19.4 million to investors led by Grotech Capital Group.

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bombing Victim Honored as Loving Family Man

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD J. LEVY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 25;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: NORTH CALDWELL, N.J., Dec. 16


Thomas J. Mosser, the advertising executive killed by a serial bomber last week,
was remembered today not as a master of Madison Avenue or as a victim of a
bizarre criminal, but as a caring father who loved touch football and golf,
homemade spaghetti sauce and pretty candles.

At a funeral Mass at Notre Dame Church here, Mr. Mosser's family and friends
spoke of small details of his life that still made them smile. His 13-year-old
daughter, Kim, recalled how much he enjoyed gathering his family around the
piano to sing Christmas carols.

"Christmas time was my dad's favorite time of year," she said. "My dad is still
here in our hearts."

And then, sobbing softly, Kim and two other children of Mr. Mosser, Abigail, 21,
and Timothy, 16, led the 500 or so congregants in singing the carol he liked
best, "O Holy Night."

Mr. Mosser's youngest brother, Kevin, said that when they played football as
children, Tom always got the ball on fourth down. Even then, Kevin Mosser said,
people instinctively turned to his brother in times of trouble.

"Tom was always the person we would look for to get us through any crisis that
came up," he said. "Tom would always show up. No matter where he was. Tom would
be there for us."

Mr. Mosser, 50, the general manager of Young & Rubicam, one of the world's
largest advertising agencies, was killed when he opened a mail bomb in the
kitchen of his home in North Caldwell last Saturday. The authorities said the
attack was the work of a bomber who has killed one other man and wounded 22 in
14 other attacks since 1978.

Federal agencies continued their investigation into the death today, still
searching for a reason why Mr. Mosser was killed, as well as other clues that
might lead them closer to the bomber. Much of the inquiry has moved to San
Francisco, where the bomber may now be operating.

Throughout the service today, there was virtually no mention of the bomber, as
if Mr. Mosser's family, friends and co-workers could not even begin to think
about justice or the search for the suspect.

The Rev. Neil J. O'Connell, past president of Mr. Mosser's alma mater, St.
Bonaventure University, made the only reference to the bomber when he discussed
grappling with what had happened to Mr. Mosser.

"The succession of whys march into our thoughts," Father O'Connell said. "Why
should one of such personal and professional accomplishment be cut down at the
moment of greatest fulfillment? Why should a mind capable of immense creativity
and delicate precision become so perverted to produce such an instrument of
fatal terror?"

Father O'Connell said that he had decided that those were the wrong questions.
Mr. Mosser had been such a good person, he said, that it was more important to
ask: "Why did we deserve to have the blessing of Tom Mosser in our lives at
all?"

Two of Mr. Mosser's colleagues also eulogized him: Peter Georgescu, president of
Young & Rubicam, and Harold Burson, founder of Burson-Marsteller, Young and
Rubicam's public relations subsidiary, for which Mr. Mosser worked for many
years.

Mr. Georgescu said he wore a bright red tie to the funeral because he wanted to
celebrate his colleague's life. He described how Mr. Mosser often rejuvenated
him at the end of a hard day.

"I would walk into Tom's office weak and I would walk out of his office strong,"
he said. "I would walk into his office insecure, and walk out of his office
confident. I would walk into his office unsure and walk out of his office wise."

The coffin of Mr. Mosser, a Vietnam veteran, was draped in an American flag. His
wife, Susan, did not speak at the funeral. After the Mass, she led the
procession following the coffin, clutching their 15-month-old daughter, Kelly,
who was wearing a powder blue down jacket, a pacifier in her mouth.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas J. Mosser, the executive who was killed by a serial
bomber, was buried yesterday. His wife, Susan, and his brother, Kevin, were
among the family and friends at Prospect Hill Cemetery in Caldwell, N.J.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Father and Son Reunion To Find Roots and Die

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 50;   Column 5;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 311 words


Kirk Douglas has developed a cottage industry of playing trimly fit,
irrepressible old men who have no intention of going gentle into any good
nights. Here he goes again, in a teleplay written by Ernest Thompson ("On Golden
Pond"). In "Take Me Home Again," on NBC at 9 tomorrow night, irascible Ed Reece
(Mr. Douglas) wants to escape his suffocating family to die in the bed and place
where he was born, somewhere in California, or maybe Oregon. The only one who
might possibly help him get there is his wandering son Larry (Craig T. Nelson),
once a Vietnam War protester and now an absentee husband and father. A wary
Larry arrives, and father and son set off on a cross-country trek, stopping to
chat every once in a while with new colorful characters and old loves.

Mr. Douglas and Mr. Nelson work well together, often quite movingly. But Mr.
Thompson's script is curiously unfocused. There are passing references,
presumably unflattering, to Reagan and Bush, but there is no real political
statement.

In a closing scene, his mother (Bonnie Bartlett) says to Larry, "The war's over;
nobody won," but the sentiment is somehow unearned. There are lovely bits and
pieces here, including a characteristically fine performance from Eileen Brennan
as Ed's old flame, but the themes of forgiveness and reconciliation fall short
of obviously grander intentions.

TAKE ME HOME AGAIN
NBC, Sunday at 9 P.M.
(Channel 4 in New York)

Written by Ernest Thompson and directed by Tom McLoughlin; Barbara Black and
Randy Sutter, co-producers; Frank von Zerneck, Robert M. Sertner and Patricia
Meyer, executive producers; Mr. Thompson, co-executive producer.
WITH: Kirk Douglas (Ed Reece), Craig T. Nelson (Larry Reece), Bonnie Bartlett
(Sylvia Reece), Bess Armstrong (Connie), Eileen Brennan (Sada), Richard
Gilliland (Russ Reece) and Ernest Thompson (Cal).

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

METHOD & MADNESS;
Armed With Integrity

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 25;   Column 1;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


THROUGH 45 YEARS of cold war rivalry, the superpowers tried only half-heartedly
to develop chemical and biological weapons, reserving their true enthusiasm for
the perfection of nuclear combat. Had either side gotten serious about germ
attacks or nerve gas, the world might now be bristling withanother means of
destruction just as deadly as nuclear weapons yet far less containable. Broad
perceptions of national interest, not philanthropy, fostered this restraint. But
if any individuals deserve credit for shaping those perceptions, a President and
a professor did more than most.

In an act of unusual statesmanship, Richard Nixon in 1969 renounced biological
warfare, just in time to avert an arms race based on the genetic engineering
techniques that were invented a few years later.

The other half of this odd couple is Matthew Meselson, a Harvard biologist who,
to a degree unusual for a scientist, has learned how to influence Washington and
set the terms of public debate. For many years he has divided his time between
the laboratory and lobbying against the conversion of biology and chemistry to
destructive ends. In his latest foray, he traveled to Russia to investigate the
1979 anthrax outbreak at Sverdlovsk, a troubling sign of Soviet interest in germ
warfare.

"I don't know that I've achieved so much," he said recently over lunch at a
Chinese restaurant near Harvard Square in Cambridge, Mass. "I do know I've spent
a lot of time that could have been spent on biology." In fact, he has made
himself an influential player in almost every debate over biological and
chemical weapons during the last 25 years.

How could a single scholar influence the affairs of nations? Meselson has
applied an unusual set of skills to his purpose. As one of the pioneers of
molecular biology, he is a first-class scientist, with analytic skills that have
proved decisive in issues like the effect of herbicides in Vietnam and "yellow
rain."

Meselson has also learned the difficult game of being both an outsider and an
insider, of criticizing the intelligence community while remaining privy to its
secrets through a long-held "top secret" clearance. His effectiveness comes from
wide access to information and complete analysis of his brief. "He doesn't want
to go into anything which he can't master more thoroughly than anyone else,"
says Paul Doty, a Harvard colleague.

As a young scientist, Meselson spent the summer of 1963 at the Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency. At the time, under pressure from the Army Chemical Corps and
others, the country was drifting into acceptance of germ and nerve gas weapons,
a direction Meselson believed was contrary to the national interest and fraught
with danger to humanity. He joined other scientists in petitioning for a review
of national policy, a campaign that lifted off in 1968 when a cloud of VX nerve
gas escaped from an Army test site in Utah and 6,000 sheep died. The review that
Washington eventually began led to Nixon's renunciation.

Meselson led a scientific mission to Vietnam in 1970 to assess the damage caused
by the herbicides used to defoliate jungle and kill crops. The White House
announced all herbicide operations would stop just as Meselson's commission made
its findings public.

Meselson's fearlessness in challenging the Government's experts was also evident
in his work on two puzzling incidents of the 1980's, which threatened to undo
all the treaty restraints on biological warfare that had been built up in the
previous decade. One was the Reagan Administration's charge that Soviet-backed
forces in Southeast Asia were using "yellow rain" toxins in warfare. Strand by
strand, with help sought from scientists and officials in several countries,
Meselson picked away at Washington's case, showing that one premise after
another was flawed. Eventually, in a triumph of one man's science over an
Administration's mendacity, a truth emerged so humiliating and ridiculous that
Washington could never bear to acknowledge it: the samples of yellow rain that
intelligence officials had so carefully gathered from the battlefields of
Southeast Asia were not some fiendish toxin. They were the pollen-laden
excrement of jungle bees.

In the Sverdlovsk case, the truth was not so clear cut and Meselson not so
right. The Soviet Union assured the United States that the epidemic was a
natural outbreak of anthrax, spread by the sale of tainted meat. United States
intelligence agencies believed, to the contrary, that the outbreak was caused by
the release of some 10 kilograms of anthrax spores from the military biology
installation in the city. If so, the Soviet Union had violated the treaty that
forbids production of biological weapons, proving it would cheat on solemn
agreements for nugatory gain.

In response to American concern, Moscow dribbled out more data, and in 1988
Meselson termed the elaborated story "plausible and consistent with what is
known from previous outbreaks of human and animal anthrax."

Regrettably, the Soviet assurances proved to be a cunning web of falsehoods, and
in 1992 President Boris Yeltsin, who had been the chief Communist official of
the Sverdlovsk region at the time, said in an interview that ". . . the K.G.B.
admitted that our military developments were the cause."

Meselson's recent inquiries at Sverdlovsk, to his credit, reached a conclusion
opposite to the one he favored earlier, while fleshing out Yeltsin's summary
statement.  With the help of local Russian scientists and Jeanne Guillemin, a
sociologist and his wife, he established that almost all those who died had been
downwind of the military biology facility, which was the source of the anthrax
spores.

In an article in Science last month, Meselson estimated that the weight of
spores released was more than a few milligrams but less than a gram. That could
conceivably be the amount released from a large research experiment -- and
research is permitted by the Biological Weapons Convention.

Yet if a mere research accident was the cause, why did the Soviet Union go to
such lengths to respond with disinformation instead of explanation?

Meselson's new study puts a heavy burden on the Russians to make clear what was
really happening in Sverdlovsk and elsewhere. Moscow officials might as well
yield those secrets now or they will face an indefinite siege. For from the lies
of governments Matthew Meselson is determined to extract what he knows as a
scientist to be true, that the pursuit of biological weapons is an extreme
folly.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
O.K., Call It War

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 30;   Column 3;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


I USED TO HATE hearing about the "war" against drugs, and as executive editor
tried to discourage that metaphor in The Times. But the politicians won the
battle of the cliche even as they were losing the war. The "war" term appeared
in this newspaper only 16 times in all of 1981, but 66 times in 1987 and 511
times in 1989, after President Bush promised at his inaugural, "Take my word for
it, this scourge will stop." Well, it didn't, and we're down to about 100
mentions in each of the Clinton years, a mere twice a week. And now I'm sorry,
for it's time the media began to cover the war on drugs as a war -- the way they
covered the last war that America lost.

The better newspapers are portraying the drug quagmire the way they once
portrayed the quagmire in Vietnam.  Dispatches from the front find cops risking
life and limb to drag in users and dealers, but just as many stalk the streets
the next night. The brass that's bragging about progress and calling for still
more troops, weapons, prisons and money must be smoking something.

If the newspapers, magazines and TV networks would agree that there's a war on,
maybe they would report a monthly "bag count" -- the number of kilo-size packs
of cocaine or heroin seized by Federal, state and local raiders in urban
hideaways, remote marinas and canine stomachs. They could point out that the bag
count, much like the Vietnam body count, is a meaningless index of progress in
the war; no matter how impressive the seizures, the flow of bags in the
underground drug channels continues relentlessly.

The press has been too generous with pictures of prosecutors and politicians
posing with the mounds of heroin and cocaine they've stumbled across somewhere.
If more of the media would open drug-war bureaus in the inner cities, their
bravest reporters would find that there's no shortage anytime, no increase at
all in the street price of drugs, just constant pressure by a guerrilla army of
street pushers supporting their own drug habit by enlarging the circle of
customers. The reporters would document the cost and futility of the pursuit,
the cynicism and corruption of the pursuers and the serene confidence of a
wealthy enemy.

GRADUALLY, MAYBE through C-Span "teach-ins" run by such radicals as former
Secretary of State George Shultz, Mayor Kurt L. Schmoke of Baltimore and William
F. Buckley Jr., the commercial networks might learn that the war on drugs --
meaning the prohibition of drugs -- is not only being lost but is also
unwinnable. The radicals have adopted the antiwar slogan of "legalization," but
the TV anchors don't have to embrace that still-undefined remedy. They need only
climb to the rooftops of Washington Heights in New York and cruise down along
the Potomac Delta while reciting the terrifying findings of their research
staffs: the direct, recognizable cost of this war is probably running in excess
of $100 billion a year. There's not even a good estimate of the cost of the
related crimes committed by drug peddlers and users, and of the measures taken
to prevent such crimes, to compensate the victims and to punish some of the
perpetrators. Hundreds of millions of dollars are being stashed in offshore
sanctuaries and hundreds of millions more are available to import the stuff and
to pave the way with bribes and untaxed wages. *

Of the 20 million American drug users, maybe 5 million are "seriously" addicted.
A year's supply of heroin for all of them can be made from opium poppies grown
on only 20 square miles of land -- not quite the area of Manhattan. A year's
supply of coke can be stashed in 13 truck trailers. So "eradicating" the supply
abroad is impossible; "interdicting" drugs at the border is a joke.

About 40,000 Americans die each year of the direct and indirect effects of
drugs; a large proportion of New York City's 2,000 annual homicides are
attributable to drug trafficking. And drug offenders, whether or not they are
violent criminals, clog the courts and prisons.

When finally one of the TV anchors senses that the country is ready to hear
unvarnished truth, like Walter Cronkite's passionate declaration in 1968 that it
was time to get out of Vietnam, she won't have to bother with statistics.
Against a backdrop of gripping graphics, she could simply list the war's
consequences:

* Urban blight, fear and destruction.
* Neighborhood turf wars and shootouts.
* Family ruin, school failure and wreckage.
* Lost productivity in the economy.
* Crack babies, kids dealing drugs, addicts felled by AIDS.
* Cops corrupted. Courts and prisons overwhelmed.
* Murder and mayhem clear to the top in Mexico, Colom

* Most of the statistics in this column are taken from "The Making of a
Drug-Free America" by Mathea Falco and "A Wiser Course: Ending Drug Prohibition,
a Report of the Special Committee on Drugs and the Law of the Association of the
Bar of the City of New York."
bia and other countries that cannot resist supplying the rich American market.
And in America, contempt for government -- and despair.

IF THE PROHIBITION OF drugs is a lost cause then "legalization" -- in some form
-- is inevitable. But the word "legalization" has been demonized, like
"negotiation" before Henry Kissinger sat down with the Vietcong in Paris. A year
ago, Surgeon General Joycelyn Elders was pilloried -- and disowned by her
President -- for recommending "some studies" of how drugs might be legalized and
regulated. Most Americans still think legalization would constitute "surrender"
to immorality. Some call it "genocide" because they imagine ghetto children
lining up at the corner drugstore for their daily fix.

Not until we in the media do a better job of reporting the horrendous costs of
this unwinnable war will the public consider alternative policies. By
definition, legalizing drugs would put the big dealers and their gun-toting
distributors out of business. It would also keep most users from having to steal
to support the habit. That alone would liberate a great deal of money and energy
for reclaiming wrecked lives and neighborhoods.

Like the Surgeon General, I don't pretend to know how a legal drug trade might
be managed. Maybe drugs should be sold inexpensively to adults through
Government outlets, like the ABC liquor stores that many states opened after
Prohibition. Maybe drugs should be given away at neighborhood dispensaries that
also offer treatment to cure addiction. Maybe dozens of experiments are in
order.

By all means, let's call it "war." Then deal with defeat.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART VIEW;
A Pair of Saints Who Refuse To Stay Dead

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 49;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2158 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


ELVIS WAS A HIP replacement, a shaky premise, a groined vault. He put the male
pelvis right where belly dancers and stripteasers had already put the female's:
up front in the spotlight. This made some people nervous. What's more, he was
vulgar, his hair was full of goo, he had a pink stripe on his black pants, and
his music borrowed freely from black gospel, blues, and rhythm and blues.
Numerous disk jockeys burned stacks of his records. Ministers preached against
him. Police and district attorneys held him responsible for juvenile
delinquency. Pravda gleefully declared him proof of Western decadence, and many
Americans agreed. He just wanted to play house in the Heartbreak Hotel. He just
wanted you to love him tender.

Marilyn was the promise of pneumatic bliss and the power to cloud men's minds.
She was the blondest woman in America, a bombshell made of custard, the ecstatic
answer to your mother's injunction to have a good time, dear. She had a smile as
bright as cloudless skies while inside she rained tears, but at the moment that
the Pill became available she let women know that sex was more fun than the
married women's instruction manuals let on, thereby helping prepare the ground
for sexual revolution. Baseball greats and playwrights married her; men in high
office bedded her. She just wanted someone to love her true.

Wendy McDaris, a curator who lives in Elvis's hometown, Memphis, has had the
clever idea of examining the impact of these two on the arts in "Elvis +
Marilyn: 2 x Immortal" at the Institute of Contemporary Art in Boston (through
Jan. 8, then traveling to institutions in nine cities, including the New-York
Historical Society next October with a well-illustrated and sometimes thoughtful
catalogue from Rizzoli). This very large show includes the work of 107 artists,
among them Robert Arneson, Joseph Cornell, Keith Haring and Claes Oldenburg.

Rather arbitrarily divided into images of cultural, heroic, mythic and religious
significance, it suffers from the usual problem of theme shows: some work is
here simply because it is about the title. But many pieces are smart and
amusing, and some are important. In Jeff Bourgeau's "You Are the One," Marilyn,
in low resolution, tantalizingly, maddeningly blows a kiss over and over on tiny
monitors while a scratchy male voice sings. Ralph Burns's report on pilgrims to
Graceland includes an amazing photograph of a fat woman in a bedroom
contemplating an Elvis mannequin stiffly at rest on the bedspread. Ashley
Bickerton's "Seascape: Floating Costume to Drift for Eternity" -- a strapped-up
trunk, equipped to float and enclosing a jeweled white Elvis jump suit -- is a
ghostly high-tech message in a bottle.

The strongest section is on religion, especially the Elvis cult. Elvis
considered himself a healer, and people with sick children trooped to his
concerts as if to Lourdes -- and that was before he died. Joanne Stephens's
"Homage to Elvis" enshrines a jeweled and crowned singer in a golden splendor of
musical putti atop a gutted television set, within which a diorama shows Elvis
belting it out for an attentive group of animals. Marilyn has an altar, too.
Mark Solomon Dennis serves up Elvis's severed head on a platter with some
salmon, Conrad Atkinson and Alexander Guy both produce crucified Elvis suits.

Our saints today, such as they are, survive a certain amount of torture at the
hands of cruel lovers, an inquisitorial public and private demons. Then, lacking
executioners, they have to finish the job themselves with neglect or overdoses
or whatever. Performers and artists are good candidates to become cult figures,
musicians especially, for they promise transcendence, initiating their followers
into ecstatic mysteries where reason cannot reach.

YOU MIGHT OVERDOSE ON Elvis and Marilyn in the midst of the I.C.A. extravaganza,
but you will certainly be convinced that artists believe, with the rest of us,
that these two are cultural icons. Marilyn and Elvis are as undead as vampires
and return more often, not being afraid of sunlight. Their images are everywhere
and have been from the moment they died. A photograph of Elvis in his coffin was
said to be the first picture of a dead celebrity on a front page; it sold six
million copies of The National Enquirer.

Yet Elvis has refused to lie still; he is sighted more often than endangered
species. Christopher Walken, in "Him," a play now at the Public Theater,
proposes that Elvis did not die but went into hiding disguised as a waitress.
Marilyn, theatrical in her lifetime, after her death was also turned into
theater in Arthur Miller's "After the Fall." Madonna resurrected her via the
sincerest form of flattery in music videos and magazine spreads. Elvis crossed
the country on a postage stamp; Marilyn became one, too, but only in St.
Vincent, in the West Indies.

It is a safe bet that very few artists make the yearly pilgrimage to Memphis to
lay a rose on Elvis's grave and take home a packet of Graceland earth. The
myriad images of Elvis and Marilyn that spangle the art-world skies are
obviously cultural commentary. Whereas the great painters of altarpieces in the
past were no doubt fired by both religious and artistic zeal, contemporary
artists, debonair in their unbelief, treat the newer icons as sociology. The
dependence on popular figures and media presentations of them is an admonition
to pay attention to the modern world.

But the art world, though its eyes are glued to the television screen and its
fingers count the nation's pulse, is actually thinking of something else all the
while: itself. It has its own gods, and they are artists. This show is actually
about three icons: Elvis, Marilyn and Andy. There are any number of riffs on
Warhol's Elvis and Warhol's Marilyn, paintings that are stars themselves.
(Warhol's "Shot Red Marilyn" broke an auction record in 1989 by fetching more
than $4 million and then brought $3.6 million this fall. Like Marilyn, the
picture is worth more because it was "murdered" and lived on; someone shot it in
Warhol's studio, and he repaired the bullet hole.)

Richard Pettibone repeats part of a Warhol Elvis. Jerry Kearns does it again,
adding familiar Vietnam images. Frank Xerox, Janice E. Williams and Raymond
Saunders rework Warhol's Marilyn, Seymour Howard paints abstractions over Andy's
Elvis and his Marilyn. Peter Halley paints a two-panel abstraction of squares
and lines, brightly colored on the left, gray on the right, and calls it "Double
Elvis" after Warhol's painting of Elvis with a gun. Halley says, rather coyly,
that he liked the idea of cloning.

Then Deborah Kass does Barbra Streisand the way Warhol did Elvis: two double
portraits of Yentl side by side, one colored, one not. Barbra is a crasher at
this party of Elvis and Marilyn look-alikes; she got in solely by looking like a
Warhol. These are in- jokes, winks, knowing references for people in the know.
As comments on the media culture, they refer to art as a mass medium on a level
art seldom achieves, though Warhol just may have. The pictures here are really
art appreciation under the guise of social critique.

Post-modernism's appropriation of newspaper, film and comic-strip imagery, an
acknowledgment that life today lodges in representation, is, in a way, a last
gasp of the 19th-century Realists' concentration on contemporary life. Rarely
have artists borrowed from art so slavishly as they do now, a practice explained
as a bow to the end of originality.

But borrowing Warhol's silk-screens of commercially distributed photographs --
the experience at second hand in the photograph, at third in Warhol, at fourth
in the newest redaction -- points up the inability of art to forge our cultural
symbols. For centuries, artists provided forms for society's heroes (or for the
heroes governments wanted society to have): statues of Greek athletes or the
Marcus Aurelius in Rome; Michelangelo's David, which was understood by the
Florentines to represent civic freedom. Photography, film, newsreels and
television changed that, and artists now are reduced to playing with images
already established in public fantasies, stoked by forces beyond the limits of
art.

Elvis spearheaded the rebellious youth culture that emerged after the silent
50's; Marilyn assured women they could enjoy their own bodies and thus foretold
sexual liberation. He was the first big rock star, solidifying the power of
popular music on the mores and behavior of the young. She was always larger than
life, her oversize invitation pulsing on the big screen before the little screen
whittled the stars down and brought them home. It wasn't just his music that
made him a star, though he did make black sound available to segregated white
ears. It wasn't just her acting, though long after she perfected the sex
kitten's purr she proved her talent, particularly at comedy.

Both of them released something pent up in their audiences: sex. (And to varying
degrees, rebellion.) Both of them said, oh, yeah, I know that's dirty, but,
baby, let me tell you it's a good time, and I'm not ashamed to say so at the
dinner table. The kids gasped, then swooned with delight. Their parents gasped,
then said, "Hmm."

They both embodied enough contradictions to captivate a motley audience. Elvis
was a choirboy in punk's clothing. Success bought him Cadillacs, gold pianos,
women, pills, but he was a rigorously polite young man and always good to his
mamma. Marilyn was a sex goddess with a mortally wounded soul. They would have
been stars but not legends had they not both been Horatio Alger and then both
died young.

The climb up from poverty and marginal status -- Norma Jean was an abused child
of an insane mother and an unknown father, Elvis merely from the wrong side of
the tracks -- gave hope to millions, stirred sympathy in the rest, and
reinforced the collective American dream. (She was one of the first stars with a
dreadful background so publicly displayed. Her fans, knowing so much about her,
felt a thrill of intimacy and an urge to protect her.) Early death is an
essential ingredient of martyrdom, and if we can no longer witness martyrs
burned at the stake, we can read all about it in the papers and shed a tear to
think what we have lost.

It did not seem to matter that they failed, that his magic dwindled, he got into
fights, and his flesh turned to porridge as he aged, or that she fell into the
arms of pills and alcohol. They had the grace to be vulnerable and to have won
once nonetheless, proving themselves triumphantly human.

Untold numbers took that to heart and identified with one or the other. Elvis
look-alike contests still attract young boys as well as men much older than the
King. Few of them can sing, and almost none look like Elvis except for the
jewels on their shirts. Marilyn look-alike contests draw every young blonde with
a dark lipstick and a passable figure in a bathing suit.

THIS IS EVIDENCE OF GLOBAL envy. Everyone wants to be somebody else. After
Schwarzenegger and Stallone, young men who never flexed a bicep before began to
pump religiously. Cyndi Lauper once spawned a rash of cheap dressers; Marilyn
boosted peroxide sales; a woman named Cindy Jackson has spent $55,000 on plastic
surgery in her quest to look like Barbie, who is a distant relative of
Marilyn's. Who is there to look up to? Politicians, doctors, even priests have
been dragged off their pedestals; teachers were never on one. We cling to
beauty, rebellion and outsiders who made it big in spite of everything --
ourselves, had we but the talent and the breaks.

Marilyn was killed by a conspiracy. The world conspired against her, poor
illegitimate baby, exploited sex symbol, plaything of powerful men, sex object
yearning to be a subject. Marilyn conspired to kill herself. Bobby Kennedy
conspired to kill her. Jack Kennedy conspired to kill her. Only Lee Harvey
Oswald inspired more rumors and theories, and nobody loved Lee Harvey Oswald,
but everybody loved Marilyn. (Except some of the big guys who just used her, and
Marilyn herself.) Her cherry lips and marshmallow body invite us closer in photo
shops and diners across the land. Her creamy voice and breathy delivery still
caress us on late-night television, where computer imaging briefly turns a model
into la Monroe to tout Chanel No. 5.

Then there was Elvis. He died on the toilet perusing pornography (or so says a
1991 book), but the ecumenical version now goes that he was reading a text on
the Shroud of Turin. Elvis! He died for our sins; he died from our sins --
addictions, prescriptions, success, excess, bad taste. He lives on in parking
lots and shopping malls, blessing his aging devotees with visions of Himself
between pickup trucks and plastic curlers and inchoate longings. The King must
die but still he lives, drawing a bead on his fans with a pistol and crooning on
CD's, right here in mass-reproduction heaven.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Earth Angel," by Jerry Kearns, above, and "Crucifixion," by
Alexander Guy (Kent Gallery), on view in Boston -- Both Elvis and Marilyn
released something pent up in their audiences. (Glasgow Art Gallery and Museum);
"Altar to Self-Indulgence and Decadence," by Michael and Heather Martin-Daniels.
(Courtesy of the artists)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 18, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  26   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      2  42   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      5   3   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 4      4  16   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 5      3   9   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 6      6   6   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 7      9   4   GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A 1981
                novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist
                from Texas.

 8     10   4   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 9      7  123  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 10     8  11   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 11    12  13   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

 12    11  21   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit
                to a small town changes many lives.

 13    14  23   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 14    15  11   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 15         6   SPENCERVILLE, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $23.95.) A cold war
                veteran returns to his Ohio hometown and rescues an old flame
                from her sadistic husband.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2  11   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 2      1   7   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to
                other faiths.

 3      4  12   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 4      3  15   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 5      5  14   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the
                present.

 6      6  10   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 7      8  52   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 8      7   7   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 9      9  10   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 10    15   3   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 11    11  11   BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An
                illustrated history of the game.

 12    10  41   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 13    13   9   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 14         1   IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Random House, $20.) A collection of essays by the late
                Southern humorist.

 15    12   8   ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic
                Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like
                overpopulation, famine and plague.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  34   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      1  82   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3  12   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.

 4      4   3   THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO. COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.)
                Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by
                Forrest Gump.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 3, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen
stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately
concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very
recently produced America's ruling class.

D.H. LAWRENCE: The Story of a Marriage, by Brenda Maddox. (Simon & Schuster,
$30.) Lawrence's violent life with the formidable Frieda Weekley, who bedded him
20 minutes after she met him, makes for absorbing if unappetizing reading.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly
charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

THE LAST SHOT: City Streets, Basketball Dreams, by Darcy Frey. (Richard
Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Mr. Frey examines the myth of deliverance
through basketball on the courts of Coney Island, where black youths compete to
be exploited by coaches, colleges and, in the rarest cases, by professional
sports.

LOST PURITAN: A Life of Robert Lowell, by Paul Mariani. (Norton, $27.50.) This
approach to the "real" character of a protean confessional poet uses letters and
diaries to reveal a writer whose fascination with preachers, statesmen and
generals hints at restlessness with his own art.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

MONSTERS OF THE SEA, by Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned
adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life forms, including the
leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).

TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of
the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat,
incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.

WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story, by Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf,
$25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of
real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Two Cruises Focus On Asian Temples

SECTION: Section 5;    Page 3;    Column 4;    Travel Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


The temples and sacred sites of southern Asia are among the highlights of two
tours this winter.

The Metropolitan Museum of Art and the American Geographical Society are
sponsoring a 23-day voyage from Java to Bombay aboard the 80-passenger, 290-foot
Renaissance IV of Renaissance Cruises. Departing Feb. 6 for Jakarta from New
York, the tour includes visits to the temple of Borobudur, Java; the island of
Phuket; a tour of the temples of the Pallava kings at Mahabalipuram, in the
Indian state of Tamil Nadu, and a three-day stop in Bombay. The tour costs from
$13,945 to $17,075 a person, double occupancy. The fare includes meals, hotel
accommodations and round-trip air fare from New York. For information, call the
tour operator Raymond & Whitcomb at (212) 759-3960.

The sacred cities of Southeast Asia are the focus of Classical Cruises' voyage
to Indonesia, Borneo, Vietnam and Cambodia, aboard the 140-passenger, 333-foot
Bali Sea Dancer of P&O Spice Island Cruises.

Two 24-day tours, departing on Jan. 9 and 19, feature a four-day journey through
Cambodia, with a daylong visit to the 12th-century temples of Angkor, and a
weeklong excursion in Vietnam, including visits to Hanoi, Da Nang, Hoi An, Hue,
Ho Chi Minh City and Halong Bay. Another week is spent sailing to ports on
Borneo and Bali.

The Jan. 9 tour includes an educational program led by Robert Stone, author of
"Images of War," on the Vietnam War, and Laurel Kendall and Jeffrey H. Schwartz,
anthropologists from the American Museum of Natural History. The Jan. 19 program
is led by lecturers from the Smithsonian Institution.

The cost of the program is $7,895 to $10,295, a person, double occupancy. The
fare includes meals, accommodations and inter-Asia flights. Information: (212)
794-3200.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Seeking Enlightenment at -- Where Else? -- the Y

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words


CAN'T anybody explain it to me? The sporting world is falling apart. There was
no World Series. There is no hockey season. Pro basketball is on a one-year
truce. The baseball owners are threatening to truck in desperadoes next spring.
It gets uglier all the time.

The worst part is, I don't understand it. I see so much money flying around in
sports that I keep assuming the owners should balance their budgets without
forcing athletes to accept a salary cap. But I'm willing to concede I'm locked
into my own point of view.

Needing enlightenment, I went to that cultural, spiritual and physical haven for
all New Yorkers, the 92d Street Y, where, at any given moment, you can hear
Cecile Licad or Shlomo Mintz perform and Octavio Paz or Alice Walker speak. The
patrons of the Y know things. And if they don't know, they ask.

The attraction at the Y Wednesday night was a panel discussion named "Sports
Commissioners Tackle the Future of Major League Sports." I wanted to hear Gary
Bettman of hockey (you remember hockey) and David Stern of basketball and Paul
Tagliabue of football addressing an intelligent, urbane audience, not knee-jerk
sentimentalist sports columnists like me.

The moderator was David Halberstam, the Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist who in
an earlier incarnation dealt with the likes of Lyndon Baines Johnson and Robert
Strange McNamara. The other night in his opening address to sports night at the
Y, Halberstam used Vietnam-war words like "precipice" and "mired."

I must admit, I never expected to see, in my lifetime, David Halberstam and Paul
Tagliabue playing Mike and the Mad Dog for 92d Street Y patrons. ("Mikey, you
don't know what you're tawkin' about." "Dawg, I can't believe you said dat.") It
would be worth the wait.

Near the beginning, Halberstam asked the Three Amigos why the players and the
public should believe the owners are losing money.

"We offered to let them look at the books," Bettman insisted, to the
accompaniment of a few taunts from the audience plus the gnashing of teeth from
hockey reporters. In Bettman's defense, he looked a bit numb at the prospect of
becoming the first sports commissioner in history to cancel an entire season.

Halberstam asked if the turmoil in sports meant something radical is happening.
"It's collective bargaining," Stern said calmly. "It's outside the realm of
sports. It's happening in I.B.M. The airlines are having huge layoffs. All
you're dealing with is how the pie is divided. It happens that sports are
becoming a big business."

Tagliabue was asked to justify an old favorite like Phil Simms being forced out
because the Giants could not fit his veteran's salary into the salary cap.
Tagliabue noted that players were guaranteed 66 percent of football's revenue
and also received a form of free agency, which allowed younger players to make
money quickly.

Then Tagliabue defended lopping off older players: "We had a college coach come
to Dallas. Jimmy Johnson proved that young people can play football." I'd never
heard the Cowboys' success explained quite that way, and it made sense.

All three commissioners shuddered at the mention of baseball's impasse. Bettman
seemed to include both sides when he referred to an "ideological battle -- they
don't want to discuss dividing the pie."

When Halberstam opened the forum for written questions from the audience, Stern
referred to the baseball players' "steelworker response," clearly a reference to
Marvin Miller's great successes over the baseball owners in the past.

Somebody asked if the commissioners were not worried that the working-class fan
was being driven out of the arenas by high ticket and luxury-box prices. Stern
nodded as if concerned, but Tagliabue said that in his league, each team
receives an equal one-28th of all television revenue, which constitutes around
60 per cent of their income. Let 'em eat commercials, he seemed to say.

One member of the audience asked why there is such concern over economics when
teams are selling for $100 million and more. Bettman admitted: "People are
willing to pay crazy amounts to be sports owners. They are not doing it for
income." I agree. Traditionally, most owners are rich egomaniacs eager to hang
out with athletes and get their names in the paper. They should pay a few bob
for that privilege.

I thought Tagliabue was going to fall off his chair from amusement when somebody
asked if commissioners were not supposed to represent the overall interests of
fans and players as well as owners. He derided the ancient baseball-commissioner
concept as "Don Quixote" tilting at windmills. Stern tactfully said, "I think
there are conflicts." And when owners are acting against the best interest of
the game, Stern said, a commissioner should "work the room" to set the owner
straight.

The subject of free agency came up again. Halberstam referred to Joe DiMaggio's
getting strong-armed by the Yankees after a spectacular debut. Tagliabue said
athletes have historically had the ultimate weapon -- "withhold their services."

Halberstam said something about feeling he was back in Vietnam dealing with Gen.
Westmoreland. And Tagliabue snapped something about being glad Halberstam had
written about basketball and baseball and not his sport. I couldn't take notes
because I was busy watching a couple of big, middle-aged guys with glasses
sitting side by side, having a class argument, pretending to be very annoyed
with each other. It was great theater. I think.

When things calmed down, somebody asked why teams couldn't just move if they
were losing money. Bettman said the eight Canadian teams cannot match the
revenue base in many American cities, but hockey is, after all, a Canadian game.
He's right. If Tagliabue's sport keeps the Packers in Green Bay, then baseball
should keep the Pirates in Pittsburgh and hockey should keep the Oilers in
Edmonton. The N.F.L. concept of sharing all television revenue makes perfect
sense.

But should the players agree to a salary cap to help out owners? The three
commissioners did not convince me of that. And judging from their responses, the
patrons of the Y were not convinced, either. However, we would all pay to see
Paul Tagliabue and David Halberstam on the same stage again. With somebody
between them, just in case.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Discussing issues Wednesday night were, from left, Commissioners
Paul Tagliabue of N.F.L., David Stern of N.B.A. and Gary Bettman of N.H.L. (G.
Paul Burnett/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

After 20 Years, Navy Prepares for Disposal of Napalm Stockpile

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 46;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: FALLBROOK, Calif., Dec. 17


In this pastoral corner of Southern California, the Navy is preparing to dispose
of a formidable relic of the Vietnam War: 23 million pounds of napalm.

The sticky, flammable substance, a mixture of gasoline, benzene and polystyrene
plastic, has been sitting for 20 years in 35,100 jungle-green bombs here at the
Fallbrook Naval Weapons Station.

Some canisters leaked, and 156 had to be incinerated, Navy officials said.

Some residents of this mainly agricultural town of 22,000 accept the potential
danger as the price for the heavy concentration of military installations here
in San Diego County. Others express concern.

State environmental officials said they did not consider the canisters hazardous
because they no longer contain detonators, but they want the items removed
because of the potential for contamination of ground water from the leaks and
the possible release of benzene vapors.

"The stuff is not very volatile," said Rich Varenchik of the California
Department of Toxic Substance Control, but "we're not going to be satisfied with
that stuff sitting out there forever."

The United States' use of napalm mostly ended with the withdrawal of its
soldiers from Vietnam. During the height of the war, American planes dropped
napalm bombs as a defoliant to clear large stretches of dense jungle and as a
weapon to burn out Vietcong guerrilla forces, sometimes at a cost of civilian
casualties.

For many people, the image of random destruction wrought by napalm came to
symbolize the worst aspect of this country's involvement in Vietnam. The symbol
was given emphasis by movies like "Apocalypse Now" and the photograph of a naked
young Vietnamese girl, her skin seared, running terror-stricken from the scene
of an attack.

The last of the military's napalm bombs are stored in wooden crates on three
dirt sites at the naval station. The first leak was discovered in 1989. Leaks
have been found this year in 1,780 canisters, said Eike Hohenadl, the Navy's
napalm project manager.

All but a few were repaired by welding or replacing gaskets where the jellylike
material had oozed out and hardened.

How to dispose of the napalm is the question.

First, the Navy tried to sell the bombs for recycling. But a succession of
contractors found that they could not make a profit, said Richard Williamson, a
spokesman for the Naval Ordnance Center in Seal Beach, which oversees the
storage site.

Officials said the cost of incinerating the bombs -- $2,500 a canister -- made
that kind of disposal unlikely.

The Navy is now considering having a waste-disposal business take on the job,
but before it seeks bids, it wants to hear from neighbors. Public hearings are
scheduled for late January, and residents have been invited to tour the bomb
sites beforehand.

Mr. Williamson said removal of the bombs was expected to take up to five years
and cost $18 million to $21 million.

Bob Leonard, executive director of the Fallbrook Chamber of Commerce, said he
spoke for many residents on the issue. "The military is part of our community,"
Mr. Leonard said. "We are very understanding and tolerant of what goes on."

Still, a handful of residents outside a shopping center expressed concern. "It's
definitely time to get rid of it," said Johnny Jones, 83. "It's past time."

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 18, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conditions At Jail Complex Under Scrutiny

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 13WC;    Page 1;    Column 5;    Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1692 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS


A SPECIAL commission charged with investigating security and safety issues at
the County Correctional Complex in Valhalla began meeting this month after the
release of a grand jury report on conditions at the jail and further reports of
disturbances there.

A grand jury was impaneled in May to examine circumstances surrounding an
incident on Aug. 15 last year, when inmates reportedly seized control of a cell
block and locked up four members of the County Correction Department.

The grand jury said in its findings that "due to negligence, inadequate
supervision and controls," basic standards at the jail complex were not being
met, and it recommended "strong corrective measures." It also said union
problems were hindering operations there.

In recent weeks, several mattress fires have allegedly been set by inmates, and
Thomas F. O'Neill, president of the union, the Corrections Officers Benevolent
Association, commonly called COBA, said at least six officers have been sent to
the hospital for smoke inhalation. During a series of incidents at the complex
on Nov. 30, two other officers suffered broken bones and were beaten about the
head, he said.

County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke appointed the eight-member investigatory
commission -- composed of a retired judge, some law-enforcement officials and
civic leaders -- to defuse what has become a politically charged issue: the fact
that the county's 1992-93 contract with the 840-member union remains unsigned.
In addition, there is friction between the County Executive's office and the
Board of Legislators over management of the jail complex.

Correction Commissioner Norwood E. Jackson said conditions at the complex --
which includes the County Jail, the County Penitentiary and the Women's
Correctional Unit -- were being exaggerated by disgruntled union members.

Nevertheless, a retired State Supreme Court Justice, John C. Marbach, whom Mr.
O'Rourke appointed to lead the commission, vowed to approach the problems "with
a fresh and open mind, separate from any politics, whatever they may be."

In his more than 11 years in office, the County Executive has rarely appointed
investigatory commissions.  In the mid-1980's, a panel was charged with
examining allegations that a garbage-to-energy plant at Charles Point in
Peekskill was causing air pollution. In the late 1980's, another commission
investigated charges that Anthony Mosca, who was Commissioner of Public Safety,
was giving unwarranted favorable treatment to a person arrested on narcotics
charges.

"Many of these things begin as the creation of politics or the media, and the
people deserve to know what really happened," the County Executive said.

In the case of the correctional complex, Mr. O'Rourke said, the unresolved union
contract and what he called "power plays" on the part of the Board of
Legislators have obscured the real issues. He also questioned whether recent
disturbances at the jail, including the mattress fires, were designed to put
pressure on the county to settle the union contract.

"Some of the problems at the jail may be because COBA enrollees think the county
is giving them a bad deal," Mr. O'Rourke said. "Maybe some officers are looking
the other way when they see prisoners with matches."

Mr. O'Neill denied allegations that corrections officers staged incidents at the
jail to promote their own cause.

"Absolutely not," he said. "These are real circumstances.

The corrections officers contract expired in 1991, and another for 1992-93
called for a 5.25 percent raise in 1992 and no raise last year. The latest
contract was approved by both the County Executive and the union, but the Board
of Legislators turned it down, arguing that the wage increase was too high for a
recessionary period. The matter went to arbitration, but the Board refused to
accept a decision in favor of the union. The union then went to court, winning a
favorable decision, but the Board has appealed that decision, saying that it has
the right to reject an arbitrator's ruling. The union and the county are
currently operating under the 1991 contract.

Meanwhile, one County Legislator is calling for the resignation of Mr. Jackson,
and another said last week that the Board was poised to begin a separate
investigation into conditions at the jail.

County Legislator Nicholas E. Spano, who represents parts of Yonkers, announced
recently that he would recommend "a complete management shakeup" at the jail
complex, where up to 1,639 inmates are housed, because there was too much
evidence that Commissioner Jackson had lost control there.

But Stephen P. Tenore, chairman of the Board of Legislators, said he was willing
to wait for the findings of the Marbach Commission, adding that the Board was
"ready to do its own investigation if necessary."

"One way or another, we are going to get to the bottom of this," Mr. Tenore
said. "I'm basically behind Commissioner Jackson, and I think he has done a good
job, but we can't completely and totally support him until we have looked into
this."

Either way, Mr. Tenore said the Board would force Mr. Jackson in the next budget
to move his offices to the correctional complex -- to "have a calming effect on
relationships there." The Commissioner's office is now nearby at the Westchester
County Medical Center, but that office will be "defunded" in the next budget,
Mr. Tenore said. The present offices would then be available to the Medical
Center.

Mr. O'Rourke has charged the Marbach Commission with a "three-point
investigative mission": asking members to review the findings of the June grand
jury report on the County Correction Department, determine whether there is
merit to allegations by three anonymous corrections officers that recent reports
describing disturbances at the jail were destroyed in a cover-up and recommend,
if needed, further safety and security measures for the complex.

The corrections officers told Gannett Suburban Newspapers that their original
reports about the Nov. 30 disturbance were destroyed by department officials and
that they were being pressured by Commissioner Jackson to rewrite the reports
and downplay the incidents.

The Commissioner denied those statements, calling the individuals "union
activists seeking media attention."

In appointing the commission, Mr. O'Rourke said he was delegating his authority
to administer oaths or affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence for
the investigation. And he said he would use the subpoena power of his office to
compel witnesses to attend commission meetings and bring necessary documents
with them. He also said that because of the urgency of the commission's task, he
wanted a preliminary report within 90 days.

"Let the smoke clear," he said.

Judge Marbach said the commission was about to call witnesses, including workers
from the jail. The panel was also seeking "someone other than the Commissioner"
to explain the structure of the Correction Department.

The jail complex includes the penitentiary, where up to 525 prisoners serving
sentences of less than a year can be housed; the jail, which can handle 910
prisoners awaiting trial and sentencing, and the Women's Correctional Unit,
which has a capacity of 204 women, some serving sentences and others awaiting
trial or sentencing.

The other members of the Marbach Commission are John Sullivan, a former member
of the New York City Police Department and professor of Law and Criminal Justice
at Mercy College; Ernest Prince, president of the Urban League of Westchester
County; Ernest J. Salvatore, a retired assistant director of probation for the
county; Luis A. Penichet, chairman of the County Hispanic Advisory Board; John
J. Maffucci, a former Correction Commissioner for the county; Dr. W. Franklyn
Richardson, pastor of Grace Baptist Church in Mount Vernon, the largest church
in Westchester, and Barbara Eliason Dunkel, a lawyer and former associate
commissioner of the New York City Department of Correction.

The grand jury report, which was written by Judge John J. Carey of County Court,
cited unresolved labor disputes that were "plaguing the Department of
Correction" and compromising its ability to carry on "in a safe and professional
manner."

The grand jury also said it was concerned with the prevalence of weapons and
dangerous items inside the jail. "In order to protect the physical safety of
those working and residing in the jail, it is essential to restrict inmate
access to any material that can be converted to or adopted for use as weapons,"
the report said. Sharpened pieces of metal and plastic have been found, the
report added.

It recommended revisions of some procedures to further protect the safety of
inmates and guards.

But Commissioner Jackson, who has held his $109,945 post since 1987 and before
that was a warden in the department, said in response to some of the criticism:
"This is a jail. These things happen all the time."

He said that the discovery of weapons among the inmates was not a concern. "The
problem is when we can't find them," said Mr. Jackson, a guard with the
Cleveland Browns in 1956 and 1957 and assistant commander of the United States
Confinement Facility in Vietnam in 1966 and 1967. He added that many of his
critics, including Mr. Spano, have no experience in the field of corrections and
had never visited the jail.

Both the union and the Board have asked the State Commission of Correction to
conduct a separate investigation of the county complex. The state, however, has
so far refused to step in, saying it would wait for the Marbach Commission's
findings before deciding whether to pursue its own inquiry.

"We will monitor the situation for now," said Jack Barry, a spokesman for the
state commission, who said that the decision to hold back was "a vote of
confidence in the Marbach commission."

But Mr. O'Neill, the union president, who said corrections officers were working
under unsafe conditions, was angered by the state's decision. He said the state
inquiry was necessary because the findings of a commission that was appointed by
the O'Rourke administration could not be trusted.

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Correction Commissioner Norwood E. Jackson, at County Jail in
Valhalla, is under pressure to resign job he has held since 1987. (Chris Maynard
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gore, the Soldier of Streamlining, Returns to Lead Clinton's Charge

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


The hand that held the hammer over David Letterman's desk to mock Government
rules for ashtrays is poised to strike again -- this time as President Clinton's
right hand in the battle to prove that his Administration can shrink the
bureaucracy and was doing so long before the Republican electoral triumph last
month.

Vice President Al Gore will be in the spotlight on Monday when Mr. Clinton
outlines the next round of budget cutting to finance his proposed tax breaks for
the middle class. And Mr. Gore's effort to "reinvent Government" is no longer
derided by some Presidential advisers as a political nonstarter, but embraced as
perhaps their best chance to stay in the hottest game in town.

Since the morning after Labor Day 1993, when Mr. Gore unveiled his initial
recommendations for cutting red tape in front of two forklifts piled with stacks
of regulations on the White House lawn, the program has gone steadily if quietly
forward, restructuring procurement rules, reducing the work force and reshaping
labor-management relations in Government agencies.

The results range from the macrocosmic (cutting almost 90,000 jobs from the
civilian work force of 2.1 million, the first step in a planned reduction of
272,000 positions) to the microscopic (reorganizing the New York office of the
Department of Veterans Affairs so that a single employee serves as the main
contact person for each veteran needing help, instead of shunting the veteran
from desk to desk).

Then there are the efforts to fix things that should never have been broken,
like the Social Security Administration's new commitment to mail out cards
within five working days and the pledge by the Customs Service to process
international air passengers within five minutes.

On the bookshelves in the Vice President's office, next to foreign language
editions of "Earth in the Balance," his 1992 best-seller on the environment, are
Portuguese, Italian and Chinese translations of his National Performance Review
report, Creating a Government That Works Better and Costs Less. Computer users
around the world have plucked half a million copies from the Internet into their
homes and offices.

"I can't tell you how many friends of mine in the Washington world said, 'What
are you going to do now?' after we put out the report last year," said Elaine C.
Kamarck, the domestic policy assistant in charge of the project for Mr. Gore. "I
said, 'You don't understand; now we're going to do it.' And people looked at me
like, Poor Elaine, what a stupid career move that is."

Now the Clinton White House is using Mr. Gore's work, and relying on his
credibility, to argue that its latest budget-cutting efforts in the departments
of Transportation, Energy, and Housing and Urban Development are not scattershot
accommodations but part of an overall plan -- albeit one greatly accelerated by
the need for a lively White House alternative to the Republican budget
brainstorms swirling on Capitol Hill.

In fact, the announcement of the cuts was both speeded up (about six weeks ahead
of the normal budget message, to bolster the President's contention that his
proposals for tax relief can be paid for, while the Republicans' bigger ones
cannot) and delayed (so that Mr. Gore could get back from a trip to Russia to
help announce them in a White House briefing with other top officials).

Mr. Clinton, as Governor of Arkansas and a founder of the Democratic Leadership
Council, has long supported reshaping Government. Since the Democrats' sweeping
defeat in the elections last month, his old friends in the moderate wing of the
party have repeatedly urged him to renew his commitment to that cause.  The
issue has the added benefit of being one on which the White House can act either
unilaterally or with the probable cooperation of a Congress that wants to go
even further.

Mr. Gore took on the project last year after Hillary Rodham Clinton and others
in the Administration claimed turf considered more glamorous, like health care.
He fought to win a staff about half the size of that involved in health care.

Vice Presidents have long sought -- and in recent years have increasingly won --
some substantive mission in a once-ceremonial job. But by any measure, Mr. Gore
has had greater influence than virtually any predecessor. From the moment Mr.
Clinton made him his running mate, the former Senator from Tennessee has
consistently been regarded as one of the President's best assets, offsetting his
boss's vulnerabilities in a range of ways, including Mr. Gore's military service
in Vietnam, his experience in foreign policy and his reputation for stolid
probity.

"His stock is never down," one White House aide said recently. "He has the best
access and influence of any Vice President in history, and yet he doesn't really
have to do anything, or get blamed for it."

Not that everyone is in love with "reinventing Government," or REGO as it is
known in White House shorthand. Managers in some agencies complain that the
program has substituted New Age touchy-feeliness for old-fashioned gobbledygook.
Some of the vehicles for encouraging employees to take risks and make
common-sense decisions without waiting for cumbersome approvals do have a kind
of hall-monitor tone. For example, the Interior Department issues "forgiveness
coupons" and the Education Department has "reinvention permission slips" -- what
amount to chits that excuse the employees holding them from punishment for
mistakes made in good faith.

And Ms. Kamarck acknowledged that the team was only now embarking on its biggest
challenge, the one saving real money and causing real pain: "cutting back to
basics" in Government programs.

"What does the Government really do?" she asked rhetorically. "What is the core
mission? What is it that the Feds should really do?"

It is those questions that have led the Administration to review selling some
Federal electric power operations to the private sector and consolidating dozens
of urban housing programs.

Still, Mr. Gore has already encouraged abolition of some real gems, like the
Pentagon's requirements for a cake that was supposed to withstand being
suspended atop two 4-inch-diameter cans spaced 6 1/2 inches apart, without
breaking or cracking. Told of the test, Mr. Gore remarked, "I think I might
rather eat a cake that failed that particular test."

NAME: Al Gore

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vice President Al Gore testing an ashtray that had been bought
by the Government on the David Letterman show in 1993, one of the many TV
appearances promoting his work "to reinvent Government." (Alan Singer/CBS)(pg.
B10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bradford Morse Is Dead at 73; Held High-Ranking U.N. Posts

BYLINE: By JENNIFER KINGSON BLOOM

SECTION: Section B;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 446 words


Bradford Morse, a former Republican Congressman from Massachusetts who rose to
become a top-ranking United Nations official, died yesterday at his home in
Naples, Fla. He was 73.

The cause was heart failure, his family said.

A lawyer who was first elected to the House of Representatives in 1960, Mr.
Morse served six terms before resigning to join the United Nations. In his
13-year career there, Mr. Morse supervised a diverse series of relief efforts
that ranged from job-training for two million Colombians to a program that built
hundreds of miles of secondary roads in five African nations.

As head of the United Nations Development Program, which helps finance and
administer development projects in more than 150 nations, Mr. Morse became an
advocate for aid to poor countries and for victims of famine in Africa. In the
mid-1980's, when droughts ravaged Ethiopia and the Sudan, Mr. Morse organized a
large-scale relief effort with help from a Canadian official, Maurice F. Strong,
executive coordinator of the United Nations Office for Emergency Operations in
Africa.

Bradford Morse, a native of Lowell, Mass., returned from Army service in World
War II to graduate from Boston University and Boston University Law School. In
1953, he was appointed as special counsel to the Senate Armed Services
Committee; in 1958, he was named Deputy Administrator of Veterans Affairs by
President Eisenhower.

Mr. Morse resigned from the Veterans Administration in 1960, the same year he
was elected to Congress. According to friends and associates, Mr. Morse was one
of the first Republicans in Congress to express concern over the sharp division
among Americans over the country's role in Vietnam, and helped develop the
strategy advanced by President Johnson to coax the North Vietnamese into
negotiations in 1968.

In 1972, Mr. Morse was appointed Under Secretary General for Political and
General Assembly Affairs. Four years later he was asked to take over as
administrator of the United Nations Development Program, which was then facing
bankruptcy. He secured record pledges, and was credited with turning the program
around financially.

After retiring from the United Nations in 1986, Mr. Morse became president of
the Salzburg Seminar, a nonprofit organization based in Cambridge, Mass., that
brings together politicians, academics and business leaders from the West,
developing countries, and countries in the former Soviet Union.

Mr. Morse is survived by his wife, the former Josephine Anne Neale, and three
children: Stephanie Hillary Jennifer Morse, of Naples, Fla.; Susanna Francesca
Morse of Cincinnati, and Anthony Bradford Morse of Washington.

NAME: Bradford Morse

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bradford Morse (Camera Press, 1964)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Ready for Combat? The Situation Isn't So Simple

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: FORT RILEY, Kan., Dec. 12


On the icy, windswept Kansas plain here, Maj. Gen. Randolph House today was
relishing the ominous "thump, thump, thump" from mud-spattered M1-A1 battle
tanks blasting at pop-up targets of a mock enemy.

"Land warfare is a complex business that you have to practice regularly," said
the 49-year-old commander of the Army's First Infantry Division, the fabled "Big
Red One," the Army's oldest active division, which has fought in every American
war since World War I.

But despite the First's long fighting history, in September, three months after
General House took command, he gave his division the Army's second-worst
possible rating for combat readiness. Two other commanders did the same to their
divisions, moves that that embarrassed Defense Secretary William J. Perry and
ultimately helped prompt President Clinton to announce he was adding $25 billion
to the Pentagon's budget over the next six years.

The debate since has transformed the subject of combat readiness from an
important but arcane military matter into an issue that threatens to hound the
Administration in the next two years. But the readiness issue is not as simple
as it might seem. While commanders at Fort Riley here in northeast Kansas and at
other bases like it have genuine problems, the Army has not been completely
candid about the causes and significance.

For several years, the Army has used a system to measure how prepared it is to
do its job of fighting wars. It looks at the components of readiness --
personnel, equipment and training -- and gives division grades, with C-1 the
highest rating and C-4 the lowest.

The First Infantry's ratings were in the low C-2 level, but General House
decided to reduce the division to C-3. "It was a subjective judgment based on
how long it would take to get us back to where we were during the Gulf war,"
said General House in explaining his more pessimistic assessment.

But interviews with more than two dozen officers and soldiers here and their
superiors disclose that the commanders of the three divisions with lowered
readiness ratings painted the gloomiest picture possible, helping the Army's
uniformed leadership in Washington argue for more money in a long-running
rivalry with the Navy and the Air Force.

Moreover, senior Army officials acknowledge that the low ratings are not as
unusual as they first suggested. Initially, they said it was the first time in
12 years that three divisions had been given such low scores. Now Army officials
concede that as many as 10 Army divisions have received the same low rating or
worse, some during the military buildup under President Ronald Reagan.

In addition, officials explain, the Army's fighting prowess is not necessarily
harmed by all this. Since the end of the cold war, the Army has given less money
and fewer troops to divisions like the First Infantry, which are used as
reinforcements and so have more time to prepare for combat than do the
first-tier forces.

Many Army officers say such a tiered structure makes sense because of America's
uneasiness about sending troops into combat, much less about fighting two wars
at once as the Pentagon's planning strategy requires.

"Given the threat today, you accept a certain amount of risk," said Lieut. Col.
Frederick Lee, Fort Riley's chief budget officer, who was a planner for Gen.
Colin L. Powell when he was the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

When operations in Cuba, Haiti, Kuwait and Rwanda cost the Pentagon $1.7 billion
more than expected for the fiscal year ending last Sept. 30, the Army raided the
budgets of the lower-tier forces to keep the front-line troops prepared. That
meant that the First Infantry suffered deep budget cuts that doomed the
division's readiness, General House said.

General House and his superiors say there was no conspiracy to squeeze more
money out of the White House. But the general said he frequently discussed his
problems with his counterparts at the two other units with lowered ratings --
the Fourth Infantry Division at Fort Carson, Colo., and the Second Armored
Division at Fort Hood, Tex. -- and found "we all were in the same boat."

Moreover, Gen. Gordon R. Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff, has created a
receptive climate for commanders to report bad news by warning in the past two
years that the Army is on the "razor's edge" of readiness.

"It is a powerful message we sent," said General House, a hard-charging,
decorated Vietnam veteran and Gulf war commander who is one of the Army's
fastest-rising young generals. "It means either we accept less readiness or you
give us more money. In this case, the timing's been effective. I'd be naive not
to admit that."

Senior Pentagon civilians voice concern the military may be trying to exaggerate
legitimate readiness problems get more money. "We cannot let the call of
readiness deficiencies justify every request for additional money," Deputy
Defense Secretary John M. Deutch said in an interview.

There is some rivalry among the services as well. For years, the Army has been
criticized by some officers as not lobbying as aggressively as the other
military branches. "We've always been the Boy Scouts, honest but dumb," said
Maj. Gen. Josue Robles Jr., who retired as the First Infantry's commander in
June and said he was "surprised" when the division was downgraded. "The Army has
never lobbied very well. But maybe this is a tentative first step."

But even the Army leadership cannot seem to agree on how serious the issue is.
Maj. Gen. Robert Scales Jr., the Army officer responsible for measuring military
readiness, told reporters earlier this month that the incident was "a blip on
the screen that is going to get fixed in short order." Lieut. Gen. Paul E.
Blackwell, the Army's chief operations officer, then upbraided General Scales,
saying he was playing down the scope of the problem.

Congress is divided on the issue as well. Conservatives like Representative
Floyd D. Spence and Senator Strom Thurmond, two South Carolina Republicans who
will head the House and Senate Armed Services committees, argue the
underfinancing is even more serious than the Army says.

But some liberal Democrats say the military doesn't need more money. "Scattered
anecdotes from the last fiscal year regarding lost training hours supposedly due
to the costs of deployments to meet contingencies requiring the use of U.S.
forces fail to account for the significant and successful Congressional effort
to fix this problem," said Representative Ronald V. Dellums, a California
Democrat who will lose his job as chairman of the House Armed Services Committee
in January.

Clearly, the First Infantry and many other Army units have some problems. For
the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, the First Infantry's operations and
maintenance budget was $159 million, down from $183 million the previous year.
The division can fill just above 80 percent of 250 M1-A1's with qualified crews.
The base took $2 billion earmarked for repairing roofs and plastering office
walls, and used it for training.

But the questions remain: How bad are these problems? And can the division still
fight? The new fiscal year that started Oct. 1 poured fresh financing into the
breach, and the Army says the three subpar divisions should recover by next
spring.

Still, money alone cannot solve the problems. The First Infantry lost training
opportunities and will need months to make up. "This division is not impotent,"
said General House.  "But if you send it now, it would mean a few more
casualties."

The worries of generals here and in Washington are transparent to the First
Infantry's junior officers and their soldiers, who have learned to make do with
less. Capt. Jeff Winters, a 31-year-old company commander from Pekin, Ill., lent
12 soldiers from his reconnaissance crews and another 12 from his mortar crews
to a unit going to the Army's National Training Center in California's Mojave
Desert.

"It affected my unit's readiness for the four to six months those guys were
gone, but the benefit was they brought back invaluable training experience to
our unit," said Captain Winters.

Capt. Matt Moyer, 28, a commander of a 106-man infantry company, said his
soldiers practiced more costly gunnery skills in the Bradley fighting vehicle
when training funds were high, and less expensive drills of troops getting out
of the Bradleys when money got tight.

For now, General House is pushing his troops hard to make up for lost chances.
At this pace, he said, the First Infantry will run out of money by next summer
unless he is ordered to cut back. "I don't know what we'll do," said General
House.  "My bias is training, training and training."

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE:  December 21, 1994, Wednesday; December 22, 1994, Thursday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about military readiness at Fort Riley, Kan., misstated the
amount of money the base diverted to training from its base repairs budget. It
was $2 million, not $2 billion.

An article on Tuesday about military readiness at Fort Riley, Kan., misstated
part of the combat history of the First Infantry Division. It did not fight in
the Korean War.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Soldiers from the First Infantry Division at Fort Riley, Kan.,
on maneuvers with a Bradley fighting vehicle. The division was one of three that
recently had its combat readiness rating lowered, a move that prompted President
Clinton to increase the Pentagon budget.; "It is a powerful message we sent,"
General Randolph House said of the decisions to lower the divisions' ratings.
"It means either we accept less readiness or you give us more money. In this
case, the timing's been effective." General House oversaw the First's field
maneuvers last week. (Photographs by Todd Buchanan for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

C. M. Hubbard, 82, Ex-State Dept. Aide

SECTION: Section B;  Page 16;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


Charlotte Moton Hubbard, who was deputy assistant secretary of state for public
affairs from 1964 to 1970, making her the top-ranking black woman in the Johnson
Administration at the time, died on Sunday at her home in Chevy Chase, Md. She
was 82.

Ms. Hubbard, who retired in 1970 at the onset of Cushing's disease, an adrenal
disorder, died of congestive heart failure, said Marc L. Alper of Rockview, Md.,
a family friend.

In her State Department post, she worked at developing programs intended to
eliminate discrimination against black soldiers during the Vietnam War. She also
oversaw the department's public services and news offices.

During World War II, she worked for the Federal Security Agency, helping to
organize arrangements for war workers and was a race and human relations
consultant. She joined the State Department in 1963 as a coordinator of women's
activities.

The daughter of a pioneer in the civil rights movement, Dr. Robert Russa Moton,
she grew up on the campus of Tuskegee Institute, where her father had succeeded
its founder, Booker T. Washington, as president. She was educated at Boston
University.

Her husband, Maceo W. Hubbard, a Justice Department official, died in 1991. She
is survived by two sisters, Catherine Patterson of Exeter, N.H., and Jennie
Moton Taylor of Indianapolis.


LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


International A3-14

ITALY'S PREMIER ON THE BRINK
After seven months in office, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi indicated that he
would resign in the face of a revolt within his governing coalition over his
leadership. A1



U.S. PILOT'S BODY IS RETURNED
North Korea turned over the body of an American who died when his helicopter
went down four days ago, and indicated it would free a surviving pilot, Pentagon
officials said.  A8

PRIEST ROILS FRENCH POLITICS
An 80-year-old priest who led a squatters' takeover of an unoccupied building in
Paris has stepped straight into France's presidential election campaign. A3

NEW ELEMENT IS DETECTED
A team of German physicists says it has succeeded in identifying three atoms of
a new element, a move that scientists hail as a landmark in nuclear physics. A5

BOSNIA CEASE-FIRE IS QUESTIONED
News analysis: With the coming of winter, the fighting season is largely over in
Bosnia. The cease-fire announced by Jimmy Carter is therefore relatively
insignificant unless it can be developed into a real disengagement of forces.
A12

YELTSIN FACES CRITICS IN MOSCOW
Opponents of Moscow's offensive in southern Russia are attacking Boris N.
Yeltsin, who has responded with an open letter to the separatists, promising
economic aid once the conflict ends. A14

Paris Journal: France's bistros are starved for customers. A4

National A16, B11-12

JUDGE APPROVES U.S. FOREST PLAN
A Federal judge approved the Clinton Administration's much-disputed plan for
timber harvests in the Pacific Northwest.  A1

MAN SHOT AT WHITE HOUSE DIES
A homeless man who was shot outside the White House as he was armed with a knife
on Tuesday by a Park Police officer died tonight from his wounds.  A16

IN VITRO PATERNITY DENIED
Judy Hart, conceived by her mother using her father's sperm, is not legally
recognized as her father's "natural daughter" because she was conceived after he
died.  A16

A GIANT LEAP FOR THE TAX MAN
The family of a man killed in the 1988 Pan Am jetliner crash over Scotland faces
a tax bill of more than $6 million on an unpaid settlement of a lawsuit.  B11

FAST TRACK FOR DRUG PATENTS
Pharmaceutical companies will no longer have to conduct clinical trials on
humans before patenting biotechnology products.  B11

RULING ON HEALTH PLAN TESTIMONY
A Federal judge said that Ira Magaziner, who designed President Clinton's health
plan, had given "misleading" court testimony.  B12

NO INCREASE IN GRAZING FEES
The Clinton Administration decided not to increase the fees paid by ranchers
when their sheep and cattle graze on public lands.  B12

Heavy Tylenol use may cause kidney failure, a study finds.  B11

Metro Digest B1

FIREBOMB EXPLODES IN SUBWAY
A firebomb engulfed a subway car in flames after it pulled into a heavily
traveled station in lower Manhattan, burning dozens of passengers in a
horrifying second and disrupting subway service to and from Brooklyn for hours.
A1

SUSPECT IN 2 FIREBOMBINGS
The police have made a disgruntled computer technician the target of their
firebombing investigation, saying he may also have been responsible for an
incident on a subway train in Harlem last week. A1

PACT REACHED WITH CHANCELLOR
The Board of Education reached an agreement with the Schools Chancellor on a new
contract, offering the Mayor only small concessions on his demands that the
Chancellor be held to performance goals. A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C7-17

Ticket-scalping report.  C7

Vladimir Ashkenazy drops out of the Royal Philharmonic.  C13

Art: Roy Lichtenstein's prints.  C7

Theater: "A Doll's Life." C7

Film: "A Man of No Importance." C11

Music: Armstrong Continuum.  C9

The Pop Life C12

Dance: "Nutcracker" guests.  C13

Books: "Nevermore," by William Hjortsberg.  C13

TV: McCowen reads Gospel.  C17

"Firing Line." C17

The Home Section C1-6

Lights are on at the governors' mansions. Anyone home?  C1

Neediest Cases B5

Sports B13-20

Baseball: Negotiations stalled as impasse approaches.  B13

Basketball: Oakley tests special shoe and Knicks test mettle.  B13

Gilliam scores 27 points as Nets roll over Pistons, 117-99.  B13

Columns: Anderson on Madison Square Garden and ITT B13

Football: Hasty wears frustration of Jets' failure on his sleeve.  B13

Hockey: N.H.L. players meet and rally against payroll tax.  B20

Skiing: conditions B19

Obituaries D18-20

DEAN RUSK IS DEAD
Dean Rusk, who as Secretary of State for Presidents Kennedy and Johnson became a
stubborn defender of the American involvement in the Vietnam War, died Tuesday
in Athens, Ga. He was 85. A1

Robert Osborn, caricaturist and satirist.  D19

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Don't veto the police commission.

Ending the Korean showdown.

Shaken, but reassured.

Mr. Foyle chooses Faulkner.

Letters

William Safire: Middle-class war.

Frank Rich: A star is born.

Ronald Grigor Suny: Moscow's dangerous game.

Chronicle B10

Bridge C17

Crossword C13

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wisely Avoids Waging Air War in Bosnia

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


To the Editor:

Critics of the Clinton Administration's Bosnian policy are making
recommendations that would lead to an Americanization of the conflict, an
expansion of the war beyond Bosnia and a foreign policy disaster that dwarfs
anything our country has experienced since Vietnam.

Advocates of the so-called Lift and Strike policy believe that a large-scale
American air campaign against the Bosnian Serbs, combined with providing heavy
arms to the Bosnian Muslims, would decisively change the balance of power in
Bosnia and lead to a quick settlement.

Such a policy would not change the military balance in Bosnia, but would put
America squarely in the middle of a complicated ethnic conflict that has no easy
solution.

From two on-site Bosnian inspections, discussions with military leaders in the
region and American military and intelligence briefings, I am convinced that a
large-scale air campaign against the Bosnian Serb forces would have only
marginal, temporary effects. Widely dispersed and small concentrations of fuel,
ammunition and troops are not amenable to effective air interdiction.

The Bosnian Serbs have shown that they are adept at placing their strategic
equipment around schools, churches and other places close to civilians. The
mountainous terrain and poor weather conditions make a Bosnian bombing campaign
radically different from what Americans saw in Operation Desert Storm.

Lift and Strike would give the Europeans an excuse to wash their hands of this
mess while placing full responsibility for protecting Bosnian Muslims (and
perhaps Croatians and Macedonians) in the laps of the United States President
and forces.

The Bosnia conflict is an intractable quagmire. President Clinton is on the
right path by not making the bad situation he inherited worse. Our policy must
continue to prevent the expansion of the conflict beyond Bosnia's borders.

For the short term, the best course is to support the diplomatic initiatives of
the contact group to find a way to cease hostilities. Over the longer term, our
national security interests in the region would best be served by proceeding
with a regional conference on the Balkans, whose goal would be to stabilize the
region.

Such a conference, sponsored by the United States, Russia and key North Atlantic
Treaty Organization countries, should address minority rights versus majority
rule, refugees, arbitration procedures, human rights monitoring, prisoner
exchange, war crimes, security issues, border issues, open media and possible
regional economic cooperation.

This won't be easy or quick, but it is the best hope for a lasting peace.

(Rep.) JOHN P. MURTHA
Chmn., Subcommittee on Defense
Washington, Dec. 14, 1994

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 22, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Dean Rusk, Secretary of State In Vietnam War, Is Dead at 85

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3056 words


Dean Rusk, who as Secretary of State for President Kennedy and President Johnson
became a stubborn if much-criticized defender of the American involvement in the
Vietnam War, died Tuesday at his home in Athens, Ga., with his family at his
side. He was 85.

The cause of death was congestive heart failure, according to a spokesman for
the University of Georgia.

Mr. Rusk, a former president of the Rockefeller Foundation, was Secretary of
State all through the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, from 1961 to 1969. He
returned to his native Georgia in 1970 and taught international law at the
University of Georgia in Athens until he retired in 1984.

Other than Cordell Hull, who was Secretary of State for President Franklin D.
Roosevelt in the 1930's and 40's, Mr. Rusk held the job longer than any
predecessor -- a total of eight years. He felt driven to defend and justify the
American involvement on the side of South Vietnam, when many in the public and
in Congress turned against it in the later years of the Johnson Administration.

Some of the more memorable moments in Washington in the 1960's included Mr.
Rusk's stout defense of the Vietnam policy in front of a Senate Foreign
Relations Committee headed by J. W. Fulbright, who had broken with the policy.

As Secretary, Mr. Rusk played almost two different roles. Under President
Kennedy, his position was much less defined, with the President often taking
advice from other officials and not paying that much attention to Mr. Rusk. But
Mr. Johnson, himself an outsider in the Kennedy Administration, relied
increasingly on the advice of his fellow Southerner.

Mr. Rusk's belief, which he never tired of stating, was that the United States
had a commitment to South Vietnam that it could not break without risking a
larger war with China or Russia.

He declared again and again that "as far as the United States is concerned, we
have a commitment to South Vietnam -- and we shall meet it."

Mr. Rusk was also deeply involved in the hot and cold American relations with
the Soviet Union. He helped engineer the first arms control accords with Moscow.
And he was President Kennedy's adviser when the Soviet Union, in Mr. Rusk's
word, "blinked" during the Cuban missile crisis.

Praised by Johnson, Reviled by Protesters

In the Johnson years, Mr. Rusk was praised by a grateful President, who said:
"He's got courage. A Georgia cracker. When you're going in with the marines,
he's the kind you want at your side."

But Mr. Rusk came to be reviled by anti-war protesters, who mobbed his
appearances and shouted insults and slogans like "Murderer!" and "Stop the
bombing!" By the end of his service, he rarely spoke to groups outside
Washington for fear of provoking such protests.

Born in rural Cherokee County, Georgia, Mr. Rusk never lost his Southern accent,
gracious demeanor and fondness for a good story.

During the increasingly bitter discussions about Vietnam in the mid-1960's, he
was often asked by critics at public meetings why the United States was
supporting a Government in South Vietnam that was not backed by its own
peasants. To this he would answer: "I don't remember waking up in Cherokee
County, pounding my chest, and saying, 'What has Woodrow Wilson done for me
today.' " His anecdote usually led his audience to chuckle and won him time to
continue his arguments for the need to persevere in Vietnam.

His background clearly had an impact on his days in Washington. In the 1930's,
he was a Rhodes Scholar and used to recall the debates in Oxford over whether
Britain should stop Hitler in his tracks when he was beginning to seize
territory. The overwhelming sentiment, he remarked, was isolationist in Britain,
and as a result only a few years later, Britain was forced to war to defends its
island.

The moral he drew was that if America stopped the North Vietnamese now, it would
not have to fight a larger war later.

Then and in later decades, his work as Secretary drew mixed reviews from
historians, biographers and foreign-policy experts.

James Chace of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace wrote in 1988, in
The New York Times Book Review, that Mr. Rusk was "a good man -- loyal,
intelligent and self-sacrificing -- who was marked by a fatal lack of
imagination and who came to bear the onus for perhaps the most tragic failure of
American foreign policy in this century, the waging of the Vietnam War."

Views on Vietnam Evolved to Firmness

Mr. Rusk's views on Vietnam changed somewhat, but by the mid 1960's he believed
firmly that that the United States had to be very forceful in confronting
aggression by the army of Communist North Vietnam in South Vietnam, whose
Government was pro-Western. Otherwise, he said, the United States would be
perceived as weak and would invite further Communist aggression, which could
touch off nuclear wars.

While Mr. Rusk was Secretary, the American role grew until almost 550,000 United
States troops were in South Vietnam in 1969, allied with the shaky South
Vietnamese Army against the North Vietnamese invaders and the Communist Vietcong
insurgents. At the same time, United States bombers were pounding North Vietnam.

But he failed to foresee that the Vietnamese Communist forces would keep on
fighting despite the vast United States intervention.

Eventually, the Nixon Administration progressively withdrew United States forces
from South Vietnam. The last troops left in 1973, after more than 50,000
Americans had died in the war. The Communists then completed their takeover of
the South, uniting it with the North.

The Vietnam War later was generally thought to be "the first war which the
United States unequivocally lost," as the Yale historian Paul Kennedy wrote in
his 1988 book "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers."

Yet Mr. Rusk did not admit any American errors when he was asked, "What went
wrong in Vietnam?" at a news conference shortly before he left office with the
end of the Johnson Administration in 1969. He quickly responded, "What went
wrong was a persistent and determined attempt by the authorities in Hanoi to
take over South Vietnam by force."

In interviews in later years and in his memoirs, however, he said he had made
two mistakes about the Vietnam War: underestimating the tenacity of the North
Vietnamese and overestimating the patience of the American people.

Mr. Rusk came to spend most of his time as Secretary dealing with Vietnam, and
his role in some other notable foreign-policy spheres was less publicized and
less crucial. He had only a minor hand in the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion
of Cuba in 1961, early in the Kennedy Administration, by Cuban exiles trained
and equipped by the Central Intelligence Agency. His role was partly passive
during the Cuban missile crisis in late 1962.

In good times and bad, Mr. Rusk generally radiated self-confidence and solidity
as Secretary. He stood 6 feet 1 inch tall and weighed 200 pounds, and even near
the end of his time in office, he remained "dogged, durable, unfailingly
courteous and considerate," as he was described then by the chief Washington
correspondent of The New York Times, Max Frankel.

But Mr. Rusk's son Richard wrote, in a commentary included in Dean Rusk's
memoirs, that his father began having chronic stomach pain in the months
preceding the buildup in Vietnam in 1965. The son wrote that the pain was "never
diagnosed and persisted into old age."

Before he became Secretary, Dean Rusk gained wide knowledge and experience in
Asian matters and foreign affairs in general. He was a student at Oxford as a
Rhodes Scholar in his early 20's and also studied in Germany.

Later he was an Army staff officer in the China-Burma-India theater during World
War II and a senior State Department official during part of the Korean War. He
took a particular interest in Asia as head of the Ford Foundation, which is
based in New York, from 1952 to 1960.

In his memoirs, "As I Saw It" (Norton, 1990), Mr. Rusk said a major lesson he
had learned from World War II "was that if aggression is allowed to gather
momentum, it can continue to build and lead to general war."

Tracing what he saw as the evolution in Mr. Rusk's thinking on Vietnam, William
Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs in 1965, wrote later
that by that summer, "Dean Rusk, skeptical in the fall of 1961 and uncertain in
January of 1965 that South Vietnam had the political cohesion to be worth going
all out for, had now concluded that to walk away from an American commitment, to
temporize in our actions to meet it, to do anything short of all we possibly
could, would pose the gravest possible danger to world peace."

'Widely Regarded As the Chief Hawk'

As the war went on, opposition to the stepped-up American involvement grew more
intense in the United States. In that period Thomas J. Schoenbaum, a colleague
of Mr. Rusk's on the University of Georgia faculty, wrote in "Waging Peace and
War: Dean Rusk in the Truman, Kennedy and Johnson Years" (Simon & Schuster,
1988), the Secretary "made himself the rock against which crashed the successive
waves of dissent" and was "widely regarded as the chief hawk in the aerie of
Vietnam advisers."

Critics also charged that Johnson Administration statements about the war could
not be trusted, that there was "a credibility gap." Professor Schoenbaum wrote
that in that era, in answering journalists' questions, Mr. Rusk "was often vague
and evasive." "Although he denies having lied to the press," Professor
Schoenbaum continued, "his half-truths and incomplete answers were frequently
misleading."

Meanwhile, Mr. Rusk wrote in his book, the Johnson Administration made numerous
"efforts to find a formula for peace with Hanoi" because "we wanted a negotiated
end to the war." He wrote that he was told by Mr. Johnson soon after he became
President, "Your mission is to bring about a peaceful settlement of this
situation at the earliest possible moment."

But Mr. Rusk failed in that mission, despite halts in the United States bombing
of North Vietnam that were meant to promote it.

More broadly, the Vietnam policies with which Mr. Rusk was so closely identified
as Secretary came to be widely regarded as particularly dismal failures, and
more than a few historians and other analysts came to hold critical views of his
work on Vietnam.

Professor Warren I. Cohen, director of the Asian Studies Center at Michigan
State University, wrote in his biography, "Dean Rusk" (Cooper Square Publishers,
1980), that Mr. Rusk had not grasped the extent to which "the 'aggression' of a
national liberation movement is much more complicated morally and much harder to
cope with politically or militarily" than the aggression of a great power.

The outcry against the war spread across America, spurred partly by the
Communists' broad Tet offensive early in 1968, even though the attack was a
military failure.

In March of that year Mr. Rusk, in another secret memorandum, argued against
authorizing a further enlargement of the American ground force in Vietnam and
advocated a cutback in the American bombing of North Vietnam. A shaken Mr.
Johnson later that month decreed a sweeping cutback in the bombing. He also
refrained from additional big troop buildups.

The partial bombing halt was followed by the inconclusive beginning of
negotiations between the United States and North Vietnam in Paris, and Mr.
Johnson later halted all bombing of the North.

Formula in Office: Endure and Survive

In carrying out his manifold duties as Secretary, Mr. Rusk worked hard and
persistently, traveling very widely. Despite grave East-West tensions, he
succeeded in developing a fairly good working relationship with the Soviet
Foreign Minister, Andrei A. Gromyko.

Nonetheless, others found fault with his overall performance as Secretary.
Appraising it near its end, Mr. Frankel wrote in The New York Times: "His
formula, under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, for self and country, was to
endure and to survive, to keep playing a mediocre hand rather than risk all for
a better one, and to stay around for greater achievement another day. He never
stood for boldness or imaginative innovation."

President Kennedy originally chose Mr. Rusk as his Secretary of State, rather
than some better-known figure, because as the historian and former Kennedy White
House aide Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. wrote in his book "A Thousand Days"
(Houghton Mifflin, 1965), Mr. Kennedy "wanted to be his own Secretary of State."

He thought that Mr. Rusk, who had worked well in large organizations, was the
right man to carry out Kennedy foreign policies. Mr. Schlesinger reported that
the President came to be impressed by Mr. Rusk's "capacity to define" but
depressed by his "reluctance to decide."

Mr. Rusk himself later concluded that he acted too deferentially when the
fledgling Kennedy Administration was pondering plans for what became the 1961
Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba. In his book he wrote of his reaction when he heard
about the plans: "Having been in the China-Burma-India theater in World War II,
I knew that this thin brigade of Cuban exiles did not stand a snowball's chance
in hell of success. I didn't relay this military judgment to President Kennedy
because I was no longer in the military."

He reported that he privately expressed to Mr. Kennedy his opposition on
non-military grounds.

But he wrote that in retrospect, "in replaying and rethinking everything, I
wished that I had pushed my reticence aside and organized resistance to the
invasion" in the Administration.

The invasion was quickly crushed by Fidel Castro's forces. Mr. Rusk wrote that
out of loyalty to Mr. Kennedy, he did not let it be known at the time that he
had privately opposed it.

A Reserved Role In Missile Crisis

Mr. Rusk also chose to play a somewhat passive role at the outset of the Cuban
missile crisis of late 1962, which was one of the tautest cold war standoffs
between the United States and the Soviet Union. It arose after the Kennedy
Administration learned from aerial photographs, taken on Oct. 14, that Soviet
missile-launching installations were being constructed secretly in Cuba.

Mr. Rusk held back from the debate among the President's advisers. In his book,
he wrote that "as Secretary of State, I felt that I should hold myself in
reserve and hear all points of view before giving my recommendation to the
President."

After five days of secret Administration deliberations, he wrote, he and Defense
Secretary Robert S. McNamara recommended to the President that he order a
partial naval blockade of Cuba.

Mr. Kennedy did so, and also threatened to retaliate militarily against the
Soviets if a missile were to be launched from Cuba. Not long afterward, the
tension eased somewhat when, as Mr. Rusk recalled in his book, several Soviet
ships that were suspected of carrying missiles for delivery in Cuba "stopped
dead in the water, then turned around and headed back to the Black Sea."

He added, "When we heard this news, I said to my colleagues, 'We are eyeball to
eyeball, and the other fellow just blinked.' "

The crisis ended on Oct. 28 when Nikita S. Khrushchev declared in Moscow that
the missiles would be pulled out of Cuba under United Nations supervision.

Mr. Rusk went on to help bring into being the partial Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty
that was signed by the United States, the Soviet Union and Britain in 1963.
Other nations later adhered to it.

After Mr. Rusk stepped down as Secretary in 1969, it took a while for him to
find a permanent job. Professor Schoenbaum wrote, "Not only did he have
difficulty finding work, but many people, including many former friends,
despised him."

Mr. Rusk went on to become Sibley Professor of International Law at the
University of Georgia at Athens, in Clarke County, 45 miles southeast of his
native Cherokee County.

A Native Georgian And Star Student

David Dean Rusk was born in Cherokee County, Ga., on Feb. 9, 1909, the son of
Robert Hugh Rusk, who had been obliged by a voice ailment to quit the
Presbyterian ministry, and Elizabeth Clotfelter Rusk.

Robert Hugh Rusk went on to farm and teach school for some years in the county,
and as a small boy there, his son ran around in underwear made from flour sacks.
Then the family moved to Atlanta, where the father became a mail carrier, and
young Dean became a star high school student. He went on to work his way through
Davidson College, in Davidson, N.C., where he was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and
graduated in 1931.

Going on to St. John's College of Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar, he
earned an M.A. degree in philosophy, politics and economics in 1934.

He then worked at Mills College in Oakland, Calif., from 1934 to 1940, teaching
Government and International Relations and serving as dean of the faculty while
also studying law at the University of California at Berkeley.

An Army Reserve officer, Mr. Rusk was called to active duty in 1940 and remained
in uniform until 1946, rising to the rank of colonel. He saw service with the
military intelligence branch of the Army General Staff, as a staff officer under
Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell in the China-Burma-India theater and back in Washington,
in the Operations Division of the War Department General Staff

He joined the State Department in 1946 as assistant chief of the division of
international security affairs and went on to serve as a Special Assistant to
the Secretary of War in 1946 and 1947 and as head of the State Department's
United Nations desk from 1947 to 1949.

From that year until 1951, he was successively an Assistant Secretary of State,
a Deputy Under Secretary and Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs.

As president of the Rockefeller Foundation, he wrote in his book, he felt that
"the third world, where two-thirds of the world's population live, was a time
bomb for the entire human race," adding, "We channeled more funding to the
developing countries in Africa, Latin America and Asia."

Mr. Rusk was married to Virginia Foisie in 1937.

He is survived by his wife; two sons, David of Washington and Richard of Bishop,
Ga.; a daughter, Peggy Smith of Stafford, Va., and six grandchildren.

A funeral service is planned at Athens First Presbyterian Church.

NAME: Dean Rusk

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 23, 1994, Friday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday with the obituary of former Secretary of State Dean
Rusk misstated the position held by the late Richard M. Bissell Jr., a planner
of the Bay of Pigs operation against Cuba. He was a special assistant and a
Deputy Director for Plans at the C.I.A., but was never the Director of Central
Intelligence.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Dean Rusk (Associated Press, 1968) (pg. A1); President Kennedy,
in April 1961, in discussion with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Richard
Bissell, the C.I.A. director who masterminded the Bay of Pigs operation. Kennedy
doomed the plan by canceling the use of American troops. (Jacques Lowe/Woodfin
Camp & Associates Inc.); Dean Rusk, second from left, conferred with Under
Secretary of State George W. Ball, left, President Johnson and Secretary of
Defense Robert McNamara, on foreign policy issues in 1964. (United Press
International); Dean Rusk, who served as Secretary of State under two
Presidents, Kennedy and Johnson, left the United States Embassy in Saigon after
a briefing on April 17, 1964. (Associated Press) (pg. D18)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Ask For an Independent Inquiry Into Gingrich's $4 Million Book
Contract

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 22


Democrats demanded an independent inquiry today into reports that Representative
Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican who will become the House Speaker in
January, has signed a $4 million book contract with the conglomerate that is
waging a regulatory battle to prevent the dismembering of the Fox television
network.

In a news conference today, Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, who will
be the Democratic whip in the new Congress, suggested that Mr. Gingrich's
contract was "a $4 million Christmas gift" from the media baron Rupert Murdoch.
Mr. Murdoch's empire includes Fox and HarperCollins, the publisher that has
signed Mr. Gingrich as an author.

"We need to lift this cloud over his head," Mr. Bonior said as if to taunt Mr.
Gingrich, "if in fact it can be lifted."

Mr. Gingrich's spokesman, Tony Blankley, said the book contract toed the line on
author's royalties in the House ethics manual, and he challenged Mr. Bonior and
others to present any evidence that the Speaker-to-be has broken any law or
rule.

"As Mr. Bonior develops his career as an attack dog for the minority party, he
should arm himself with facts rather than fluffery," Mr. Blankley said. "To
infer improprieties where there are none is scurrilous."

Later, a public relations spokesman for Mr. Murdoch denied that his employer had
known in advance about the book deal or that Mr. Murdoch had made any effort to
influence Congress on the regulatory dispute.

Mr. Murdoch's media holdings string from Australia to Britain, where he controls
The Times of London and television interests, to the United States, where his
empire also includes TV Guide and The New York Post. Mr. Murdoch was born in
Australia but is now an American citizen.

Today's Democratic attack, which began at the White House and was carried to
Capitol Hill, did not explicitly charge that Mr. Gingrich's book deal was an
example of influence peddling or bribery. But it left that unmistakable
impression, and in that bluntness it recalled the many attacks on Democratic
ethics that Mr. Gingrich mounted in the 1980's, especially the assault that led
to the resignation of Speaker Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas, in the late 1980's.

Mr. Bonior's specific suggestion was that the Fox network had clear legislative
interests before Congress, and that Mr. Gingrich's book deal raised the
appearance, if not the reality, of improper influence.

Fox is defending itself before the Federal Communications Commission against
charges that it is violating the legal prohibition on foreign ownership of
American television stations. The NBC network contends that Fox is foreign owned
because the News Corporation, an Australian company controlled by Mr. Murdoch,
provided almost all the money to buy the network's big television outlets.

Mr. Bonior noted that House and Senate Republicans supported legislation to
remove the Federal ban on foreign ownership and that Mr. Gingrich would be able
to affect legislation on every important matter in Congress.

Mr. Bonior said Mr. Gingrich should disclose any relationship with Mr. Murdoch,
including whether Mr. Murdoch had given money to his political causes.

"Last week, Newt Gingrich threatened to shut down public broadcasting," Mr.
Bonior said. "This week we learn that Newt's cut a sweetheart book deal with the
most notorious foreign news corporation in the world. Is this Newt Gingrich's
idea of renewing American civilization: to silence Big Bird and Mr. Rogers while
turning the airwaves over to foreign companies?"

Not all the details of Mr. Gingrich's latest venture are clear. But Mr. Blankley
said Mr. Gingrich had agreed this week to produce two books espousing his
conservative philosophy for HarperCollins, with the first to appear next fall.

Neither Mr. Blankley nor HarperCollins would say what Mr. Gingrich was being
paid, but an official of a rival publishing firm placed the fee at a minimum of
$4.1 million, with a chance for more if the books sell extremely well.

Books by elected politicians are hardly new; Senator William Maclay profited by
selling the journals of the first Congress in 1791, and even Mr. Bonior has
published while in office (a book on the Vietnam war, which he says earned less
than $1,000). According to a 1989 wire service report, at least 26 of the 100
senators serving then were published authors.

Mr. Bonior has been demanding for some time that the House Ethics Committee hire
an outside counsel to investigate Mr. Gingrich's many writing and fund-raising
activities, including the financing of two previous books and his stewardship of
a privately financed conservative venture, called Gopac, that trains Republican
candidates for office.

In one of his best-known attacks on Democratic ethics in the past, Mr. Gingrich
deposed Mr. Wright, in part, by raising questions about his sales of a
vanity-press book called "Reflections of a Public Man."

Mr. Gingrich charged that Mr. Wright had skirted the House limits on
legislators' income from honorariums by engineering bulk sales of the book to
trade associations and companies to which he gave speeches. At the time, House
members were barred from accepting speaking fees that amounted to more than 30
percent of their House salary, but income from book sales was unlimited.

Mr. Bonior, among others, complained at the time that Mr. Gingrich's public
attacks amounted to character assassination. But although Mr. Wright, who earned
about $55,000 from his book, denied knowledge of the scheme, the bulk sales were
shown to have occurred, and the revelation led directly to his resignation --
and Mr. Gingrich's rise to prominence -- in 1989.


LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Democrats are criticizing Representative Newt Gingrich of
Georgia, the next Speaker, for signing a $4 million book deal with a publisher
owned by Rupert Murdoch. Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the new
minority whip, displayed a mock-up of the advance at a news conference
yesterday. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Religion Journal;
In the Cherish Life Circle, Revenge Is No Sweet Thing

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1;    Page 8;    Column 1;    National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


The Nativity scene on the front of the Christmas card didn't look unusual: a
woodcut of the Holy Family under the words "The Prince of Peace . . ."

Then Sister Camille D'Arienzo opened the card to reveal a depiction of the
Crucifixion with the tag line: ". . . was a victim of Capital Punishment."

A friend, she said, gave her the card, affirming the bond they had formed as
members of a discussion group opposed to the death penalty. In recent months,
members of the group have been promoting a "Declaration of Life," urging people
to sign a form saying that if they are murdered during a violent crime, their
killer should be spared the death penalty.

About 1,200 people have signed the form, including the spouse of a man killed by
Colin Ferguson during a shooting spree on the Long Island Railroad on Dec. 7,
1993; the Rev. Daniel Berrigan, who protested the Vietnam war, and Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo.

Because Gov.-elect George Pataki campaigned for the death penalty, Sister
Camille and members of other religious orders have written to Mr. Pataki asking
for a meeting to discuss prevention programs and alternative punishments.

Mr. Pataki has yet to reply. But after a fire bomb went off in a subway car on
Wednesday, Mr. Pataki repeated his call for capital punishment, saying the
suspect should be sentenced to death if he is convicted.

What some call justice, Sister Camille calls revenge. "For a person of faith
confronted with a painful, violent or sinful situation, what does the just
person do?" she asks. "Killing doesn't solve the societal problem or the problem
of the soul. If you talk about it in terms of the soul, then you talk about
people with a life beyond this one. It gives us a different perspective with
what to do with a criminal."

Sister Camille is the president of the Brooklyn Regional Community of the
Sisters of Mercy. The order's early work with criminals gave her the idea for
the Declaration of Life campaign. She had been rooting through her religious
community's archives when she came across references to a convicted murderer
referred to only as "Prisoner Greenwall." She said the documents told how
members of her order had visited the prisoner in the early 1860's in a Brooklyn
jail. Prisoner Greenwall went to the gallows insisting he was innocent. Later,
Sister Camille said, the real murderer confessed to the crime.

"We know in history that many people have been executed unjustly," she said.
"That's when I knew I had to do it on a scale larger than myself."

She said she and some friends formed a group they called the Cherish Life
Circle. One member suggested they circulate the Declaration of Life, which is
modeled after a document used by a national group called Catholics Against
Capital Punishment.

The one-page, notarized declaration is to be given to prosecutors, politicians
and the judge after a suspect is convicted of murder.

Sister Camille acknowledges that the court is under no legal obligation to honor
the document, but she says it still has value.

"It provides the opportunity for a person who feels powerless against capital
punishment to speak for himself and exert some influence on the legal system,"
she said. "We hope they would hear the desire of the individual."

She also said she hoped that Roman Catholic Church officials were listening:
While she sent copies of the declaration to all the bishops in the nation, only
nine responded even though the national bishop's conference has repeatedly
stated its opposition to capital punishment.

Sister Camille's group has been trying, so far without success, to persuade the
bishops to designate a Sunday on which congregations would discuss church
doctrine on the death penalty.

Sister Ave Regina Gould, another nun who is active in Cherish Life, said: "We're
not hearing it in popular teaching. The person in the pew depends on what is
preached in terms of moral guidance. It hasn't filtered down."

Sister Camille said she wanted people, especially Catholics who are opposed
abortion but who support capital punishment, to realize the contradiction.

To those who doubt that her group is little more than a bunch of do-gooders
removed from reality, Sister Camille points to a letter she received from Sister
Catherine Ann Grabowski, another member of the Sisters of Mercy.

When Sister Catherine's aunt was killed by her spouse, who then committed
suicide, the abstract became real. Had he not killed himself, Sister Catherine
wrote, what would she have wanted? Her answer remained: choose life.

"I sadly believe that violence is capable of wrapping its bony fingers around
anyone's life in any town anywhere," Sister Catherine wrote. "While I am still
grappling with the anger and outrage directed at my uncle, I do feel some
compassion for his soul to find some rest and that he may be at peace. While I
rage at the unanswered questions, I would not wish him harm if he were still
alive."

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sister Camille D'Arienzo (Ruby Washington/The New York Times

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHRISTMAS ON THE ROAD -- HONG KONG: CRAIG R. WHITNEY;
Half a World From London, Goose and That Pudding

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY;   CRAIG R. WHITNEY is the European diplomatic
correspondent of The Times.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 460 words


If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had
their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there
were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.

In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents
range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a
Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat
in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in
Sarajevo. All remember how they counted their blessings.

Christmas dinner 1971 in the Repulse Bay Hotel in Hong Kong was a mirage you
could actually taste: roast goose, candlelight and glittering Christmas trees
inside, palm trees and junks floating on the bay outside.  It was an illusion
conceived by homesick British colonials to remind themselves that for all the
incessant sunshine and spoken Chinese around them, back in England things were
winding down for a proper holiday. The Repulse Bay did its best to humor them.

On the other side of Hong Kong island from the modern bank skyscrapers, the
Repulse Bay came from the same era and the same mindset as such other great
hostelries as the Raffles in Singapore or the Peninsula across the bay. It had
high ceilings; were there ceiling fans to turn lazily when the tropical heat
returned? I cannot remember, for the weather in Hong Kong in December is rather
cool and misty, forcing people to wear sweaters and adding to the seeming
Englishness of the holiday.

There were eight or nine colleagues around our table; the rest of the room,
gaily decked with greens, was filled with expatriates, all trying desperately to
pretend they were 10,000 miles away. The goose was as hearty, the vegetables as
sterilized and the Christmas pudding as authentically inedible as the real thing
back in London.

Christmas pudding rarely fares well outside of England, and certainly not in the
Orient. One addressed to the New York Times bureau in Vietnam a month before we
sat down to dinner in Hong Kong did not surface at the sweltering post office in
Saigon until the following July. It was left there after an argument with
Vietnamese customs, which wanted a king's ransom for the little bottle of spirit
that came with it. I wonder what the Vietnamese made of the dry, clumped
concoction the brandy was supposed to set aflame.

Asia is another world now, and Hong Kong's days as a Crown Colony are rapidly
running out. A wrecker's ball brought down the Repulse Bay Hotel 20 years ago to
make room for a tourist center, condominiums, a shopping mall -- I don't really
want to know. The memories of that long-gone Christmas will outlast them all.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: December 25, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1478 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  27   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      2  43   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      3   4   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 4      4  17   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 5      5  10   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 6      6   7   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 7      8   5   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 8      9  124  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 9      7   5   GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A 1981
                novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist
                from Texas.

 10    10  12   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 11    12  22   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual
                visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its
                inhabitants, as well as her own.

 12    13  24   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 13    11  14   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

 14    14  12   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 15         3   STAR TREK GENERATIONS, by J.M. Dillard. (Pocket, $20.) Capt.
                Jean-Luc Picard and Capt. James T. Kirk must track down a
                scientist with a dangerous weapon.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  12   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 2      2   8   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to
                other faiths.

 3      4  16   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 4      3  13   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 5      7  53   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 6      5  15   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the
                present.

 7      6  11   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 8      9  11   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 9      8   8   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 10    10   4   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 11    11  12   BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An
                illustrated history of the game.

 12         1   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words
                and pictures.

 13    14   2   IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern
                humorist.

 14    12  42   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 15    13  10   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  83   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 2      1  35   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      3  13   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.

 4      4   4   THE BUBBA GUMP SHRIMP CO. COOKBOOK. (Oxmoor House, $14.95.)
                Seventy-five shrimp recipes, said to have been inspired by
                Forrest Gump.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 10, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M.
Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF LOUIS AUCHINCLOSS. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) Nineteen
stories, the oldest from the 1940's, by a writer unfashionably and passionately
concerned with the beliefs and behavior of the WASP civilization that until very
recently produced America's ruling class.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly
charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life,
the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic
politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically
agreeable.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

MONSTERS OF THE SEA, by Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $30.) A delightful and learned
adventure in cryptozoology (the study of hidden life-forms, including the
leviathan, the sea serpent, the kraken, the blob and the globster).

TOULOUSE-LAUTREC: A Life, by Julia Frey. (Viking, $34.95.) A valuable life of
the only great painter of France's golden age who was an aristocrat,
incorporating much family correspondence recently made available.

WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: An Advertising Story, by Randall Rothenberg. (Knopf,
$25.) A lively rendition, by a former advertising columnist for The Times, of
real life at an agency that tried to sell cars by ridiculing ads for cars.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: December 25, 1994

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 854 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    15   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2    32   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 3     5   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.

 4     8   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery
           writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to
           take his place.

 5    28   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 6     4   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
           $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.

 7    13   THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to
           the 20th century.

 8     6   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) The
           psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tracks a series of
           violent deaths.

 9     3   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.)
           Archy McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a
           Palm Beach mansion.

 10   13   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction
           of their young son creates a crisis for a man and a woman
           and for her first lover.

 11   17   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           death.

 12    6   YOU BELONG TO ME, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $6.50.) An
           arranged marriage between two reluctant partners in
           19th-century Russia.

 13   25   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 14   10   THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of
           vampirism.

 15   13   THE DOOR TO DECEMBER, by Dean Koontz. (Signet, $6.99.) A
           revised edition of a 1985 novel about a young girl's
           mysterious disappearance.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    14   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     1   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.)
           Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of
           "Seinfeld."

 3    50   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           A psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 4    13   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters,
           both of them over 100, reflect on their lives.

 5     9   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 6     2   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A
           psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 7    48   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 8     9   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More
           comments on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 9    581  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott
Peck
.
(Tou
chst
one/
S&S,
$10.
95.)
Insp
irat
ion.

 10   17   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 11   32   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 12    7   ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour"
           of an armored cavalry regiment.

 13*   7   A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ... OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR,
           by Erma Bombeck. (Harper Paperbacks, $5.99.) Thoughts on 44
           years of marriage.

 14    9   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 15   13   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the changing life and terrain of the Great
           Plains.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    12   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 2    13   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."

 3     3   ENSUCKLOPEDIA, by Sam Johnson, Chris Marcil, et al.
           (MTV/Pocket, $10.) Cartoon humor featuring the television
           characters Beavis and Butt-head.

 4     4   THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews & McMeel,
           $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 10, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHRISTMAS ON THE ROAD -- SAIGON: BARBARA CROSSETTE;
Poor and Derelict, a City Glows in Candlelight

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE;   BARBARA CROSSETTE is the United Nations bureau
chief of The Times.

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 8;  Column 4;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


If Christmas is a time for surprises, New York Times correspondents have had
their share: along with the Japanese Santa and tree-trimming Muscovites there
were the Serbian snipers, the bullets in Beirut, the tragic fire in Tennessee.

In writing of their most memorable Christmases away from home, 10 correspondents
range around the world; some recall elegant feasts, in a Swabian castle or a
Hong Kong hotel; others cannot forget the fruitcake they could not possibly eat
in Somalia, the joy radiating from a Saigon cathedral, or the tearful Mass in
Sarajevo. All remember how they counted their blessings.

We came from Hanoi, a cold and miserable place in December 1984 when two
Congressmen, Steven Solarz and Robert Torricelli, took one of those tough trips
that belies the luxurious image of a Congressional junket. We were on our way to
Phnom Penh, still a definitively inhospitable place at the time. In between was
Saigon -- almost no one calls it Ho Chi Minh City, then or now.

It was Christmas Eve, and a balmy night that obliterated the memory of chill,
grim days on the rain-sodden, almost sullen streets of Hanoi. Saigon, the refuge
of Catholics who fled North Vietnam in the 1950's, celebrated Christmas with a
spirited vengeance.

Less than a decade after the end of the war, the country was still impoverished,
but on Saigon's almost derelict streets, the atmosphere was one of national
holiday: avenues and byways were thronged with people in a party mood. There
were ad hoc Christmas shops and sidewalk markets selling meager but ingenious
decorations -- hand-drawn paper angels and tree ornaments made of discarded
holiday cards and bits of wool or string. Bakers had produced French-style
Christmas logs, with cocoa sent by relatives in Australia or the United States.

The red-brick Cathedral of the Virgin Mary, rising from its island in a genteel
city square, glowed with the warm light of hundreds of candles. Glorious music
filled the nave and spilled out the open doors where an overflow congregation
stood, many poor and thin, singing familiar hymns and responses in Vietnamese as
I had not heard it used before. The only Vietnam I knew was the austere
post-1975 state imposed by uncompromising party leaders in Hanoi who did their
best to discourage religion, Buddhist and Christian alike.

The joy of Christmastime radiating from the cathedral drew throngs to the
square, among them the war-disabled and orphaned hoping for a larger measure of
charity on this night. Young people stood beside grandparents. Cyclo drivers
paused to take in the sight.

For a few pennies, I bought some of the simple, homemade Christmas tree
ornaments being sold on the streets. I'll take them out again this season, frail
things that they are, to hang with the more opulent decorations. A decade later
(now that blinking lights and imported colored balls no doubt trim Vietnamese
trees) these little paper ornaments carry with them memories of an unexpected
encounter with the resilient spirituality of Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Mourning for the Lives Lost to Drunken Driving

BYLINE: By JULIE MILLER

SECTION: Section 13CN;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1688 words


PHOTOGRAPHS of Regina Baker, Michael Tesler, Edward Farrell, Lisa Marie
LaRochelle and many, many others were displayed on the altar of United Methodist
Church in Gales Ferry. Their smiling faces belied their circumstances. All had
been either injured or killed as a result of drunken driving.

About 65 family members and friends attending a candlelight vigil sponsored by
Mothers Against Drunk Driving came forward one by one and lit candles in memory
of those whose young, promising lives had been wiped out by drunken drivers. The
church was decorated for Christmas. But there were tears instead of celebration.

Mothers, brothers and sisters shared poems they had composed and dedicated to
their loved ones. It didn't matter whether a year or 10 years had passed. The
pain was fresh. Gene and Cathy Baker of Norwich, whose 22-year-old daughter,
Reina, was killed last year, held each other and wept as they lit their candles.
A small child, Peter D'Amato of Gales Ferry, solemnly lit a candle in memory of
his grandfather, who was killed five years ago.

The Eastern Connecticut chapter of MADD sponsored the vigil to raise public
awareness about the deadly effects of driving while intoxicated, especially
during the holidays. The organization also began its Project Red Ribbon in
November, during which drivers tie red ribbons on their vehicles as a symbol of
their commitment to stay sober when they are behind the wheel.

December is National Drunk and Drugged Driving Prevention Month. There is Lights
on for Life, a one-day national headlight observance in remembrance of those
killed and injured in alcohol-related crashes, and drivers may be sure that
police departments nationwide will be especially watchful for drunken drivers
during the holidays.

Although traffic deaths related to drinking have decreased nationwide by almost
a third in the last decade, according to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, drunken driving remains a major problem.

Traffic crashes last year involving drunken drivers caused 17,461 deaths, or
43.5 percent of all 40,115 traffic fatalities reported in the United States, the
centers said. Last year's national figures for the the holidays, according to
MADD, show that: during Thanksgiving, there were 271 out of 567 traffic deaths,
or 47.8 percent involved alcohol; during Christmas, 219 out of 401, or 54.6
percent; between Thanksgiving and New Year's Eve, 1,746 out of 4,092, or 42.6
percent, and 111 out of 155 on New Year's Day, or 71.5 percent.

Other figures are equally striking. In the past decade, four times as many
Americans died in drunken driving crashes as were killed in the Vietnam War,
according to the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.

MADD, a nonprofit organization, was founded in 1980 by a California woman, Candy
Lightner, whose daughter was killed by a drunken driver who was a repeat
offender. What began as a one-woman crusade is now a national organization of
more than 400 chapters in the United States. The Eastern Connecticut chapter in
Gales Ferry, founded in 1984, is one of six in the state. MADD works with
lawmakers to change laws related to drunken driving and monitors local courts to
see if the laws are being enforced. The organization offers victims assistance
in following court cases and writing statements for the court describing the
impact of the crash on victims and their families.

It took Regina Baker's death on Nov. 2, 1993, for the courts to realize that the
driver who killed her was a danger to society, her parents wrote the court.
Jason Tipton, the driver of the car in which Regina was a passenger, pleaded
guilty to second-degree manslaughter with a motor vehicle. He was given a
10-year jail sentence, which will be suspended after three and a half years, and
sentenced to five years' probation, according to MADD.

Mr. Tipton was Regina's friend, but she was not aware of the extent of his drug
abuse or his run-ins with the law, the Bakers said. In August 1993, a judge
denied an arrest warrant for Mr. Tipton for violation of probation.

"Gina would never have met Mr. Tipton had the court followed through with the
arrest warrant and locked Mr. Tipton up," the Bakers said. "On the very day of
the car crash, Mr. Tipton was to be given probation for the five cases he had
that were pending in court over a two-year period. He was out celebrating this
when the crash happened. He had beaten the system. Mr. Tipton had been allowed
to run amok the last two years at the hands of our judicial system. He had a
lawyer who was clever enough to keep him free."

An assistant state's attorney in New London for six years, Peter McShane, said
more must be done to stop repeat offenses, and a first step would be to dispose
of cases faster. "Unfortunately, we have cases that are 15 to 22 months old. Too
much time passes between an arrest and a conviction," he added. "We have people
with two or three drunken driving cases on the jury list." Through its
educational programs, MADD has been able to attract public attention to the
deadly effects of drunken driving, Mr. McShane said. When he first started
trying cases, he added, he noticed a lenient attitude among jurors. "They no
longer have that attitude," Mr. McShane said. "We're able to get more
convictions."

It would appear that the drop in alcohol-related traffic deaths is a result of a
combination of improved law enforcement, states that have raised their drinking
ages to 21 and lowered their legal limits for intoxication, fewer people
drinking, societal pressure against driving drunk and heightened public
awareness because of groups that include MADD.

Roadside sobriety checkpoints are among the most powerful weapons against
drunken driving, the director of MADD's Eastern Connecticut chapter, Paula Fee
of Stonington, said. Nine cities and towns in Southeastern Connecticut, in
addition to state police, belong to a regional traffic enforcement unit that
sets up checkpoints on secondary roads once a month, each time in a different
municipality, the regional traffic safety coordinator, Leslie Williams Jr.,
said. The unit is funded by a federal grant. Started last year, the checkpoints
have resulted in 31 drunken driving arrests, Mr. Williams said. Individual
police departments in Southeastern Connecticut set up checkpoints during
December with additional federal money.

But the traffic unit's checkpoints should be carried out more frequently, Mr.
Williams added. "Once a month is not sufficient. We would love to do more. It
works out to one in each town every 10 months. But the police departments don't
have the resources to do more."

The checkpoints act as a deterrent, Sgt. Thomas Forbes of the City of Groton
Police Department, a member of the traffic enforcement unit, said. Sergeant
Forbes, whose brother was killed by a drunken driver, supervises checkpoints and
teaches police officers procedures for enforcement of drunk-driving laws. He is
also a volunteer for MADD. "We're not going to effect change if there isn't a
deterrent," said Sergeant Forbes. "The only way is for drivers to get caught and
to know that if they drink and drive, they'll encounter a police officer."

Choosing a designated driver, someone who agrees to stay sober and drive others
home, is another deterrent. "It's a fantastic concept," Sergeant Forbes said.
"Because it's socially acceptable, it's easy for people to use, especially
teen-agers."

Sobriety and blood alcohol concentration tests are not the only evidence
officers use to decide whether or not to arrest someone for driving while
intoxicated, Sergeant Forbes said. Typically, the driver is guilty of some type
of motor vehicle violation, and officers are trained to watch for slurred
speech, messy clothing, fresh damage on the vehicle, slow reactions and lack of
concentration. "You can see these in the first three seconds when you approach
the vehicle," Sergeant Forbes said.

Blood alcohol concentration is measured directly through testing blood or
indirectly through tests of breath, urine or saliva. A driver in Connecticut is
legally intoxicated if his blood alcohol concentration is .10 or above. One of
MADD's objectives is to reduce the legally intoxicated level to .08 percent, the
former public policy liaison for Connecticut's MADD organization, Jane Engelke,
said. She added, "We know that driving skills are affected by the time people
reach that level."

MADD also intends to push for legislation prohibiting any alcohol in the body
for drivers under age 21. "There is a disproportionate number of people under 21
who are driving after drinking small amounts of alcohol and are involved in
fatal crashes," Mrs. Engelke said. "They drive differently. They take more risks
even without alcohol."

Other proposed legislation supported by MADD would enable police officers to use
another type of test to determine the presence of drugs if the first test
indicates intoxication is not due to alcohol. Under current state law, two tests
of the same type are required as evidence in a drunken driving arrest, Mrs.
Engelke said.

The vigil in Gales Ferry was a reminder that drunken driving accidents spread
their devastating effects to other generations. Michael Tesler, who was 36 when
he died, left a wife and four children. His photograph in the church showed him
holding an infant daughter. Angela Marquette, who was Mr. Tesler's friend, lit a
candle for him at the vigil and spoke about the fragility of life.  "He was
snuffed out. It's sad, so sad," she said.

Candles were also lit for Edward Farrell, whose tearful teen-age daughter said
she hopes no other little girls will have to grow up without fathers.

The driver who killed Mr. Farrell had been arrested previously for drunken
driving. The woman was sentenced to 16 months in jail and five years' probation,
Mrs. Farrell said. "I would like much stricter enforcement. I would like to see
them serve a lot more time," she added. "They should do community service in an
emergency room and see the effects of drunk driving. I would like them to feel
some of the pain we feel."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lighting candles and trying to change the law.; Pictures of
accident victims at a candelight vigil in Gales Ferry organized by MADD.
(Photographs by Thomas McDonald for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Peter D'Amato
at a vigil in Gales Ferry sponsored by Mothers Against Drunk Driving. (Thomas
McDonald for The New York Times) (pg. 12)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations / Telford Taylor;
The Laws of War Are Many, but Self-Interest Is the Only Enforcer

BYLINE: By MARC D. CHARNEY

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words


AT Nuremberg in 1945, a young American Army officer named Telford Taylor helped
write the rules for prosecuting Goering and other top Nazis. He went on to
become chief prosecutor of their henchmen, and an authority on the laws of war.
Today he looks at Bosnia and warns: Don't expect any avenging angel in any
courtroom to punish the war crimes of the Balkans. If you want to do some good
there, work for a truce that will stop the killing.

What the United Nations can do in Bosnia simply is not the same as what the
Allies could do at Nuremberg, he maintains. If anyone is tempted to hope
otherwise, he implores that one thing be understood first: "The laws of war are
going to be used only by those who think it will do them good."

Self-evident? Perhaps. But unappreciated.

"So many people at the beginning of all this came running to me and to others
saying, 'Look, can't we find something in the laws of war -- can't we fix things
from that?' And I said: Obviously not, because the situation is so wholly
different. I've been saying that we were on the wrong side of the river in
Bosnia, by which I meant that as things were, there was no way that we could do
anything to the people that seemed to be the most ferocious."

World War II ended in total victory, Professor Taylor said: "The Germans had
nothing left. There was no government of any kind.

"All of the papers and things that one would need to find out what the Germans
had been doing all this time, they were right there," he added. "And therefore,
please don't come back to this and tell us what to do in Bosnia. Unless we want
to start a great big war, we can't do it."

Professor Taylor, now 86, only recently stopped teaching law at Columbia. Having
applied and taught the laws of war, he still argues passionately that these
principles save lives. But he is a realist about war and power. And on a crisp
fall day, when a visitor comes to his living room overlooking upper Manhattan,
he is happy to spell out how he believes the laws of war fit into the world's
increasingly brutal small conflicts.

Bosnia has been in flames for two years; the United Nations has set up a
tribunal to look into accusations of crimes, primarily by Serbs, that include
the use of rape as a terror tactic to evict civilian populations. The professor
settles into a seat and in slow, folksy language picks through a trove of
anecdotes to tell what the laws of war are, and aren't. Sometimes the words come
slowly, but age has not blurred the care with which anecdote is fitted to logic.




There Are Rules

The laws of war, he explains, are understandings evolved over centuries, written
down only after most nations found them advantageous. They include the
principles that prisoners should not be shot, that soldiers cannot rape and
pillage, and that starting a war of aggression is a crime.

Take the rule that prisoners of war should be kept alive. Even Hitler, when he
chose, followed that. "For at least 200 years, that view had been getting
stronger and stronger and stronger. And long before the middle of the 19th
century, when we finally put it down on paper, almost everybody had agreed on
this. Yes, it was nice to get it all written down, but what was written down was
mostly what had already come into being."

During World War II, he said, "lots of Americans had been taken by the Germans,
and when the war was over all of them came back to where they belonged, to their
own houses. However, if you look at this, we're talking about Germans with
Americans, British, French, Italians. But what's going on in the East? Just the
reverse.

"For about a year and a half, approximately 2 million, maybe more, Russians had
been captured by the Germans. All these who have been captured were set out,
right in the field, so they couldn't get away. They got no food, they got no
heat, they got no help if they were sick, as they were, and the whole purpose
was to kill 'em. Just put 'em there and let them die. And they did."

"The lesson in that is that the laws of war have to be managed by the views of
the people who have power, as to whether these laws will be followed or not.

"You see," he said, "what we have is that the laws of war unfortunately do not
have any police, any judges; all that there is, is that a bunch of men have
gotten together and said, 'That's the way it ought to be all the way around the
world.' But nothing is given that says: 'Look, if you do that, somebody is going
to hit you in the head.' "

Yes, terrible crimes have been committed in Bosnia, he said. But don't expect
anyone to arrest the criminals. Professor Taylor recently discussed this with
Richard Goldstone, head of the United Nations tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia, wondering whether it would be wise to convict people in their
absence. Although a few Serbs suspected of war crimes are in custody in the
West, most will never be brought to justice.




Warring Concepts

"My own view is that I don't like the idea of saying that people are guilty when
you haven't had a trial," Professor Taylor said. "But we can set forth to the
world . . . the evidence which is available -- formal accusations."

Behind this warning against expecting too much from international tribunals is a
respect for two concepts: first, the power of armies to commit crimes and of
governments to protect their soldiers and second, the interest that countries
nevertheless have in following the laws of war.

Professor Taylor also argued that there are times when it is clearly wise not to
enforce the laws of war, such as when the Soviet Union marched into Afghanistan.
"Quite plain that this was a terrible breach of the laws of war," he said. "But
there was nothing to do. Obviously, at that point, for us to make war against
the Russians because the Russians had gone there would get the whole world all
tied up in wars."

In practice, Professor Taylor said, truces almost always leave it up to
individual nations to punish their own war criminals. This is hardly comforting,
considering the record, and he cites three cases: an American general whose
troops slaughtered civilians while putting down a Philippine rebellion at the
turn of the century (he was brought back home); two U-boat officers convicted by
German courts of shooting survivors of an attack in World War I (they were
sentenced to four years each but disappeared from prison after three months),
and Lieut. William Calley, who was given a life sentence in the My Lai massacre
in Vietnam, but was allowed to stay in house arrest during most of his appeals.
His sentence was progressively reduced and he was ultimately paroled.

"All of them get out," Professor Taylor noted acidly. "And that's the fact."

If that is so, are efforts to construct an international law of war futile? Not
at all, Professor Taylor argued, citing the prisoners of war who survived. "The
laws of war are for the benefit of keeping people alive," he said. "The actual
results of keeping these laws results in more people following them and fewer
people getting killed. These laws are in people's minds and they worked."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Telford Taylor, in his apartment, is blunt about justice's
limits. (Chester Higgins, Jr./The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ideas & Trends;
In Bosnia, the War That Can't Be Seen

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: ZAGREB, Croatia


THE Bosnian war is increasingly invisible. Its most recent crises, at Bihac in
western Bosnia and Gorazde in the east, have had enormous repercussions around
the world, but the two small towns themselves have remained lost in the fog of
second-hand reporting. Western journalists, almost without exception, have been
unable to get there.

The result is troubling, and the reports sometimes baffling. Serbian forces
advance and advance and advance across towns you can drive through in five
minutes. Villages are taken, then retaken by the same army a few days later.
Casualty figures swing wildly, reported by local witnesses who may be hunkered
down in their basements or distant from the scene.

The precise locality of photographs is often vague. Television crews plead for
"bang-bang pictures" from commanders not above a touch of stage management.

The bizarre situation thus created in Bosnia is that journalists' access to
information stands in inverse proportion to the volume of sophisticated gear
they carry around to communicate what they know. The very possibility of
instantaneous and worldwide transmission, it seems, has made the facts that much
more politically explosive and so that much more necessary to conceal.




The Usual Reasons

Of course, there have been attempts to limit or censor reporting in most wars.
The Pentagon set strict standards for the gulf war that provoked the ire of many
editors. But concern over divulging military information has usually been the
main consideration behind the constraints.

In Bosnia, where attempts to manage and manipulate the press are now accorded as
much importance by Muslims and Serbs as maneuvers on the battlefield, the
concern is much wider: that any graphic image or report could shift public
opinion and so public policy. Thus does information become suspect and the
journalist dangerous.

It took a while to learn this in Bosnia. The war was chaotic in the early months
and more treacherous. But there were few restrictions. In August, 1992, I
crossed the Bosnian border from Serbia in a bus full of Serbian volunteers armed
to the teeth, and I followed them to the hills overlooking Sarajevo: telling
images -- too telling for today's bureaucratic and intensely media-conscious
managers of the war in the Serbian stronghold of Pale and in Sarajevo.

The responsibility for the war's increasing disappearance from view lies with
both sides, but particularly the Serbs, and with the United Nations, for its
apparent complicity in this exercise.

Acutely aware that a strong press report can affect U.N. sanctions or NATO's
role, the Serbs have taken to sealing off areas under their control. The United
Nations has allowed them to do so. The Muslim-led Bosnian Government has also
become more restrictive, limiting access to advances in central Bosnia, perhaps
out of concern that its image as victim could be affected.

When was a reporter last in Srebrenica, the seething and Serbian-encircled
Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia? Or in Gorazde? When another shell hits the
Bihac hospital, what does that really look like? As for Zepa, another eastern
enclave, no western reporter has managed to get there since it was surrounded by
the Serbs.

At the end of the Gorazde crisis last April, Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose took
to berating the Sarajevo press for inflating Muslim casualties and so, he
claimed, almost precipitating World War III. Why, then, I asked him, would he
not put a handful of reporters into one of the U.N. helicopters then going to
the town? Oh no, he replied, that would irritate the Serbs and cut off U.N.
access to Gorazde. When I suggested he was kowtowing to the Serbs, he got angry.

But that, in essence, is the United Nations' policy toward the press. There is
scant evidence that General Rose, or anybody else, has pressed the Serbs to
allow journalists into Muslim enclaves, and on no occasion has the United
Nations taken the initiative in deciding that information was more important
than the Serbs' objections.

Announcing last week that journalists would henceforth be allowed on United
Nations flights in Bosnia, Kofi A. Annan, the United Nations under-secretary for
peace operations, said: "Peacekeeing operations in particular depend for their
support on widespread public awareness of the conflicts, and we are committed to
doing everything we can to facilitate the work of the media." Up to now,
however, this has not been the case.




In the Line of Duty

Of course, it is not the United Nations' business to do journalists' work for
them. It is always possible to try to circumvent restrictions, by walking over a
mountain and across a front line, for example. But in this conflict, where such
courage has not generally been lacking, 46 journalists have been killed -- far
more than in Vietnam.

Journalists have been directly targeted, particularly by the Serbs, who think
they are biased against them. Last month, Luc Delahaye of the Magnum photo
agency and a colleague were picked up by the Serbs just north of the Bihac
pocket. They were held for two days, kicked, punched, doused in cold water in
freezing rooms, threatened with death, made to lean against walls with their
entire body weight on their heads until they collapsed, kicked again and
repeatedly interrogated. "Every time I would deny that I was a spy for the
Muslims and say I worked for Magnum, I braced myself for the next blow," Mr.
Delahaye said. "You say the word -- Magnum -- and you know what it will
trigger."

For "Magnum," the word "journalist" could easily be substituted. The Muslim-led
government and the Serbs, not used to any open flow of information after five
decades of Communist rule, have come increasingly to see international reporters
as either tools or enemies.

It is not just in Bosnia that information is under attack. In another bitter
conflict, in Algeria, 24 journalists have been killed in the last two years. The
most recent, Said Mekbel, the editor of Le Matin of Algiers, was assassinated by
Islamic fundamentalists on December 3. In his last, prophetic article, he wrote:

"This thief who, at night, hugs the walls as he walks home, is him. This father
who recommends to his children never to mention his profession is him. This
vagabond who does not know where to spend the night is him. This man who swears
he will not die with his throat cut is him. He is all these things, and he is
only a journalist."

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Reports from Bosnia have been murky because reporters cannot get
to the war. In Bihac, Serb soldiers observe Muslim positions. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Russia's Army Seen as Failing Chechnya Test

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;    Page 1;    Column 1;    Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1598 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 24


Demoralized and underpaid, the Russian Army is facing in the rebellious Chechnya
region its stiffest test of professionalism and morale since the collapse of the
Soviet Union, and it is failing the test, Western diplomats and Russian military
analysts say.

Its officers are rebelling in the face of an increasingly vicious war against
other Russians. Its soldiers are dispirited and disorganized, badly fed and
cold, without any clear idea of why they should be fighting the Chechens.

The army's heavy armor has little strategic value in Chechnya, its movements
have been sluggish against little resistance, and its jets are almost
haphazardly bombing a city defended by only a few thousand poorly equipped
troops.

One result is a public relations fiasco so bad that even President Boris N.
Yeltsin's supporters in the West, who have regarded Chechnya from the start as
an internal affair, have started to complain. The sense of confusion about
Moscow's methods is shared by Russians, too.

"It's hard to call this a strategy," said Sergei Yushenkov, the chairman of
Parliament's Defense Committee. "It is the barbaric destruction of the city of
Grozny and its inhabitants."

Military officials keep saying the army has a plan to use laser-guided bombs and
special forces to infiltrate Grozny, the Chechens' capital, and "decapitate" its
leadership, including President Dzhokhar M. Dudayev.

There is already a growing and abiding new hatred for Russian power in the North
Caucasus, which hoped that the post-Soviet world would be a different one. There
is already, in the Russian press, criticism of the military and its leadership
that is reminiscent of the American news media toward the end of the Vietnam
War. And there is already, in the new Russian military, a sense of shame over
Chechnya that will probably further poison attitudes toward Mr. Yeltsin,
democratic and economic change, and all politicians generally.

No matter what happens in Chechnya now, whether Grozny is taken tonight or
tomorrow or not taken at all, the Russian Army will face a severe period of
rebuilding not unlike the United States Army's after the professional
humiliation of Vietnam.

Then, American officers said, it was difficult to attract young people of
sufficient quality, let alone feel much pride in a military career. The American
military responded with much better recruitment and advertising techniques, and
most important, with higher pay and better benefits.

But if there is one persistent fact of Russian political life today, it is the
scarcity of money for any social need in a tight federal budget, and Defense
Minister Pavel S. Grachev has already warned of the political consequences of
continuing to starve the army of funds for training, housing and modern
equipment.

Speaking to Parliament last month, General Grachev said an impatient and
impoverished Russian military was losing its ability to defend the Motherland.
Young officers are leaving in large numbers, he said. Pilots are not flying
because of budget cuts in fuel and maintenance, and ships are stuck in port.
Nearly 200,000 officers and their families are without decent housing. Military
units engage in trade and troops work as laborers to supplement their pay.

"We must frankly ask ourselves the question -- do we need an army?" General
Grachev said. "If so, it is a sin to keep it in poverty and half-starved."

"Not a single other army in the world is in such a catastrophic state," he
added. "I ask you to take this as a warning."

The military's performance in Chechnya is a testament to General Grachev's
concerns. Despite his efforts to reorganize the army and give it a new mission
in a post-cold-war world, there has not been the money to develop the mobile
striking units the new military doctrine calls for, and which could have been
effective in Chechnya.

But the rot was evident long before Chechnya. "If anyone still had any doubts,"
said Pavel Y. Felgengauer, the military analyst for the newspaper Sevodnya, "the
war in Chechnya has certainly shown the low levels of military readiness and
morale of the Russian Army."

Draft evasion remains rampant; there are too many generals running nearly empty
units; patriotism is out of fashion; vicious hazing of recruits, especially of
those from the Caucasus, frightens young men and their parents; high-ranking
generals speak with contempt of President Yeltsin and General Grachev.

The vaunted military-industrial complex that supported the army, even if the
quality of the science was overrated, has now largely turned as a matter of
state policy toward making civilian products or selling its hardware overseas
for dollars.

From the height of Soviet power, with five million men and women under arms
(including border troops) and an almost unlimited budget, the Russian Army is
now believed to be a hollow force of only 1.4 million or fewer, and without
enough money to care for them properly.

It is an enormous fall for an institution that embodied the pride of the empire,
first Russian and then Soviet. The officer corps was a pampered elite; the
uniform brought respect; the institution had saved the nation from Napoleon and
Hitler against all odds.

Then came Afghanistan -- which the Soviets invaded 15 years ago today -- and the
first real humiliation; then the revelations of glasnost and a budding free
press; then the collapse of the Soviet Union, a professional disaster for the
army. And then the inevitable and coruscating pull into politics, despite all
the efforts by military leaders to stay out of the maneuvering.

In August 1991 the army refused to carry out the putsch against Mikhail S.
Gorbachev -- its first taste of popularly applauded insubordination. In October
1993 it made a pained and slow decision to support Mr. Yeltsin by firing tank
shells at the old Russian Parliament. Even General Grachev, Defense Minister by
dint of his loyalty to Mr. Yeltsin in 1991, hesitated then, and the country came
within a few hours of being run by Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, a former air force
general who was then Vice President and led the parliamentary revolt.

The army's support of Mr. Yeltsin suddenly seemed conditional on Mr. Yeltsin's
keeping his promises of better support, promises the generals believe that he
has not kept. And that conditional support also helps explain Mr. Yeltsin's more
robust and nationalist foreign policy.

Then General Grachev became further tarnished. He has always been regarded by
the army elite, the General Staff, as a jumped-up paratrooper who earned his
position by political loyalty. Suddenly this autumn came a whole new cycle of
corruption charges that nearly brought him down.

Sharp and shocking criticism came from inside the army, including criticism from
young Turks like the popular Lieut. Gen. Aleksandr I. Lebed, commander of the
14th Army in Moldova. General Lebed, always outspoken, turned his popularity
into a successful public defiance of General Grachev, refusing to be reassigned
and appealing directly to Mr. Yeltsin. General Lebed also spoke contemptuously
of Gen. Matvei P. Burlakov, who had commanded Russian troops in Germany and was
accused of corruption.

Mr. Yeltsin was forced to dismiss General Burlakov last month "to preserve the
honor of the army," he said, and General Grachev's position was felt to be
hanging by a thread.

But the traditional respect for the army was gone, both in the press and the
public, and a pattern of insubordination had taken hold. When Chechnya began to
get hot, General Lebed opposed intervention publicly, as he continues to do
without reprisal. Even Gen. Boris Gromov, a First Deputy Defense Minister,
warned against the military action.

And during the slow, clanking advance toward Grozny itself, and now the
round-the-clock bombing, generals and lesser officers have refused orders,
expressed dissent and tried to resign. They have said that carrying out warfare
against Russian citizens violates the Russian Constitution, and resent carrying
out a police action on Russian territory.

The semi-official Itar-Tass news agency first reported that General Grachev had
taken personal control of the attack and suspended or relieved six top
commanders, including a Deputy Defense Minister, Gen. Georgi Kondratyev, who
kept warning Moscow to negotiate and not attack, and Col. Gen. Eduard Vorobyov,
the deputy commander of all land forces, the backbone of the army.

The report of the suspensions was then denied, but not the report that General
Grachev was now in direct command, implying that the General Staff is belatedly
trying to keep its distance from the disaster.

Some Russian critics of the Chechnya action think that attacking Chechnya was
forced upon General Grachev as the price of keeping his job, so there would be a
ready scapegoat. Some think that the army is using its poor performance now to
be able to put pressure on Mr. Yeltsin for more support and more money.  Some
think that Chechnya means an army even more politicized then before.

"After a long sequence of defeats and humiliations, beginning in Afghanistan,"
Mr. Felgengauer said, "the Russian Army has reached a point where it might
simply refuse to obey orders."

But the biggest problem for the institution was described by General Vorobyov,
the most senior of the dissenting officers, confirming that he had tried to
resign but that his resignation had been refused.

"I love the army very much," he told Izvestia in an interview. "I gave it 38
years of my life. And I don't want even the smallest stain on its uniform."


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Many States Adopt an Easy Way to Raise Money for Charities

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section 1;    Page 26;    Column 1;    National Desk

LENGTH: 1101 words


For many Americans, charity begins at home and ends up going through the
personal-income-tax offices of 41 states and the District of Columbia.

Checkoff boxes that let taxpayers convert part of their tax refunds into
donations to good causes have proliferated on the front pages of state tax forms
to such a degree that in some states, tax calculations are pushed inside the
return to make room for them.

Alabama and California taxpayers have eight checkoff boxes. Virginia and Rhode
Island have seven each.

Typically, the donations go to state committees authorized to distribute grants
to individuals, institutions and organizations doing work in a field related to
the cause represented by the checkoff box.

The most popular checkoff, found in all but a few of the 41 states and the only
one in the state of New York, is protecting wildlife. Contributions to state
political campaign funds are available in 21 states. Nineteen states help to
raise funds to prevent child abuse. Six will channel funds to Olympic
committees.

The checkoffs are viewed as a painless way to help environmental, medical and
social programs at a time of state budget crunches.

The money harvested by checkoff boxes pales alongside the $64.3 billion in
charitable donations listed last year by those who filed itemized deductions on
their Federal income tax returns. (The total for all philanthropy in the United
States is estimated at $126 billion annually.)

But the big difference for the groups benefiting from the checkoff funds is
this: They do not have to spend money to raise money.

"It's almost like money falling from heaven," said Kelly Watts, executive
director of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial project in Holmdel, N.J., a public
subscription fund that has raised nearly a half-million dollars through a
checkoff box on New Jersey returns. "These are people we might not otherwise
find for contributions."

A checkoff box to help finance Presidential campaigns has been on Federal tax
returns since 1972, and Colorado became the first state to have a checkoff box
for something other than political campaign contributions in 1977 -- for the
protection of wildlife.

The concept was widely adopted by other states. Most offered people who are owed
refunds a chance to donate $1 to $10 of their refunds to the listed causes via
checkoff boxes.  Several states have expanded the checkoffs to all taxpayers, so
those people who are not getting refunds can send in extra money with their tax
payments as donations.

In 1983, there were 67 funds in 33 states. By 1992, the Federation of Tax
Administrators, a Washington-based group of state tax collectors, was able to
identify 144 checkoff funds that raised $27.8 million.

Michigan, with three checkoff boxes, pulled in the most of any state, $2.9
million, followed by $2.7 million in Minnesota, with two boxes and $2.7 million
in California with seven.

Even so, the survey showed that in most states, fewer than 1 in 50 tax returns
came back with a marked checkoff box.

Arkansas, with five boxes, attracted only $33,000, among the lowest state
totals, although the average amount contributed by those who marked the box to
protect wildlife, $10.23, was among the highest in the nation.

Causes rise and fall in popularity, sometimes losing their luster between the
time legislation adding a checkoff box is passed and the next year's tax forms
are printed.

In Colorado, for instance, veterans groups in 1991 thought it was a good idea to
have a box to raise a bonus for Persian Gulf war veterans in the state. But it
was well into 1992, more than a year after the war's end, before taxpayers saw
the new forms. Altogether, the 7,664 veterans eligible for the bonus each
received an average of $12.65 from the $97,026 contributed.

Some states have provisions to purge a checkoff box if a cause fails to attract
a set proportion of taxpayers. Other checkoffs, like the Colorado veterans
provisions, are on returns for a set number of years and are then automatically
removed. But many checkoffs hang on whether or not they get much support.

Mainstream causes on the checkoffs find that their share drops as new boxes
compete for attention at tax-filing time. It happened in New Jersey.

State income-tax forms for 1991 had only two checkoff boxes, for wildlife and
the children's trust. Some 139,000 tax returns, of a 3.5 million total, came
back to Trenton with each fund receiving about $450,000.

In 1992, a third box appeared, seeking contributions to help build a Vietnam
veterans memorial in the state. Ten thousand more people contributed and they
gave a total of $100,000 more in donations. But the two older funds together
received less money than they had in the year before while the fund for the
memorial took in $260,000.

Things worsened with the 1993 tax returns, which gave $320,000 to the children's
fund and $338,000 to wildlife, while the memorial took in another $191,000.

The $3.8 million memorial, to honor the 1,461 New Jerseyans killed or reported
as missing in Vietnam, was also supported by by veterans groups and grass-roots
organizations. It is scheduled to be dedicated next spring. The checkoff box,
originally limited to two years, has just been extended by the Legislature for
another five to raise money for an educational center at the memorial.

"That's good news for the veterans but not great news for us," said Donna
Pincavage, executive director of the children's fund, who said she had
anticipated the fund would bounce back to the 1991 level of support once the
memorial's checkoff ended its two-year run.

Meanwhile, the Assembly passed a bill in October to place a checkoff box for a
breast cancer research fund on future tax returns. The measure is awaiting
Senate action.

"This checkoff box can be a place of hope and I believe it will bring in a
minimum of a half million dollars the first year," predicted Assemblywoman Rose
Heck, Republican of Bergen County.

James Bausch, president of National Charities Information Bureau in New York
City, which reports on nonprofit organizations that solicit funds from the
public, said the proliferation of checkoff boxes seemed to be a positive trend.

"I do worry about how decisions are made to divvy up the pie after the money is
collected," he said. "I don't see lists of who actually gets the funds, what
committees distribute them and what good works my donation produces."

He said it would be helpful, if unwieldy, to list alongside checkoff boxes the
names of individuals or organizations who benefited from donations the previous
tax year.


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "FOR EXAMPLE: Checking the Tax Checkoffs" shows two examples of
the checkoff boxes that have proliferated on state income tax forms in recent
years.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 25, 1994, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dec. 18-24: Congressional Ethics;
A $4 Million Book Deal Makes Gingrich a Target

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


Newt Gingrich, the Georgia Republican, Democratic nemesis and next House
Speaker, signed a $4 million-plus contract last week to produce two books on
conservatism. Democrats were utterly aghast, but it was hard to tell whether
they were shocked, jealous, playing hardball politics -- or all three.

The question is whether the deal passes the ethical smell test. The contract is
easily the largest ever for a sitting Federal politician; the White House said
that alone makes it suspect. And Mr. Gingrich's publisher, HarperCollins, is
owned by Rupert Murdoch, the right-leaning media potentate whose Fox television
network is embroiled in a nasty Federal regulatory battle. Republicans in
Congress already side with Mr. Murdoch in that fight, a fact that led a
Democratic Representative, David Bonior of Michigan, to brand the Gingrich deal
a "Christmas gift" from "the most notorious foreign news corporation in the
world." In other words, close to a bribe.

But Mr. Bonior, who once decried Mr. Gingrich's talent for political "character
assassination," offered only insinuation. Mr. Murdoch furiously denied
impropriety, and Mr. Gingrich noted that the contract meets House rules for book
deals.

One ethicist, Michael Jacobsen, said Mr. Gingrich's contract, as described,
seems to pass muster. The bigger question is whether any elected official should
parlay power into profit, whether it be Mr. Gingrich's bonanza or Mr. Bonior's
$500 or so from an old, little-read book on Vietnam.   MICHAEL WINES

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 1994, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gephardt's Star Rises in '96 Scenarios

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 15;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25


In the latest manifestation of unease among Democrats, some are quietly talking
up the Presidential prospects of a man who lost his party's nomination in 1988
and is about to become the leader of the most discredited group of politicians
in town these days: House Democrats.

He is Richard A. Gephardt, a Congressman from St. Louis who was elected by his
colleagues to be the House minority leader in the next Congress.

While no prominent Democrat is publicly making the case for Mr. Gephardt, he is
the subject of a behind-the-scenes chatter on Capitol Hill among Democrats who
fear that President Clinton's popularity will not rebound and believe that Mr.
Gephardt would be a logical alternative should the President decide not to seek
re-election -- whether by his own choice or because he is forced into early
retirement.

This is the thinking of the Gephardt partisans: Having run for President, Mr.
Gephardt is far better known and will get more attention than Thomas A. Daschle
of South Dakota, who will be the Senate minority leader next month.

Moreover, they say, Mr. Gephardt will become only more visible as the foil to
the new House Speaker, Representative Newt Gingrich, Republican of Georgia. And
Mr. Gephardt has long been popular among working-class Democrats, a constituency
that Mr. Clinton seems to have lost.

While some Democrats suggest that Vice President Al Gore would be the likely
alternative should the President falter, others, like Representative Thomas J.
Manton, a Queens Democrat, are not so sure. "I don't know if some of the
animosity toward Clinton has rubbed off on him," Mr. Manton said of Mr. Gore.

But Mr. Manton, like most of Mr. Gephardt's allies, said he fully expected Mr.
Clinton to get his party's nomination in 1996.

Mr. Gephardt, who was among a handful of Democrats who considered a Presidential
run in 1992 when Mr. Clinton's campaign seemed to be coming apart, also
dismissed the scenarios.

"All of this rumoring is just part of politics," he said in an interview on
Friday. "People always discuss things in terms of what exists today will exist a
year and a half from now. I don't buy it. I think Clinton can win the Presidency
again in 1996."

But more than anyone else, Mr. Gephardt invited the speculation when he upstaged
Mr. Clinton by announcing his own proposal for a middle-class tax cut just two
days before the President went on national television with his own announcement.
Suddenly, Mr. Gephardt was viewed as the Democrat who is the biggest threat to
Mr. Clinton, supplanting Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, an unsuccessful
contender for his party's nomination in 1992.

One prominent Democrat who is advancing Mr. Gephardt's case, speaking on the
condition of anonymity, put it this way: "If there's a Whitewater legal problem
and an opening for the nomination, you'll probably see a Kerrey-Gore-Gephardt
scenario in which I think Gephardt's a favorite. He's run before and he's got a
constituency and a fund-raising base separate from the Administration."

In the interview, Mr. Gephardt insisted that he had cleared his speech on tax
cuts with the President. But some Administration officials were clearly miffed,
particularly when Mr. Gephardt advocated an agenda that "will come from
America's houses, not the White House."

While one White House official said that he had known about the speech in
advance, he added, "That doesn't excuse lines in the speech."

Another Democrat close to the White House said of Mr. Gephardt: "I'm suspicious
about what he's up to. You get out in front of the President by 48 hours with a
tax cut proposal -- and that raises some question about what his short-term and
long-term motives are."

But to the less suspicious, there is also a logical explanation for the strategy
of Mr. Gephardt, who was first elected to Congress in 1976, the same year voters
sent Jimmy Carter to the White House: that he and other House Democrats want to
work with Mr. Clinton but not be viewed as being in his pocket.

"I wouldn't assign any Machiavellian thoughts," said Representative Ronald D.
Coleman, a Texas Democrat close to Mr. Gephardt. "We in the Congress have our
view of the kind of tax cut that can work."

Acknowledging the whispers about Mr. Gephardt's taking on the President, Brian
Lunde, a former executive director of the Democratic Party, said: "I don't want
to be seen as fanning the flames, but we have a tendency to turn on our own
Presidents and eat them alive. And there's this undercurrent of concern about
the President."

Still, for all the reasons that Mr. Gephardt could be an obvious alternative to
Mr. Clinton, there are as many reasons why he would not be. One is that Mr.
Gephardt, 53, represents the very group that so many voters resoundly rejected
in November: House Democrats.

And many former Gephardt aides have gone to work at the White House, including
George Stephanopoulos, a senior adviser to the President, so the Congressman
cannot turn to them for support. Another Gephardt loyalist, Terry McAuliffe, has
become finance director of the Democratic National Committee and is expected to
play that role in a Clinton re-election campaign.

In the view of many Gephardt supporters, the best thing that he could do for
Democrats, and for his own career, is to help his party regain control of the
House in 1996.

Meanwhile, the quiet talk about a Gephardt candidacy in 1996 persists. Some
Democrats said that while Mr. Gephardt was not nervy enough to take on a sitting
President directly, he might be positioning himself just in case Mr. Clinton
bows out.

"Gephardt will not be the first person to challenge the President in 1996;
that's just a given," Mr. Lunde said. "But there is this theory out there that
Gephardt or Kerrey may be the second challenger to the President. They will get
themselves in the Robert F. Kennedy position. It wasn't McCarthy who benefited
from challenging President Johnson; it was Kennedy."

In the 1968 Democratic primary in New Hampshire, Eugene J. McCarthy, an ardent
opponent of the Vietnam War, surprised President Lyndon B. Johnson by winning 42
percent of the vote; four days later, on March 16, Robert F. Kennedy announced
that he was running for the nomination. After Mr. Kennedy was assassinated in
California three months later, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey went on to win
the Democratic nomination -- and then lost the election to Richard M. Nixon.

The challenge for Mr. Clinton may be whether he and his advisers can trust Mr.
Gephardt enough, and are confident enough, to work closely with him.

"Nothing could be more self-defeating than for the Clinton Administration to
begin looking at other formidable Democrats as adversaries," said Representative
Robert G. Torricelli, a New Jersey Democrat who is a strong Gephardt ally. "This
is a real test for the White House in whether they reach out and include the
Gephardt operation in planning their Presidential operation."

As aggressively as Mr. Gephardt dismisses the talk of a President Gephardt,
there is little doubt that he still has designs on the White House.

Asked if he was more qualified to be President now than in 1988, he most
assuredly said yes. "Obviously," he said, "I have learned a lot about issues and
Congress in the five or six years since 1988. I hope it qualifies me to be a
better minority leader."

And to be President? "I figured out a long time ago," he replied, "you can deal
with one thing at a time."

NAME: Richard A. Gephardt

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Japan to Negotiate On Automotive Trade Today

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section D;    Page 1;    Column 1;    Financial Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


American and Japanese negotiators are to meet today in London for hastily
arranged discussions on various trade issues between the two countries,
including automobiles, auto parts and activity in emerging markets.

Jeffrey E. Garten, Under Secretary of Commerce for International Trade, said
yesterday as he was departing for London that the meeting had been requested by
Japanese officials.

The talks were announced yesterday by senior Japanese trade officials at a news
conference in Tokyo. Hideaki Kumano, Japan's vice minister for international
trade and industry, said the two sides had "suddenly agreed to have a meeting on
various trade issues, including autos and auto parts."

Mr. Kumano said the talks would also cover trade in emerging markets like India,
China and Vietnam, and trade with South Africa. Japan will be represented by
Sozaburo Okamatsu, vice minister for international trade affairs.

While there has been some recent progress in the talks between the two
countries, American negotiators have expressed frustration about the failure by
Japan to further open its huge market in automobiles and automotive parts.
President Clinton initiated proceedings against Tokyo in the fall that could
lead to punitive tariffs on some Japanese auto exports to the United States.

In Tokyo early today, Japanese and American officials said that they did not
expect substantive discussion on the issues involved in auto trade itself, only
on the ground rules for future talks.

But even setting such ground rules could be difficult. At a meeting with the
United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, in Indonesia last month,
Japan's Minister of International Trade and Industry, Ryutaro Hashimoto, set
down three principles under which Japan would resume negotiations. These
included that no numerical targets be set and that the discussions be limited to
areas within the Japanese Government's scope and not those it deems matters for
private industry.

If the United States accepted such principles, it could mean giving up talks
aimed at getting Japanese auto dealers to carry more foreign cars or getting
Japanese auto manufacturers to buy more foreign parts, two of Washington's key
objetives.

Talks between the two countries on finding ways for Americans to sell more cars
and parts in Japan have been stalled since September, leading to the President's
consideration of sanctions against Japan.

At the meeting in Indonesia in November, held during the Asia-Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum, American and Japanese officials discussed resuming the talks.

Officials of both countries said they had been trying to arrange a meeting
between Mr. Garten and Mr. Okamatsu since last month.

One Japanese official said the two Governments wanted to meet in a place that
would be away from most American and Japanese journalists.

The timing of the meeting could also be related to the fact that Tuesday is to
be Mr. Okamatsu's last day in his job as the top trade-related official at the
ministry.

Both Mr. Okamatsu and Mr. Kumano will retire tomorrow. Mr. Kumano, in
particular, is said to be resigning to take responsibility for an internal
political matter at his ministry.

Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama is scheduled to visit Washington in two weeks,
and that might also motivate Japanese officials to want to report progress in
trade negotiations.

The American trade deficit with Japan rose to a new peak of $6.7 billion in
October, according to figures released this month by the Commerce Department.
Cars and car parts account for about two-thirds of that, with the annual trade
imbalance running at roughly $60 billion.

On Dec. 12, the Clinton Administration said it had finally reached an agreement
with Tokyo to assure American companies access to Japan's $4.5 billion-a-year
market for flat glass. There, the Japanese market has long been dominated by a
cartel of three companies.

Administration officials portrayed the agreement as an important precedent
because the Japanese Government agreed to take steps against a keiretsu, the
close grouping of companies that hold one another's stock and buy one another's
products.

However, American trade negotiators have recently begun to shift their emphasis
from Japan to other countries in Asia and Latin America, where the growth in
American exports is expected to rise sharply in the next decade.

Along with the increased exports, the political opportunities may be better
elsewhere. The chance of a major breakthrough in trade talks with Japan is
viewed as slim. And Mr. Clinton's advisers have said that they believe
concentrating on other countries could yield an increase in exports and jobs in
time for the 1996 Presidential election.

                             --------------------


Japan Car Exports Up

TOKYO, Dec. 26 (Reuters) -- The Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association said
today that vehicle exports in November rose 10.7 percent from those of a year
earlier, helped by a particularly strong showing in Europe. Earlier this month,
the association forecast that Japan's overall vehicle exports would be 4.49
million units in 1994, down 10.6 percent from a year earlier. So far this year,
vehicle exports in the 11 months through November have totaled 4,099,574 units,
the association said.

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


Companies

ITT agreed to sell its commercial finance unit for $4 billion in cash to the
American subsidiary of Deutsche Bank. The deal reflects the continuing
transformation of ITT, a onetime sprawling conglomerate that has been selling
units in an effort to emphasize its growing entertainment and gambling business.
[Page D1.]

Pepsico sees Chile as a crucial test of the company's ability to expand in South
America. While its Pizza Hut and Taco Bell fast-food chains have done well in
Chile, Pepsico is attempting a turnaround with its KFC chain. [D8.]

Fourteen insurance companies have been sued by the Archdiocese of Milwaukee for
refusing to make payments to people seeking damages from the Roman Catholic
Church because they were victims of sexual misconduct by priests. [A10.]

Signature Products plans to market two types of bullets that escape a Federal
ban on fragmenting rounds because they are made of carbon-based plastics, rather
than metal. [A10.]

International

When it devalued the peso, Mexico may have devalued investor confidence even
more. The country depends on foreign investment, particularly from the United
States, to finance much of its economic activity, and the crisis has led many
foreign investors to become suspicious of the Government's economic policies.
[D1.]

Hastily arranged trade talks between the United States and Japan are to start in
London today. The talks will deal with opening Japanese markets to American
automobiles and auto parts, trade in emerging markets and other trade issues.
[D1.]

OPEC's grasp on world oil prices is slipping as production from countries
outside the oil cartel increases. In the North Sea, the North Slope of Alaska
and in China, Russia and Vietnam, new exploration and technology and improved
corporate efficiency are helping the industry revive non-OPEC production. [D1.]

A deal with the Ukrainian Government to convert weapons for civilian uses has
been bogged down by bureaucracy. The deal by Alliant Techsystems, a large
American arms maker, illustrates the difficulties in doing business in the
former Soviet Union. [D1.]

The Economy

The Clinton Administration is turning to privatization, proposing to make some
agencies Government-chartered corporations. But Government experience in
imposing market forms on bureaucratic operations is mixed. For every economic
success like Fannie Mae, there is a service like Amtrak that loses money. [A1.]

The holiday shopping season is not over yet, to which throngs of shoppers across
the nation, from inner-city sidewalk marts to hermetic suburban malls, could
attest yesterday. [A1.]

Sales of personal computers surged this holiday season, up 33 to 35 percent from
a year ago, a market research company said. Multimedia computers were among the
big sales gainers. [D5.]

The Wall Street area is no longer the home of financial might it once was. Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani wants to revive the area and has proposed reducing taxes and
changing zoning rules. But the district's ebbing fortunes may reflect deeper
problems: poor public transportation to the suburbs and obsolete buildings that
discourage renovation for either housing or offices. [B1.]

Today's Columns

Best Buy has grown quickly, but its stock price has slumped since the company
said earlier this month that earnings would be below Wall Street expectations.
Some analysts suggest that Best Buy could have more disappointing news in its
current quarter, largely because the consumer electronics chain has about $100
million more in inventory than expected. Market Place. [D6.]

A stock exchange is not an easy thing to sell. But the American Stock Exchange,
the smallest of the three big national exchanges, is aggressively trying to make
its case in a series of bold print advertisements using conceptual art.
Advertising. [D8.]

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OPEC Rivals Curb Cartel's Impact

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON,     Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D;    Page 1;    Column 3;    Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1472 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Dec. 26


The oil production of non-OPEC nations, declining since 1988, has begun an
unexpected revival this year that will continue into the next century, tempering
price increases and limiting the world's dependence on the oil cartel.

Already, higher supplies from oilfields beyond OPEC's domain have helped to keep
prices low despite booming demand and OPEC production quotas.

New technology, improved corporate efficiency and the opening to exploration of
vast foreign tracts, energy experts say, promise to increase non-OPEC production
6.5 percent by 2000.

On Alaska's North Slope, new finds and modern techniques for sucking more from
existing wells have kept oil flowing at rates nearly two-thirds higher than the
state predicted.

In China, Vietnam and Russia, Western exploration and production crews are
swarming to areas that had been long closed to foreign investment.

In the North Sea, fields thought to be entering their dotage after 25 years of
pumping are producing 20 percent more oil than last year, helped by lower
production costs and new discoveries.

For the first time since 1988, output from non-OPEC nations will rise this year,
to about 39.1 million barrels, up 600,000 barrels from last year, according to
Cambridge Energy Research Associates, a leading consulting firm. The
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries itself has recently confirmed this
turnaround and predicted its continuation.

"The non-OPEC production increase," Dr. Subroto, OPEC's former secretary
general, said in a recent speech, "changes the rules of the game."

Though more oil comes from outside the cartel, OPEC's coordination, vast
reserves and spare capacity, especially in Saudi Arabia, have given its member
nations disproportionate influence. By 2007, the cartel expects to be producing
a majority of the world's oil. Still, in the late 1980's, nonmembers rebuffed
OPEC's suggestions to cooperate on pricing.

There are no guarantees that higher production will keep prices stable. In the
United States, new oil tanker insurance standards and reformulated gasoline
mandates might roil the energy markets early next year. More Russian or Middle
Eastern turmoil, or especially rapid growth in global demand, could still create
shortages. In the long run, the largest part of the world's increasing thirst
for oil can only be met by OPEC.

But for next year, the International Energy Agency, which represents
oil-consuming nations, predicts that more than half the world's increased demand
of 1.1 million barrels a day will be met by producers who do not belong to OPEC.

"All this non-OPEC oil is postponing the day when OPEC will be required to fill
the gap," said Robert W. Esser, a Cambridge Energy senior consultant.

The latest supply figures and prices contrast remarkably with the outlook a few
years ago. The consensus of industry executives and analysts in 1990 was that
oil, then $20 a barrel, would go to $30 by 1995. They cited rising worldwide
demand and lagging production.

The demand has materialized, especially among developing nations. But so has new
capacity. Oil prices, which rose above $36 a 42-gallon barrel in 1981, have
recently been less than half that because of increased supplies.

Oil companies have more than accommodated themselves to high production at low
prices. "I don't think there's any question that the industry is learning to do
things, like deepwater drilling, at $17 a barrel and $2 a cubic foot, that
couldn't be done two or three years ago," said H. Laurance Fuller, Amoco's chief
executive, referring to today's low oil and natural gas prices. "When life is
tough you find ways to do things better."

Although most of the technological advances and foreign ventures are known,
their combined impact is only now becoming clear. Even the production declines
in the United States are slowing, because of new sources ranging from the Gulf
of Mexico to the North Slope of Alaska.

New technology is rendering the rig count, long the most trusted guide to the
domestic oil industry's health, less useful. Faster drilling and pinpoint
targeting result in more discoveries and production for each drilling rig.

Twelve years ago, drilling 8,000 feet deep took 17 or 18 days. More durable
drill bits have greatly reduced time spent pulling long strings of tubing to the
surface, so the same depth now takes just five days.

"If we extend this trend,' joked Forrest E. Hoglund, chief executive of Enron
Oil and Gas Company, in a recent speech, "by 1997 we shouldn't need a rig."

Others, however, are truly drilling without rigs. On Alaska's North Slope,
Atlantic Richfield is using motorized drill bits at the end of flexible tubing
to drill sidetracks to existing holes.

Newly developed North Slope fields and new drilling techniques have greatly
slowed the decline in Alaska's flow. In 1988 the state predicted that daily
production would fall from 2 million barrels then to 1 million by now. Current
production: 1.6 million barrels a day.

Fields thought to be played out in other countries, including Venezuela, an OPEC
member distant from the jittery Persian Gulf, are coming back to life with
horizontal drilling and enhanced recovery techniques.

Methods for mapping underground reservoirs have improved the odds of a strike,
promoting new production. What geologists call 3D-seismic technology bounces
sound waves off underground formations, then uses computers to create
three-dimensional pictures. These techniques help give oil companies the
confidence to build billion-dollar platforms in the Gulf of Mexico.

The gulf is the leading site for deep-water production, which has been extended
to 2,860 feet from 1,351 feet in the last six years. Oil companies are laying
plans to bring the same technology to West Africa and South China. Using what
they call directional drilling, they can sink wells miles from a platform, in
much deeper water, without the cost of separate platforms.

Oil companies have also cut costs by reducing staff, making new projects more
economical. Employment in the domestic oil industry has fallen by more than half
in 12 years, from 920,000 to 450,000 today. Amoco's new data processing center
in Tulsa, Okla., will do with 1,000 people next year what 1,800 did last year.

Lower costs and newer discoveries have allowed the North Sea to sharply increase
its daily output by about 900,000 barrels, to 4.7 million, this year. In 1990,
Britain predicted that its share of North Sea production would go from 1.9
million barrels then to 2.1 million now -- far short of the current rate of 2.5
million.

Other countries are giving the oil companies' capital and expertise an
increasingly warm welcome. China, Vietnam, Venezuela and the former Soviet
republics are only some that in recent years have been opened to foreign oil
investment.

The rules governing these investments, often imposed by officials new to
capitalist notions of a fair return, can be murky and changeable. Some oil
companies are already disappointed by their earnings.

Still, an energy conference in Houston earlier this month, sponsored by the
Arthur Andersen accounting and consulting firm, seemed like a global investment
bazaar. Chinese and Vietnamese officials vied with OPEC leaders in appealing for
oil company executives to help plumb their supplies.

In a speech there, even Dr. Subroto, the former OPEC leader, cited the advances
of OPEC rivals while insisting that the West had to invest much more in OPEC
nations to satisfy its future oil demand.

In 1990, Dr. Subroto predicted that world demand for OPEC crude oil would reach
29 million barrels a day by next year. But OPEC is now pumping only about 25
million barrels a day and plans to maintain that level in 1995.

Daily non-OPEC production of crude oil and associated liquids fell from a peak
of more than 41 million barrels in 1988 to 38.5 million barrels last year,
according to Cambridge Energy. Mr. Esser sees the rate returning to about 41
million barrels in 2000, then leveling off. OPEC has recently adopted almost
exactly the same outlook.

Others are more optimistic. John H. Lichtblau, chairman of the Petroleum
Industry Research Foundation, sees output by OPEC rivals continuing to rise
through the year 2005 for a total daily gain of about five million barrels from
this year.

In the United States, the world's largest oil user and importer, increased
technology and efficiency are slowing the declines in output. Since 1985,
production has fallen from 10.6 million barrels a day to an estimated 8.3
million this year. Cambridge Energy predicts 7.5 million barrels a day in 2000.

Mr. Esser's challenge in predicting supplies is estimating how much more
expenses will fall. "Costs are coming down so much that the minute you put a dot
on a graphic," he said, "it could be wrong."

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "A Revival at the Rigs" shows world oil production, including
crude oil and associated liquids from '88-'95 ('94 and '95 are estimated).
(Source: Cambridge Energy Research Associates)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1994, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Even in Her Own Words, A Woman of Convictions

BYLINE: By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1822 words


In the 30 years since Vanessa Redgrave first dazzled Americans as the loopy rich
girl ditching an impossible, hammer-and-sickle obsessed husband in "Morgan!,"
this English actress often seemed to be living at cross-purposes. She would win
raves for her performances, then lose jobs with her support for unpopular
causes. In the late 1980's, she became a shadow in newspapers and magazines by
demanding that reporters wanting to interview her about acting agree not to ask
her about politics, as if there were two Vanessa Redgraves whose passions
remained strangers, perhaps enemies.

But in her recent "Vanessa Redgrave: An Autobiography" (Random House), Ms.
Redgrave says she has come to see her commitments as a river that does not so
much divide as nourish her. "I thought long ago that life was more categorized,
more compartmentalized, and that was wrong," she said in a recent interview that
began over lunch and continued at her dressing room in the Union Square Theater,
where she is appearing with Eileen Atkins in "Vita and Virginia." She speaks
quietly, her head dropped forward as if sculpturing sentences in a private
workshop, auburn hair falling in a half-curtain over her face.

At 57, Ms. Redgrave remains one of this era's more intriguing figures.  Daughter
of the actors Sir Michael Redgrave and Rachel Kempson, sister of Lynn Redgrave
and mother of Natasha and Joely Richardson, she was once hailed as "the greatest
actress of the English-speaking theater" by Tennessee Williams. Others have
praised an originality and raw truth of her performances, whether she is
portraying the hump-backed 17th-century Ursuline nun of smoldering, frustrated
hungers in Ken Russell's film "The Devils," the insecure wife of a Southern
bigot in Tennessee William's "Orpheus Descending" or the celebrated creator of
modern dance, Isadora Duncan, shattered by age and sorrow. Writing in The New
York Times, David Richards described her performance as Vita Sackville-West in
"Vita and Virginia" as a "vivifying force of nature."

As much as she has been praised for her acting, Ms. Redgrave has been scorned
for her radical politics. She has run for Parliament several times on the
Trotskyist Workers' Revolutionary Party, never gathering more than a few hundred
votes on a platform that included nationalization of major industries without
compensation and that warned that a Conservative victory in the 1970's would
lead to dictatorship and concentration camps in England.

But it has been her fervent anti-Zionism that has done the most to keep her off
American stages. In 1977, she sold both her houses to finance a documentary
about the Palestine Liberation Organization in Lebanon, which showed her dancing
with a Kalashnikov rifle. Later, after a successful lawsuit against the Boston
Symphony Orchestra for canceling an engagement, in what she said was
blacklisting for her political activities, she sought a cultural boycott that
would have banned British actors from performing in the Jewish state or having
their work shown there. As the war in the Persian Gulf erupted, she made yet
more enemies by calling the unsettled Arab dispute with Israel -- then enduring
the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's repeated Scud attacks without retaliation
-- the source of "all conflicts in the Middle East."

Ms. Redgrave's book suggests an evolution in her priorities and some of her
positions that coincides with major progress in struggles with which she has
identified in the past, and that has, in the process, freed the actress to mend
conflicts that have sundered her own life. Among these, she counts the end of
apartheid in South Africa, the peace talks on Northern Ireland and the start of
an accord between Palestinians and Israelis.

"New things are taking place, some fundamental changes," she said. "Everyone is
seeing our world with new eyes."

She said she wrote the book in part because she received too much mail from
students and aspiring actors seeking advice to answer personally. The book is
equally her record and explanation of an unconventional past.

"There are the facts -- who said what, what happened -- and then there's also
the history of who the protagonist is and why he or she would have acted that
way, or done or said a certain thing," Ms. Redgrave said, adding that she went
about her own biography almost as a detective, tracing the circumstances of
childhood and the influence of events outside herself to reconstruct her views.

Oddly, she said that when she imagined the book, she thought pictures of her
family, caretakers, homes and pets would have been far more interesting than
those of herself in different roles, and had to be persuaded by her publisher to
use snapshots of herself.

The book is a patchwork of snippets from her private life and recollections
about different roles she has played, which inevitably give way to lengthy
passages about her developing political sense and involvement in different
causes, particularly the ever-splintering Workers' Revolutionary Party of Gerry
Healy. She seems to live from one crisis to the next through these pages,
whether it be mobilizing opposition to the American involvement in Vietnam among
G.I.'s stationed in Britain or supporting a teachers' strike in Los Angeles. In
one plausible, but unintentionally hilarious passage, Ms. Redgrave segues from
being in labor with her second child to an analysis of how capitalism has forced
more Caesarean births on mothers because they cost more. In a sense, it is as if
the actress took E. M. Forster's plea -- "only connect" -- to heart, and the two
words eclipsed all other possible views of the world around her.

The years, she said, have brought her to appreciate the importance of art in all
its forms -- drama, dance, music, painting, sculpture and literature -- to
"human beings, as opposed to dehumanized beings."

"When I was very young, I loved these personally, but I didn't really understand
how vital they were to human beings, as vital as oxygen," said Ms. Redgrave, who
seems to have found a unity of purpose in her new role as Unicef's special
representative for the performing arts to the besieged city of Sarajevo. It is a
job to which she brings her legendary single-mindedness; during lunch, she sent
an escort from her publisher off on a fruitless search for six kerosene lamps
that Harvey Keitel, the actor, needed to take when he left for the
battle-ravaged city Mostar later that day, where he had set himself the daunting
task of making a feature film.

Ms. Redgrave said that for a period she refused to discuss politics in
interviews about forthcoming films and plays because she did not want to be seen
as using her acting jobs to advance her own political agenda, and because she
felt she was often misrepresented. Her book acknowledges now that the colors of
a person are not distinct bits of stained glass, but mix freely within, and it
is from this understanding that her most interesting observations unfold.

Her role in a 1960 production of Robert Bolt's antinuclear play called "The
Tiger and the Horse," she writes, prompted her involvement in nuclear
disarmament, and a visit to Fidel Castro's Cuba for a film festival with Tony
Richardson, her husband at the time, "fundamentally transformed" her political
outlook. Isadora Duncan's fervent support of Communism became a source of
inspiration for the actress portraying her, while reading for "St. Joan of the
Stockyards," she writes, "became a source for the development of my political
consciousness."

When she says that the qualities that force her to political involvement are the
same ones that make her a fine actress, she does not mean it in the obvious
sense, that an ability to sink into strangers' psyches means considering the
world through their eyes after the curtain falls. Rather, Ms. Redgrave's
starting point is political; in tackling a role, she studies the historical
context in which characters operate to uncover their natures. It is from this
extra dimension, she asserts, that her performances draw their richness.

Those Ms. Redgrave has alienated by her strenuous stands against Zionism may
remain offended by her book, which describes the 1948 United Nations partition
plan for Palestine as illegal and calls Israel a state created "through terror
and mass expulsion." Ms. Redgrave blames Israel for such "massacres" that she
contends created Palestinian refugees as the 1948, 1967 and 1973 wars, in which
Israel either responded to an imminent military attack or had been attacked
first by its Arab neighbors.

But Ms. Redgrave embraces the Declaration of Principles signed by the Palestine
Liberation Organization chairman, Yasir Arafat, and the Prime Minister Israel,
Yitzhak Rabin, and goes so far as to say that she counts the opening of the
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington as one of the "great
achievements" of recent years, along with the movie "Schindler's List." She
praises the film for its portrayal of Nazism's barbarity and its potential as an
educational tool, though it is probably Hollywood's most unabashed case for the
creation of Israel.

"There's Zionism and there's Zionism," she said, asserting that there were
partisans of humanity as well as brutality in every group. "There's Christianity
and Christianity, times when some beastly things have been done in the name of
Christianity."

"That's true of all ancient religions, in the sense that they have a long
history, but they've also got progressive people," she said, "wonderful people.
One has increasingly to look at life in this way, because if we don't, we'll be
back in the old dogmas."

Ms. Redgrave, who has been attending anti-racism rallies in Germany and
elsewhere, says that for her: "The question of questions is, How can we join
together, especially culturally, as well as politically and very practically --
whether it be kerosene lamps or joint productions -- to prevent this new
worldwide fascism from drenching not just Europe but the U.S. as well, Russia,
India, the Far East, the Middle East? What can we do? What can I do?"

Earlier, unprompted by a specific question, Ms. Redgrave brought up the
concluding paragraph from "The Common Reader," in which Virginia Woolf asks
critics to take a broader, more encouraging approach to literature. She rifled
through a large black shoulder bag for a copy of the book but could not find it.

The actress, perhaps trying to find her own way back in a new world, was
searching for Woolf's message to the scandal-minded critics of her day. "Let
them slam the door upon that cozy company," Woolf wrote, "where sugar is cheap
and butter plentiful, give over, for a time, at least, the discussion of that
fascinating topic -- whether Byron married his sister -- and withdrawing,
perhaps, a handsbreath from the table where we sit chattering, say something
interesting about literature."

NAME: Vanessa Redgrave

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vanessa Redgrave, who has recently written her autobiography, in
the Union Square Theater, where she is appearing as Vita Sackville-West, to
Eileen Atkins's Virginia Woolf, in "Vita and Virginia." (Sara Krulwich/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Rare Mix of Tenants;
Working Residents Create a New Model for Welfare Hotels

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 2;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


In the ornate lobby of the former Times Square Hotel, a remarkable cross-section
of people come and go.

There's the model who used to appear in J. Crew catalogues but now suffers from
AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma. There's the actress who scrimps by as an extra on
television shows like "Law and Order" and "One Life to Live," waiting to make it
big. And there's the Vietnam veteran who has coped with depression and
post-traumatic stress syndrome since the war.

At the Times Square, once one of New York City's most notorious welfare hotels,
a social experiment of sorts is under way. The formerly homeless and the
mentally ill are living together with almost an equal number of working people,
neighbors in a newly restored building that used to be a neighborhood blight.

For the two nonprofit groups that provide a range of social services for the
residents, the experiment at 255 West 43d Street was intended to demonstrate
that single-room-occupancy hotels can be salvaged, that they can become more
than just dumping grounds for people with problems. The groups saw clear,
pragmatic reasons for offering many low-rent apartments to working people, as it
would make it easier not only to manage the property, but also to earn the
community's acceptance.

But their primary motivation was therapeutic. They knew that the mix of tenants
would be healthy for their clients.

"Most of our special-needs tenants have never lived in a place where they had
examples of people who got up in the morning and went to work, people whose
lives functioned," said Rosanne Haggerty, executive director of Common Ground
Community, a nonprofit housing and economic development organization that owns
and manages the building. "To observe that, instead of having it described to
you, is a really powerful thing."

Common Ground wants to repeat the model in the Prince George, a former welfare
hotel that stands empty at 14 East 28th Street, near Madison Avenue. The group
has preliminary financing commitments from the city and state, but must sell the
idea to a community that still recalls the horrors of that once-elegant hotel's
most recent incarnation.

At the Times Square -- "Hotel" was dropped from the name to reflect its new use
-- some residents are obviously ill. But because the working residents and
special-needs tenants are spread out on all the floors, it is hard to tell who
has AIDS or a mental illness or a history of homelessness, and who does not. "We
lose track," said Ms. Haggerty, referring to the 73 staff members.

Rob Skinner, a 56-year-old Vietnam veteran with chronic depression, has found
residing with regular working people and going about his business without the
label of mental illness liberating. "You haven't been stereotyped, so it brings
out the best in you," he said, "and you strive to fit right in."

The residents who are there because they meet the income requirements, making
$13,000 to $25,000 a year, witness occasionally zany, sometimes tragic behavior.
But some say they get a charge out of the diversity of the tenants and could
never afford such a nice studio apartment in a nonsubsidized midtown Manhattan
building.

"There's just a great energy here," said Peter Zazzali, a 28-year-old actor who
pays $474 a month for his studio. "There are people stricken with god-awful
diseases and older, destitute folks whose issues are being dealt with. Then
there are a lot of artists. It's not to say there aren't discouraging moments at
times, but in general there's a positive quality to everything going on here."

Sometimes, Jennifer Ann Galvez, a 25-year-old actress, has to put up with dates
whose teasing about her choice of residence verges toward ridicule. And she once
rode an elevator with a woman screaming that Mussolini had been her husband.

But then, Ms. Galvez thinks of her actor friends who are doubled up in
one-bedroom apartments in genteel buildings with doormen and swimming pools.

"They're temping in the daytime and waiting tables at night, and they don't have
time to act," Ms. Galvez said. "With the money I'm not spending on rent, I can
see Broadway shows and travel."

It was a housing concept that almost did not happen.

The Times Square Hotel, a rundown single-room-occupancy hotel and a huge source
of affordable housing with 735 units, was used by New York City in the late
1980's to house hundreds of homeless families. And it was managed by Tran Dinh
Truong, a notorious landlord whose Kenmore Hotel on East 23d Street was seized
by Federal authorities last summer because of poor conditions there.

With stabbings, fires, drug dealing and rats all rampant in the Times Square
Hotel, according to court papers, the city government took over management from
Mr. Truong in 1990 and sought proposals for an economy-class tourist hotel. Its
plan called for the 205 original single-room-occupancy tenants, many of them
elderly and mentally ill, to live in a part of the building that was sealed off
and had a separate entrance.

But Common Ground and the Center for Urban Community Services starting talking
up their own plan -- a plan that did not write off the original tenants but
included them -- with local officials and community leaders in the Times Square
area.

Some nearby businesses initially recoiled at the prospect of adding a permanent
group of mentally disabled and formerly homeless individuals, as well as people
with AIDS, to a neighborhood already burdened by teen-age runaways, drug addicts
and criminals. Government officials doubted that such an experiment could work
on the scale of such a large building.

But, responding to the enthusiastic support of Community Board 5, Mayor David N.
Dinkins approved the plan. The Department of Housing Preservation and
Development contributed $28.8 million through a loan program for the purchase
and renovation of the building. And Federal historic rehabilitation tax credits
paid for the restoration of the lobby's elaborate gilt and cream plaster
ceiling, terrazzo floors, marble stairs and original chandeliers.

Money for social services has come from a range of government agencies: the
city's Division of AIDS Services, Department of Homeless Services and Department
of Mental Health; the state's Department of Social Services and Office of Mental
Health, and the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Now, after a two-and-a-half-year gut renovation, the 15-story building's facade
and interiors practically gleam. The number of units was reduced from 735 to 652
so that all the residents would have private bathrooms and 80 percent would have
their own kitchens. Each floor also has a special activities room, from an art
studio and a computer lab to a music rehearsal space and a weight room.

Rodney W. McCray, a former model with AIDS, was living in a boarding room
without a bathroom before moving to the Times Square. "I took two friends who
have really nice apartments on a tour here," he said. "They were impressed. And
they're snobs."

Many early skeptics now praise the project. "It's a small miracle," said Rebecca
Robertson, president of the 42d Street Development Project, a division of the
state's Urban Development Corporation. "From an economic development point of
view, it has cleaned up what was a serious eyesore."

Residents who are mentally ill or who were once homeless have many opportunities
to work in one of the 100 jobs in the building, whether stocking the soda
vending machine two hours a week or working full time as security guards.

What has perhaps attracted the most notice from the neighborhood is the addition
of a Ben & Jerry's ice cream shop on the building's ground floor, at the corner
of Eighth Avenue and West 43d Street -- a yuppie beacon on a stretch of blocks
dominated by sex shops and scruffy souvenir outlets.

One of the assistant managers and all of the ice cream scoopers live in the
building. Because Ben & Jerry's donated the $25,000 franchise to Common Ground,
all profits go back into the jobs program, as well as economic development plans
for the building's remaining commercial space.

The breakdown of tenants is based on a rather complex formula. There are 165
original single-room-occupancy tenants remaining. As they move out or die over
the years, they will be replaced on a 50-50 basis: half of the new tenants will
have low incomes, while the other half will qualify for the social services.
Common Ground plans to limit the number of residents with AIDS to 50 and the
number of people with mental illness to 200.

While some other projects in the city have integrated the same kinds of
populations, the income ceilings are generally lower, so the working people tend
to be poorer. In addition, they might make up only a fifth of the residents, Ms.
Haggerty said. And the Times Square actually recruited some of the actors who
work in the surrounding theater district, adding an arty sophistication to the
building's makeup.

Whether Ms. Haggerty and her colleagues can pull it off again at the 13-story
Prince George remains to be seen. Their first move was to change the name of the
building to the Madison Square to dissociate the project from the 1980's welfare
hotel.

Real estate interests and neighbors have already expressed concern. But
Community Board 5 appears to have faith in Common Ground, with its housing and
human services committee recently voting unanimously in favor of the plan.
Anticipating community opposition, Nicholas Fish, the community board's
chairman, cautioned his neighbors to have an open mind.

"We cannot allow the bad facilities to crowd out the good proposals," he said,
"because we don't get many good proposals."

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Common Ground Community, a nonprofit housing group, wants to
show that single-room-occupancy hotels are still viable. Rosanne Haggerty,
executive director of the group, shows off the lobby of the former Times Square
Hotel. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times); "I took two friends who have really
nice apartments on a tour here," said Rodney W. McCray, a resident of the Times
Square. "They were impressed." (Norman Y. Lono for The New York Times) (pg. B1);
Jennifer Ann Galvez uses what she saves on rent at the Times Square to see
Broadway shows and travel. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Pauline Kael, Loving and Loathing

BYLINE: By MARGO JEFFERSON

SECTION: Section C;   Page 19;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 995 words



FOR KEEPS
By Pauline Kael
1,291 pages. A William Abrahams Book/Dutton. $34.95.

Critics are always looking for good or great works of art; readers have the
right to look for good and great critics with the same avidity. My ideal would
have a poet's receptivity (the ability to imagine any place, sensation or
person) and a hack's tenacity. (What Fitzgerald called, on a writer's worst
days, the ability to turn out work "done in a workmanlike manner for its own
sake, and part of it done fatigued and uninspired, and part of it done when even
to remember the original inspiration and impetus is a psychological trick.") A
critic's tools must include persuasion, seduction, exhortation, formal analysis,
five working senses and, expressed openly or not, strong views about art,
entertainment and society. Along with the willingness to risk looking like a
fool from time to time.

In "For Keeps," a vast selection of movie reviews from 1961 to 1991, Pauline
Kael could be describing herself when she describes a major artist as "a mixture
of pompous bore, master strategist, used-car salesman, maniac and messiah." She
has created her own legend as surely as any director. She may not care all that
much for westerns, but she has done wonders with the western myth of the
outsider who strides into a prissy, self-conscious civilization to teach it some
much-needed lessons about honor, justice and truth.

Ms. Kael was the rancher's daughter, the girl of the golden West who learned to
analyze literature and curse like a truck driver at college, then found herself
and her place in the culture at, in and through the movies. Writing in San
Francisco, she recalls, "publishing in a batch of mostly obscure 'little'
magazines, reviewing on KPFA in Berkeley, and then, in 1965, bringing out 'I
Lost It at the Movies,' I razzed the East Coast critics and their cultural
domination of the country." Then she came East, moved through small, august
magazines like The New Republic and Partisan Review, and settled at The New
Yorker until she retired in 1991.

"For Keeps" begins just as America is poking its head out of the 1950's with
"Hud," "West Side Story" and daring foreign films like "Breathless"; it ends
with an America that is still reeling from the blows of the 60's and 70's
("Goodfellas," "Dances With Wolves" and "Platoon"). In 1961, Ms. Kael was out to
smash highbrow smugness: "For several decades now educated people have been
condescending toward the children, the shopgirls, all those with 'humdrum' or
'impoverished' lives -- the mass audience -- who turned to movies for
'ready-made' dreams.

"I would like to suggest that the educated audience often uses 'art' films in
much the same self-indulgent way as the mass audience uses the Hollywood
'product,' finding wish fulfillment in the form of cheap and easy congratulation
on their sensitivities and their liberalism."

By the 1970's, her main enemy was middlebrow corporate crassness: "There is no
way to estimate the full effect of Vietnam and Watergate on popular culture, but
earlier films were predicated on an implied system of values, which is gone now,
except in the corrupt, vigilante form of a 'Dirty Harry' or a 'Walking Tall.'
Almost all the current hits are jokes on the past, and especially on old films,
a mixture of nostalgia and parody, laid on with a trowel. . . . Nobody
understands what contemporary heroes or heroines should be, or how they relate
to each other, and it's safer not to risk the box-office embarrassment of
seriousness."

In the beginning she often wrote about "art"(which usually meant foreign) films:
not the smug ones, but the subtle or thrilling ones by Jean Renoir and Akira
Kurosawa and Satyajit Ray. But as the years went by she became an Americanist: a
descendant of Gilbert Seldes and Constance Rourke in her obsession with the
love-hate ties that bind our high culture and our mass cultures; arty trash and
trashy art; tradition and invention; the layers of meaning even the crudest
cultural product possesses, and the reverberations it can set off in any and all
viewers.

It's not that she is always right; how could she be when she's so eruptive and
overbearing? Her denunciations can send some fairly ordinary actor or director
hurtling into darkness. And she can overpraise what she loves, thereby reminding
us how close criticism comes to the kind of romantic obsession once described as
turning what we must love into what we can love. But in the end you want a movie
critic to be implacably right -- movies just about never are -- and you want her
to be a worthy mentor, adversary and collaborator, someone who, right and wrong,
keeps your mind and heart alert.

How smart Ms. Kael is, not just about actors' gifts and limits but about
directors.' In 1980, she forecast the hollowness of "The Silence of the Lambs"
by stating that when Jonathan Demme made thrillers he seemed to be "an
empty-headed director with a little hand-me-down craft." And the Robert Redford
of "Quiz Show" is the Robert Redford she first spotted in "Ordinary People,"
with its "respectable, pictorial, dated look that movies get when the director
has a proficient team of craftsmen but doesn't really think in visual terms."
She was talking about movie advertising in 1974 when she wrote, "People are
cynical about advertising, of course, but their cynicism is so all-inclusive now
that they're indifferent, and so they're more susceptible to advertising than
ever," but it's a perfect description of 1994's voters in the face of political
campaigning.

She nails her own faults as a writer: "reckless excess, in both praise and
damnation": analogy gridlock and rhetorical overkill. Turn them inside out and
you have her virtues writ large: intellectual breadth, verbal inventiveness and
the storyteller's gift for making thought suspenseful and feeling palpable. It
is not a style writers should imitate, but it is a style readers should savor.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Pauline Kael (Chris Carroll/Dutton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1994, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Even With Guilty Plea, Justice Official's Crimes and Motives Remain Enigma

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 10;   Column 1;   National Desk

LENGTH: 1814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


Early last month, Webster L. Hubbell traveled to Arkansas to tell a few old
friends that the embezzlement charges he had denied so vehemently for so long
were actually true.

But even now, three weeks after the former Associate Attorney General stood up
in court to plead guilty to stealing hundreds of thousands of dollars from his
former law firm, friends and former colleagues here and in Little Rock, Ark.,
are still wrestling with some mysteries. Why did he steal? Where did the money
go? And how can they square the man they knew -- a Presidential confidant, whom
even opponents called a man of integrity -- with the sloppy, almost brazen
thefts he has admitted?

Nearly nine months into the case, even the investigators who have pored over his
records and finances remain uncertain about his motive and how much he actually
stole.

In pleading guilty to tax evasion and mail fraud, Mr. Hubbell admitted to
stealing at least $394,000 over four years, a sum that effectively doubled his
after-tax income. His average income from the Rose law firm during his final
years there was $120,000 to $150,000 before taxes, associates said. At the same
time, he built up substantial debts. By 1993, when he arrived in Washington, he
had credit card debts of $66,000, car loans of $60,000, a $50,000 unsecured loan
he had recently taken out and his mortgage had nearly doubled to $400,000
through several refinancings he had negotiated over the last decade.

Those debts, which in retrospect look like clues to financial distress, emerged
last year during his confirmation proceedings to become Associate Attorney
General. But at the time, and in the absence of other warning signs,
investigators from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Senate Judiciary
Committee did not regard them as serious enough to warrant an inquiry.

Even Closest Friends Saw Few Clear Signs

And many of his closest friends, interviewed in recent days, say that even in
retrospect they can think of few signs that he had lived extravagantly.

Instead, they recollect what could be a piece of the puzzle here or there --
four children in private schools, family vacations and shopping sprees. In
outlining the charges against Mr. Hubbell, prosecutors mentioned only a few
expenses: credit card bills at a women's clothing store in Little Rock and at an
unidentified fur company, and clothing purchases in Dallas.

Through his lawyer, John Nields, Mr. Hubbell declined to comment about his
motives or his crime.

By all outward appearances, Mr. Hubbell was not a big spender. He wore rumpled
suits and took the subway to work in Washington, where he still lives. His wife
did not wear fancy dresses or extravagant jewelry, and often when the couple
invited friends over for dinner, it would be a potluck affair. Friends say he
routinely had no cash in his wallet and would borrow change for sundries.

While he regularly played golf and would go with friends on outings to courses
in Florida and at Hilton Head, S.C., he played out of the same golf bag for
years. Friends say he was not a gambler.

He and his wife would also take take annual winter vacations in the Caribbean or
in Mexico with other friends, but they were hardly exorbitant trips. In
interviews, Little Rock shopkeepers describe the Hubbells as good customers, but
hardly given to spending binges.

Still, his closest friends in Little Rock say they have come to believe that he
stole to maintain his life style, which was not particularly lavish for a top
partner at one of the most prominent law firms in the South.

Some Recall a Man Generous to a Fault

One close friend recalled seeing him shake his head in disbelief when his wife
and children returned to Little Rock from Dallas with a large pile of bills and
clothes from their annual shopping spree.

"In a perverse paradox, what did him in was his generosity to his family,"
theorized a friend who has known him for decades. "It was his own self-inflicted
pressure to give his family and children anything they wanted. Web is one of the
most generous people you will ever know."

The nature of his scheme suggests that Mr. Hubbell was either desperate or
confident he would never be caught. For instance, he altered time records of his
partners, said a lawyer involved in the investigation, a move that could easily
be detected. Prosecutors say he also listed bogus expenses, including
depositions that were in fact never taken, a step that could easily be
discovered.

Mr. Hubbell has acknowledged that on more than 400 instances over four years, he
would either bill a client or his firm for expenses and then draw the firm's
checks to pay off one of the 10 Mastercard, Visa and American Express cards that
had personal charges on them. Many false expenses were for less than $1,000, and
under the firm's bookkeeping practices, they did not require a second partner to
sign the disbursement checks.

Some evidence has surfaced to suggest that Mr. Hubbell was stealing from his
firm even before 1989, although investigators have had a hard time tracking the
earlier period because credit card companies do not keep records going back that
far. Still, one client was told by the Rose firm that personal expenses charged
on Mr. Hubbell's credit card were listed on a bill earlier than 1989 as
out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the firm for the client.

Months of Denials And Countercharges

For months, Mr. Hubbell had told close friends, colleagues at the Justice
Department and White House, and even his lawyer that he had been the victim of a
political witch hunt. He told them that there was nothing unusual about what he
had called a trivial dispute about records between him and his former law
partners and that he had been driven from his high-ranking job at the Justice
Department only because the climate of scandal in Washington had reached a
fevered pitch.

His friends and many officials in the Justice Department say they believed him.
After all, he had been the chairman of the Arkansas Bar Association's ethics
committee and the head of the state's Board of Bar Examiners. He had drafted a
state ethics law and had earned the admiration and close friendship of President
Clinton.

He had practiced law and invested with Hillary Rodham Clinton. And even after he
arrived in Washington last year to become a top official at the Justice
Department, he continued to make speeches about legal ethics and became a
trusted aide to Attorney General Janet Reno, who had also vigorously come to his
defense when the investigation into his finances became public.

For years, Mr. Hubbell was a large and respected figure in a small city. He had
been the administrative partner at the law firm that had billed itself as the
oldest legal establishment west of the Mississippi. He was Little Rock's Mayor,
and he prided himself as an active leader of the Little Rock Boys Club.

He had returned to Little Rock, where he had been born and grew up, after
graduating from law school in 1973 and had met Bill and Hillary Clinton while
studying for the bar. Theirs was, at first, an unlikely friendship. The Clintons
had arrived from their education at elite Eastern universities, where they had
been active in campus politics and protesting the Vietnam war.

By contrast, classmates say Mr. Hubbell showed no political interests when he
was at the University of Arkansas, where he had earned a bachelor's degree in
electrical engineering. His big interests were watching basketball and playing
football. At 6 foot 5 inches tall and 290 pounds, he was considered large even
for an offensive guard and was a well-recognized figure on campus.

In 1969, he helped the Arkansas Razorbacks finish the season ranked sixth in the
nation, with a 10-and-1 record that was highlighted with a 16-to-2 victory over
Georgia in the Sugar Bowl. Drafted by the Chicago Bears, he never made it in the
National Football League because of a knee injury.

Over the years, the Clintons and the Hubbells grew close. Mr. Clinton turned to
Mr. Hubbell to handle many of his sensitive assignments, including drafting the
ethics law and serving as an interim Chief Justice of the state's highest court.
Mr. Hubbell was also close to Mrs. Clinton, not only as part of the inner circle
at the Rose firm, but also as an investor in a fund that they created in the
1980's called Midlife Investors.

Maze of Self-Deception And Getting Free From It

Arriving back in Little Rock last month, Mr. Hubbell told his friends that there
was a hidden side to his life that he had only begun to understand with the help
of a therapist he had recently started to see in Washington.  Mr. Hubbell said
that shaking free from that self-deception had led him to decide to plead guilty
to Federal charges that he had systematically looted his law partners and
clients over many years.

Although his law partners had begun to raise questions about his billing
practices in the spring of 1993, at the same time that the F.B.I. and the Senate
Judiciary committee were looking into his background for confirmation
proceedings, those questions were not known by the investigators. And those
matters they were aware of, like his credit cards debts, did not seem serious
enough by themselves to merit pursuing.

Around that time, the Rose firm was adjusting to a shake-up in its senior ranks,
which had been depleted with the departure of Mr. Hubbell and three other top
partners, Mrs. Clinton, Vincent W. Foster Jr. and William Kennedy, who moved to
the White House.

A lawyer at the firm who spoke on the condition of anonymity said that while
some questions were raised around the time of the confirmation, Mr. Hubbell was
widely viewed as a trusted former partner, and that no one at the firm knew
about the full magnitude of what he had done until many months later.

The lawyer said that the firm had repeatedly requested backup records to justify
the questioned expenses and that Mr. Hubbell assured the partners they would be
forthcoming. They never were.

The Rose firm was unable to conceal the embarrassing news this year, and
investigators in the Whitewater independent counsel's office learned of Mr.
Hubbell's billing irregularities from a tip provided by a relatively junior
person in the firm. The independent counsel's office is expected to question Mr.
Hubbell about several areas it is investigating.

Even as he was confronted by a reporter about the billing questions last
February, Mr. Hubbell told nothing of the questions to his closest associates at
the White House and the Justice Department.

"In retrospect, the level of self-deception was simply astonishing," said one
senior Justice Department official who had worked closely with Mr. Hubbell.
"None of us can imagine going through the confirmation process with that kind of
secret lurking in the past."

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Webster L. Hubbell, a former Associate Attorney General in the
Clinton Administration, with his wife, Suzy, at far right after he pleaded
guilty on Dec. 6 in Federal District Court in Little Rock, Ark., to charges of
mail fraud and tax evasion. (Rick McFarland/Arkansas Democrat-Gazette)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

George Coleman, 35, Publishing Executive

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 227 words


George Coleman, a vice president and executive editor at G. P. Putnam's Sons,
died on Saturday at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center. Mr. Coleman, who lived
in Manhattan, was 35.

The cause was progressive multifocal leukoencephylopathy, a rare neurological
disorder associated with AIDS, said his companion, Mark T. Lameier.

In Mr. Coleman's five years with Putnam's, he worked on such best sellers as
"Ann-Margret: My Story"; "The Haldeman Diaries," by H. R. Haldeman; "In the
Absence of Angels," the autobiography of the AIDS spokeswoman Elizabeth Glaser,
and on the works of such popular novelists as Dale Brown, Jack Higgins and Steve
Martini.

Mr. Coleman also acquired biographies of the Lindberghs by A. Scott Berg, of
Robert Kennedy by C. David Heymann and of Audrey Hepburn by Barry Paris. He also
acquired a book to be written by the rock group Aerosmith.

Before joining Putnam's, Mr. Coleman worked at Donald I. Fine and at Arbor
House. At the latter, he acquired the best-selling "Mayflower Madam," by Sydney
Biddle Barrows, and William Novak, "No More Vietnams," by Richard M. Nixon, and
works by Anthony Burgess.

In addition to Mr. Lameier, Mr. Coleman is survived by a brother, Chris Coleman
of Jacksonville, Fla.; a sister, Linda Weimer of Tacoma, Wash., and his mother
and stepfather, Carrie and Andy Wheatley of Austin, Tex.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 29, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Casinos in Pursuit of New Players

BYLINE: By BARRY MEIER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words


Rock and roulette, anyone?

Twanging guitars and clattering wheels of chance might once have sounded like a
weird combination. No longer. In March, the Hard Rock Cafe and Harveys Casino
Resorts plan to open a youth-themed casino and hotel in Las Vegas, Nev.

The casino will feature touch- screen-style video machines that will let
gamblers play a variety of games, and gambling tables in the shapes of musical
instruments. Attracting younger gamblers is just one strategy on which the
casino industry is relying to keep its business growing.

After years of aggressive expansion, gambling companies face the prospect that
the capacity of casinos will eventually outpace the number of players to fill
them. So companies are looking to attract new customers. They are also looking
to bigger attractions -- like a coming Mirage Resorts casino in the middle of a
man-made lake, and MGM Grand's New York-New York project -- to pull in the
casual tourist. Finally, they are considering new markets in the United States
and in nations from Greece to South Africa.

At the same time, casino companies are attracting corporate suitors. Last week,
for instance, the ITT Corporation, which operates hotels and casinos
internationally through its ITT Sheraton subsidiary, agreed to acquire Caesars
World Inc. in a deal valued at $1.7 billion. The deal will benefit ITT by
bringing it Caesars gambling management experience and linking the Caesars
operations with ITT's hotels worldwide.

The ITT move followed its acquisition of Madison Square Garden and coincided
with the sale of some of its financial service operations. It is seen by many
analysts as an effort by ITT to concentrate on the entertainment and leisure
industry. By buying Caesars, ITT -- already the owner of the Desert Inn casino
in Las Vegas -- is also able to scrap its plans to build the Desert Kingdom
casino, a three-year project with an estimated cost of $1 billion.

There is speculation about other acquisitions, Naomi Talish, an analyst with
Morgan Stanley, said. And the number of riverboat-style casinos and gambling
operations on Indian reservations is also expected to grow in the next year.

For the moment, there is little need to find new gamblers. Last year, Americans
wagered about $297.3 billion on casino games and $393.3 billion on all forms of
legal gambling including parimutuels and lotteries, according to a recent Smith
Barney report. That figure has been growing in recent years at about 10 percent
annually.

But for all the current interest in gambling deals, there are troubling signs on
the horizon. The average age of those playing slot machines is 46. And younger
people, raised on a diet of Nintendo and Sega, have little interest in spending
hours building their biceps pulling one-armed bandits. Hence, the
touch-screen-style video gambling machines and gambling tables in the shapes of
musical instruments at the Harveys-Hard Rock venture.

Meanwhile, some smaller gambling companies have been hit by bankruptcies. And
even among larger and healthier concerns like the Promus Companies, which
operates Harrah's casinos, the cost of borrowing to finance new operations is
becoming much more expensive.

Promus recently agreed to pay more than 21 percent on borrowed funds to finance
the construction of a casino in New Orleans. Coupons on the bonds pay a heady
interest rate of 14.25 percent; the company also agreed to give bondholders 7.25
percent of the casino's cash flow up to $350 million a year, according to a
Harrah's New Orleans official.

"This was the year that investors learned that risks involved in casinos were
higher than originally perceived," Jason Ader, an analyst with Smith Barney,
said.

The gambling industry has also recently taken its share of lumps politically.
Despite a war chest of $10 million, an industry-led effort to bring casinos to
Florida was defeated this fall by the state's voters. And while a few states
like Missouri and Indiana have opened their doors wider to gambling, the
industry's prospects in larger, more lucrative states like New York,
Pennsylvania, Texas and California remain clouded.

A recent wild card was the election of a new crop of state governors. In New
York, for instance, Governor-elect George E. Pataki has indicated that he might
consider legislation permitting casinos. And in Pennsylvania, where gambling
advocates believed that they were on the verge of victory, Governor-elect Thomas
Ridge said he would probably permit a statewide referendum on the issue.

Mr. Ridge's comments may sound positive for industry interests. But in the past,
casino companies have had greater luck in getting gambling bills approved inside
legislatures than through the ballot box.

Still, even in an era of uncertainty, leading casino operators are developing
plans to expand their reach.

Caesars World, which already has linked two casino operations to Planet
Hollywood restaurants, plans to open a third soon. The two companies also have
an agreement to develop additional restaurant and casino concepts together.

"The name of the game these days is to get the walk-in business," said Joseph
Coccimiglio, a gambling industry analyst with Dean Witter.

Mirage Resorts may have the most ambitious plan of those on the drawing board.
Known as Beau Rivage, or Beautiful Shore, the casino-hotel will be built in Las
Vegas, on a 17-acre island surrounded by a 50-acre man-made lake. Each hotel
room in the $900 million complex, which is scheduled to open in mid-to-late
1997, will have a water view.

Another major Las Vegas development in the works is New York-New York, being
built by MGM Grand. The project will recreate the flavor of New York City in the
1950's, and is scheduled to open by the end of 1996.

Elsewhere, an effort by Promus, the Harrah's operator, to open the country's
largest casino in New Orleans has been delayed. Earlier this year, the Attorney
General of Louisiana, Richard Ieyoub, ordered that a public contract for the
casino should be rebid because Promus had significantly changed its original
winning proposal. In July, however, the company won the contract again.

Because of the delays, Harrah's is not expected to open the 200,000- square-foot
casino until mid-1996 at the earliest. In the meantime, it plans to open a
temporary casino in New Orleans in April.

One fixture on the Atlantic City scene -- the ubiquitous Donald J. Trump -- is
also planning to expand his operations. Mr. Trump received one of two licenses
recently awarded to operate a riverboat casino in Gary, Ind. Pending financing,
that project may open in six to nine months.

Mr. Ader of Smith, Barney said that South Africa is likely to become a casino
center and that both China and Vietnam appear to be moving toward liberalizing
gambling.

Other countries mentioned by analysts as growing or new centers for gambling
include Argentina, Australia, Greece, and Mexico. Plans by the Greek Government,
for instance, call for two new casinos outside Athens, one in Thessalonika, one
in the Porto Carras resort and others on the islands of Corfu and Rhodes.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Artist's rendering of the casino and hotel that the Hard Rock
Cafe and Harveys Casino Resorts plan to open in March in Las Vegas, Nev. It is
one of several casinos aimed at attracting younger gamblers. (The Hard Rock
Hotel & Casino) (pg. D1); Crowds outside a Planet Hollywood restaurant in Las
Vegas, where the chain has joined with Caesars World casinos in two ventures.
(Lennox McLendon/Associated Press for The New York Times) (pg. D17)

Chart: "More Action" shows some leading U.S. casino companies and their
expansion plans (Source: Listed companies) (pg. D1)

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1994, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Rusk Stayed Calm In a Wrenching Era

SECTION: Section A;  Page 30;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 229 words


To the Editor:

As deputy to Averell Harriman in his quest for a negotiated settlement of the
Vietnam War during the early to mid-1960's, I spent hundreds of anxious,
frustrating and harrowing hours in the presence of Secretary of State Dean Rusk
(obituary, Dec. 22).

I recall Mr. Harriman's losing his temper, and I remember myself getting angry.
I cannot think of a single session in which Mr. Rusk was anything but calm and
courteous.

On the eve of Richard M. Nixon's inauguration in January 1969, Mr. Rusk, other
Johnson Administration senior officials and a few score State Department
colleagues and reporters gathered in the darkness at Andrews Air Force Base near
Washington to greet Mr. Harriman and Cyrus Vance as they returned from Paris and
their final hours of negotiations with the North Vietnamese.

At the dreary gathering that followed in the Officers Club, I tried in vain to
get through the crowd to seize a moment or two with Mr. Rusk. I wanted to tell
him how much I respected him, to say goodbye, to wish him well. I wrote him to
say all this the following day.

I didn't expect an answer. But 48 hours later I received a full-page letter,
typed by Mr. Rusk himself, thanking me for my assistance and good wishes. I saw
Dean Rusk only a few times since then, but I shall miss him.

CHESTER L. COOPER
Chevy Chase, Md., Dec. 27, 1994

LOAD-DATE: December 30, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 265 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1994, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pataki to Freeze Nonessential Hiring

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 28;   Column 4;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


On the eve of the inaugural festivities in Albany, Governor-elect George E.
Pataki yesterday made another round of appointments to the top level of state
government and announced that, as one of his first acts as Governor, he would
freeze "nonessential" hiring for the rest of the state work force.

Mr. Pataki said the state's fiscal condition -- made worse by what he said is a
$100 million hole in this year's budget -- prompted the need for the freeze. He
said he planned to issue an executive order covering the 230,000-person work
force in the first few days of his administration and could not predict when the
state would begin hiring again.

"I would expect that given the magnitude of the fiscal problems we face, it
could be for some time," Mr. Pataki said in a telephone interview, when asked
about the possibility of a freeze. "I certainly would rather freeze hiring at
the beginning and reduce the risk of layoffs than allow the state to continue to
hire people and have to go through massive layoffs."

An exception, he said, would be those workers necessary for the "health and
safety" of citizens, but even those might have to be approved by budget
officials, he said. The possibility of a freeze was first reported yesterday by
The New York Post.

The other exceptions are top officials to state agencies, authorities and
commissions, and yesterday Mr. Pataki made another 10 major appointments and
named four other people to key staff jobs.

James F. Gill, 63, a Democrat and labor lawyer who headed the so-called Gill
Commission on school corruption in New York City five years ago, agreed to serve
for three months as director of the Office of Employee Relations. He said his
job will be to negotiate this spring with the half-dozen state unions whose
contracts are to expire. The job now pays $101,505 a year.

Mr. Hill is the second official Mr. Pataki has appointed for only 90 days; the
first was Mary E. Glass, named earlier this week as Commissioner for Social
Services. Transition officials said that the two 90-day appointments do not
reflect a difficulty in filling top jobs, although they concede that some
prospects want more money than the state pays and that, given 20 years of
Democratic rule, there is no great pool of Republicans with state-wide
governmental experience.

"We have coaxed them into the administration with specific goals and purposes in
mind," Mr. Pataki said about the short terms of Mr. Gill and Ms. Glass.

Among the other appointments, Charles A. Gargano, 59, the finance chairman for
Mr. Pataki's campaign who helped raise $14 million, was named to be director of
economic development as well as chairman of the state Urban Development
Corporation. The job now pays $90,832.

A long-time aide to Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Mr. Gargano was from 1955 to
1984 a vice president and part owner of the J.D. Posillico Company, a
construction company based in Long Island.

During his tenure there, the Suffolk County District Attorney brought a civil
racketeering suit against the company and two other construction firms. Mr.
Gargano was not a defendant in the suit, which charged that the three companies
were involved in fraud and payoffs in connection with the awarding of $1 billion
in Suffolk County sewer contracts. The Posillico Company settled the suit for
$315,000 without admitting any wrongdoing.

A routine investigation of Mr. Gargano by the Federal Bureau of Investigation in
1988, part of his appointment by President Reagan as Ambassador to Trinidad and
Tobago, resulted in no reports of wrongdoing at his Senate confirmation hearing.

In total, Mr. Pataki has named 25 people to top jobs in the week before he is to
be sworn in. In addition to Mr. Gill and Mr. Gargano, four other appointments
require confirmation of the state Senate:

*John L. Behan, a Republican Assemblyman from Montauk who lost both legs above
the knees in Vietnam, was named director of the Division of Veteran's affairs.
The job now pays $76,421.

*Edward J. Muhl, who was the Insurance Commissioner in Maryland from 1982 to
1988, was named state Insurance Superintendent. The job now pays $90,832.

*Edward Mercado, the former director of the Office for Civil Rights in the
Federal Department of Health and Human Services in Washington, was named
Commissioner of the state Division of Human Rights. The salary is now $82,614.

*Peter W. Delaney, the administrator of the Westchester County Department of
General Services, was named Commissioner of the State Office of General
Services, a job that oversees state purchasing and properties. He is a friend of
Mr. Pataki, and also lives in Peekskill. The job now pays $95,635.

Four other jobs do not require confirmation:

*Robert J. Bellafiore, a former Associated Press reporter and director of
communications for the Business Council of New York State, was named press
secretary. His salary has not been set.

*Donna Arduin, a deputy in Michigan to Patricia A. Woodworth, the newly
appointed budget director, was named deputy to the budget director. Her salary
has not been set.

*Donald G. Dunn, the former first deputy under the Republican Comptroller,
Edward V. Regan, was named first deputy secretary to the Governor. This is a new
position.

*Louis R. Tomson, a lawyer and former general counsel to the New York State
Dormitory Authority, was named deputy secretary to the Governor for Authorities.
This is also a new position.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1994

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: "Schedule of Inaugural Events" Location and times of Saturday's,
Sunday's and Monday's events.

                   Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
