
                               1 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Nebraska Senator Enters the 1992 Race

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN, Neb., Sept. 30


To the strains of Bruce Springsteen's "Born to Run," Senator Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska entered the race for the Democratic Presidential nomination today and
asserted that a short-sighted and cynical Federal Government was robbing young
Americans of their birthright of good jobs, good educations and national
greatness.

Mr. Kerrey, whose political odyssey began as a Navy Seal in Vietnam, where he
won the Medal of Honor, accused the Republicans of a decade of "malignant
neglect" that had left the nation adrift.

His speech was an echo, in spirit if not in langugage, of John F. Kennedy's 1960
appeal to "get the country moving again." Against the backdrop of the Nebraska
Capitol, which Mr. Kerrey portrayed as a monument to prairie optimism in the
depths of the Depression, the 48-year-old Senator said he hoped to touch off
another era of national renewal.

"I want to lead America's fearless, restless voyage of generational progress,"
Mr. Kerrey said. "We have been led off course by a Federal Government whose
engine has become inertia, whose direction is drift, and whose compass is
cynicism."

Mr. Kerrey's speech reflected many of the traits that his allies say will serve
him well in this late-starting race for the nomination. It was emotionally hot,
an effort to provide the kind of inspirational leadership that many Democrats
believe has been lacking in their party.

Mr. Kerrey's indictment was as much against a state of mind as against a party,
asserting that continued inaction by the Federal Government had let the economy,
the schools, the cities, the infrastructure of highways and bridges founder.

"Unless we do things differently now," he said, the nation in the year 2000 will
be a grim place "where stagnant incomes will force them into more hours at work
and less time with their children, where homeownership and college tuition and
even adequate health care will be beyond the reach of all but the wealthiest."

It is time, he said, "for leadership that focuses its attention on posterity,
rather than popularity, on the next generation, rather than the next election."

Unconventional Career

Mr. Kerrey's announcement today capped a meteoric and unconventional political
career that begin in 1982 when the young Nebraska restaurateur decided to run
for office for the first time -- and defeated an incumbent Republican Governor.
As the Springsteen title suggested, Mr. Kerrey's allies see him as a natural
politician who seemed destined to take the step he took today, even though, for
most of this year, he brushed aside the Presidential rumors that surrounded him.

As he took the stage in a downtown Lincoln park, under a brilliant autumn sky,
surrounded by a euphoric crowd, that periodically broke into University of
Nebraska fight cheers, Mr. Kerrey's eyes glistened and he seemed, for a moment,
to be taking the full measure of what he was about to do. He looked out over the
crowd, and an almost melancholic look crossed his face, then he turned to his
speech and began.

Mr. Kerrey's attack on the Bush Administration did not have the personal tone
used by his colleague and rival, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa. But Mr. Kerrey's
language was unstinting.

He said the 1992 election "offers us a chance to break from a decade in which
our leaders invited a season of cynicism." He went on: "They invoked morality
but winked at greed. They crticized the public sector, but then robbed it blind.
They spoke of balanced budgets but never submitted one.

"They railed against taxes but raised them on the middle class. They called for
civil rights but practiced racial politics. They wrapped their cause in
motherhood but then worked to deny motherhood of choice and meaningful
opportunities."

But Mr. Kerrey asserted that Mr. Bush was not the enemy. "A more difficult enemy
for us to defeat is our own pessimism," he said, "particularly in the Democratic
Party."

Mr. Kerrey is the fourth major candidate to enter the race for the Democratic
nomination, joining former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, Mr. Harkin
of Iowa and Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia. Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas is
expected to announce his candidacy in Little Rock on Thursday; former Gov.
Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California is exploring a race, as is Representative Dave
McCurdy of Oklahoma. The Rev. Jesse Jackson is still considering his options.

Mr. Kerrey will have a impact on the campaign of Mr. Harkin. Athough Mr.
Harkin's message of economic populism and old-time Democratic religion is quite
different from Mr. Kerrey's, they draw from the same regional base. Mr. Kerrey
will also probably cut across Mr. Clinton's potential support, since both offer
themselves as young, exciting, change-oriented Democrats.

While his race is starting late, Mr. Kerrey's operation had a seasoned look to
it, thanks, in part, to his quick collection of several campaign veterans,
including some top strategists from the campaign of former Senator Gary Hart.

He was surrounded by a loyal audience of family and friends, including his
former wife, Bev Higby. Mr. Kerrey, who was divorced in 1978, remains single.

Mr. Kerrey, who has often talked of his anger over the Vietnam War after he
returned home, opened today's speech by thanking his community for helping a
"bitter and lonely and altogether unpleasant young man." Mr. Kerry lost part of
his leg in a raid that won him the Medal of Honor.

It is Mr. Kerrey's status as a Medal of Honor winner that, many Democrats
assert, will protect him from Republican attacks, which often center on the
charge that Democrats are weak on defense and out of touch with traditional
patriotic values. But Republicans see vulnerabilities on this front: Mr. Kerrey
voted against the resolution authorizing the use of force in the Persian Gulf.

There are also people in both parties who wonder whether Mr. Kerrey can live up
to his billing. "It reminds me of John Glenn," said Charles Black, a top
Republican strategist. "You remember, in 1983, Glenn announces -- astronaut,
world hero, huge press coverage. Then he ran out of steam on the biography and
had no message. And he got elbowed aside. Maybe Kerry has a message, but the
jury's still out on that."

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After he announced he was entering the race for the Democratic
Presidential nomination yesterday in Lincoln, Neb., Senator Bob Kerrey went into
the crowd with his son, Ben, center, to thank supporters. (Ted Kirk for The New
York Times)

Chart: "Bob Kerrey: Democratic Presidential Contender"

Current Job: Senator since 1989.

Born: Aug. 27, 1943, in Lincoln, Neb.

Education: University of Nebraska, B.S., 1965

Religion: Congregationalist.

Military Service: Navy, 1966-1969

Married: To Beverly Defnail in 1974; divorced in 1978.

Children: Benjamin, 16, and Lindsey, 15

Government: Positions: Governor of Nebraska, 1983-1987

Other Major Positions: Developer of a chain of restaurants and fitness centers,
1972-1982.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Wave of Attacks On Foreigners Stirs Shock in Germany

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: BONN, Sept. 30


A wave of attacks on immigrants and refugees has shocked many Germans as the
country nears its first anniversary of unification.

The violence reached a peak last weekend, when youths in 20 German towns
attacked buildings where foreigners live. That brought the total number of
attacks this year to more than 80, four times the number for all of last year.

The attacks appear to be in response to the growing number of immigrants from
Vietnam, Mozambique, the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. They reflect both
hostility to non-Germans and a belief that foreigners are taking jobs,
apartments and Government subsidies that belong to natives.

More than 150,000 refugees have arrived in Germany so far this year, and 75,000
additional ones are expected by year's end. No other European country receives a
third as many.

A local election held Sunday in the northern city of Bremen suggested that the
issue is shaking German politics. The Social Democrats, who advocate liberal
policies toward foreigners, plunged from 51 percent of the vote in 1987 to 39
percent. A local far-right party called the German People's Union polled more
than 6 percent, almost double its 1987 showing.

In Hoyerswerda, a depressed eastern town, rightist attackers recently scored a
victory. For nearly a week in mid-September, gangs of youths supported by
hundreds of jeering residents beseiged two apartment complexes where foreign
laborers lived. The police made 83 arrests, but were unable to contain the
violence.

In the dead of night, the 230 terrified foreigners, among them Africans and
Vietnamese, were spirited aboard buses and taken to safety at an army base.

Jubilant Hoyerswerda residents later appeared on national television to proclaim
their town "foreigner-free."

"There is a profound connection between the riots in Hoyerswerda and the
election result in Bremen," the newspaper Die Welt said today in a front-page
editorial. "Politicians must resolve this situation, and very soon."

Racists Prevail

The Hoyerswerda episode made headlines because it marked the first time that
political leaders had bowed to the demands of violent racists. But the attacks
are spreading across both eastern and western Germany.

In an incident Saturday, the police arrested 15 skinheads in the western town of
Herford after they gathered in front of a home for asylum seekers and began
demolishing automobiles and throwing gasoline bombs. Early Sunday, groups of
neo-Nazis surrounded houses in Leipzig where refugees lived, and the city
authorities later moved 240 Romanians away from their homes.

One foreigner has been killed in the latest round of attacks, a Ghanaian who
burned to death when the apartment house where he lived in the western town of
Saarlouis was set afire on Sept. 19. He was the second killed by German racists
this year. A Mozambican died after youths threw him from a train in Dresden on
Easter Sunday.

At a special session of Parliament last Wednesday, legislators deplored what one
called a "return to barbarism" in Germany.

"Forty-six years after Adolf Hitler, we are skating on very thin ice," warned
Cornelia Schmalz-Jacobsen, a leader of the centrist Liberal Party.

The German President, Richard von Weizsacker, said in a radio interview on
Sunday that he considered the attacks "horrifying and shameful," adding that he
would begin visiting groups of foreigners this week as a gesture of support.

Given Germany's 20th-century history, political leaders do not want to be seen
as acting against foreigners. But many citizens say it is time to halt or curb
the flow of refugees.

A poll taken this month found that 21 percent of eastern Germans and 38 percent
of Westerners now have some sympathy for "radical rightist tendencies."

Moves to Curb Immigration

Leaders of all major parties agree that something must be done to reduce the
number of foreigners coming to live in Germany.

The Social Democratic leader, Bjorn Engholm described the situation as "totally
unacceptable," and Interior Minister Wolfgang Schauble said the Government would
work to check the "uncontrollable flow" of foreigners.

"Germany is friendly to foreigners, and will remain so," Mr. Schauble said. "But
this can only happen if the concerns of our citizens are heeded."

There are about five million immigrants and refugees living in the country. Most
came originally as laborers, but as many as 20 percent are now seeking political
asylum. The Government spent nearly $6 billion in 1990 to support them.

Most of the foreigners in eastern Germany, a total of nearly 200,000, are
Vietnamese and Mozambicans brought there under labor contracts by the former
Communist Government. During the Communist era, they lived in isolated apartment
complexes and were resented by many local people for their freedom to travel and
their access to Western goods.

Then there is the complication of the ethnic Germans. In the last two years, the
number of refugees of German background arriving from the Soviet Union, Poland
and other East European countries has soared. Last year, Germany received
397,000 of them, in addition to 193,000 people seeking political asylum.

By decree of the Bonn Government, these asylum seekers and other immigrants are
being settled in apartment buildings throughout Germany. Some find themselves in
the midst of communities brimming with frustration.

"Disappointment, anger and 45 percent unemployment in some areas is what leads
to violence," an eastern newspaper, the Leipziger Volkzeitung, said in an
editorial.

According to police reports, however, many of the youths recently arrested for
assaulting foreigners have both jobs and apartments. And in western Germany,
where nearly half the attacks have taken place, there is no pattern of poverty
or social dislocation.

"I hear people say that this is all a result of social pressures, but those
arguments aren't enough to explain what we're seeing now," said the principal of
a high school near Hoyerswerda. "Something else is at work. I can't put my
finger on just what it is, or maybe I don't want to."

Some Express No Shame

On the streets of Hoyerswerda, opinion over the events of recent weeks is
divided. Some residents are embarrassed that their town has become a national
symbol for hatred, but others express relief that foreigners do not live here
anymore.

Three young men enjoying an afternoon beer at a cafe said they hoped that one
day, there would be no more foreigners living in Germany.

"Let them stay in the bush," one of them urged, as his colleagues nodded
approval. "This is Germany. They don't belong here. German women with black
babies -- can you believe that?"

An older man passing by could not restrain his emotions on hearing such
sentiments.

"You don't know what that kind of ideology leads to!" he cried. "I spent four
years at war, and then five years in a prison camp. That's the result of hatred.
Don't let it happen again."

The youths shouted him down, and he walked away shaking his head.

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Germany highlighting Hoyerswerds (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE GATES HEARINGS;
Excerpts From Senate Hearing on Nomination of C.I.A. Chief

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 5768 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


Following are excerpts from hearings by the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence on the nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central In
telligence, as transcribed by the Federal Information Systems Corporation, a
private service, including a statement by Senator Frank H. Murkowski, Republican
of Alaska, vice-chairman of the committee, and testimony by Melvin A. Goodman, a
former division chief in Soviet affairs at the Central Intelligence Agency;
Graham E. Fuller, a senior analyst at the Rand Corporation and a former
intelligence officer, and Harold Ford, a C.I.A. contract employee:



Murkowski Statement

The allegation that intelligence analysis has been slanted or suppressed, .
.goes to the integrity and it goes to the very heart of the intelligence
process. The taxpayers have paid many, many millions of dollars to build an
exotic collection and communications system and to maintain a massive
intelligence bureaucracy. But what is that investment worth if the analysis that
actually goes to the policy makers at the end of the day is tainted?

But the specific issue before us today is whether Robert Gates, as the senior
manager of the C.I.A. in community analysis, was responsible for slanting or
suppressing intelligence to please policy makers. I think the record should note
that we have heard from three of the most experienced and respected figures in
American intelligence -- John McMahon, Admiral Inman and the current D.D.I.,
Richard Kerr -- testify that they believed Robert Gates did not do so. Mr. Gates
himself has given this committee strong assurances that he regards the integrity
of intelligence analysis as vital. In my view, therefore, those who assert the
contrary have a very heavy burden of proof.




Testimony by Mr. Goodman

. . . I want to thank the Committee for the opportunity to discuss these issues
in public.  For too long, the C.I.A. has hidden behind a veil of secrecy not to
protect legitimate assets or legitimate secrets, but to protect its reputation.
I feel this has complicated our efforts, the C.I.A.'s efforts, to recruit the
best brains in the country, and I also feel that it has created a public
perception of the C.I.A.'s disregard for law, morality and public disclosure.

I must say that there has been some confusion with regard to the circumstances
of my departure from the C.I.A. and I am going to take a few minutes to develop
that.

In 1985 I was told privately by the director of my office, that Bob Gates had
ordered my removal from my managerial position in SOVA. I was not the only one
to be removed, there were three of us.

Why did I leave the C.I.A.? I left because of politicization. And I must state
at the outset that I agree with John McMahon, that the integrity and the
objectivity of intelligence is central to the mission of the C.I.A.

Moreover, I strongly believe that any effort to subvert the process of
independent analysis, that is, politicization, can lead to the loss of life, as
in Vietnam; to national embarrassment, as in the Bay of Pigs; and to national
tragedy, as in Iran-contra.

Now, I can understand the country's desire to put Iran-contra in the background.
And I can certainly understand the Congress desire to put Iran-contra in the
background. But it should never be forgotten that the actions and the policies
of very few people in government, including the C.I.A., led to the sale of arms
to the same Iranians who held U.S. diplomats hostage for more than a year, and
were linked -- and we know this from intelligence sources -- were linked to the
murder of more than 200 Marines in Lebanon, the savage bombing of the U.S.
Embassy in Beirut, and the death of a good friend, Bob Ames.

There were two primary targets for politicization. First, nearly all
intelligence issues connected to covert action. That is, the operational
commitments that Casey had made regarding Iran, Nicaragua and Afghanistan.  All
those issues were politicalized. The second area concerned Casey's other major
concern, his world view of the Soviet Union.  That is, the Soviet Union as the
source of all U.S. problems in the international arena.  Casey seized on every
opportunity to exaggerate the Soviet threat. This included the case for Soviet
involvement in the papal plot, international terrorism and Soviet-third world
relations, my own area of specialization. All of those issues were
politicalized.

Gates's role in this activity was to corrupt the process and the ethics of
intelligence on all of these issues. He was Casey's filter in the Directorate of
Intelligence. He protected Casey's equity in these issues. And as the memo
calling for the bombing of Nicaragua showed, he pandered to Casey's agenda.
There were other memos of this type that maybe you have not seen. I remember one
calling for the bombing of Libya to, quote, change the map of the region,
unquote.

Gates's other contribution was to ignore and suppress signs of the Soviet
strategic retreat, including the collapse of the Soviet empire, even the Soviet
Union itself. . . .

I'm going to start with my first charge, the use of the Directorate of
Operations to slant Directorate of Intelligence analysis. I will be making a
very important charge, and I know it's a very serious charge. I believe that the
C.I.A. was responsible for providing the N.S.C. and even the President with
misleading and false information on a sensitive issue.

As you well know, George Cave, from the Directorate of Operations, joined Robert
McFarlane on the trip to Iran in 1986. Upon return, he was allowed or encouraged
to do several things.

One, he sent a typescript memo to the White House regarding Iranian politics.
This memo was never coordinated in the Directorate of Intelligence. The memo
argued for the fact that there was a moderate faction in Iran that wanted to
establish contacts with the United States.

Two, he sent Director of Operations reporting along with the P.D.B., that is the
President's daily brief, to the President. These reports, in terms of their
message, were at variance with the views of the Directorate of Intelligence and
the senior analyst on Iran with regard to whether or not there was a moderate
faction in Iran.

Three, he was allowed to brief the N.S.C. on the basis of these reports. He was
given a special channel to the White House and the N.S.C. Also, I might add that
the N.I.O. for Counterterrorism, Charlie Allen, sent a memo to the N.S.C. that
said that moderates were eager for improved relations with the United States and
that they were in sufficient charge to carry this policy out.

Five, the N.I.O. for Counterterrorism briefed the NSC on Iranian attitudes
toward the United States. Again, the analysts of the Directorate of Intelligence
were not consulted.

Now all the activity I've cited thus far was not coordinated within the
Directorate of Intelligence. It was at variance with the views of the
Directorate of Intelligence and with the entire intelligence community,
especially with regard to the existence of moderate factions in Iran wanting
contacts with the United States.

I believe, this is my opinion, that this was a conscious attempt to provide
uncoordinated information to the N.S.C. and even the President in support of
operational activities and that this effort had devastating consequences. This
activity also violated the ethics of the intelligence community. And it may mean
that when President Reagan said he thought he was dealing with a moderate
Iranian faction with interest in dealing with the United States, he was acting
on the basis of false C.I.A. analysis.

So a question remains. Was the President himself a victim of C.I.A.
misinformation or even disinformation?

Now, I want to deal with my third charge: Regarding intelligence on Iran, which
I believed involved every instrument of politicization.

Let me introduce this subject by providing some context. From 1981 to 1985, the
Directorate of Intelligence -- that is, the analysts in the Office of Soviet
Affairs and the analysts in the Near Eastern Office -- developed rather strong
analytical positions on several key issues: Iran support for terrorism was
significant; Iran's political scene did not include a moderate faction; seeking
ties with the United States; that the Soviet position in Iran was in decline;
and that Soviet arms sales were declining significantly. I might add that in
1986 there were no Soviet arms deliveries to Iran. The important point about all
of this is that all of this analysis was based on very strong evidence.

Now, one thing is certain and can be documented: The C.I.A. changed its
analytical position on all of these views during a very important period. We're
talking about mid-May 1985, before the delivery of Hawk missiles to Iran.

I think it's also important that the views were changed without a strong
evidentiary base, and over the protests of the senior analysts, particularly in
SOVA. I find it's also interesting that in 1986, after the disclosure of many of
these events associated with Iran-contra, the C.I.A. then reverted to the old
line it had consistently established from 1981 to 1985.

Now, Gates has told this committee that he was unaware of dissent . . . In fact,
Gates suppressed dissent, and he even strongly pressured one agency, the State
Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, not to take a footnote. I
think he also strong-armed his own Directorate of Intelligence.

Now, just to sum up this point, I think that this swerve in analysis in the
estimate on Iran and the intelligence on terrorism and the view with regard to
the moderate faction were all cases of politicization. That is my opinion.

Now I would like to deal with the suppression of intelligence. In some ways I
consider this just as important as my previous examples, because it deals with
all the things, all the analysis we were never permitted to say.  We're talking
about the intelligence that policymakers never got, trends that were never
reported, data that was suppressed, particularly with regard to Soviet
retrenchment and retreat.

This was true also with regard to Soviet problems in Africa, and I'll give you a
personal example from 1981. This was before Gates joined Bill Casey's staff. He
was still the N.I.O. for the Soviet Union. At that time he commissioned an
assessment on Soviet policy in Africa. I didn't believe the assessment was a
good one. I had to go to the meetings for coordination because I was the DI
representative to the coordination process, and I thought it was only fair to go
to the drafter to give him some advance warning that I was going to have some
problems at the meeting. I thought the paper had ignored evidence that the
Soviets were having their own problems in Africa. The analyst who drafted the
paper said, "Your problem isn't with me. I was just, quote, 'a hired gun' on
this paper." I said, "Who hired you?" He said, "Bob Gates."

I took my problems to Bob Gates. This was the first encounter I ever had with
Bob Gates, someone who I have known since 1968 --
 the first encounter with Gates on integrity and the intelligence process. There
was an angry exchange. It is not necessary to go into that. The important point
I want to make is that when we got to the coordination meeting, even though some
changes were made in the coordination process, at one point in these
deliberations Bob Gates says this is the paper that Casey wants, and this is the
paper that Casey is going to get.

I want to just point out one other issue. We lost a lot of good senior people in
the directorate of Intelligence because of this activity. I think we lost our
best people. Some of our best people are working now for other intelligence
agencies.

Let me tell you about one anecdote of someone who has stayed behind, who is
still there. One day he wrote a piece that apparently attracted a great deal of
anger of the management of the Office of Soviet Analysis -- this was recent,
this was in the last year.  He was called in by his supervisor, and I quote, You
know, this isn't a democracy we're running here. Your job is to know the message
the office wants and make sure the analysts get it right, unquote.

Frankly, I find this history distasteful. I find my own recollections
distasteful. I don't want anyone on this committee to think that I get any
satisfaction whatsoever out of bringing any of this to you. I might add that I
did not come to the committee; the committee came to me.

Frankly, I worry about the signal that would be sent in returning Gates to the
environment he created. I worry about the effect this would have on the
standards of others back at the Central Intelligence Agency to be led by someone
so lacking in vision, integrity and courage.

Testimony by Fuller

Mr. Chairman, as I read the testimony of others in the past week, I find myself
disquieted. Serious charges have been raised against Bob Gates, especially those
of Mel Goodman. While I know and respect Mel Goodman as a very knowledgeable and
experienced Soviet analyst, in all frankness, I do not readily recognize the Bob
Gates described in his testimony. I am indeed disturbed at hearing the specific
and worrisome accusations that he levels against Gates. But I find that when he
talks on those incidents of which I am personally familiar, his account, in my
opinion, contain serious distortions in content and in the manner of telling.

In brief, I do not believe that during my five-year's tenure at the National
Intelligence Council I witnessed anything that I would call improprieties in the
conduct of estimative work by Bob Gates. I have no direct knowledge of his
leadership of the DI, which has figured in so much of the testimony. But I do
know that within the confines of the NIC and the National Intelligence
Estimates, I have not seen Gates engage in anything that can be loosely called
polticization of intelligence.

It is very important to distinguish between sharp differences of opinion and
sharp disagreements about the implications of those differences on the one hand
and deliberate distortion of facts on the other.

During my entire time at the N.I.C., I felt there was a scrupulous regard and
concern for the integrity of the estimative process and a singularly high
proportion of time spent in talking about what the integrity of that process
implies in concrete terms.

'Taken Flack for Casey'

To be specific, at no time was I ever told what either the administration or
Gates or Casey wanted to come out of an estimate or what it should say or what
conclusions it should reach. Not only was I never told what to say, but I would
have regarded it as outrageously improper to even hear the suggestion and I
would have rejected it forthright.

I have taken flack for Casey for what we ended saying on occasion. He did not
always like the product that I delivered to him. But I have never been told what
to say, even indirectly. There was never a hint that there was an unspoken line
somehow to follow and that I was to respond to.

Mr. Chairman, I may have many failings and I have indeed made errors in calling
the political shots correctly on a number of issues over my many years in this
very risky business of prediction. But nobody who knows me would ever call me a
toady or patsy to upper management.

Casey had a broad sense of global politics and the interrelationships of things.
He could usually think of 10 more implications of any international event than
the average analyst could. He read widely, and his N.I.O.'s had to run to keep
up with his restless mind and flow of various hypotheses. He was an unabashed
cold warrior and tended to view all events in terms of their impact on the
struggle with the Soviet Union apart from other regional implications.

Mr. Goodman, I think, has suggested what I think is a slight parody of Casey's
views on these things.

Now Bob Gates may be a skillful staffer who has served a number of differing
bosses well. But he, too, is not a faceless bureaucrat.  He is immensely
intelligent, has a superb grasp of substance. He is a quick study, and he fully
understands the relationship between policy and intelligence. He was indeed able
to keep pace with Casey's own geopolitical instincts, but he was also able to
tone down some of Casey's more far-fetched hypotheses, in discussions which were
held in which I have been personally present.

Where Casey did not always hide what he hoped intelligence might indicate, Gates
was always fully aware of the requirements of analytic procedure and the
validity of independent analysis from everything I saw within the NIC. I cannot
speak to charges leveled about Gates' handling of research within the D.I. . . .
.

Gates did share a hardline view, but a very well-informed view of the Soviet
Union, independent of Casey. The international situation at that time, I would
argue, perhaps justified a fairly hard line view in any case. The world was very
different in 1980 to 1985, prior to Gorbachev, than it has been in these
stunning years that we have witnessed following the Gorbachev tenure.

I felt [there] was the development of an adversary culture within CIA -- within
at least the Third World branch of SOVA, given Mr. Casey's own strong views, Bob
Gates' partial adherence to some of those views, and the very strongly felt
discontent within the SOVA-Third World group that saw things quite differently .
. . .

My own sense of [the Soviet-third world group] was not that they were wrong in
their understanding of what the Soviets' stated positions were and what Soviet
writings and analysis were in these things, but that sometimes they reflected
less of an understanding of the countries whose Soviet relationships they were
examining. As someone who had served overseas for many years, I had a slightly
different sense of reality about the Soviets on the ground...

It was not part of the SOVA culture to believe that, quote, That was the way the
Soviets would do business, unquote. No SOVA analysts would have been likely to
tell you, until the troops were lined up and ready to go, that the U.S.S.R.
would ever send the Red Army into Afghanistan, because the Soviet Union had no
history and no background of doing that.

When Mr. Goodman suggests, for example, that in the year that we were doing the
analysis on Iran that the Soviets were losing a position in Iran and were
systematically finding their position weakened, I would only like to point out
that the same was true in Afghanistan in the year that preceded the Soviet coup
there.

.  .  .


 Now I do not want to oversimplify what were complex views of both sides of
these debates. But I for one independently grew unhappy with the product that I
received from many SOVA Third World analysts.  There was a liberal versus
conservative struggle, and this was not a healthy situation within the Agency to
have exist.

Iran was ultimately the key power in the Gulf and already a major ideological
threat to the region and to Western interests there through its zealous Islamic
fundamentalism.

But American policies towards Iran in that period were based solely on two
factors and had only two goals: one was to strike back at Iranian terrorism and
the other was to staunch all flow of any weapons from the West to Iran. Now
these goals were certainly understandable. . . .These two factors hardly
constituted a serious policy designed to get the United States back into some
position in Iran. We were engaged in a basic struggle with Moscow for influence
in Iran, the most important country on the entire southern Soviet border.

I was likewise concerned with our excessive tilt towards Saddam Hussein, who --
and I am on record on this -- I felt had never moderated during the Gulf War.
Now DIA analysts -- excuse me, DI analysts within the Agency's analytic section
had already produced analyses earlier that year indicating concern for
instability, future instability in Iran, with which I agreed. Any careful look
at the situation raised potentially alarming prospects. The clerical regime was
perhaps foundering. Khomeini was aging and losing grip daily on the situation,
opening the way potentially to radical leftist forces within the country.

I was concerned that a very serious geopolitical imbalance could be emerging in
Iran of major import to U.S. policies. If Western arms -- if the Western arms
embargo was a total success, it was logical that Moscow would be the most
natural next source of arms and could quickly come to gain a monopoly over arms
to Iran if it wished. A direct arms relationship with Moscow would have provided
a major strategic advance for Moscow in Iran . . . . A weakening clerical regime
could certainly strike a bargain with the devil to survive. I believe that
Moscow would not turn down that opportunity if it were presented, especially as
the clerical regime seemed to move towards possible collapse in that year, as
was feared by the CIA's own estimative Middle East people.

A pro-Soviet group conceivably could have come to power in Iran under such
circumstances, a far worse disaster for the West than Afghanistan had been so
far. I had communicated my concerns to Casey on this quite unsolicited at about
this time.

When the SOVA analyst brought me his draft portion of the estimate, Mr.
Chairman, on Soviet policy towards Iran, I was immediately unhappy. It dismissed
the possibility that the USSR would even seek to take advantage of the desperate
arms need in Iran and it comfortably dismissed any serious Soviet design or
intention to gain dominant influence in Iran in the foreseeable future. Such a
view ignored several hundred years of Russian expansionism inexorably southward
. . . .

It ignored a Soviet effort to ditch Iraq in favor of Iran as soon as Khomeini
had come to power. . . . Even if the possibility were only slight, the impact of
such a logical move by Moscow to support left wing forces in Iran, to exploit
chaos, or to become a sole arms source to Iran would have been a major political
coup for Moscow and a major loss for the U.S.

I felt that a formal warning of this eventuality -- potential eventuality was of
critical importance to US interests. And estiamtes are partly designed to play a
warning function as well.

I do believe that it can only be through the relentless examination of various
new hypotheses and counterhypotheses that the intelligence community will ever
have a chance to get at the elusive truths of forecasting the unknowable.

Because of this legitimate disagreement, SOVA analysts -- some of them -- have
chosen to cast this issue in terms of right and wrong, truth versus
politicization. Their own internal frustrations seem to have caused them to
reject out of hand this line of analysis that was not stated as a certitude on
my part but only as a distinct and serious strategic possibility that the U.S.
Government must be watchful for.

The argument instead has been presented now as to being -- serving either Casey
or serving Gates or serving the White House. I have not even been given the
courtesy of simply being called "wrong," but rather portrayed as someone else's
instrument in the struggle against SOVA. Whether the application of the word
"wrong" is appropriate in any case is questionable when one speaks of the
warning function in intelligence. . . .

'Plenty of Fires'

No, in the end the barn did not burn down, but there were plenty of fires raging
in the region and people were playing with matches in the barn. Even the
possibility of this major calamity for American interests seems not to have been
acknowledged by SOVA analysts.

Mr. Chairman, the N.I.O. and I and Gates were also accused of politicization in
an estimate we did on Soviet-Israeli relations in a year or so later. In that
estimate, both myself and the Soviet N.I.O., impressed with the new vigor of
Gorbachev in foreign affairs in the early days, reconsidered the old issue of
Soviet-Israeli relations, and we felt, in fact, by now there were very good
reasons why it would now be in the Soviet advantage to establish diplomatic
relations with Israel within, as the estimate said, within possibly the next 18
months.

. . . There were no policy needs, Mr. chairman, as far as I can see. To say that
the Soviets might do this I could see as playing one agenda; to say that they
wouldn't do it might play to another policy agenda.

Our revisionist review, myself and the Soviet N.I.O., of this time-honored SOVA
position -- that we chose to review this time-honored position was viewed with
scorn by SOVA, and our estimate was acknowledged -- even though our estimate
openly acknowledged a difference of opinion and explicitly stated so.

SOVA analysts now triumphantly point out that they were right; that diplomatic
relations were not, in fact, restored within 18 months between the Soviet Union
and Israel.  But if formal relations were not restored, Mr. Chairman, in fact a
whole revolution came out about in Soviet relations with the whole region, and
informal ties, informal ties with Israel blossomed extraordinarily. It was a
true time of revolution.

This indeed -- and this is a very important point, Mr. chairman, this is one of
the dilemmas of intelligence work. It is not a good versus evil. It is a dilemma
of intelligence work. Does absence of evidence mean that something is not there
or it has not happened? How much should we rely on intuition, judgment and
experience in appraising the likelihood of events or motives or the issue of who
benefits from an event?

This dilemma can never be solved. SOVA seems to have clung to the idea that the
sweeping force of, quote, no evidence, means that we don't think it happened,
which is the safe and perhaps appropriate position for a junior analyst. But is
a more experienced analyst or manager wrong to examine other considerations even
in the absence of evidence that we may never collect?

Mr. Chairman, this is the real world of intelligence analysis that I knew and
experienced. That is the Casey and the Bob Gates that I know. I am acutely aware
that we have many analysts, including serious respected and knowledgeable senior
analysts and junior analysts, who somehow feel pain at the way the process
worked when they were there.

But in the trenches of analysis and policy over the years mistakes do get made.
We have all made them. God knows I have made mistakes in my own judgments, and I
will probably go on to make more in the future.  Yet I have not personally
experienced anything that I would call true politicalization of estimates in my
personal experience, even by Casey . . . . Nor do I think that politicalization
accurately or fairly describes the Gates that I worked with for five years,
whatever failings, harshness, insensitivies, or analytical misjudgments he, too,
may be guilty of in this period.

Testimony by Mr. Ford

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some very difficult things to say today, but I
feel I must say them.

In brief, my message is that I think Robert Gates should not be confirmed as
Director of Central Intelligence. This is a difficult task for me, in part
because though semiretired, I am still an employee of the C.I.A. on part-time
contract. This is also a very painful task for me. It is painful to be negative
about someone who has been my colleague, a relationship that was cooperative
throughout, and where there was no bad blood whatsoever between us. Moreover, as
my supervisor, Bob Gates was good to me and awareded me increased
responsibilities. Furthermore, he is extremely able and has clearly had unique
experience in both the production of intelligence and its use by the country's
to decisionmakers. It is also painful to have to differ with my good friend,
Graham Fuller. I see things differently, I see Bob Gates diferently, as I will
spell out.

Discerning what is a skewing of intelligence and what is not is a tricky
business, but from my four decades of experience in and around intelligence, I
think I can help the committee thread its way through the differing kinds of
pressure which Bob Gates did or did not bring on intelligence analysis. It is my
view that many of his pressures were justified as he sought to sharpen analysis
and its usefulness to decision-makers. Secondly, that some of the pressures he
brought on analysis simply reflected differing professional judgments, and that
some of the allegations that he skewed intelligence doubtless have arisen from
an analyst whose pride was damaged by his revisions. Thirdly, however, as I am
prepared to discuss at greater length, it is my view based on documents that
have been released in the last few days, on testimonies that have been given to
this committee of late, and on the confidence of many C.I.A. officers whose
abilities and character I respect, that other of Bob Gates pressures have gone
beyond professional bounds and clearly constitute a skewing of intelligence. Not
in the fields of military and strategic issues, but chiefly concerning Soviet
political matters, Soviet's and the third world.

With respect to the latter, I would interject, events have proved that the
Soviets have for some years been definitely lessening their commitments in Asia,
Africa, and Latin America; thus validating the earlier judgments that SOVA made,
not those that Bob Gates and his supporters did.

I would also add that the skewing of intelligence and the purging of dissident
D.D.I. analysts, as we've already heard today, goes considerably beyond the four
particular issues this committee happens to be focusing upon. It isn't wholly
across the board, but there are many more than just four issues.

In my view, that 1985 estimate on Iran was not an estimate in the usual sense. A
national intelligence estimate presents the data -- all the data on all sides --
and then draws what seem to be the most likely patterns and the most likely
future. If an N.I.E. or S.N.I.E. goes on to talk about, "Well, it's possible
that the Soviets might do this, the worst case that they might do this," it
clearly says so. This 1985 estimate was a worst-case paper, clearly, but it did
not clue the reader that it was, and therefore the readers could misjudge it,
thinking this is the way things were going to be -- not this is the way things
might be if the Soviets did their damnedest.

More important, that 1985 estimate skewed -- had significant policy
consequences. As the Congress's Iran-contra report and the Tower Report both
indicate, that estimate directly fed White House interest and enthusiasm with
respect to reversing the then-boycott of U.S. arms to Iran. Again, as Doug
MacEachin said in his memo to Dick Kerr of January 1987, later national
intelligence estimates backed off from the 1985 estimate's stress on the Soviet
threat to Iran.

I differ with Graham. I think no one can read these without drawing that same
conclusion. They softened that view. Why? Because it became more clear that the
level of Soviet military support to Iran had been dropping precipitiously for
some years.

As for the pressures Bob Gates wrought within C.I.A. overall, it is clear that
he leaned much more heavily on intelligence analysts in the Directorate of
Intelligence than he did with the N.I.C. This is probably because it is harder,
much harder, as Graham has said, to skew a broad national intelligenc estimate
than it is the narrower questions more often addressed by and in the D.D.I.
Secondly, it was probably more difficult because the D.D.I.'s analysts are
mostly younger, more junior officers than the N.I.C.'s tough veterans.

Now, the key question before us, why do I take the painful step of urging that
Bob Gates not be confirmed?

Several reasons. First, my views on the nomination have become markedly more
critical since the confirmation hearingfs began . . . .

Secondly, I have become more critical because of certain testimonies of Bob
Gates himself. His earlier testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,
which I mentioned a moment ago, and his many instances of forgetfulness in his
responses to this committee. I am sorry to say it, but the word that for me
captures this latter testimony of his is clever. The forgetfulness of this
brilliant officer gifted with a photographic memory, does not to me instill
confidence.

Thirdly, to develop the finest U.S. intelliegence possible, as D.C.I., Gates
would have to attract and recruit the best brains in the country. I fear that he
would have some difficulty doing so because many would shy away from serving a
D.C.I. about whom some serious questions have been raised.

Fourthly, there should also be reservations about Bob Gates's analytical style
and judgment. Over the years the best analytical results in U.S. intelligence
have occurred when the D.C.I. attracted the very best analytical talent he could
find, then listen to their judgments, ground in his own and then presented their
collective views to the senior policymakers.

My view that Bob Gates has ignored or scorned the views of others whose
assessments did not accord with his own would be okay if he were uniquely all
seeing. The trouble is he has not been. Most importantly, he has been dead wrong
on the central analytic target of the past few years -- the outlook for change,
or not, in the fortunes of the U.S.S.R. and the Soviet-European block.  He was
wrong in presenting the Soviet threat to Iran in 1985 as a true N.I.E., and then
telling the Senate Foreign Relations Committee two years later that those things
still applied. I think Bob Gates was overly certain earlier that the Soviets ran
or were in charge of international terrorism. He certainly was overly certain
that the sky would fall if we didn't bomb Nicaragua, to say nothing of the
wisdom of such a recommended course of action.

The U.S.A. deserves a D.C.I. whose analytic batting average is better than that,
especially if that D.C.I. tends to force his views on C.I.A. and the
intelligence community, and especially at a time when U.S. intelligence and US
policy face a far more complex world than the one we have known.

I do agree with Admiral Inman's testimony that there will not necessarily be
dancing in the streets in C.I.A. if Bob Gates becomes the D.C.I. I do feel,
however, that Admiral Inman may have left a mistaken impression with this
committee that the reason C.I.A. senior officers might not wholly welcome a
D.C.I. Gates is because they are simply set in their ways and don't want to have
to change.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Graham E. Fuller, who worked for Robert M. Gates at the C.I.A.,
testified that the agency's Soviet division slanted intelligence on the Soviet
Union because of the strong views of Mr. Gates and of William J. Casey, who was
then Director of Central Intelligence. (Andrea Mohin for The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 2, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE GATES HEARINGS;
Excerpts From C.I.A. Documents Released in Gates Hearings

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4128 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


The Senate Intelligence Committee today gave outsiders a rare glimpse into the
way the Central Intelligence Agency molds the secrets it gathers into the white
papers, known as intelligence estimates, that the White House uses to help shape
foreign policy. A sheaf of declassified documents released as part of committee
hearings on Robert M. Gates's nomination to become Director of Central
Intelligence reflects the debate between Mr. Gates and his staff of analysts
over some of the most heated intelligence issues of the 1980's.

Following are excerpts of some of those documents, reflecting internal
disagreements over Soviet involvement in the attempted assassination of Pope
John Paul II, Soviet influence in Iran and elsewhere in the third world and the
effect of United States economic sanctions against Libya.

The excerpts reflect debates about the quality of written intelligence analyses
that were produced by experts at the C.I.A. or the National Intelligence
Council. The council is a senior body of analysts that represents the consensus
view of all United States intelligence agencies on world events. From 1982 to
1986, Mr. Gates was both the C.I.A.'s Deputy Director for Intelligence -- the
head of its analysis shop -- and chairman of the National Intelligence Council.

Still classified -- and therefore not published here -- are the actual estimates
that sparked the debates. The exception is the situation in Iran in the early
and mid-1980's, a subject on which many analyses by the C.I.A. and the
intelligence council have been made public. Several others were released today.
Excerpts from one are printed below.

Soviet Role in Third World

Melvin A. Goodman, a deputy division chief in the C.I.A.'s Soviet analytical
division, wrote a draft National Intelligence Estimate in early 1982 concluding
that Soviet influence in the third world may be reaching its limit. Mr. Gates,
then head of the C.I.A.'s intelligence analysis shop, responded with a
memorandum on Feb. 14, 1982, sharply criticizing the report.

Per your request, I have read the attached draft and, unhappily, find it to be
rather dry and lacking any sense of the dynamics of Soviet involvement in the
third world . . .

*. . . one has only a snapshot of Soviet involvement in the third world that
tends too much to reflect on present opportunities and power balances and less
on the ideological and political motives that have impelled the Soviet Union to
an activist role in the third world now for more than 60 years. . . .

This section would then draw the distinction between the policies that the
Soviets pursued until the mid-1970's and then the different kind of involvement
that the Soviets have sponsored since that time, including a modernization of
the Cuban armed forces to encourage Cuba's greater role abroad. . . .

In sum, this estimate misses the whole historical significance of Soviet
involvement in the third world and the ways in which their tactics and approach
have changed in the postwar period. The reader cannot understand Soviet
activities in the third world without some understanding of these changes. The
importance of the changes is reflected by the fact that the Soviets have allowed
their relationship with the United States to founder in many respects over the
last eight years over the question of their involvement in the third world. . .
.

*On page 10 the estimate draft contends that Moscow believes that the U.S. is
now more willing to counter Soviet activities in the third world than during the
immediate post-Vietnam years. I think it is not possible yet to draw that
conclusion and I think the Soviets themselves have not drawn that conclusion. So
far, except in El Salvador, the Soviets principally have seen American rhetoric
since 1975 and very little action. . . . The only place they know we are
involved to any degree at all is in Afghanistan. . . .

*On page 24, the draft indicates that Soviets will have more difficulty in
gaining new clients than after first becoming active in the third world in the
1950's. Again, this does not reflect the change in Soviet tactics. It is much
easier for the Soviets to let the Cubans or the Libyans or others develop such
clients and to support them indirectly than it is to do so directly. Examples
include Grenada and potentially Suriname. . . .

*The estimate seems to conclude that fewer opportunities will present themselves
to the Soviets in the 1980's than before for a variety of reasons and that the
opportunities the Soviets have exploited will begin to present them with
increased problems. I think this overlooks the creativity of the Soviet approach
. . . I see a lot more trouble for us in the third world in the years ahead
because it's easier to make trouble than it is to solve it.

Libya Analysis Assailed

On July 12, 1983, Mr. Gates sent a memo to the director of the C.I.A.'s Near
East and South Asia analysis division, criticizing a report that concluded
United States economic sanctions against Libya were ineffective.

1. This seems to me too narrow a cut at this subject and presumes an important
lack of sophistication . . . it is fairly well documented that few, if any,
expected the sanctions to have a significant economic impact . . .

2. It seems to me that they went ahead as a political gesture to dramatize
Qaddafi's behavior, [Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, Libya's leader] rivet attention on
his activities, and try to ostracize him. . . .

3. I have three additional problems with the paper:

*Most importantly, the paper conveys (unintentionally or not) a strong bias on
the part of the author against economic sanctions. The analysis simply does not
sound objective.

*Second, I believe the paper is too generalized for those interested in the
topic.

*Finally, the paper has the underlying but unproven assumption that Libya has
been pushed further into the Soviet camp by our sanctions. No attempt is made to
prove this . . . These references add to an aura of slanted analysis.

4. In sum, the paper reads like the author had reached his conclusions at the
beginning and then researched and wrote the paper to substantiate the
conclusions.

Analysts' Response

On July 21, 1983, the analysts defended the report.

We disagree that few, if any, policymakers expected the sanctions to have a
significant economic impact or to cause Qaddafi to change his stripes. . . .
This is evidenced by:

*A 17 December memo from [censored] to the D.C.I. [William J. Casey, then
Director of Central Intelligence] . . . This memo states: "To sum up, the
Intelligence Community unanimously feels the proposed sanctions would be
counterproductive. If they are applied, their symbolic nature must be clearly
understood. I do not believe the policy level task force personnel [the Reagan
Administration policymakers who decided to impose sanctions] are seized with
this fact."

*A draft of the discussion paper from a 4 February N.S.C. [National Security
Council] meeting which states "Economic sanctions . . . as well as other
economic and military measures are intended not only to signal Qaddhafi about
our displeasure, but to pressure him as well to cease his policies of
international terrorism and aggression." *A 1 September 1982 meeting of the
Libyan Working Group called by [censored] to "review the effects of our economic
measures." If the sanctions were only a symbolic gesture, why hold this meeting?

We agree that the author and reviewers of the paper pretty well knew the
conclusions the paper would reach before it was written and in fact do have a
bias against economic sanctions as applied against Libya. We fail to see any
problem with this, however, since this simply reflects the experience,
knowledge, and judgment of the individuals involved.



Attempted Assassination of Pope

In early 1985, Director Casey ordered Mr. Gates to review intelligence on the
shooting of Pope John Paul II four years earlier, with the stated aim of making
the strongest argument that the Soviet Union had masterminded the assassination
attempt. A review of the evidence in 1983 had concluded that the Soviets were
not involved in the shooting by Mehmet Ali Agca, the Turkish gunman.

Mr. Gates assigned three analysts to prepare the case, entitled "Agca's Attempt
to Kill the Pope: The Case for Soviet Involvement." The report was not among the
documents made public today.

Some five months later, an internal C.I.A. review panel produced a report that
found "serious shortcomings" in both the 1983 and 1985 analyses, as well as
other C.I.A. reports on the assassination attempt.

Key Findings

*Our review of the product record on the Papal assassination attempt reveals
some serious shortcomings . . .

*Alternative explanations were not adequately examined . . .

*The widespread perception that upper management had strong and in some cases
conflicting views on the issue had a pervasive effect on the analytic and
production process.

*Senior management may want to take some steps to dispel the perception in some
quarters that the issue has become politicized . . .

I. Nature of the Case and the Analytic Environment

The environment with C.I.A. -- particularly the reorganization of the D.I. in
late 1981, the mindsets prevailing in various offices, and the "hot potato
climate" associated with the [Papal shooting] case -- also influenced the amount
and quality of D.I. production. [Mr. Gates and other senior officials had
overhauled the C.I.A.'s analysis division. They also created new offices,
covering such subjects as terrorism, that crossed both geographic and topical
lines, sparking turf fights among analysts.]

Responsibility for the case initially went to the Terrorism Branch. . . . .

As time went on and the Italian judicial investigation increasingly pointed to
Bulgarian involvement, the case became the responsibility of one analyst in
O.G.I. This analyst was eventually designated by the D.D.I. [Deputy Director for
Intelligence] as the key person responsible for the case within the D.I. . . .
As a result, incentives for interoffice cooperation began to evaporate.

Even more important appears to be the view expressed by some analysts
interviewed that most SOVA [Office of Soviet Analysis] analysts and managers
preferred, at least in the early years, not to consider the "seamy" side of
Soviet policy -- wet operations [assassinations] and the like. . . .

Perhaps the most important factor contributing to this climate was the
perception by analysts and managers that the seventh floor [the C.I.A.'s
executive offices] had strong views on the case. Most thought that the D.C.I.
[Mr. Casey] had a strong gut feeling that the Soviets were involved; most also
were convinced that the D.D.C.I. [then John McMahon] for a long time was
persuaded that the tradecraft exhibited did not bear the marks of a Soviet
operation.

II. Setting the Stage: Moscow and the Polish Pope

By early 1981 . . . several D.I. products warned that Moscow might be growing
"disillusioned with the utility of its connection" because it had not led to
greater calm in Poland and since the Soviets were unhappy with Walesa's [Lech
Walesa, the Solidarity leader] highly publicized meetings with the Pope. In
retrospect, we would have expected that this latter reporting would have set the
stage for analysts at least to consider Soviet motives for getting rid of the
Pope. In fact, they continued to see the Pope as a moderating force . . .

III. The Production Record

Looking first at the internal agency documents and responses to specific
external questions (30 documents covering September 1982 to June 1985), several
patterns emerge:

*As in the current and serial publications, the tendency is to cast doubt on
Bulgarian complicity.

*The major recurrent reasons for this position are the agency's inability to
obtain specific evidence of a Bulgarian/Soviet link, [and] the supposedly
"sloppy" tradecraft in the operation.

*The nearly complete absence of consideration of alternative scenarios to
explain the Papal shooting.

Noteworthy by its uniqueness in mentioning alternative scenarios is a memo on 17
September 1982 from the D.D.I. to the D.C.I. titled Status of the Investigation
of the Attempted Assassination of Pope John Paul II. After discussing in
considerable detail what the agency knew about the case, the memo concluded that
"hard information . . . supports several scenarios not all of which are mutually
exclusive:

*That Agca's plans . . . were known beforehand, perhaps to one or more of
several parties including the Bulgarian service and rightist Turkish terrorists.

*That Agca attempted to assassinate the Pope without sponsorship and for his own
reasons . . .

*That Agca was a hired assassin."

But the memo then went on to judge that if Agca was a hired assassin, Turkish
terrorists were probably his paymasters, because the Soviets would have regarded
him as having "too high" a profile and being "too risky an instrument."

Despite the unidimensional thrust of much of the ad hoc production, the D.I., in
our judgment, took a balanced, objective -- and agnostic -- view of the case in
the three instances in which it addressed a wide or important external audience.


Of the three formal Intelligence Assessments [I.A.s] the D.I. has produced since
the assassination attempt, two address the question of bloc complicity. These
are "The Papal Assassination Attempt: A Review of the Record" (May 1983) and
"Agca's Attempt to Kill the Pope: The Case for Soviet Involvement" (April 1985).
Both papers are impressive efforts to bring some order out of the fragmentary
and often contradictory data on the case. Judging from our own review of the two
papers and from our interviews with key participants, however, both assessments
were troubled by problems in coordination and sourcing.

The 1985 I.A., a joint effort by O.G.I. and SOVA, is the agency's most
comprehensive look at the case to date. By any standard, it is an impressive
compilation of the facts and marshalling of the evidence and reasoning for
Soviet involvement. . . .

The I.A. breaks new ground by taking the agency's first comprehensive look at
the possibility of Soviet complicity. But many of the people we interviewed
thought the paper had an unusual thrust for an intelligence assessment. They
thought that calling the paper "The Case for Soviet Involvement" and marshalling
evidence only for the side "stacked the deck" in favor of that argument and ran
the risk of appearing biased. This impression was further reinforced, they
thought, by the "unbalanced" treatment of counterarguments in the text.

Many participants in the process thought that without the qualifiers,
particularly on source reliability, the Key Judgments give readers the
impression that the agency is saying -- more definitively than the paper intends
or the evidence warrants -- the Soviets were responsible. At the very least, the
sourcing in the Key Judgments is inconsistent with the D.D.I. guidance in 1982
to "focus on the weakest element in the collection chain in terms of
reliability" when referring to D.O. [Directorate of Operations] sources in D.I.
publications.

The sourcing issue was at the heart of complaints about coordination from
officers in D.O./S.E. [the C.I.A. division that runs clandestine operations in
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe] and D.O./EUR [the Agency's European
operaitons division]. S.E. officers said their reservations about the sourcing
chain on the original raw reports were serious enough that they might not have
disseminated the reports had it not been for the high interest in the subject.
In their view, the paper was deliberately skewed to make the case for Soviet
complicity look more solid that it is; they thought the author(s) had been
"manipulated."

The concerns about "balance" and about readers misinterpreting the paper might
have been eased by the inclusion of a Scope Note saying that the paper
deliberately does not try to make the counterargument against Soviet complicity.
Absent such a Scope Note, this paper, like its 1983 counterpart, would have been
strengthened and made more balanced by consideration of alternative scenarios.

But we would not exclude the possibility that the agency might not, in the final
analysis, be able to choose any single theory as the most plausible; in this
case, we would serve our readers well by emphasizing the complexity of the case,
the contradictory nature of the evidence, and the difficulty of arriving at any
firm conclusion. As the D.I. record stands now, our readers are left to gues
what the Agency poistion is on this issue, or, indeed, whether we have a
position. The definitive piece is yet to be written.

IV. Problems in the Analytic Process

. . . Another external influence was the "perception in the trenches that there
was a mindset at the highest levels" in the U.S. Government and the agency that
the Soviets were behind the attempt on the Pope's life. In one manager's
opinion, the effect of this perception on analysts was either to intimidate them
or (in our view, more often) to push them into a defensive posture. . . .

In the early phases of the case, however, there appears to have been a conscious
effort on the part of upper management -- the D.D.I., at least -- to keep hands
off the D.I. product in order to avoid the appearance of manipulating the
analytic process. . . .

Largely because of the sensitivity of the issue, however, we found that most ad
hoc production was initiated from on-high or in response to outside request
rather than from below. So, despite the D.D.I.'s best efforts, there was a
perception among analysts of upper-level direction, which became more pronounced
after the new evidence of Soviet complicity was acquired. In the event, however,
our interviews suggested that it was not so much D.C.I. or D.D.I. direction as
it was an effort on the part of some D.I. managers at the next one or two layers
down to be responsive to perceived D.C.I. and D.D.I. desires.

V. Conclusions

*Throughout the case, greater emphasis should have been placed on analysis of
alternative scenarios . . .

*Finally, senior management could have provided clearer and more explicit
guidance -- to all of the relevant players -- on how it viewed this problem . .
. The last point may hold the key to where the agency goes from here in dealing
with the case. . . . As things stand now, there is a deeply rooted perception at
the working level that senior management:

*Regards this as a politically sensitive case that requires special handling.

*Leans toward the view that the Soviets were involved.

*Takes a special interest in the content and timing of what is published on this
issue.

*Has "anointed" one office, and indeed one analyst, with principal
responsibility for the problem and has therefore discouraged others from taking
initiative on the issue.

Changing U.S. Policy on Iran

On May 17, 1985, the chief Middle East analyst for the National Intelligence
Council, Graham E. Fuller, sent Mr. Casey and Mr. McMahon one in a series of
memoranda arguing that the United States and the Soviet Union were reaching a
crossroads in their competition for influence in Iran. Critics say that this and
other C.I.A. and intelligence council analyses helped create the view of Iran
within the Reagan Administration that led to the arms-for-hostages scandal. In
Senate hearings today, they contended that Mr. Gates suppressed dissenting views
of other C.I.A. analysts.



1. The U.S. faces a grim situation in developing a new policy toward Iran.
Events are moving largely against our interests and we have few palatable
alternatives. In bluntest form, the Khomeini regime is faltering and may be
moving toward a moment of truth; we will soon see a struggle for succession. The
U.S. has almost no cards to play; the U.S.S.R. has many. . . .

2. The Twin Pillars of U.S. Policy. U.S. policy at present comes down to two
major pillars.

*We will respond with force directly if Iran should undertake another terrorist
outrage against the U.S.

*We seek to choke off all arms supplies to Teheran wherever possible.

3. Terrorist Attack: We can and must have some policy against terrorism. We must
also recognize that this cannot represent the bulk of our policy toward Iran.
Furthermore, radical forces in Teheran may welcome a direct confrontation with
the U.S. -- including U.S. military retaliation -- in the hopes of replaying its
extraordinarily successful gambit against the U.S. in the 1979 hostage crisis.

..  .


5. These two pillars of U.S. policy -- both sensible while Iran was in a vacuum
and Khomeini was strong -- can no longer serve as the primary vehicle for U.S.
policy toward Iran. Both are entirely negative in nature and may now serve to
facilitate Soviet interests more than our own.

6. Some Broader Policy Considerations. Nobody has any brilliant ideas about how
to get us back into Teheran. Nearly all tentative proposals require
uncomfortable choices and clear-cut downsides. Nonetheless, we need to review a
broad spectrum of ideas. I submit below a range of thoughts, carrots and sticks
-- all of which are flawed -- but which might assist in sparking better and more
refined positions to meet our needs.

a. Work with Iraq to bring Teheran to its knees. We could consider moving much
closer to Iraq to bring the war to a quicker end -- particularly by way of
encouraging crippling attacks on Kharg Island and key Iranian economic
facilities. . . . Disadvantage: We have no knowledge about who would emerge
victorious from such shambles; it could well be radical elements filled with
hatred of the U.S.

b. Open up Iran to friendly state influence. We could tell all our European
allies, as well as Israel, Turkey, Pakistan, China, Japan, Brazil and Argentina
that Western influence must develop a paramount position during this critical
period in Iran. We would remove all restrictions in sales -- including military
-- to Iran. . . . Disadvantage: Possible encouragement for Iranian perpetuation
of the war.

c. Go after Iran's radical allies. While direct U.S. assault against Iran could
bring about the very thing we wish to avoid, i.e. Soviet domination of Iran,
direct attack on Iran's radical allies, Syrian and Libya, would probably sober
Iran and weaken its support from those quarters. . . . This "indirect strategy"
would demonstrate U.S. resolve against radicalism without directly pushing Iran
in the wrong direction. Unlike Iran, we have nothing to lose in Libya and
everything to gain.

d. Battening down the hatches in Turkey and Pakistan. Assuming that we may be
heading for a major Soviet gain in Iran, we may need to greatly step up our ties
with Turkey and Pakistan. . . .

e. Getting the Message Through to Teheran.. . . There is room for such broad,
public statement on a regular basis to ensure Iranian moderates -- and
opportunists -- that we are not dedicated to the overthrow of the Islamic
Republic or the collapse of Iran. . . .

f. Massive reassurance to Iran of U.S. intentions. . . .

g. Bargaining with the U.S.S.R. We have little leverage here.

7. On reflection I believe that the option most constructively oriented is that
of inserting Western allies and friends into Teheran quickly through the arms
door.

8. Our tilt to Iraq was timely when Iraq was against the ropes and the Islamic
revolution was on a roll. The time may now have come to tilt back -- at least
via our allies -- to ensure the Soviets lose both attraction and potential
access to the clergy.

Chance of Soviet Invervention

After the arms-for-hostages affair became public in late 1986, the C.I.A.'s
chief Soviet analyst, Douglas J. MacEachin, reviewed the agency's own studies of
Soviet influence in Iran and sent his conclusions to Mr. Gates.

1. . . . Attached is a package containing Key Judgments and summaries of various
SOVA [Office of Soviet Analysis], joint NESA-SOVA and NIC or [National
Intelligence Council] products since 1980 dealing with Soviet-Iranian issues. 2.
The record shows that except for a "swerve" in 1985, . . . both the D.I. and
community products have followed a pretty consistent line.

*The sharp increase in Soviet planning since 1980 for major military campaigns
against Iran has been examined in great detail, . . . The judgment -- not just
ours but the Community's -- has been that, on balance, the U.S.S.R. is unlikely
seriously to consider intervening military unless the Soviets believe the U.S.
is about to do so, or central power in Iran breaks down, or a leftist faction
seizes power and appeals to the Soviet Union for help.

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Among issues raised at the Senate Intelligence Committee's
hearing on teh nomination of Robert M. Gates to be Director of Central
Intelligence is the agency's involvement in aiding the Nicaraguan rebels. The
attempt to kill Pope John Paul II in 1981, right, was linked to the Soviet Union
by C.I.A. (United Press International)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1236 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-11

A campaign to isolate Haiti's junta began, aimed at putting economic pressure on
the nation and restoring the democratically elected government. The Organization
of Amerian States initiated the effort.  Page A1

Vietnamese refugees could go home from camps throughout Southeast Asia under a
tentative decision by Hanoi. But the United States, which opposed similar
decisions before, may try to derail the proposal. A1

Palestinians forced to flee Kuwait are finding hardship and few opportunities in
their new home of Jordan. In addition to their suffering, the exodus has the
potential for deep political consequences to Jordan.  A1

Soviet arms cuts will not be as deep as initially reported, the Defense Ministry
announced, saying that the reductions would be smaller and would come within the
framework of disarmament negotiations. A8

U.S. has no plan to ask for direct aid for Soviets A8

Romania's drive for a free market will continue under a caretaker Government
drawn from several political parties in an attempt to restore the nation's
reputation after the riots there last week. A9

Croatian leader appeals for a cease-fire A6



A vote on loan guarantees to Israel will be delayed after a Senate decision to
formally accede to President Bush's request for a postponement. It was an
unusual setback for Israel and its American advocates.  A11

Israel urges halt to Mideast buildup A10

United Nations suspects Iraq has a fourth nuclear plant A3

The guns in Zaire have fallen silent a week after violence and looting broke out
across the nation. But many say the new coalition Government seems uncertain
about how to deal with the crisis it inherited. A5

A withdrawal of United States forces over three years was agreed to in the
Philippine senate. Washington expressed regret, but said it would not fight the
decision. A3

Kabul Journal: Afghans erase painful page of historyA4

NATIONAL A12-23

Unpaid family leaves were approved overwhelmingly in the Senate, which called
for up to 12 weeks of leave for many workers to attend to emergencies like the
sickness of an elderly parent or care of a child. A1

Support for Robert Gates weakened among some Democrats on the Senate
Intelligence Committee after two straight days of crucial testimony over his
nomination to head the Central Intelligence Agency. A1

News analysis: The central question in the Gates nomination is whether his role
in the internal intelligence feuds of the 1980's an intellectually honest one or
driven purely by ambition and political loyalty. A1

Washington Talk: Legislative tactics on alcohol tests A12

Congressmen said to be dining on the house A16

President Bush said he was annoyed at the political pressure on unemployment,
civil rights and other issues and noted, while vowing to veto a bill on jobless
benefits, that he had still not announced for re-election.  A12

Senators hear of indifference to Medicare abuse A19

Fewer American women breast-feed, a study shows, reversing a trend that began in
the 1950's. Some experts said the trend was dangerous because of the advantages
of mothers' milk to newborns. A12

The ban of a popular sleeping pill in Britain over safety concerns will not
immediately spur the United States to follow suit. The drug, Halcion, has been
linked to memory loss and violent behavior. A18

An attack on a special business code for encrypting proprietary and other
confidential information has been mounted by two Israeli scientists, who have
developed a mathematical approach to cracking the code. A18 American Express
faces big losses because of mounting problems with its credit card operations.
The company has set aside $265 million to cover the loses and pay for
reorganizing its flagship business. D1

E.P.A. details new steps to prod cleanup of wastes A12

REGIONAL B1-9

A debate on academic independence has exploded at the University of Bridgeport,
where officials are considering ceding control, for $50 million, to a group
funded mostly by the Unification Church.  A1 Sidewalk repairs will be suspended
in New York City amid allegations of corruption in the program and numerous
complaints from property owners. An investigation is centering on contractors.
B1

New York's civil courts are clogged, sparking worries that the maxim about
justice delayed being justice denied will become an everyday reality. The
problem has set off a fierce round of political squabbling. B1

Shelter deadline stirs Dinkins- Vallone clash B7

Judge orders rurun in Council primary B2

Water meter contract could have saved $8.4 million B8

An 8-month-old Bronx child died of suspected child abuse even though a man had
called a state hotline 10 hours earlier with a tip that the child was being
mistreated.  B1

A woman held in child abuse faults officials B3

Bias against minority prisoners is common at New York State's Elmira prison in
discipline, job assignments and housing, a Federal judge ruled. He ordered
prison officials to remedy the discrimination.  B1

A mob boss is missing and on the run to escape execution by other mobsters,
Federal officials said, who called the disappearance of Alphonse D'Arco evidence
of turmoil among the city's major Mafia groups. B3

Man called cartel's assassin is denied bail by U.S. judges B4

Woman files age-bias suit against department of aging B5

Transit and housing officers sue on transfer law B9

Times to appeal judge's ruling on arbitration B5

Upper West Side Journal: She won't stand for litter B2


BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section

Tara, the myth, lives on in America's suburbs C1

Cocooning with the chief trend- bender C1

Doctor acts to heal Romania's wound of baby trafficking C1

Parent and Child C2

Enhancing furniture's looks with filler C5

Beene's new frontier: tabletops and dressers C7

For eight 'classic' crayons, an active retirement C9

A young fashion designer hears the beat and wins C10

Arts/Entertainment

Frankly, readers do give a damn. Again. Hundreds of thousands of people have
been stampeding bookstores to buy "Scarlett," the sequel to "Gone With the Wind"
whose success has even astonished its publisher. A1

Clement Greenberg speaks C17

Theater: Four young playrights C20

Film: An eccentric grandfather C21

Music: Mozart's Requiem C17

Dance: San Francisco Ballet C17

Word and Image: New Stephen King thriller C23

TV: "Devices and Desires" C17

Sports B10-17

Baseball: Blue Jays clinch title B11

Glavine wins 20th for Braves B13

The Met manager circus B13

Basketball: Knicks trade Cheeks B11

Column: Anderson on coaching in New York B11

Football: Syracuse's missile B11

Do Giants need chemistry?  B14

Hockey: Outlook for Rangers B11

Running: Ultra-Marathoners in Flushing Meadows B16

Obituaries

Dimitrios I, Eastern Orthodox Patriarch D21

Lloyd K. Garrison, lawyer D20

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

Mr. Gates, chapter and verse

Standoff won't help the jobless

SUNY's gay rights dilemma

Topics: A guide to good works

Letters A24

Tom Wicker: Courage and vision A25

William Safire: The Kurds come to Washington A25

Stuart Taylor Jr.: Beware the judicial override A25

Cynthia J. Arnson: Bizarre justice in El Salvador A25

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 3, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Agrees to Forced Return Of Its Citizens From Asian Camps

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 2


Vietnam has tentatively agreed to accept the forced return of tens of thousands
of Vietnamese refugees now held in camps throughout Southeast Asia, diplomats
and refugee workers said today.

The decision, a major policy reversal for Vietnam, would allow nations housing
Vietnamese refugees to send them home by force if they are determined to have
fled their country for economic reasons, rather than out of a well-founded fear
of persecution.

"The first of them may be forced onto planes or boats and sent home by the end
of the year," a Western diplomat said. "The saga of the Vietnamese boat people
would be all but over. It could be a rather ugly ending."

The Vietnamese offer reported today had been sought by Britain, and would
doubtless be welcomed by several Southeast Asian nations that are now sheltering
boat people and have sought for years to send them back to Vietnam. But the
United States brought a halt to a similar Vietnamese plan two years ago, and may
try to derail that proposal.

[In Washington, a spokesman for the State Department said American officials had
not yet received details of the proposal but noted that the United States has
long been opposed to forcible repatriation of the boat people.

["Our position on involuntary repatriation is well known," said Joseph Snyder,
the spokesman. Mr. Snyder said that American diplomats had been in contact with
the British and United Nations officials responsible for the new proposal but as
yet have not received all the details.]

More than 100,000 Vietnamese refugees are living in refugee camps in Southeast
Asia -- about half of them in the British colony of Hong Kong and the rest
mainly in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and the Philippines.

Until now, Vietnam has opposed mandatory repatriation of the refugees, in part
because it lacks the money and other resources needed to resettle them.

More than 6,000 boat people have gone home to Vietnam under a two-year-old
voluntary repatriation program in which they are given living allowances drawn
from an international fund for refugees and are monitored by representatives of
the United Nations to be certain they are not persecuted.

Diplomats said the Vietnamese offer to accept forced repatriation of the boat
people had been made in discussions over the last two weeks with British and
United Nations officials.

Ending U.S. Embargo

But the offer has not been formally announced in Hanoi, and diplomats warned
today that it might be quickly withdrawn if there were strong objections from
the United States, which the Vietnamese Government is reluctant to offend.

Vietnam has sought to restore diplomatic relations with the United States and to
end a punishing American economic embargo on this impoverished nation.

The United States expressed outrage when, in December 1989, the authorities in
Hong Kong forced 51 Vietnamese refugees, many of them kicking and screaming,
onto a plane in the middle of the night and flew them to Vietnam. There have
been no forced repatriations since.

The exodus of Vietnamese began shortly after the end of the Vietnam War in 1975.
Vietnamese, some seeking to flee political persecution, many others trying
simply to escape the wretched poverty of their homeland, took to rickety boats,
and tens of thousands died in the treacherous journey across the Gulf of Tonkin
and the South China Sea.

'Economic Migrants'

Under a 1989 international agreement intended to end the exodus, Vietnamese
refugees who cannot demonstrate a well-founded fear of persecution are labeled
as "economic migrants" and must be returned to Vietnam.

More than 80 percent of the Vietnamese refugees in Hong Kong and elsewhere in
Southeast Asia are estimated to fall into that category, refugee workers say.

But since the Governments of Vietnam and the United States object to forced
repatrition, it is not being carried out, even as hundreds of new refrugees flee
from Vietnam each month.

The authorities in Hong Kong, where the crisis is most severe, maintain that
most of the Vietnamese in its camps are illegal aliens and should be sent home
without delay.

'Trying to Escape Poverty'

"The international community is returning to forced repatriation because it has
to," said a diplomat who is sympathetic to Hong Kong's situation.

"The boat people who are leaving Vietnam today are not searching for political
freedom so much as they are trying to escape poverty," he said. "At some point,
we have to ask ourselves why the Vietnamese should receive privileges that we do
not extend to others who are also trying to escape poverty."

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Leaving Vietnam" shows Vietnamese in refugee camps through
April 1991 (Source: Lawyers Committee for Human Rights) (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Fallout Expected in Hanoi Refugee Issue

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 3


The Bush Administration may be heading toward a confrontation with the British
Government over a reported agreement between Britain and Vietnam to for cibly
repatriate Vietnamese living in refugee camps in Hong Kong, Administration
officials said today.

State Department officials said they were still uncertain of the details, but
Margaret D. Tutwiler, the State Department spokeswoman, reiterated the
Administration's long opposition to such forcible repatriation. "Our position on
involuntary repatriation is well known," she told reporters today.

In December 1989 the United States led a worldwide outcry after 51 refugees were
forced by British authorities to return to Vietnam from Hong Kong. Journalists
reported that many of those being deported were weeping and screaming as they
were taken by bus and forcibly put on an airplane.

That deportation was supposed to be the beginning of a repatriation of thousands
of Vietnamese who had declined to go home voluntarily. In British eyes, the
Vietnamese clogged an already overcrowded Hong Kong. But the complaints from the
United States and elsewhere -- notably an unusual rebuke of the British
Government by the Pope -- halted the program.

Question of Economic Refuge

"The key question now is whether the Administration will continue to stick with
its strong opposition," a senior Congressional official said. In 1989, President
Bush opposed Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on the issue, and now Mr. Bush
will be facing her successor, John Major.

Some Administration officials said today that they were confident that Mr. Bush
would not change his views. "Bush has been pretty consistent in maintaining
opposition to any involuntary repatriation," said one.

Some Administration officials faulted the British for what they described as a
failure to adhere closely to a 1989 international agreement that focuses on the
need to make voluntary repatriation more attractive. "Instead they have seemed
very impatient to get on with the business of deporting people against their
will," said one official.

But officials acknowledged that the 1989 agreement is somewhat ambiguous about
what to do with people who are not deemed political refugees but rather economic
refugees and refuse to return home.

Officials also complained that London and Hanoi worked out the agreement largely
in secret. Though the agreement is said to directly concern only those refugees
in Hong Kong, it is widely expected that other Southeast Asian countries that
have been unwilling hosts to thousands of refugees will quickly follow suit.

Hanoi Keeps Its Distance

HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 3 (Special to The New York Times) -- Vietnam said today
that the forced return of Vietnamese refugees to their homeland was "not a good
measure," even as diplomats reported that Vietnam had tentatively agreed to
reverse policy and accept involuntary repatriation of thousands of the refugees.

In a statement to reporters, the Vietnamese Government said it preferred to look
for "better, appropriate ways" that would preserve "the dignity of refugees."
More than 100,000 Vietnamese are living in refugee camps across Southeast Asia,
most with little hope of resettlement outside Vietnam.

Diplomats said the statement appeared to be an effort to demonstrate that, if
forced repatriation is begun, it is not at Vietnam's suggestion.

"Quite rightly, the Vietnamese may be trying to distance themselves from any
suggestion that they came up with this strategy," said a diplomat here. "It was
the idea of Hong Kong and the nations that now have to care for the boat
people."

Vietnam has in the past opposed forced repatriation, if only because it lacked
the resources needed to resettle the refugees.

Diplomats in Hanoi said today that Vietnam would probably back away from its
offer to accept the refugees if the Bush Administration is strongly opposed to
the plan. Vietnam is reluctant to offend the Administration, and is trying to
re-establish diplomatic relations and trade with the United States.

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two Vietnamese refugees shouting through barbed-wire to friends
in a detention center in Hong Kong. They thought it might be their last chance
to speak to their friends, who are scheduled to be repatriated. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words



International A3-9

Haiti's capital city is tense, as soldiers are often the only people on
Port-au-Prince's streets on the fourth day after a military coup. Diplomats on
the scene say the military leader is really following the lead of the soldiers
in the streets.  Page A1

News analysis: The coup in Haiti puts the Bush Administration and its talk of a
new world order on the spot: can the United States do less to restore a
democratic government in the Caribbean than it did to return a feudal monarch to
Kuwait's throne? A8

The deposed President of Haiti, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide, took his
campaign to oust the military junta to the U.N. Security Council, where he asked
for help in restoring democracy to Haiti and warned that takeovers could "murder
democracy" elsewhere.  A8

Liberian says vote will put an end to civil warA8

A dire analysis of the Soviet Union surfaced at a meeting of Supreme Soviet
members, warning that the country is mimicking recent events in Yugoslavia. The
document's authorship is in some dispute, but it has expressed the fears of
many. A6

HarperCollins has a publishing coup, President Gorbachev's personal account of
the August uprising against him. The book, which will be shipped to stores by
the end of October, was bought for a reported $500,000. D1

Soviets hit snag on economic plans A6

Soviets are expecting shortages of food A6

Peres urges halt to West Bank settlements A5

U.N. starts helicopter flights to find missile sites in Iraq A6

Navy blockade of Croatia is renewed A3

El Salvador's military began attacks against rebels at Guazapa volcano, just
days after the signing of partial peace accords in New York. The Government
asserted that the air and artillery bombardment was provoked by by guerillas
there.  A9

U.S. is studying Phillippines' base plan A9

Fallout expected in Hanoi refugee issue A3

National A10-18

Robert Gates lashed back at critics in an attempt to save his nomination for
Director of Central Intelligence and rebut charges that he slanted intelligence
analyses at the C.I.A. But his defense seemed to sway few Senators' minds, with
Republicans praising his performance and Democrats saying that doubts remained.
A1

The House bank will soon be closed, House Speaker Thomas S. Foley announced in
response to criticism of members' special checking privileges. Members' bad
checks would be sent to the ethics committee for investigation, he added. A1

Clarence Thomas is near approval in the Senate, as a 12th Democrat said he would
suppport Mr. Thomas for the Supreme Court. Wyche Fowler Jr. of Georgia made his
announcement as the full Senate began debate on the nomination.  A16

Bush's speech's on education becomes political issue A16

A nuclear reactor planned by the U.S. that would produce tritium, a radioactive
gas used to increase the power of nuclear weapons, may no longer be necessary in
light of the President's call to reduce nuclear arms, officials say. The reactor
was expected to cost more than $5 billion. A1

Atomic repository is ready, U.S. says A11

Gov. Bill Clinton said he would run for the Democratic Presidential nomination.
The 45-year-old Governor from Arkansas offered an indictment of Republican
policies and a promise to restore the American dream to "the forgotten middle
class." A10

Farmers are in better financial shape now than they were a decade ago, even
though this year's drought has reduced yields. Many now look to the Soviet
Union, where a poor crop has raised the need for imports. A10

Best seller is a fake, professor asserts A11

Congress urges that doctors be tested for AIDS A18

Researchers tie new gene defect to cause of Alzheimer's A18

Regional B1-6

Programs to train welfare mothers are replacing the past practice of placing
them in low-paying jobs in New York City in a major shift in thinking about how
to lead people out of poverty. A1

Kings County Hospital's treatment of a mentally ill inmate who was found dead is
one of a number of incidents raising concerns about supervision of staff and the
quality of care. The inmate's death, after being restrained by unsupervised
nurses' aides, has been ruled a homicide.  A1

Emergency room treatment called chaotic in New York B4

Warning of abuse of a Bronx baby -- two months before she died apparently from
abuse -- did not lead to any action, a hospital employee said. The hospital that
treated the baby gave the warning to child welfare officials. B1

Heavy use of child-abuse line is said to delay action B3

A New York swimming club was sued by the state's Attorney General for
discriminating against blacks who sought to join. The state says undercver tests
at the club in New Rochelle, which has no black members, show that blacks were
discouraged from joining. B1

New York City's sidewalk repairs by private contractors were halted by the
Department of Transportation until new inspection procedures can be put in
place. City officials said property owners have been overcharged for shoddy and
unnecessary work performed by private contractors given sweeping authority. B1

New York's top educators are studying writing, of all things, by order of
Commissioner of Education Thomas Sobol, who said he is fed up with the muddy
language used in memos and letters in his office. B1

Police sergeant is wounded in a Brooklyn shootout B3

Weicker plans limited shutdown of Connecticut's agencies B4

Vallone offers new plan to tighten ethics rules B3

Audit of CUNY Student Senate finds $85,000 mispent B3

Business Digest D1

 Weekend

Nadine Gordimer won the Nobel Prize in Literature for her works on South Africa,
which have served as powerful, yet poignant, opposition to her country's
apartheid system. A1

A master of walking tours C1

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

Film: De Sica retrospective C1

"Night on Earth" C1

"Zombie and the Ghost Train" C8

"The Super" C10

"The Man in the Moon" C13

Music: Parnassus benefit C3

Dance: San Francisco Ballet C3

Art: Friends and followers of Seurat C19

In review C24

Auctions C29

Restaurants C22

Word and Image: "Brotherly Love," Pete Dexter novel C29

TV Weekend C30

Obituaries

The man Shea Stadium is named for, William A. Shea, died at age 84. Mr. Shea was
a politically powerful lawyer who brought a new baseball team to New York, the
Mets, and in the process had a stadium named in his honor. D16

Peter Heyworth, music critic D15

David Lean, director, is honored D16

Leonard A. Rapping, an author D16

Sports B7-14

Baseball: Maas says he has solution B8

Will ax fall on Stottlemyre?  B9

Braves are relaxed B9

Dodgers take on Candlestick B9

Basketball: Ewing speaks B7

Columns: Berkow on the ball B7

TV Sports B9

Araton on the Knicks B10

Durso on Horse Racing B10

Football: DeOssie arrested B7

O'Brien looks beyond numbers B11

Hockey: Rangers lose to Bruins in opener B7

Law Page B16

Now playing in court: The best comedy in town

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A30

The right choice for the U.N.

Late on managing Medicaid

American education gets a C

Topics: Bad sports

Letters A30

Anthony Lewis: Corrupting the process A31

A. M. Rosenthal: If not now, when?  A31

Dan T. Carter: The transformation of a klansman A31

Robert A. Pastor: Haiti is not alone A31

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 4, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage, and Off

BYLINE: By Alex Witchel

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words


A Public Forum

What do playwrights need to survive? Commissions of $25,000, the banishment of
all critics from the face of the earth and someone who will at least read their
plays, with perhaps a good health plan to boot. What can JoAnne Akalaitis,
artistic director of the Public Theater, do about it? Maybe nothing. The opinion
on last week's "town meeting" for playwrights, attended by 273 people and
organized by Ms. Akalaitis, was split, judging from a sampling of 10 who were
there.

Those who liked the meeting, held at the Public, commend Ms. Akalaitis's effort
to reach out to them as a community. Those who didn't, call the meeting
unproductive, a free-for-all gripe session rather than a mobilization of forces
by an artistic director for a common goal.

One of the two most theatrical moments occurred when Jon Robin Baitz ("The
Substance of Fire") said: "I don't want to be part of a community. I write
alone." Then he left. The other came after a long-winded speech by Steve Tesich
("The Speed of Darkness") who railed against the plight of playwrights in
America, concluding that they were all "clowns." To which Terrence McNally
("Lips Together, Teeth Apart,") responded, "I am not a clown," which met with
some applause.

Mr. McNally also says he suggested to Ms. Akalaitis that just as her
predecessor, Joseph Papp, "committed to doing 36 Shakespeare plays, that she
would commit to doing 36 new plays." Her response? "She was listening," he says.
"She was trying to open up, and it was great to see energy and passion to do new
theater."

Though Mr. Baitz was unmoved by the meeting ("If writers are brothers it still
does you no good when you're sitting alone"), he supports Ms. Akalaitis's
efforts to find money for commissions and spoke with her later, offering his
help.

Albert Innaurato, whose "Coming of Age in SoHo" was produced by Mr. Papp, says,
"When Robbie Baitz walked out of the room, it was clear that many of the people
there didn't even know who he was. He was referred to as 'that fellow who didn't
want to work in the community.' Obviously, there is no community."

Ms. Akalaitis says the meeting went better than she expected. She plans to hire
10 to 20 readers soon, she says, so unsolicited scripts can be reviewed. She
also plans what she calls a Playwrights Lab, where established playwrights would
help young playwrights, though exactly how they would do that is still unclear.

Mr. Tesich says: "What I heard at that meeting most often was a need for home.
Those who had homes at other theaters said what a wonderful experience it was,
and those who didn't said how much they wanted one, a place where they could
find support. But how many plays had any of us written that ever reflected a
home like that?"

From Australia

Don't say it fast or it sounds like shmata. "Shimada," a new play by Jill
Shearer, an Australian playwright, is scheduled to open on Broadway on April 23,
starring Ben Gazzara, Ellen Burstyn, Mako and Estelle Parsons.

The play is about a struggling Australian company whose management becomes
bitterly divided at the prospect of a Japanese buyout. The action shifts between
the present and a World War II prison camp in the Burmese jungle. Mr. Gazzara
plays a former P.O.W. who runs the company with his war buddy's widow (Ms.
Burstyn) and becomes convinced that the Japanese corporate executive (Mako) is
really Shimada, his former prison guard. The play will be directed by Simon
Phillips, the 34-year-old artistic director of the South Australia Theater
Company in Adelaide.

Paul B. Berkowsky and Richard Seader will produce with Ellis and Mike Weatherly.
Tony Straiges, Judy Dearing and Richard Nelson will design the sets, costumes
and lighting, respectively. The original score for "Shimada" is being composed
by the Emmy Award winner Angelo Badalamenti ("Twin Peaks").

Changing 'Miss Saigon'

Better hurry if you want to see Jonathan Pryce in "Miss Saigon." The Tony Award
winner for best actor in a musical plays his last performance on Saturday
evening, Dec. 14. He will be replaced on Dec. 16 by Francis Ruivivar, who filled
in for Mr. Pryce during his vacation. Mr. Ruivivar played the title role in
"Shogun: The Musical" last season.

Cameron Mackintosh, the producer of "Miss Saigon," calls Mr. Ruivivar "the
strongest Asian contender" for the role of a Eurasian pimp working in Saigon
during the Vietnam War. "When Jonathan was out, there was not one complaint
about Francis," Mr. Mackintosh says. "He was tremendously appealing in the
role."

Lea Salonga, who won the Tony Award for best actress in a musical, is to remain
with the show until March.

'Winchell' Workshop

The workshop of "Winchell," a new musical by Martin Charnin and Keith Levenson,
goes into rehearsals on Monday. What makes this workshop different from all
others is that after its two weeks at the Eighth Avenue Studios, it will move
directly to the Brooks Atkinson Theater, where it will rehearse a third week and
play performances in its fourth week for an invited audience of theater
professionals and potential investors.

Mr. Charnin is directing "Winchell," which will feature Mark Zimmerman in the
title role, and Linda Haberman will choreograph. Arthur Rubin, executive vice
president of the Nederlander Organization, says his company will finance the
workshop about the legendary journalist for about $150,000, which is at the low
end of what such projects can cost. If the workshop works, "Winchell" might make
it to the Brooks Atkinson as a full-blown production later this season.

Even Lower?

Penn and Teller, those perennial preadolescents, have something new in their Off
Broadway show, "Penn and Teller: Rot in Hell." After adding the Ford model Carol
Perkins to their act (she eats fire and is also a babe), they've considerably
lowered their standards to include Mendelssohn, a four-foot python. For a
limited engagement, you can see Mendelssohn snipped in half with a pair of
poultry shears, then miraculously restored without a scratch. Is there a
12-year-old boy on earth who can resist?

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lead Roles Filled: Stella! Here she is, folks: Amy Madigan. She
joins Jessica Lange (Blanche DuBois) and Alec Baldwin (Stanley Kowalski) in the
revival of Tennessee Williams's "Streetcar Named Desire," opening at the
Barrymore Theater in April. Timothy Carhart ("Thelma and Louise") will play
Mitch. Gregory Mosher will direct and co-produce with James Walsh and the
Shubert Organization. (Bill Evans Public Relations)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Casing In The Bomb;
Disarmament Plan Quickens Calls for A Peace Dividend

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN most respects, the budget deal President Bush and Congress struck last
October was as pleasant for the politicians involved as a skinned knee. The
President was forced to renege on his no-new-taxes pledge. Democrats had to
concede that there would be no growth in social programs for years. But the
agreement did have one fundamental political attraction: it was supposed to put
off further argument about spending and taxes until after the 1992 elections.

Now, that has gone by the boards. When the President startled the nation a week
ago Friday by announcing that he planned to scrap a significant portion of the
nuclear arsenal, it was guaranteed that the size of the military budget will
once more come under intense political scrutiny. And that will throw open the
door to fresh debate on the basic budget issues that have divided politicians
for years: how high taxes should be, how large the deficit should be and how
much the country can afford to spend on health, highways and the myriad other
Government programs voters demand.

Lawmakers from both parties agree that changed circumstances mean that the
military budget should be re-examined. If, as the President said -- even before
yesterday's announcement of plans for sweeping cuts in the Soviet nuclear
arsenal -- war with the Soviet Union is "no longer a realistic threat," then
why, they ask, is it necessary to keep active a dozen aircraft carriers at an
annual cost of about $600 million apiece? Why should the nation spend billions
for the Star Wars missile defense system, the B-2 Stealth bomber, a new attack
submarine or other astronomically expensive state-of-the-art weapons? Why should
tens of thousands of troops be maintained in Germany, South Korea and elsewhere
around the world?

Those questions were raised not only by liberal Pentagon critics but by such
staunch conservative supporters of the military as Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia
Democrat who heads the Armed Services Committee, and Senator John McCain, a
conservative Republican and former career naval officer who was a prisoner of
war in Vietnam.

On Friday, the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, Representative
Les Aspin, suggested that he foresaw deep new cuts in the Pentagon budget,
which, at close to $300 billion a year, now accounts for about one-quarter of
total Federal spending. Mr. Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat, announced that he was
beginning an investigation to "determine what real defenses we need at the
spending levels we can justify by the real threats we face."

Things Fall Apart>

After days of similar speech-making and news conferences, it was clear by the
end of last week throughout the Capitol, downtown at the White House and across
the Potomac at the Pentagon that the budget arrangement was coming apart and
would have to be renegotiated next year, before the election.

"It's getting very frayed around the edges," said Senator Jim Sasser, the
Tennessee Democrat who is chairman of the Budget Committee and was one of the
main authors of the budget agreement. "An unraveling is imminent."

The cornerstone of the deal between the President and Congress was that tax
rates, the military budget and domestic spending were locked in concrete for
years. Any proposal to reduce taxes was required to have an offsetting spending
cut. And money could not be shifted between the military and domestic sides of
the ledger.

The issue now is not whether the annual spending levels for the Defense
Department enacted last year will be reduced in the years ahead. That is almost
a certainty. What must be decided is how much will be cut and what the money
will then be used for.

'Reasonable' Cuts

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, were concentrating last week on getting their budget through
Congress for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1 and insisting, at least publicly,
that cutbacks in the years to come would be unwise.

While some saving might result eventually from the President's new moves to
reduce nuclear weapons, they said, initially the Government will face the added
expense of destroying some nuclear weapons and shipping others home.

But a senior adviser to the President said he was sure that if Mr. Bush had not
already instructed Mr. Cheney to begin preparing a new, less expensive long-term
plan for the military, he would soon tell the Defense Secretary to do so. "What
the President insists on," said the aide, who talks with the President often,
"is that the defense reductions be reasonable and prudent and not done in
haste."

How much is reasonable and prudent is, of course, open to question. Two
authorities on the subject, William W. Kaufmann, professor emeritus of political
science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and John D. Steinbruner,
director of foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution, argued in a
paper prepared before the failed coup in the Soviet Union and published late
last month that the budget now planned for the Pentagon could safely be cut over
the next 10 years by nearly 50 percent at a saving of $316 billion.

"The future ability of the United States to maintain the conditions of its
security will depend as much on its moral authority, diplomatic skills and
economic assets as on its military capabilities," the study asserted.

The Pentagon and the White House surely will not agree to cuts that deep, and
Congress might not either. But a reduction of 25 percent or so in the military
budget has already been scheduled over the next five years, and further
reductions of tens if not hundreds of billions of dollars are not out of the
question.

That money could be used in three basic ways: to reduce the budget deficit, to
cut taxes or to expand domestic programs.

Many Democrats in Congress would like to spend the money on new social programs,
particularly in the area of medical care. But the Bush Administration is dead
set against that.

"One of the big problems in opening up the defense budget for debate again is
that the money can be used as an offset for anybody's favorite spending
program," said one of the President's senior assistants. In the same vein,
Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady said in an interview last week that the
Administration vigorously opposed "an income-transfer policy, which we know in
the Great Society was tried for a long period of time and which economists have
thrown over as a way of life."

Republicans in Congress generally favor a proposal by Senator Phil Gramm of
Texas that would divide Pentagon savings between a tax cut and deficit
reduction. "The American people should be rewarded in some fashion for the
fruits of their labors," said Senator McCain.

Meantime, discussion has begun within the Administration about taking some money
out of the Pentagon budget to provide short-term economic assistance to the
Soviet Union. Secretary Brady said he thought such talk was premature, and
whether the President himself has been involved in such discussions is not
clear.

The best bet -- no surprise in these times of divided Government -- is for a
negotiated settlement: a little money for the Soviet Union and much more for
popular social programs, middle-income tax relief and reduction of the deficit.

Expect the debate to last all next year. It will be a framework for the 1992
campaign.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Two More Candidates Join the Race

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


AND now there are five.

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska bounded onto the stage in Lincoln last week, to
the Bruce Springsteen anthem "Born to Run," and promised to lead his country on
"its fearless, restless voyage of generational progress." Republican policies of
"malignant neglect" had led the country adrift, said Mr. Kerrey, a former
governor who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam.

A few days later, in Little Rock, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas entered the
race, promising to fight for the "forgotten middle class." He said Republican
policies had left the middle class with economic distress, diminished
opportunities and feelings of abandonment.

The 1992 Presidential campaign seemed truly under way. President Bush certainly
seemed to feel it: On Friday, he held a news conference to say that he really
did care about domestic problems.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Senator Bob Kerrey (Gail Folda/Sipa); Gov. Bill Clinton
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Swedish Coalition Plans Overhaul of Policies

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: STOCKHOLM, Oct. 4


The new conservative Government of Sweden has pledged to cut taxes, permit
private medicine, crack down on drug abusers and cut off aid to Cuba, but to
keep the policy of neutrality pursued by its predecessors.

"The age of collectivism is at an end now," Prime Minister Carl Bildt told
Parliament on Friday. Mr. Bildt, 42 years old, is the head of a coalition of
four conservative parties that ousted the Social Democrats from power in
elections on Sept. 15 for only the second time in 60 years.

With Sweden's industrial production falling by 6 percent this year, Mr. Bildt
said his Government would work for "a new approach to private ownership, private
enterprise and private savings," and changes in tax laws to encourage small
business and to do away with Social Democratic measures deeply resented by
Swedish industry.

Mr. Bildt promised to phase out the most controversial measure, employee
investment funds administered with the involvement of labor unions and financed
by a 20 percent tax on business profits.

And in what is expected to be the most popular move, Mr. Bildt said the
Government would rescind this year's increase of value-added tax on food,
restaurant and hotel bills and on domestic transport tickets, lowering the tax
from 23.5 percent to 18 percent, still slightly above the European Community
average, on Jan. 1.

Some Social Democrats said Mr. Bildt would have proposed even more radical
changes toward a free market and in politics if he had not had to make
concessions to his Moderate Party's coalition partners, the Liberals, the Center
Party and the Christian Democrats.

"It's a very right-wing government," said Hans Dahlgren, an adviser to the
Social Democratic Party of former Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson, who is out on
the streets with six months' severance pay.

No NATO Membership

Mr. Dahlgren said that only insistence by the Center Party had probably kept Mr.
Bildt from distancing Sweden more strongly from its traditional neutrality. The
Government statement pledged to follow through on the Social Democrats' decision
last year to apply for Swedish membership in the European Community, and Mr.
Bildt proposed a national referendum to resolve all doubts about the question by
September 1994, a year before the target date for joining.

Within the community, he said, Sweden will take part closely in foreign policy
and security cooperation with other European countries.

But he added that Sweden's nonparticipation in alliances in peacetime and
neutrality in war remained of "fundamental significance." Asked later if he
believed that the end of the cold war had rendered the idea of alliances
obsolete, Mr. Bildt replied, "I take note of the fact that most European
Community members think the NATO alliance will continue to be essential to their
security in the future," but, he said, membership was still out of the question
for Sweden.

He also named women to top posts, Anne Wibble, a Liberal, as Finance Minister,
and Margaretha af Ugglas, a Moderate, as Foreign Minister.

Other foreign and domestic policies geared to the Social Democrats went out the
window. In addition to the pledge to cut aid to Cuba, Mr. Bildt said, Vietnam,
taken under the Swedish wing in the 1960's, will lose all Swedish aid money
unless Hanoi shows "clear signs of democratization."

Longer Prison Sentences

At home, he promised to increase penalties for minor narcotics abuses, now
punishable by maximum of six months in prison, and to abolish the practice of
automatically releasing prisoners convicted of all crimes after they have served
half their sentences. From now on, he said, they will have to serve two-thirds
of their sentences.

With Government finances now in deficit, Mr. Bildt did not promise any new
reductions in personal income taxes, but said this year's cuts to a maximum rate
of 51 percent would stay in effect.

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 7, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

M.I.A. Issue Shouldn't Set U.S.-Vietnam Policy

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


To the Editor:

Cokie Roberts's "Why the M.I.A.'s Live On" (Op-Ed, Sept. 20) will only provide
more ammunition to those for whom the Vietnam War is not over. The hype and
public attention surrounding this issue only mask the chauvinism of
reactionaries who wish to extend the Vietnam War into the 1990's, now that the
cold war is over.

There is little concrete evidence that any American soldiers are held against
their will in Southeast Asia. And the Vietnamese Government has already bent
over backward to assure Americans that it will do its utmost to facilitate the
finding and return of remains of dead American soldiers.

Lest we forget, Vietnam is an impoverished land, and it must deal with an
enormous debt, with high rates of infant mortality, with poverty and disease
(much of it caused by the conflict that is known in Vietnam as the American
War).

It is unconscionable that Americans would make the return of servicemen missing
in action the top priority in their relations with Vietnam. The United States
has yet to pay one cent of war reparations as stipulated by the Paris Treaty of
1973.

Vietnam has to contend with more than 300,000 of its own as missing, and the
wave of human exodus in Southeast Asia, caused not only by poverty but also by
United States intransigence in settling the Cambodian conflict, shows the
Administration's declarations to be not only insulting but also clearly the
chauvinistic (not to mention racist) ploy they are -- reminiscent of the "they
do not value human life as we do" attitude of the Vietnam War years.

To give some perspective to this issue, we should consider that there are more
than 8,000 American soldiers still listed as missing in the Korean War and
almost 80,000 from the European front in World War II.

And yet we don't see this Administration making grandiose pronouncements about
scouring the European countryside for remains of American soldiers.

TSUH YANG CHEN
New York, Sept. 20, 1991

The writer, a member of New York City's Human Rights Commission, is a volunteer
with the Committee Against Anti-Asian Violence.

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

German Vote Raises Foreigners' Fear

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: BREMERHAVEN, Germany


After local elections in which a small far-right party received many more votes
than expected, foreigners in Bremerhaven are suddenly beginning to fear for
their future.

"Up to now, we've been living here pretty much normally," a young Turkish
immigrant said as he walked past the Sarajevo Cafe in a section of town where
many foreigners live. "But now we know that at least 10 percent of the people
here hate us."

The far-right German People's Union won more than 10 percent of the vote in the
election held on Sept. 29. The principal reason is opposition to the presence of
foreigners in Germany.

Although the election was only for local officials in Bremerhaven and nearby
Bremen, the result shook Germany's political establishment. Coming as it did in
the midst of a wave of attacks on foreigners, it seemed to confirm that a strong
backlash against liberal immigration policies is spreading across Germany.

Party Was Little Known

The People's Union was unknown to most Germans until recently. It held only a
single seat in the Bremerhaven city council, and none in Bremen.

The Bremerhaven council member, Franz Wilhelm Schmidt, was known principally for
having set off a local furor last year. When another council member referred in
a speech to the number of gypsies killed by the Nazis, Mr. Schmidt shouted:
"What, not more? Too bad."

Results from the recent election here gave the People's Union new
respectability. It won a total of 11 seats on the Bremen and Bremerhaven
councils, making it the third-largest party in this two-city state.

It is also the most politically successful xenophobic party in today's Germany.
The Republican Party, another far-right group, won some support in the 1970's
and 80's, but its influence has waned, partly as a result of internal troubles.

Several local officials in Bremerhaven declined requests to discuss the
situation.

"It's too hot a subject to talk about," said the head of a city department that
deals with foreigners.

'The Boat Is Full'

Election posters supporting the People's Union still hang along many streets in
Bremerhaven. They carry slogans like "Keep Bremerhaven German" and "The boat is
full -- Stop the flood of asylum-seekers."

About 10 percent of Bremerhaven's 130,000 residents are foreigners. Many are
Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, Yugoslav and Turkish laborers invited here in past
decades to work in fish-processing plants and fill other jobs that few Germans
will accept. The more recent arrivals are ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe,
and political and economic refugees from around the world.

Residents joke that no one here will openly admit to having voted for the
People's Union. Even at the party's small local office, workers refused to
discuss their political views.

The chief organizer of the People's Union in Bremerhaven, Hans Altermann, made a
political trip to the eastern city of Dresden soon after the election here. His
trip added to fears that rightist organizers from western Germany are moving
their resources to the east, sensing that they have great potential support
there.

Appeal to Nationalism

Election leaflets distributed by the People's Union appeal to German
nationalism, and warn that allowing more foreigners to come here will lead to
"the destruction of European culture."

"Integrationists are hateful racists who want to destroy all cultures by
mixing," one leaflet asserts.

Mr. Altermann said in an interview that the People's Union had won so many votes
because "we say aloud what everyone thinks."

"We have nothing to do with Nazi ideology, and we have never said we want
foreigners out," he asserted. "We want the false asylum-seekers, the ones who
are not truly fleeing from persecution, to be sent home, and we want foreigners
who commit crimes to be sent home. America does that, too."

Most Young and Male

An analysis of the election results here showed that two-thirds of those who
voted for the People's Union were male, and that most were young.

"We have an unemployment rate well above the national average, and plenty of
people can't afford a nice apartment," said Andreas Glandorf, an editor of the
local newspaper. "As the number of foreigners grows, so does the resentment of
the benefits they get from the Government."

"Politicians are afraid to give real leadership on this issue, which means that
the situation is definitely going to get worse," Mr. Glandorf said. "The
hysteria is here, too."

In September, there were more than 200 attacks against asylum-seekers,
immigrants and foreign-born laborers across eastern and western Germany. No such
attacks have been reported in Bremerhaven, and children of foreigners still play
freely in public playgrounds here without attracting attention from German
passers-by.

In Bremen, however, two attacks were reported in the days after the recent
election. Arsonists set one hostel afire, causing $65,000 damage, and a man
fired a flaming signal flare at another. A suspect was arrested in the latter
case.

Prominent politicians have deplored the attacks, but there is no consensus on
what to do about them.

A prominent German Jew, Heinz Galinski, decried what he called "this horrible
development," and said Jews were especially frightened by the surge in violence
against foreigners.

Germany offers relatively liberal benefits to settlers and asylum-seekers, and
partly as a result, more refugees come here than to any other European country.

According to official statistics, 28,732 foreigners entered Germany in September
in search of refuge or resettlement. The largest group, more than 10,000, came
from Yugoslavia. Other large groups came from Romania, Turkey, Bulgaria,
Vietnam, Nigeria, the Soviet Union and Iran.

"I heard that some people got attacked somewhere in other parts of Germany,"
said a Nigerian refugee walking near the Bremerhaven train station. "You like to
tell yourself that it couldn't happen here, but who knows? They don't exactly
love us here."

At a downtown snack bar, a black American, Kieth Wagner, ate lunch with his
German wife and their small son. Mr. Wagner served at a nearby American Army
base for five years.

"There isn't any violence against us here, but the mood is definitely more tense
than it was a few years ago," Mr. Wagner said. "People don't like to wait on
foreigners in restaurants or stores.  They make you feel like an outsider, and I
don't like it, especially since I spent five years here protecting these
people."

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Germany showing location of Bremerhaven.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

ON PRO FOOTBALL;
How to Beat System On Third and Long

BYLINE: By Thomas George

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 813 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo.


Derrick Thomas knows what it is like to be young and full of despair and feel as
if you are "a product of the system." He particularly understands that there is
a direct link between education and self-esteem and effecting change.

He is a product of that system.

He is effecting change.

Before the Kansas City Chiefs clashed with the Buffalo Bills last night, Thomas,
the Chiefs' rock-solid linebacker, reflected on growing up in Miami, growing up
as a pro in Kansas City and on his Third and Long program, which seeks to help
this city's inner-city youth understand that learning to read unlocks doors.

"I based my program on past experience," said the 24-year-old Thomas, who is in
his third season with the Chiefs and who last season led the league in sacks
with 20.

"I majored in criminal justice at Alabama, but before that I was a product of
the system in Miami. From a period of age 11 through 16, I went through living
two lives. I was a good kid -- well, a semi-good kid -- from 7:30 in the morning
till 6 in the afternoon after football practice. At night I would go stand on
the corner with the guys and get involved in all kinds of deviant acts.

"One fatal day I wound up in court in trouble and they took me out of public
school for a year and put me into what was like a boot camp, the Day Marine
Institute. I thought it was the worst thing that ever happened to me. I was a
sophomore in high school and I thought my life was over. No football. No
nothing.

"It turned out to be the best thing that ever happened to me. I gained a
positive outlook and learned to set goals and see them through. I gained
friendships, even with the judge in Miami who sentenced me, that have lasted. I
gained a sense of pride and the value of reading. I guess what I learned most
was this: If you educate a youth, you've won half the battle.

"Once you educate, they have the ability to make decisions and better choices. I
guess I always remember what a professor once told me. He said, 'Once you
habilitate an individual, he can be rehabilitated.' And a counselor once told
me, 'Derrick, if you want to help the youth the most, teach them one thing: how
to read.' "

Thomas, who wears No. 58, has 58 youths in the program. Each Saturday before
Chiefs home games, Thomas gathers his group at a library where stories are read
by a librarian, himself and other Chiefs' players. Reading skills are practiced.
He also offers them an annual Christmas party and always a receptive ear.

The program has given Thomas inspiration on the field. At 6 feet 3 inches and
236 pounds, he is listed as a right outside linebacker but often lines up on the
left side and in passing situations becomes a defensive end.

Opponents have paid more attention to Thomas and had limited him to 11/2 sacks
this season. But he had four sacks last night in the Chiefs' 33-6 victory. His
play is a reason the Chiefs' defense entered the game with the American
Conference's No. 4-ranked defense (seventh against the run and third against the
pass), allowing only 12.6 points per game.

Last season, Thomas had seven sacks in a Chiefs game at home against Seattle.
Before the game, Air Force pilots offered a spectacular air show over Arrowhead
Stadium and one gave Thomas a bandanna the pilots wear, which he wore under his
helment in the game.

Thomas's father, Robert, was an Air Force captain lost in Vietnam during an
operation called Linebacker Two. He was declared legally dead in 1980 and
remains Thomas's chief hero.

The Chiefs think they are a Super Bowl caliber team, but their offense has
barely reached that level yet. Kansas City relies on a crunching ground game and
a sporadic passing attack, but the defense and Thomas shine. Thus, developing a
consistent offense is the final ingredient for the Chiefs to reach their goals.

Thomas thinks the offense will improve. It is all a matter, he said, of making
the right moves and, against complex defenses, the right reads.

"Our defense has played well, but our offense hasn't clicked yet," he said. "We
will get it together. You look around the N.F.L. and scoring is down everywhere.
I think it's injuries to key people on offense, like Joe Montana with San
Francisco and Randall Cunningham with Philadelphia. We've missed key people on
offense due to injury, too. Teams are more interested in ball control after what
the Giants did last year, but I think things will pan out in scoring by the end
of the season.

"One of the things I hope to do with my group is to bring them closer to the
N.F.L. and to football and their dreams and maybe to come up with some type of
uniform for them. Some have designer clothes, others barely nothing. I want them
to know that no matter what your economic situation, you walk into my program
and you are equal. And reading? It wipes out a lot of silly craziness that they
go through."

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Muhammad Ali: The Boxer, the Man

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 494 words


Tonight's biography of Muhammad Ali, at 8 on the Arts & Entertainment cable
network, catches the courage, independence and sharpness that made the boxing
champion an admired figure outside the ring, too. The hour, with its scenes from
the big fights and the hype that accompanied them, covers his career from his
youth as an amateur boxer -- when he was still known as Cassius Clay -- to his
gold medal in the 1960 Rome Olympics to his interrupted years as champ.

There he is, doing his famous prefight theatrics, especially before the 1963
match with Sonny Liston that made him No. 1: "The world did not dream when they
laid down their money/That they would see a total eclipse of Sonny." It wasn't
just brashness. The challenger predicted he would win in five rounds, and Mr.
Liston decided not to come out for the sixth.

When Arthur Ashe, one of the admiring observers interviewed here, says, "He
talked for all of us," he is speaking less of the fighter's punchy rhymes than
of his defiance of power and public opinion. In the 1960's he converted to the
Nation of Islam and changed his name, a thumb in the eye to the white
establishment. In 1965, as tonight's audience can see, he would take revenge in
the ring on Floyd Patterson, who continued to call him Clay and seemed to
represent the sort of respectable black athlete whites could easily root for.
Mr. Ashe is pained by the victor's cruelty in that bout, when he taunted the
battered Mr. Patterson and refused to end his pain and humiliation with a final
punch.

Mr. Ali's championship was lost outside the ring in 1967 when he was sentenced
to five years in prison for refusing to be drafted because he opposed the
Vietnam War. The sentence would be overturned, but his boxing career seemed
ended at its height. His astounding comeback in the 1970's in tough fights
against Joe Frazier and George Foreman, powerfully if briefly captured here,
remains more than just a sports story.

Dick Schaap, the sports reporter, expresses the feelings not just of fans but of
many who couldn't care less about boxing yet were knocked out by the man
himself, when he says the story would have ended on the right note if Mr. Ali
had stopped when he took back the championship from George Foreman in 1974.
After that there were downs and ups, ending with him showing the effects of so
many years of blows to the head.

Still, in 1978, the year that the 36-year-old Mr. Ali was beaten by and then
beat Leon Spinks, he is seen telling the cameras: "I'm actually a pretty man.
I'm not conceited, I'm convinced." The hour is convincing about both his beauty
in the ring and his strength outside it. After all the clowning, Muhammad Ali
ends up with his dignity intact.

Biography
Muhammad Ali

Produced by Lilibet Foster for A&E/CEL Communications; Charles Grinker,
executive producer; Peter Graves, narrator. At 8 P.M. on A&E.

WITH: Arthur Ashe, James Earl Jones, Dick Schaap and Thomas Hauser.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 433 words


Vietnam has tentatively agreed to accept the forced return of tens of thousands
of its citizens who left, often risking their lives in dangerous, leaky boats.
The agreement, worked out with Britain and the United Nations, could fall apart
under strong objection from the United States.

That would be unfortunate. The U.S. has adamantly opposed forced repatriation of
the Vietnamese. But circumstances, including U.S.-Vietnam relations, are
changing and this new policy may be more realistic. Rather than block it, the
U.S. ought to help insure that it is carried out fairly.

More than 100,000 refugees from Vietnam are now living in camps in Southeast
Asia, about half in Hong Kong. Sympathy for these escapees probably peaked at
Christmastime 1989, when Britain deported 51 boat people, mostly women and
children, from Hong Kong to Hanoi.

Britain's action may have been crude, but it vividly underscored the need to
distinguish between genuine political refugees, who have a "well-founded fear of
persecution" in their homeland, and economic refugees, seeking to escape
poverty.

By international agreement, political refugees deserve the most generous
treatment. But the same preferences do not apply to those fleeing economic
deprivation. That points to the need for proper and relatively uniform screening
procedures to distinguish. As long as the procedures themselves do not violate
human rights, those screened out as economic migrants are candidates for return.

It's not a happy result. But no country can let in everyone who wants in;
governments are constantly forced to make these decisions. Hong Kong sends
illegal immigrants back to China. The U.S. forcibly turns back boat people from
Haiti.

In any case, forcible return for the Vietnamese is not, arguably, any less
humane than requiring them to stay in squalid resettlement camps where they are
subject to robberies, murder and suicide.

Since 1989, about 6,000 boat people declared to be economic migrants have
already returned to Vietnam voluntarily. An international fund for refugees
provides them with living allowances and U.N. monitors check to see that they
are not persecuted.

The United States now has some leverage to help insure that those who are
returned to Vietnam are treated humanely. Last year, a plan was sketched out to
normalize U.S.-Vietnam relations.  The prospect of economic benefits that would
result from normalization ought to be a powerful incentive to Vietnam to treat
its returnees decently -- and could ultimately discourage more economic migrants
from fleeing the country.

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Old Butler Ploy

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words


President Bush says the media did it. Not the butler. The butler never does it
anymore. Everybody's been on to the butler for years. It must have been 1913
when I first heard a kid coming out of a movie tell a pal who was waiting to get
in, "Don't waste your nickel, the butler did it." If not earlier.

Anyhow the butler hasn't done it in years. This is because hardly anybody has a
butler anymore. The people who can afford butlers nowadays are mostly in prison,
which makes you wonder why you never hear anybody say, "The butler's boss did
it."

So knowing he couldn't pin the rap on the butler, President Bush called a news
conference the other day and said the media did it. In politics these days and
even in high-flown ideological disputation, it is almost always the media that
do the dirty deed.

At any given moment half the population is pinning the crime of the given moment
on the media. Monitoring organizations, each as relentless as Javert tracking a
stolen loaf of bread, are constantly alerting us to media depredations.

Still, it's surprising to find President Bush doing the Charlie Chan, Hercule
Poirot, Miss Marple number. Few Presidents have been jollied so tirelessly by
the media. The burbling of journalists in print and television about Mr. Bush's
mastery of practically everything can make you grind your molars down to stubs
if you hold that the journalist's first duty is to keep an eye open for clay
feet on the mightiest of gods.

But back to our story: It was a Friday on television. CNN featured Robert Gates,
Bush's nominee to run the C.I.A. Gates was insisting that, if given the job, he
would never refuse to tell Presidents things those Presidents didn't want to
hear.

This foolhardy announcement seemed to mark Gates as hopelessly unqualified for
the job considering the history of what usually happens to people who tell
Presidents what they don't want to hear, which is that they don't last long.
Anybody remember George Ball?

In Lyndon Johnson's reign, Johnson officially authorized Ball to tell him things
he didn't want to hear. The deal was Johnson wouldn't make Ball disappear, he
just wouldn't pay any attention to what Ball told him. So Ball told him he
couldn't win in Vietnam and Johnson, keeping his end of the deal, ignored Ball
and saw his Presidency destroyed by losses in Vietnam.

While Gates on CNN was reminding us of the reckless foolishness of telling
Presidents what they don't want to hear, Bush interrupted with a news conference
to counter Democratic efforts to depict him as indifferent to the shabby state
of the country's domestic affairs.

Somebody at the office had obviously made bold to tell him the Democrats were
scoring with the line that while he was a crackerjack President of the Whole
Darn World, as President of the United States he left a lot to be desired.
What's more, the economy wasn't too good either.

Such counsel goes to the problem of what Presidents must do to win the next
election, one field in which most of them will tolerate hearing what they'd
rather not. So the President spoke a good deal about "domestic agenda," as
though to say: "Here now! Who dares say I'm too dazzled about being President of
the Whole Darn World to be deeply involved in our domestic problems?"

What gave the public the unfair impression that he had time only for
international problems? You guessed it, folks: the media. All that coverage the
media devoted to foreign affairs distorted the public's idea of the true nature
of his toil.

Take this very news conference. He had summoned the media to talk about the
economy and how to get it hopping again by cutting the tax on income from
capital gains, for instance. Yet these media people had persistently changed the
subject to foreign affairs.

He had obviously come prepared to nail down his case, for he picked up a sheet
of paper and said he'd been keeping score: how many questions on domestic
issues, how many on foreign? He didn't give his tally, but the Times reporter,
Andrew Rosenthal, later counted a total of 26 questions, 10 of them on domestic
affairs, which may be enough to convict if the jury is saturated with great
sound bites.

Makes you wish they'd bring back the butler.

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Foreign Minister Asks for Ties Now With U.S.

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 88 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Oct. 8


The new Foreign Minister of Vietnam called today for the immediate restoration
of diplomatic ties between Vietnam and the United States and described the Bush
Administration's refusal to end a 16-year trade embargo against this
impoverished nation as "not right."

At a news conference with foreign journalists, Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam
said the United States had increased its demands for restoring relations with
Vietnam. "If the conditions continue, it will be difficult to reach a
settlement," he said.


LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 9, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The Asia Test for Mr. Bush

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 721 words


President Bush will soon face his biggest and most challenging test in shaping a
new world order since the Persian Gulf war. Beginning in mid-November, Secretary
of State Baker and later Mr. Bush himself will spend the better part of a month
traveling in Asia, ending symbolically on Dec. 7 in Pearl Harbor.

They will be trying to pull together a policy for the Asian-Pacific rim, an area
of the world that will probably have a greater impact on America than all the
latest Soviet-American arms control announcements and the Middle East
negotiations.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker will be dealing with the core issue of any new world
order -- foreign economic policy -- in the largest, most dynamic economic region
of the globe.

The Bush-Baker challenge will be to replace the historic anti-Soviet focus of
U.S. Asian policy with a new emphasis on geoeconomics, to forge new economic
bonds and use them to resolve political problems and prevent economic disputes
from exploding into political confrontations.

The stakes are investment, jobs, growth, trade and trade wars, and -- most
delicate and dangerous of all -- relations with China and Japan. Washington's
troubles with these two Asian giants edge ever closer to a blowup.

No country is more important to the U.S. than Japan, and with no other country
are its economic ties so strained. Mr. Bush has managed to keep things together
through his personal relationship with the departing Prime Minister, Toshiki
Kaifu, but personal friendships will not substitute for the tough political
decisions needed in both capitals to sidetrack economic warfare. The two sides
are talking about the right issues (American budget deficits and education and
Japanese restrictive trade and investment practices), but they just are not
getting anywhere.

Japan will be Mr. Baker's principal stop in a trip that will begin with a Nov.
12 meeting with Asia's leading free-market countries. Later in November Mr. Bush
will journey to Japan, South Korea, Indonesia and Australia. Neither now plans
to stop in China.

Chinese leaders are approaching a full boil over Congressional pressures on
human rights, Mr. Bush's visit with Tibet's Dalai Lama and a host of other such
matters. U.S. leaders are steaming over China's $15 billion trade surplus with
the U.S., some of it the fruits of slave labor.

Some China experts would like Mr. Baker to stop in Beijing and defuse the
tension. But the Secretary and the President worry that such a high-level
contact would send American human rights watchers into orbit. The solution, and
Administration diplomats are working on it secretly, is to see if Beijing will
agree in advance to certain concessions to be announced during a Baker visit.

America's hold on China turns on trade, technology and investment, all of which
Beijing requires to modernize. That hold, tragically, has done little to
alleviate Beijing's human and political rights abuses. But Washington has used
its leverage well to gain China's critical neutrality at the U.N. during the war
against Iraq, pressure on Communist rebels to end the fighting in Cambodia and
agreement to restrict missile sales to the volatile Mideast and elsewhere.

The power of the purse is everywhere evident in Asia. Japan is using it to pry
its northern islands away from the Soviet Union. Tokyo is employing the same
bait to persuade North Korea to halt its none-too-secret nuclear arms program.
North Korea is coming out of its nasty and dangerous shell because it is an
economic basket case. Vietnam will also sink into economic oblivion without aid,
which explains its recent help in concluding Cambodia's civil war.

Overarching all this are the worldwide GATT free-trade negotiations, a vast
multilateral gabfest now in an ominous stalemate. A breakdown in these talks
could lead to Western European and North American trade blocs. To guard against
such possibilities, some Asians are flirting with establishing their own trade
bloc.

Fortunately, Asian nations still depend on free trade, oppose protectionism and
fear Japanese domination if America is excluded. Every Pacific rim nation wants
full American involvement in the region, which gives the U.S. an inherent
long-term advantage that Mr. Bush and Mr. Baker can start using next month to
mold the emerging geoeconomic order.

LOAD-DATE: October 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Singapore Journal;
Back to Somerset Maugham and Life's Seamy Side

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


Discovering too late that much of its colonial history was being smothered
beneath antiseptic towers of steel and tinted glass, Singapore is trying to
restore what remains of its past, both the dignity and the debauchery.

The dignity is embodied in Raffles, the big wedding cake of a hotel once
described as having stood "for all the fables of the Exotic East." Raffles
reopened in September after a $90 million, two-year renovation intended to
return the hotel to the tropical glory that attracted the likes of Somerset
Maugham and Rudyard Kipling.

The debauchery is Bugis Street, which was once the Singaporean equivalent of
Bourbon Street in New Orleans or Place Pigalle in Paris and which was largely
bulldozed over in the early 1980's to make way for a new subway station.

The transvestites of Bugis Street have been quietly told that they can soon
return to what had for decades been their dusk-to-dawn home. Bugis Street
(pronounced BOO-gees) is being recreated.

"Darling, it's going to be show time again in Singapore," said a 34-year-old
transvestite and former denizen of Bugis Street who goes by the "stage name" of
Tammy Tan.

Losing Touch With the Past

The restoration of Raffles and Bugis Street is the result of a larger
realization among Singaporeans that, in turning a fetid, malarial port into one
of the most modern, ruthlessly well-scrubbed nations on earth, Singapore was
losing touch with its past.

A place that still conjures up images of opium dens, bawdyhouses and brawling,
peg-legged pirates, Singapore is now better known among its Southeast Asian
neighbors for Japanese-style efficiency and for hygienic standards second to
none. In Singapore, you can drink the water.

In recent years, historic neighborhoods of ramshackle row houses and small shops
have fallen to the wrecker's ball to make way for the futuristic office towers
that now dominate the city-state's skyline.

The economic miracle of modern Singapore is the vision of the nation's first
and, until last year, only Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, whose leadership
involved a strong element of puritanism. It took his successor, Goh Chok Tong,
to lift a national ban on jukeboxes and R-rated movies.

But this nation's 2.7 million residents are nothing if not astute business men
and women, and it has occurred to many here that Singapore's sterile,
oblivious-to-its-history reputation, deserved or not, could be scaring the
tourists away.

Among visitors to Singapore, Japanese are the biggest spenders, and a 1989
survey found that while 47 percent of Japanese tourists were attracted to
Singapore for its lush greenery and its cleanliness, only one percent said they
were brought here principally by the opportunity for sightseeing.

"Singapore has a lot to offer, but I think it's true that we don't have much of
what would collectively be known as historic sightseeing areas," said Jennie
Chua, the general manager of Raffles. The resurrected Raffles, she said, will
serve two purposes: luxury hotel and premiere tourist attraction.

Opened in 1887 and named for the colony's founder, Sir Stamford Raffles, the
hotel early on developed a reputation as the home away from home for men of
letters. Its guest list has included Kipling, who advised travelers to "feed at
Raffles when visiting Singapore," and Maugham, who paid his first visit to
Raffles in 1921 and who was said to sit beneath a fragrant frangipani tree in
the hotel's Palm Court and craft short stories from tidbits of gossip overheard
while supping among Singapore's gentry.

The hotel is woven into Singapore's history. In 1942, on the eve of the Japanese
invasion, British colonialists made their "last stand" at Raffles, gathering to
sing "There'll Always be an England."

Yet unlike the other Grand Dame hostelries of Southeast Asia, Raffles was
allowed to deteriorate, a victim of Singapore's worship of the new, and by the
late 1980's there were reports that the hotel, faded and a bit dowdy and
therefore very un-Singaporean, was preparing to close for good.

The rescue began in 1987, when Raffles was designated a national landmark. It
closed two years later for a complete rehabilitation.

The conversion has turned Raffles into a palatial all-suites hotel; each of the
104 suites is now complete with teakwood floors, 14-foot ceilings, overhead fan
and handmade carpets. It will be the most expensive hotel in Singapore, with
prices beginning at $350 a night.

The famed Long Bar -- where in 1903 the bartender Ngian Tong Boon created the
Singapore Sling, a slow-acting concoction of gin, cherry brandy, lemon juice and
soda -- has been moved to what will be a shopping-and-dining complex adjoining
the hotel.

'A Partying Place'

Only a few blocks north of Raffles, the rehabilitation of Bugis Street is
intended to appeal to those searching for something very different -- a taste of
the island's raucous, disreputable past.

Bugis Street may have had its heyday during the Vietnam War, when sailors
descended by the boatful on the its open-air restaurants and hawker stalls to
drink and carouse. Bugis Street accommodated them, remaining open 24 hours a
day.

In a second-floor office on the recreated Bugis Street, Ronnie Chia, the
developer who is overseeing the restoration, displays photographs of the street
carnival that was the old Bugis Street.

"It's going to be a fun place, a partying place," Mr. Chia said of the new Bugis
Street, which, like the old, will feature buildings with old terra cotta-tiled
roofs and Venetian windows. "We want to create the original flavor of Bugis
Street," he said. "Good food, 24 hours of fun."

"I have no objections about these ladies coming back, so long as they don't get
in trouble with the law," Mr. Chia said of the Bugis Street transvestites. "This
is Singapore. They will have to behave themselves."

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Raffles Hotel reopened last month after a $90 million
two-year renovation, helping Singapore regain another segment of its past.
(Patrick Lim for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 11, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Crackups And Downs

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 567 words


"The Boy Who Cried Bitch," a more serious film than its terrible title suggests,
tries to examine family dynamics between the deeply troubled 12-year-old Dan
Love (Harley Cross) and his skittish, defensive mother Candice (Karen Young),
who is clearly a huge part of Dan's problem. In the film's disturbing opening
sequence, Candice comes home with a male friend only to have Dan and his two
younger brothers pelt the stranger with dirt and address their mother as
"slutbitch" and "the happy hooker," insults that soon have her retaliating in
kind. Dan, who is clearly out of control and scares himself as much as he scares
others, spends most of his time at a private school that keeps him out of his
mother's hair.

The film, which plays like an earnest, watered-down case study, observes Dan's
growing inability to get along with his peers. Violent and erratic, he finds
fellowship with the school's maintenance man, Jim (Gene Canfield), a haunting
Vietnam veteran who shares his back issues of Soldier of Fortune with the boy.
Jim is well on his way toward child molestation when he himself shows severe
signs of mental strain. The older man's crackup, eerily rendered here, prompts a
similar breakdown for Dan, who is consequently moved to a private psychiatric
hospital.

At the hospital, Dan makes friends with various other young patients, but
eventually alienates them all. The film, which opens today at the Village East,
progresses inexorably but very slowly toward a grim resolution of the mother-son
conflict at the heart of the story.

As directed by Juan Jose Campanella and written by Catherine May Levin, "The Boy
Who Cried Bitch" is conspicuously more soft-hearted than its subject. The film
never fully enters into either Dan's furious impulses or his mother's
dangerously unstable frame of mind. The boy, though played intensely and well by
Mr. Cross, never exhibits anything more surprising than textbook psychotic
symptoms, and these only at well-timed intervals. Much of the time, he seems a
good, misunderstood child who waves hatchets, writes on walls, rocks
rhythmically and so on simply because he has problems at home.

Ms. Young has more shock value, but her character as written is brittle and
repetitive. The story's mother-son friction is presented in clinical detail, but
it is seldom allowed room for dramatic development. Also in the film, in helpful
but ultimately ineffectual capacities, are Dennis Boutsikaris, John Rothman,
Samuel Wright and Kario Salem as medical personnel doing their best to help Dan,
and Moira Kelly and Adrien Brody as young patients trying very hard to be his
friends.

The Boy Who Cried Bitch

Directed by Juan Jose Campanella; written by Catherine May Levin; director of
photography, Daniel Shulman; edited by Darren Kloomok; music by Wendy
Blackstone; production designer, Nancy Deren; produced by Louis Tancredi;
released by the Pilgrims 3 Corporation. At the Village East, Second Avenue and
12th Street, Manhattan. Running time: 105 minutes. This film has no rating.

Dan Love . . . Harley Cross
Candice Love . . . Karen Young
Mike Love . . . Jesse Bradford
Nick Love . . . J. D. Daniels
Jim Cutler . . . Gene Canfield
Jessica . . . Moira Kelly
Eddie . . . Adrien Brody
Orin Fell . . . Dennis Boutsikaris
Stokes . . . John Rothman
Richard . . . Samuel Wright
Dr. Habib . . . Kario Salem

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
New York Is Cast as Villain and Victim

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1619 words


In the second act of "Babylon Gardens," things would appear temporarily to be
looking up for Opal, a homeless black woman and Jesus freak who's been surviving
as best she can in the streets and alleys on the Lower East Side of New York.
Bill, a perpetually stoned anesthetist, has taken her to a flophouse, paid for
two nights' lodging, rented her a TV set and even given her $12 in mad money.

Opal is not appeased, though. Fixing her benefactor with a fierce stare, she
thunders -- as Daniel did to the King of Babylon -- "Your kingdom is finished.
You have been weighed in the balance and found wanting."

"You get no argument from me there," replies Bill, too exhausted by this time to
be his usual flip self.

The trouble is you'll get no argument from the playwright Timothy Mason, either,
which may explain why "Babylon Gardens" is so dramatically fallow. Ostensibly,
the play, which recently opened the season at Circle Rep, examines some troubled
young professionals coping with life in New York City in the troubled 1990's.
But don't fool yourself. It's really about America the Not So Beautiful -- home
of the drugged, the crazed and the dispossessed.

How Mr. Mason's characters got so messed up -- or, for that matter, how the
country did -- is not the issue. They just are. It just is. Mr. Mason's mind is
made up from the start. The land and its people have been weighed in the
balance, and the balance has had its say. Nothing that happens on stage is going
to alter that judgment. The play, for all practical purposes, is over before it
begins.

Bill (Timothy Hutton), a transplant from Little Falls, Minn., starts out stoned,
stays stoned at home and in the operating room, and, except for a brief and
unsatisfying flirtation with sobriety, winds up stoned. Since he has the faintly
imbecilic sensibility of a latter-day flower child, maybe it's a deep nostalgia
for the 1960's that accounts for his drug habit. But who can say? I suspect
we're simply supposed to accept his addiction as evidence of how rotten things
are around him.

When he proclaims, "I am an anesthetist because I desire to spread peace in the
world," he means to be funny. But Mr. Mason is reading a certain amount of
symbolism into the profession. The 1990's are too much with us. We need numbing.

Bill's wife, Jean (Mary-Louise Parker), has already found her escape hatch --
periodic flights of madness that can be traced to the birth of her anacephalic
baby. Although the deformed fetus was immediately whisked away, she sees the
child everywhere, talks about its education, worries over its welfare. She also
lives in terror of the rays emitted by the television set and sees "shapes" in
the window that opens onto mean streets getting meaner by the second.

"I'm not always weird," she admits in what may be the truest analysis of her
character. "I am just sometimes weird."

I don't believe that Mr. Mason has made these characters up out of whole cloth.
The play gives off too strong a scent of autobiography for that. But he has left
so many blank spaces and glossed over so many motivations that the actors and
their director, Joe Mantello, should probably be credited as co-authors merely
for finding their way through the piece.

With his stringy hair, his eyes narrowed to slits and a complexion the color of
old sheets, Mr. Hutton has the "air of wastedness" the other characters
attribute to him. But even he, a likable actor, is bereft of charm in the role.
Ms. Parker's tactic is to position herself on the near side of madness. No
plunges off the deep end, no wild and sudden seizures. Quietly, sweetly, she
slips into her fantasies -- the look of candor on her face giving no indication
that anything's amiss. The drifting back and forth is artfully done, although
just what provokes it each time is matter for conjecture.

Dramatically fuzzy as they are, the drugged-up hubby and his wigged-out wife are
still the best delineated of Mr. Mason's characters. Opal (Cynthia Martells) --
who once stripped on bar tops for dollars, now quotes scripture for free and
favors a nip or two of Nyquil before curling up on the sidewalk -- seems like a
reject from Whoopi Goldberg's one-woman stage show. Molly (Bobo Lewis), a double
mastectomy patient, is there only to let us know that in olden days -- and they
were better days -- the authorities flooded the now notorious Tompkins Square in
winter, turning it into a free skating rink.

As for the Puerto Rican youth (Hector M. Estrada), whom Jean, in her sentimental
folly, befriends by the East River, he's not the innocent he appears, as any
tourist from Wichita could tell you. Well, altruism is tricky business. Nobody
in this city is who he pretends to be. And if you consider the state of the
country -- make that the state of the world -- we're all homeless.

Sam Shepard plunged us into similarly murky metaphorical waters last season with
"States of Shock," in which a family restaurant stood for America, a rampaging
general embodied our blood lust and a crippled Vietnam veteran represented the
maiming of Manhood Itself. By the conclusion, bombs were exploding offstage and
the customers had begun to curl up in fetal position on the floor.

Mr. Mason doesn't envision such a violent end in "Babylon Gardens," just
continuing deterioration. But there's no question that he, too, considers
greatness behind us. "Anybody remember when America died?," Bill asks some of
his married friends who've dropped by for the evening. "Where Were You When
America Died? Think of it as a party game."

O.K. If we must. You go first.

'The Radiant City'

"Babylon Gardens" may be unable to elucidate our urban angst, but there's no
shortage of explanations for why New York City, at least, turned out as it has
in "The Radiant City," the new multimedia presentation written, designed and
directed by Theodora Skipitares at the American Place Theater. Here, in an
enchanted nutshell, is a history of the town and its environs, beginning with
the Ice Age and continuing on down to the World's Fair of 1964-65, with
particular emphasis on the life and schemes of the city planner and demagogue
Robert Moses. If that sounds dry and academic, let me add hastily that Ms.
Skipitares is the most fanciful of professors and frolicsome of theorists.

While she has her points to make, she makes them with such invention that it may
be more helpful to look upon "The Radiant City" as one of those eccentric
sideshow exhibits that come magically alive when you insert a nickel in the
slot. In her limitless imagination, which she seemingly has no difficulty
translating to the stage, skyscrapers dance, highways unfurl like banners and
beach umbrellas perform a bright Busby Berkeley routine, all the while puppets
act out Moses's rise to prominence, his stranglehold on city development in the
1940's and 50's and his eventual fall from grace -- with a shove or two from the
Brothers Rockefeller.

I realize that if you mention puppets, most of the country's adult population
automatically starts running in the other direction. Know, then, that it is the
loosest of terms for the captivating variety of constructions that Ms.
Skipitares employs in her 90-minute show. There are puppets on rods and puppets
on strings and little whitewashed figures attached to movable platforms (the
ordinary people uprooted by Moses's vast redevelopment plans) that could have
been designed by George Segal.

There are heavy marble friezes of the sort that were once carved over post
office doors -- except that here they depict poor folk in Depression bread
lines, who actually shrug their shoulders and bow their heads in despair.
Moses's political cronies in Albany are life-size papier-mache sculptures,
similarly articulated, so that one can puff on a cigar, a second toss back a
shot of whisky and a third roll his eyes craftily from side to side, just to
make sure no one catches him in a shady deal.

Moses comes in all sizes and shapes, depending on the state of his fortunes. At
birth, he's a featureless wooden doll, stirring in the dust inside an empty
aquarium. At his political apogee, he's represented by a massive stone bust
(petty dictator model) that is just asking to be toppled by the people. After
the inevitable toppling, he's reduced to a pathetic Giacometti-like figure,
shaking a wispy head in bewilderment or senility.

They are all splendidly manipulated by a team of performers dressed in black.
But the puppets (sorry!) are only part of a beguiling mixture that includes film
footage, vintage slides, model roadsters, juggling, Hannibal on an elephant,
light-up maps, a Ferris wheel of fortune and a three-piece band, playing a
dissonant, although often witty, musical score by Christopher Thall. Lisa
Kirchner and William Badgett supply the narration, speak for the characters and
sing the quasi-Brechtian commentary.

No 90-minute show, of course, can pretend to give a comprehensive picture of
Moses's long and controversial career. (For that, we have Robert Caro's
masterful biography, "The Power Broker.") What seems fascinating to me about
"The Radiant City" is that Ms. Skipitares's assertive social consciousness in no
manner precludes an extravagant sense of play. While "The Radiant City" gives
you lots to ponder -- the arrogance of developers, the efficiency of glaciers
and the inevitability of traffic jams -- she illustrates her ideas so originally
that you don't really think of them as abstractions so much as pop-up surprises
in some fun house of the mind.

If ever the Disney corporation decides to build a theme park for intellectuals,
Ms. Skipitares is the obvious choice to preside over the planning committee.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Timothy Hutton and Mary-Louise Parker in Timothy Mason's
"Babylon Gardens" at the Circle Rep, and a sculpture of Robert Moses from "The
Radiant City" by Theodora Skipitares at the American Place Theater--varieties of
urban experience (Paula Court/"Babylon Gardens"; (M. Draper/"The Radiant City")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Seeking Peace in a German Hostel Faced by Hate

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: MONCHENGLADBACH, Germany, Oct. 9


In a quiet section of this town, on a pleasant tree-shaded street, stands a low
apartment building that is a symbol of the racial crisis now shaking Germany.

The building is a hostel for 160 foreigners from Romania, Yugoslavia, Turkey,
Afghanistan, India and Vietnam. They are refugees from war, repression or
poverty, and they have come to Germany hoping for a chance to live and work in
peace.

Over the last few weeks, there has been little peace for foreigners in Germany.
A wave of attacks by racist and neo-Nazi gangs began in early September and has
continued unabated.

The hostel in Monchengladbach is among several hundred such places that have
been attacked. On Oct. 2, assailants hurled two firebombs from a car. Neither
went through a window, and no one was injured.

Very Difficult Mood

In a similar attack in Hunxe, 30 miles from here, a bomb went through a window
and set a childrens' bedroom afire. Two young Lebanese girls were seriously
burned.

"The mood is very difficult, very negative," said Josef Hutz, a social worker
who supervises the hostel here. "Most people I know just want to see the backs
of these foreigners. They want them out. Hate is what most people are feeling.'

Another social worker who was listening protested: "No, that's too strong. Most
Germans don't hate foreigners."

Mr. Hutz replied, "Well, maybe not most, but quite a few."

"All right, quite a few," the other social worker said. "We can agree on that."

The recent outburst of racist violence in Germany has upset life at the hostel.
Residents feel nervous, and are reluctant to leave the immediate neighborhood
unless necessary.

'Bombs From Fascists'

Several young children were traumatized by the firebomb attack here, and their
mothers have allowed them to stay home from school for a while.

"We left everything behind to come here so we could get away from bombing by
fascists," said a Yugoslav mother. "Now that we're here, we also have to face
bombs from fascists."

It is evident even from a block away that this apartment house is not like
others in Monchengladbach. Flocks of dark-haired children play in the street,
men in turbans talk on the sidewalk and elderly women in bright dresses lean
from upstairs windows.

Inside, the hostel is a riot of noises, smells and modes of dress. While not all
of the residents can understand each other, some friendships have developed.

"I had to run away from the police in Turkey, so naturally I sympathize with
people who have run away from their own police,' said one young man. "Everyone
who is here has made a choice to look for a better life, so we sympathize with
each other."

Looking for Prosperity

Refugees who come to Germany are registered by a central agency, which then
decides where to send them. Government policy requires cities and towns across
the country to accept a share.

There are eight homes for refugees in Monchengladbach, housing more than 1,000
people. Several hundred other asylum-seekers have found apartments on their own.

Conditions at the hostel Mr. Hutz runs are reasonably sanitary, but crowded.
Many large families are squeezed into single rooms, and the dormitory for single
men is a barracks-style hall filled with bunk beds.

Despite such conditions, refugees in Germany enjoy benefits more generous than
those offered by almost any other country. They receive clothing and furniture,
rent-free living quarters and monthly stipends that range from $400 for a single
person to $1,200 for a family of six.

The majority of those who apply for permanent asylum in Germany are turned down,
but they normally manage to stay for several years while their cases are
pending. Those from countries with repressive governments are allowed to remain
indefinitely, subject to expulsion if conditions in their homelands improve.

Many Germans complain that the foreigners, who are now crossing into Germany at
the rate of nearly 1,000 a day, are coming here not to escape political
repression, but to find economic prosperity. There is evidently some truth to
that charge.

Support From Some Neighbors

"When we stopped giving out cash and started giving food coupons instead, there
was a lot of grumbling," Mr. Hutz said. "A couple of people actually decided to
leave because they thought we were becoming too stingy."

Activity at the house in Monchengladbach reaches a peak at midday. Many stoves
are in use, and the air fills with exotic aromas.

As a cheerful Kurdish refugee showed a couple of curious Sikhs the ingredients
of a Middle Eastern soup, two young Germans appeared. They said they lived in
the neighborhood, had several friends among the refugees here and liked to stop
by to make sure things were going well.

"I can't stand this racist stuff that's been going on lately," one of them, who
gave his name as Roland, said. "These guys are human beings exactly like us.
They had to get away from wars. If there's ever war in Germany, I'd run to
Yugoslavia or somewhere myself."

More Germans like Roland have been making themselves known in recent days, and
their presence has reassured some refugees. But the hostel here is still
unguarded at night, and no one inside sleeps peacefully.

Most residents say that despite the violence they face in Germany, they do not
regret having come here.

"It sounds like a tough thing to say," said a city official who works with
foreigners, "but when you come right down to it, you're a lot better off being
alive in Germany, even today, than tortured or dead in some other place."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Germany indicating Monchengladbach

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Redd Foxx, Cantankerous Master of Bawdy Humor, Is Dead at 68

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 48; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 801 words


Redd Foxx, a ground-breaking comedian best known for his portrayal of a
curmudgeonly junk dealer in the 1970's televison series "Sanford and Son," died
late Friday night in Los Angeles after suffering a heart attack on the set of
his new television series. He was 68 years old.

Mr. Foxx collapsed during a rehearsal for the CBS series "The Royal Family," in
which he and Della Reese starred. The series had its premiere on Sept. 18.

He died at Queen of Angels Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center, a hospital
spokesman said early yesterday.

While Mr. Foxx was best known as the bow-legged, raspy-voiced star of "Sanford
and Son," which ran from 1972 to 1977, he had had a long career on the black
theater and cabaret circuit, where he was known as the dean of X-rated
comedians.

Long before Richard Pryor and others began skewering social taboos about sex,
race and other delicate topics, Mr. Foxx was playing nightclubs and making 54
"party records" -- spoken comedy with no music -- a genre he claimed to have
originated in 1956.

"No one expected me to be on television because I had a reputation from the
party records as X-rated, but that's the type of humor I liked," Mr. Foxx said
in an interview in 1982. "That's the humor I heard in the ghettos. They didn't
pull no punches, and they didn't want to hear about Little Boy Blue and
Cinderella. So I gave them what they wanted. I busted loose."

Mr. Foxx's real name was John Sanford. His televison character, Fred Sanford,
was named for his brother.

Born in St. Louis, Mr. Foxx grew up in Chicago in a poor family. His father left
home, and Mr. Foxx ran away when he was 13.

Even earlier, though, he had decided that he wanted to work in show business.
When he was 7, he would tell jokes to relatives and friends. He began
professional work as a teen-ager, playing in a washtub band on street corners
and later moving to the black vaudeville circuit.

Jail for Minor Offenses

Success did not come easily. Mr. Foxx spent a considerable amount of time
working as a dishwasher or sign painter in order to eat. For some years, show
business dates alternated with brief jail sentences for such offenses as
stealing a bottle of milk and sleeping in a hallway.

In Harlem Mr. Foxx got the nickname "Red" because of his hair color and light
skin, and he later added another "d." Sometimes he was called "Chicago Red" to
differentiate him from his friend, "Detroit Red," the young Malcolm X.

With the first of his party records, in 1956, Mr. Foxx began to be heard by
larger audiences, eventually selling 20 million records. He was a bridge between
a decades-old burlesque-show tradition of scatological party humor and a younger
generation of comics and social satirists from Lenny Bruce to Andrew Dice Clay.

It was not until the late 1960's that Mr. Foxx moved from black clubs to
television and to clubs in Las Vegas, where he lived for many years.

Mr. Foxx repeated his role as Fred Sanford in a series that ran in 1980 and 81.
He starred in another comedy show in 1986, but nothing ever achieved the
popularity of his first series, which also starred Demond Wilson as his son,
Lamont.

Despite his popular and financial success, Mr. Foxx often expressed bitterness
about his career. He felt that he had been exploited by unscrupulous associates
and victimized by racism in the entertainment industry.

"I've been cheated more than most people because I'm gullible and I'm a target,"
he said. "My heart is open, and I listen to people and I believe their sob
stories."

A big spender who once owned a fleet of fancy cars, Mr. Foxx made millions of
dollars from "Sanford and Son." But he filed for bankruptcy protection in 1983,
citing mounting debts. Two years ago the Internal Revenue Service raided his Las
Vegas home and took many possessions, claiming he owed nearly $3 million in
taxes, penalties and interest.

Mr. Foxx often feigned heart attacks as a comedy routine in the role of Sanford.
When he collapsed on Friday, many in the cast first thought he was joking, then
quickly realized he was ill. Earlier he had complained of chills.

Slappy White, an early partner, accompanied other friends and relatives to the
hospital. "He's going to be missed a great deal because he was pretty creative,"
Mr. White said. "The comedy world is going to miss him. He broke a lot of
barriers."

Bob Hope, who performed with Mr. Foxx in Vietnam in the late 1960's, called him
"a natural comedian."

And Ruth Brown, a rhythm and blues singer, credited Mr. Foxx with renewing her
singing career after she had been working as a maid and busdriver.

"Redd would do anything for a friend," she said. "He was constantly putting his
arms out to help somebody."

He is survived by his wife, Kahoe, of Los Angeles, and his mother Mary.

NAME: Redd Foxx

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Redd Foxx (Associated Press, 1977)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
Wary New Hampshire Watches Campaign Unfold

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 38; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, N.H., Oct. 11


Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas was eating a salad in the cafeteria at Dartmouth
College one afternoon this week when a reporter for the student newspaper asked
why he had chosen now to return to his alma mater.

Mr. Tsongas, who has been campaigning for President almost entirely by himself
since April, paused, shrugged and gave a rare smile.

"Well," he said, "This is New Hampshire."

Mr. Tsongas is no longer alone in the competition for votes in the state where
the nation's first 1992 Presidential primary will be held on Feb. 18. Four of
the five announced major Presidential candidates spent the week crisscrossing
the state in a sort of political fall foliage tour.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and Senator Bob Kerrey
of Nebraska descended on college campuses, hotel meeting rooms and private
homes, courting campaign workers and learning the landscape. The crowds seldom
number more than 50, and the people who come to see the candidates neither
applaud nor commit themselves easily.

"They fly up straight from Washington and they look like they're from another
planet," said Paula Wolcott, who came to see Mr. Harkin at a luncheon in
Littleton.

Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia, traveling in the Far East on state business,
was the lone major candidate missing from what turned into a campaign kickoff
week.

As the newcomers tested the waters, many New Hampshire political Democrats were
shopping as well, carefully gauging the message the would-be Presidents were
bringing to voters who are almost smugly comfortable with their role in the
nominating process.

The 1992 New Hampshire primary is expected to be an even more important test
than usual, since Senator Harkin is the presumed favorite in the Iowa caucuses.

Since the New Hampshire primary became a prominent indicator in 1952, no
candidate has won the Presidency without first winning here.

In 1988, President Bush was on shaky ground after his loss to Senator Bob Dole
of Kansas in Iowa. But a New Hampshire victory following an anti-Dole
advertising blitz debilitated his opposition and restored a political edge that
earned him the Republican nomination.

For old party hands who have been waiting for months for the campaign to begin,
the five candidates who entered the race in recent weeks are virtual unknowns.

Most of the Democrats interviewed this week as the candidates made speeches and
attended receptions said they planned to remain neutral for at least another
month as they took the measure of the candidates and waited for the field to be
fully assembled.

Jesse L. Jackson; Jerry Brown, former Governor of California, and Representative
Dave McCurdy of Oklahoma have said they may join the race.

So far, the New Hampshire Democrats have been welcoming but cautious about the
new group.

"I have to admit that I do not know a lot about Governor Bill Clinton," John
Lynch, a lawyer and former Merrimack County Democratic party chairman, remarked
as he introduced the Arkansas Governor at a breakfast for state legislators in
Concord.

Mr. Kerrey opened a talk to a gathering of social studies students at Winnisquam
Regional High School in Tilton almost sheepishly. "I appreciate that you know
practically nothing at all about me," he said.

In addition to the virtual anonymity most of the candidates share, they are also
facing a wary group of Democrats, many of whom felt stung by Michael Dukakis's
Presidential election defeat by George Bush in 1988.

Democrats are looking for a candidate the Republicans cannot make a fool of,
said Henry Sullivan, a Manchester lawyer who attended receptions for Mr. Kerrey
and Mr. Clinton on successive evenings this week.

"He told me what he wanted to do, but he didn't tell me how," said Helene
Higgins, the campus minister at Plymouth State College, after hearing Mr. Harkin
speak at the town library. "I kept wanting to yell, 'How?' "

Democrats attempting to mount a Presidential campaign that underscores
deficiencies in the economy found a useful backdrop in New Hampshire this week.
On Thursday, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation closed five New Hampshire
banks that had fallen victim to the recession and bad real estate loans. Five
hundred jobs are expected to be lost in the next 18 months because of the bank
failures.

This week, each candidate proposed his solutions to the problems of the economy,
focusing on job creation, health care and early-childhood education programs
like Head Start.

"We need to reconnect the office of the Presidency to the problems of America,"
Mr. Clinton told state legislators in Concord.

That is as close as Mr. Clinton or Mr. Kerrey came to attacking President Bush.
Mr. Tsongas and Mr. Harkin were more direct. The state of the economy, Mr.
Tsongas said, is Mr. Bush's "center of vulnerability."

Bush's Rating Going Down

Mr. Tsongas noted that the President's popularity has been sliding downward
recently. The New York Times/CBS News poll taken last week found that 64 percent
of those surveyed thought Mr. Bush was doing a good job, down from 70 percent
last month.

The generational themes of some may also find fertile ground. Fifty-two percent
of those surveyed said they thought the next generation of Americans would be
worse off than today. In March, 26 percent felt that way.

The new candidates seem hesitant to criticize each other yet. "I'm not going to
define my opponent," Mr. Harkin said after delivering a standard speech in which
he vowed to "beat up on Bush."

"They can define themselves," he said.

Some Democrats also see New Hampshire's economic problems as an opportunity for
Democrats in a state where Republicans hold a significant edge in voter
registration.

Ned Helms, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for governor in 1992, said,
"Not a soul in New Hampshire believes that" the recession is winding down, as
Vice President Dan Quayle said this week.

"The difference is going to be with the candidates," he said. "What they say and
what they've done."

But first, voters have got to figure out who these candidates are.

Will Kanteris, Mr. Kerrey's New Hampshire campaign manager, said his candidate
will win voters with his directness and with the compelling story he brings as a
Medal of Honor winner who lost part of a leg in Vietnam.

"But," he said, "we have people who still don't know if he's John Kerry or Bob
Kerrey."

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Creeping Nincompoopism

BYLINE: By Christopher Buckley;  Christopher Buckley's most recent book is the
novel "Wet Work."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 909 words



BAD
Or, the Dumbing of America.
By Paul Fussell.
201 pp. New York: Summit Books. $19.

Jeremiads about the decline of America are not in especially short supply, but
when the Jeremiah is Paul Fussell, author of the masterly "Great War and Modern
Memory," attention must be paid. "Bad" is his summa contra America. What he
likes about the United States would comfortably fit under a gerbil's paw. Mr.
Fussell makes his home in Philadelphia, where he is a professor of English at
the University of Pennsylvania, but after more than 200 pages of excoriation
you're left to conclude that on the whole he would rather be somewhere else --
like, say, England, where he spends a lot of time.

"Bad" is an alphabetically organized denunciation of everything that is "phony,
clumsy, witless, untalented, vacant, or boring that many Americans can be
persuaded is genuine, graceful, bright, or fascinating. . . . For a thing to be
really BAD," he posits, "it must exhibit elements of the pretentious, the
overwrought, or the fraudulent."

For example, Mr. Fussell continues, "Bathroom faucet handles that cut your
fingers are bad. If gold plated, they are BAD. Dismal food is bad. Dismal food
pretentiously served in a restaurant associated with the word gourmet is BAD.
Being alert to this distinction is a large part of the fun of being alive today,
in a moment teeming with raucously overvalued emptiness and trash."

Mr. Fussell's uppah-case "BAD" takes some getting used to, typographically, but
you soon settle down to an enjoyable, if depressing, tour through what he calls
this country's "Paphlagonia." Say what? It's a conceit based on the British
philosopher David Hume's reference to the backward Roman province in Asia Minor
where "the people were extremely ignorant and stupid, and ready to swallow even
the grossest delusion." Its capital is Salt Lake City, "the very pulsating
heart" of the U.S. of P.

His special disdain for Mormons derives from his conviction that "the dumbing of
America" originated during the "creeping nincompoopism" -- as one contemporary
put it -- of the 1830's, when Joseph Smith was visited by the Angel Moroni. It
climaxed, he says, in 1978, when 913 followers of Jim Jones drank flavored
cyanide in the jungles of Guyana. A half-dozen lacerating references to Ronald
Reagan, as well as several to his successor, introduce an element of nearly
mortal despair over our collective predicament. Vice President Dan Quayle is
hardly mentioned -- a strange omission, you might think, in this context, unless
Mr. Fussell did not want his English friends to accuse him of broad satire.

His BAD mansion has many rooms, and in them you'll find Chrysler's "Corinthian"
leather, made in Newark; John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York
(hear, hear) and the Albert Speerish Kennedy Center in Washington; the statue
added on for political reasons to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial; novels by
anyone less than middle-aged; our habit of interrupting one another; American
engineering (the French and Japanese have their fast trains, the Swiss invented
Velcro; "The American achievement -- I know it's bad taste to mention this -- is
the Challenger, brought to you by faulty manufacture, inept and dishonest
quality control, and lying and evasion for the sake of big bucks"); processed
cheese (natch); the national pathology of euphemizing our language into
meaninglessness ("shower activity for rain, nonperforming loans for bad debts");
People magazine and USA Today; Leonard Bernstein; Andrew Lloyd Webber's Broadway
productions; Pachelbel's Canon in D; the United States Navy; the "creepy metal
mannequins" of the sculptor J. Seward Johnson; television (and how), "a grossly
proletarian medium . . . a place where nothing exciting or interesting can
possibly happen" (like when the Challenger blew up?); waiters who insist on a
first-name basis, and that 35-foot-long white limousine.

Here and there you can hear the tree limbs cracking underneath an excess of
weight. Call me a philistine -- he will, he will -- but I sort of like Lincoln
Center. Does the "medical evidence" really suggest that one in 10 Americans is
"insane"? And is The Washington Post truly a "second-rate newspaper"?

Mr. Fussell's loathing for television -- which he nominates as the chief cause,
along with the collapse of the public secondary school, of our slippery slide --
has an amusing flash point: once, while rehearsing for a talk show about
culture, he was asked to substitute "an easy synonym for anthropological, a
term, I was assured, way over the heads of the audience."

His policy prescriptions sound a bit like the platform of a Cuomo-Tsongas
ticket: nationalize the airlines, abolish nuclear energy, stop exploring space
while children go hungry, raise the capital gains tax and "get the homeless into
a new Civilian Conservation Corps," presumably with all that capital gains
windfall. On the private sector side of things he wants us to "start a few
sophisticated national newspapers," reinstall Latin in the high schools and have
the guts to tell BAD restaurateurs that no, we have not enjoyed our dinner,
thanks all the same.

He has seen the future, and it is broken. "The new Goddess of Dullness is in the
saddle, attended by her outriders Greed, Ignorance, and Publicity." You can say
that again, bub. America in the late 20th century ain't no place for an
18th-century man.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Macho Men and the Women Who Love Them

BYLINE: By Rand Richards Cooper;  Rand Richards Cooper is the author of a book
of stories, "The Last to Go."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 991 words



BEYOND DESERVING
By Sandra Scofield.
310 pp. Sag Harbor, N.Y.: The Permanent Press. $21.95.

Katie Fisher loves her husband, Fish. Trouble is, she can't stand living with
him. He's a Vietnam veteran prone to rages, he drinks too much, he never fixes
the car when he promises. When a troublesome habit of borrowing strangers' cars
lands him in prison for a year, Katie has some time to think things over. She
draws a line down the middle of a sheet of paper. LOVE, she writes on one side,
and on the other, THE REST OF IT.

Ursula Fisher loves her husband, Michael -- Fish's twin. A high school teacher,
Michael is a somewhat civilized version of his renegade brother. Ursula and
Michael have managed to cobble together a decent middle-class life, featuring a
daughter who dances and a son who's a computer whiz. But Michael dreams of the
old days of hunting with his brother, and seems to chafe quietly at his own
respectability.

Geneva Fisher, meanwhile, loves her husband, Gully, the twins' father. But Gully
is ornery. He likes hanging out in the woods with his friend Melroy and Melroy's
dogs; dragged to his own 50th wedding anniversary, he submits himself to eating
cake from his wife's hand "with the enthusiasm of someone eating a sock."

What are women to do with men like these? The answers form the matter of "Beyond
Deserving," Sandra Scofield's story of family entanglements, set in the woods of
southern Oregon. Like Ms. Scofield's previous novel, "Gringa," "Beyond
Deserving" sets forth a fascination for strong men and the women who love them.
Katie listens to Fish's war stories as raptly as Desdemona listening to Othello.
Having passed through worlds of violence (in "Gringa" the homme fatal is a
bullfighter) seems to confer upon men a superior, irresistible authenticity. The
novel dishes out broad swipes at the figure of the Sensitive Man, embodied in
Katie's lover, Jeff, whom she takes on during Fish's prison term. Jeff, an
agricultural geneticist, has developed an orange baby cauliflower and a
"delicate, blush-red pear." (Rather than confronting nature in a manly way -- by
hunting, say, or fishing -- he sneakily manipulates it.) Well-schooled in
relationship talk, Jeff lacks passion. There's no real eccentricity in him, and
no anger.

If you don't have the power to wound, Ms. Scofield's novel suggests, you don't
have the power to love. The notion that men, in becoming sensitive, have
abdicated some essential maleness makes "Beyond Deserving" a timely novel; it's
one woman's view of the "Iron John" phenomenon. Constructed largely out of the
points of view of the various Fisher girls and women, it nevertheless sits
comfortably with the works of male writers like Ken Kesey or Ed McClanahan, J.
P. Donleavy or John McGahern; it certifies the amiability (indeed, the
spirituality) of the rogue. Fish Fisher is like a Geiger counter, registering
the silliness of male pretensions to gentleness and sincerity. Trying to woo
Katie away from Jeff, he shows up at her door with a bottle of wine and suggests
that they "share it." Share it? Katie asks. "I read up on what to say," Fisher
says, grinning.

The narrative of "Beyond Deserving" is discursive, taking us unhurriedly forward
through the life of the Fisher clan while backtracking frequently to fill us in
on their pasts. Little happens to drive the plot forward aside from the steady,
inevitable curve of Katie and Fish's reconciliation. The pleasures of "Beyond
Deserving" are discoveries of character: again and again the novel's meandering
course reveals itself to be a slow, determined circling around the central pains
and joys of the half-dozen people whose lives and points of view it takes up.

Ms. Scofield skillfully plants exposition through the novel, as if to mimic a
habit of partial, sometimes painful recollection. Thus when we hear an almost
passing mention of the death of Gully and Geneva's daughter, Evelyn, it isn't
until 30 pages later that we learn the cause of death was "a botched abortion."
Wounds are not healed by time; they are merely submerged. And always, however
painful, they remain part of the bond between husband and wife. Katie has been
treated shoddily by Fish -- the novel begins with him hitting her -- and yet
leaving him seems like destroying part of herself. "What history would she
have," she wonders, "if she eliminated him?" "Fish knows her," and he is "the
only person she comes close to understanding." Sustaining a marriage, Ms.
Scofield seems to suggest, is not a question of fairness. Intimacy is beyond
that.

"Beyond Deserving" pleasingly satirizes aspects of our therapeutic society. When
Kate and her friend Maureen watch tapes of "Donahue," it's like kooky background
music for discussing their own relationship problems:

"As Maureen was talking, a grossly fat woman on Donahue started telling about
being asked to leave a restaurant because she was offending other diners. The
woman began to quiver as she talked; her arms and jowls shook, and then she
sobbed, moving all over, like a huge caught tuna. Donahue asked if she was okay,
he asked her how she was doing. She blubbered, 'I'm hungry.'

"Katie and Maureen looked at one another in horror, and then burst out laughing.
It felt better between them."

There's simple, wicked fun in this; but the moment is also part of a consistent
animus in the novel against the notion that all unhappiness can be, should be,
worked out. In this way, "Beyond Deserving" seems meant to weigh against what
one of Ursula Fisher's friends calls the "whole goddamned list of books on
getting it together." "There's good reason to be sad once in a while," the
friend says.

A pear, in other words, doesn't always need a delicate blush worked into it; the
man who's truly in touch with his feelings is the one who has feelings in the
first place. These are the lessons of Sandra Scofield's intelligent and
observant novel.

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 14, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gregory Vlastos, 84, Philosopher Who Analyzed Classical Works

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 456 words


Gregory Vlastos, a preeminent scholar on Socrates who transformed the analysis
of classical philosophy, died Saturday at Alta Bates-Herrick Hospital in
Berkeley, Calif. He was 84 years old and lived in Berkeley.

Dr. Vlastos died of cancer, his family said.

A professor emeritus at both Princeton University and the University of
California at Berkeley, Dr. Vlastos was widely respected as a teacher and
thinker in philosophy.

His studies culminated in his final book, "Socrates, Ironist and Moral
Philosopher," published in June by Cornell University Press to widespread
acclaim. A review in The New York Times called it "the best work available on
its subject."

Dr. Vlastos "transformed the way his subject was studied and taught," said
Robert L. Meister, a friend and former student who is a professor of political
philosophy at the University of California at Santa Cruz. He said Dr. Vlastos
applied the analytical techniques of modern philosophy to restate and evaluate
the views of Socrates and Plato.

Critiques Were Prized

Scholars and students prized Dr. Vlastos's critiques. Dr. Meister said, "He was
the kind of professor who would explore your ideas more than you did yourself,
write more on your paper than you did and show what you had said would really
mean."

During his career, Dr. Vlastos wrote several texts and edited more than 50
books. He served as president of the Eastern Division of the American
Philosophical Association. Among his numerous awards and honors, he won two
Guggenheim fellowships and was awarded the MacArthur Foundation fellowship in
1990.

He was born in Istanbul, known then as Constantinople, where his family belonged
to a small sect of Greek Protestants. He earned his undergraduate degree at the
American-run Robert College in Istanbul. At the age of 18 he came to the United
States to study.

At the Chicago Theological Seminary, he earned a doctorate of divinity and was
ordained as a Congregational minister, although he never became a pastor. Then
he went to Harvard University to obtain a doctorate in philosophy.

Dr. Vlastos taught at Queen's College in Kingston, Ontario, from 1931 to 1948,
when he went to Cornell. After seven years there, he went to Princeton
University, where he became chairman of the philosophy department and played a
leading role in campus governance. Upon retiring from Princeton in 1976, he
moved to Berkeley and taught there part time for more than a decade.

In his personal views, Dr. Vlastos was outspoken for social change and
progressive causes, including opposition to the Vietnam War and support of
feminism.

He is survived by a son, Stephen, of Iowa City, a daughter, Mari, of Berkeley,
and a brother, Kimon, of Athens, Greece.

NAME: Gregory Vlastos

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 15, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

More Than Just Up or Down

BYLINE: By James Reston;  James Reston is former chief Washington correspondent
and former executive editor of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


For more than a week, the Senate Judiciary Committee discussed sexual harassment
without even being able to agree on how to pronounce it. All the central figures
in this tragedy -- the judge, the professor and the committee members -- have
been caught in a fog of contradictory information about the past, and it is easy
to be sorry for them all.

But the question now is not about the past but about the future, not about how
to restore the good names of Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill but how to restore
the good name of the Senate and do something about the moral squalor in the
nation.

Considering the underhanded tricks to block Judge Thomas's elevation to the
Supreme Court and the sneaky attempts to question Professor Hill's sanity, this
won't be easy, but it is only part of the larger problem. There was a crisis of
confidence across the country long before this case startled the people.

Since Vietnam and Watergate, it has been hard to read a newspaper any morning or
listen to the nightly news without being told of some leader in government or
business, even the church, violating his trust or the law, then lying about it.
This is much more serious than whether Judge Thomas or Professor Hill told the
truth.

So the immediate question is whether the confirmation or rejection of Clarence
Thomas will put a brake on this mad political rush to profit and win at any
cost. The hearings did not do that. They not only raised more doubts about the
honesty of our politics and the cheap, clever tactics of some senators but also
increased the tensions between the sexes and the races. This is precisely what
we didn't need.

We heard a lot about the flaws in the Senate's confirming "process," but few
said anything about the flaws in the nominating process.

One mystery of this avoidable scandal is why President Bush ever nominated
Clarence Thomas in the first place. He said he never even considered Judge
Thomas's race but sent his name to the Senate because he regarded Judge Thomas
as the best qualified person for the job, and nobody even laughed. This was such
an obvious misrepresentation of the facts (even Judge Thomas was surprised) that
the nomination should have been examined against the President's claim and
"returned to sender."

The hearings did, however, tell us something about Judge Thomas. He is an
intelligent, attractive man. He was a believable witness, with a most admirable
record of struggle out of poverty and prejudice. But he pictured himself, with
self-pity, as a victim of racial politics, as if this were the America of the
rope and lynch mob.

Most committee members apologized for this process and its unfairness in
dragging him and his privacy before the nation. This was understandable,
considering the challenge to his character.

But his anger and his condemnation of the Senate for trying to deal with the
contradictions facing it did not say much for his sense of history or judicial
temperament, which are relevant to his confirmation.

After all, this democratic process, with all its shortcomings, staggering and
blundering, brought two such remarkable and intelligent people as Clarence
Thomas and Anita Hill into prominent positions in the Government. It was this
process that led Congress, in fairness, to the policy of affirmative action.
Judge Thomas had nothing to say about that.

So now the Senate will have to vote him up or down, and we'll see whether the
100 members will be more loyal to their personal interests than to the nation's
interest. Or whether they are willing to take President Bush's word for it that
Clarence Thomas is really the best possible nominee.

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Clinton Vs. Kerrey

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


Into a Democratic Party now totally dispirited by the performance of its
senators in the Thomas hearings, into Democratic Presidential primaries long
scarred by race and interest-group politics and long dominated by old-style
liberals and unappetizing technocrats, come two men from the nation's heartland
who could be credible and compelling leaders.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska are easy to
like. They have presence and brains. Their handsomeness holds eyes on them. They
are in their 40's with their eyes fixed on America's bleak future for those now
in their teens. Both have spent much of their adult years in politics -- with
spotty accomplishments. Their ideas are similar -- not more government but
better government, and not just government but people taking greater
responsibility for their own lives as well.

They are locked in mortal combat for what they hope is a silent majority of
Democrats who share these centrist ideas. Both are making the same long-shot bet
that there are enough frustrated Democrats to beat traditional liberals like
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa. They know that even if such a silent majority
exists, it will not be big enough for both of them. To win the party nomination,
only one of these two promising moderates can survive the winter.

But for all their yoked dreams and shared political hurdles, these two men are
not very similar.

I followed them around New Hampshire last week, through breakfasts with party
faithful, high school gatherings, evening cocktail parties and private chats.
Mr. Harkin had already come and gone from the state.

The Kerrey message is the man himself. A Vietnam warrior with a Congressional
Medal of Honor who barely survived his heroism, a self-made millionaire and
former Governor, he is selling his conviction in himself as a leader. "I have
the capacity to tell the truth, to govern, to inspire, to overcome pessimism,"
he told a group of potential supporters who seemed riveted by his intensity.

Mr. Kerrey presents himself as the anti-politician. He's running not just
against Washington but against "politicians." He says that politicians often
know what must be done (such as his plan for national health care), but lack the
will to make hard choices. He rails against elected officials "who are afraid to
be unpopular."

Bob Kerrey wants voters to respect him; Bill Clinton wants their love. The
three-term Governor, who tasted defeat after his first term, is a natural
politician who relishes campaigning. He plays to the crowd like a young,
friendly bear, sometimes prancing away from the podium to fetch a glass of
water, and people respond more warmly to him than to Mr. Kerrey. Mr. Clinton's
need for approval is endearing, but it suggests that he can be pushed around.

Bob Kerrey's aim is to show voters that he's tough; Bill Clinton's is to show
them that he's smart. He almost can't help himself, can't contain his knowledge.

Mr. Clinton, unlike Mr. Kerrey, is loaded with specific answers to specific
problems. Asked about education, he pours out history and data and spells out
programs for college loans and apprenticeships. His range of thoughtful
knowledge about health, education and welfare is probably unrivaled by any
politician save Senator Pat Moynihan of New York.

His command of detail and penchant for programmatic answers suggests a touch of
Dukakisitis. But unlike other technocrats, he always adds that there is "not a
program for every problem, and so we must accept individual responsibility."

On foreign affairs, neither Mr. Clinton nor Mr. Kerrey can hold a candle to
President Bush and they know it. Both speak vaguely about cutting military
spending. More than the Arkansan, the Nebraskan is searching for a Bush weakness
here and is experimenting with effective lines about standing up for democracy
and freedom.

Bill Clinton possesses prodigious knowledge of domestic issues, but has no
single defining message. Bob Kerrey's message is high on personal drama, and
very low on substance. Both are short on organization and quality advisers.

If the national press bears down on them now, their campaigns might well
collapse. Both have to hope for more primary-priming time to get ready for prime
time.

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising;
The Real Golden Oldies Are Popular Again

BYLINE: By Stuart Elliott

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 646 words


MOVE over, Paula Abdul, here comes Louis Armstrong. Guns 'n' Roses, watch out
for Benny Goodman. More and more of the nation's advertising agencies are
featuring the big band, swing and pop tunes of the 1930's, 1940's and 1950's in
television commercials for their clients.

The reason for the golden-oldie gold rush, agency executives say, is that these
distinctive sounds from previous decades help their spots stand out amid the
cacophony of commercials scored to rap, rock and heavy-metal music.

"People are kind of sated with rock music," said Ted Littleford, senior
executive vice president and creative director of FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New
York, which has used the songs "When You're Smiling" and "It's Been a Long, Long
Time" in spots for Milk-Bone dog biscuits and Oreo cookies.

Such music offers "something sweeter than more recent songs," he added, and
evokes "a happiness, an innocence that you don't get in later years."

Dick Tarlow, who incorporated film clips of Nat (King) Cole singing
"Unforgettable" into a commercial for a Revlon fragrance called Unforgettable,
agreed.

"When I watch it, I become like a boy in high school," said Mr. Tarlow,
president of Tarlow Advertising in New York. Another benefit, he said, is the
contrast between his spot and those playing contemporary music: "I love the idea
of going on MTV with this, where the ads are blasting away."

Indeed, said Mary Moore, vice chairman and chief creative officer of Wells Rich
Greene BDDP in New York, "Maybe it's time for something more peaceful, not so
frenetic." Her agency is using a Goodman recording of "How Am I to Know" in a
series of spots for the Chase Manhattan Bank, she said, because of its "relaxed,
easy feel, versus all that's going on in banking, all the turmoil."

One feature of nostalgic music that appeals to Bruce Rooke, vice president and
associate creative director at J. Walter Thompson, Detroit, is that "there is a
certain honesty to it."

"That means there's less of the huckster approach" in ads based on this music,
added Mr. Rooke, whose spot for the 1992 Ford Crown Victoria features an
Armstrong-influenced version of the George and Ira Gershwin song "They All
Laughed."

If there were a hit parade of retro ad music, the Benny Goodman Orchestra's
recording of "Sing, Sing, Sing" would be No. 1 with a bullet. After being used
last year by Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, in a spot for the Nikon One Touch
100 camera, it has turned up in a commercial for Nutrasweet, created by
Chiat/Day/ Mojo Inc., New York, and in a promotional spot that NBC produced for
one of its new fall series, "Man of the People."

The trend to adapt this music for advertising purposes dates to 1982, when a
Chanel No. 5 commercial included the Ink Spots' version of "I Don't Want to Set
the World on Fire."

It has been accelerating since 1987, when, in another instance of the interplay
between advertising and popular culture, Americans flocked to see the Robin
Williams film "Good Morning, Vietnam," whose soundtrack featured Armstrong's
version of "What a Wonderful World."

And in the wake of Revlon's "Unforgettable" commercial, Natalie Cole released an
album of interpretations of her father's songs, which soared to the top of the
charts this summer. The most popular cut featured Cole's rendition of
"Unforgettable" intermingled with his daughter's to create a duet effect.

Sometimes, the nostalgia generated by ad music is not what it used to be.
Several spots use recently created tunes that cleverly mimic bygone genres. For
instance, the big band music heard in spots for the Chrysler Corporation's 1992
Eagle was written for that campaign.

"I love listening to this stuff, but Benny Goodman is my parents," said Gary
Topolewski, executive vice president and acting creative director at Eagle's
agency, Campbell-Mithun-Esty in Southfield, Mich.

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nat (King) Cole, as he appears singing "Unforgettable" in a
commercial for Revlon's fragrance of the same name. (Revlon Inc.)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
On 'L.A. Law,' New Faces but the Same Nasty Edge

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 591 words


Last season, NBC's "L.A. Law" seemed determined to self-destruct as most of the
major players at McKenzie, Brackman turned on one another venomously, some
leaving to establish their own law firm. The show has now returned for a sixth
year, Thursdays at 10 P.M., but the still festering wounds could well turn out
to be fatal.

The unseemly nastiness that erupted among formerly close colleagues was hardly
spontaneous. Its practical roots could be found behind the cameras as several
key members of the cast decided that they had had enough of courtroom theatrics
and that it was time to push their careers in different directions. Among the
defectors were Harry Hamlin, Susan Dey and Jimmy Smits. Actually, Miss Dey's
Grace Van Owen, once in love with and made pregnant by the Smits character, has
returned with neither lover nor baby. Explanations so far have been sketchy, but
poor Grace does look grim. Meanwhile, Michele Green, the long-suffering Abby
Perkins, has also decided to leave the show.

Major cast changes are not to be dismissed lightly. But another change in the
"L.A. Law" roster is likely to prove far more damaging. That's the departure of
the producer and writer David E. Kelley, directly responsible for many of the
series' best episodes. At its periodic best, "L.A. Law" could come up with a
provocative mixture of timeliness and wit. This Kelley-less season, if the first
couple of episodes are any indication, already seems content to be merely
obvious and coarse.

The formula, with its office politics here and court cases there, has gone flat.
The scenes in court have all the fizz of a set-in-concrete "Matlock" encounter
as dramatic outbursts alternate regularly with brooding stares of significance,
the camera lingering pointedly. The issues are current, but the scripts are
strictly fill-in-the-blanks exploitations of topics like spouse abuse or the
legal status of Vietnam M.I.A.'s. In short, "L.A. Law" has become totally
predictable. When Kelsey (Jill Eikenberry) is looking for a baby sitter and
turns down an obviously qualified male for a chancey female, we know she will
eventually see the light and admit, "I was being sexist." Yeah, Kelsey!

Among the new regulars is a breezily vulgar entertainment lawyer named Susan
Bloom (Conchata Ferrell). Described as dynamic and on the cutting edge, she
wants to rent office space from the financially pinched Leland McKenzie (Richard
Dysart), but he isn't terribly enthusiastic about having to deal in any capacity
with a lawyer who bursts into his office with a condescending "Hiya, Leland" and
a gum-chewing promise to save him from bankruptcy. But of course Susan will get
her office, bringing with her one or two other characters who also seem to have
advanced degrees in obnoxious assertiveness.

It's not difficult to figure out the new directions being plotted for "L.A.
Law." None of them are especially enticing.

L.A. Law

Created by Steven Bochco and Terry Louise Fisher; directed by Elodie Keene;
written by Judith Feldman and Sarah Woodside Gallagher; director of photography,
Timothy E. Wade; editor, Chuck Weiss; music by Mike Post; production designer,
Michael L. Mayer; produced by Robert Breech for 20th Century Fox Film
Corporation; Rick Wallace and Patricia Green, executive producers. At 10 tonight
on NBC.

WITH: Susan Dey, Corbin Bernsen, Jill Eikenberry, Alan Rachins, Michael Tucker,
Susan Ruttan, Blair Underwood, Larry Drake, Sheila Kelley, Amanda Donahoe, John
Spencer, Cecil Hoffmann and Richard Dysart.


LOAD-DATE: October 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Susan Dey (NBC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Some Victims in Texas: A Colonel, an Ex-Teacher and 'Dr. G.'

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 533 words

DATELINE: KILLEEN, Tex., Oct., 17


Steven Charles Dody was an Army lieutenant colonel stationed at Fort Hood, just
two weeks from retirement.

Zona Lynn was already retired, a former schoolteacher in her 60's, who came to
Killeen on Wednesday to help plan a Baptist state convention.

They were among the 22 people who were killed when George J. Hennard opened fire
at midday Wednesday on a crowded restaurant here.

So were Michael E. Griffith, a veterinarian from a nearby town, and Venice Ellen
Henehan, a Missouri woman who was traveling to her granddaughter's wedding in
Houston.

Colonel Dody, the son of an aircraft mechanic, won medals flying reconnaissance
missions for the Army in Vietnam after enlisting in 1969. Last year he
coordinated an airlift operation that moved 27,000 troops from Fort Hood to the
Persian Gulf area in the war with Iraq, and supervised a similar move back to
Fort Hood earlier this year.

The 43-year-old officer was the only member of the armed forces from the
nation's largest Army base to die in the shootings at Luby's cafeteria.

The Dody family had lived in Texas for eight years. In his off-duty hours
Colonel Dody liked to putter with car engines and jet-skied with friends and
family members at Lake Stillhouse, in nearby Belton.

On Wednesday morning Mrs. Lynn left Marlin, Tex., a town of about 7,000 people
45 miles northeast of Killeen, and drove here. She and three friends were going
to attend a meeting to plan the Baptist convention, to be held in February.

Clodine Humphrey, 64, who was to be the convention's master of ceremonies, also
went on the trip from Marlin.

Both women were killed.

Mrs. Lynn, the mother of two and grandmother of two, was "one of the most
prominent black women in Marlin," said Ross Setzler, editor and publisher of The
Marlin Democrat, a twice-weekly newspaper. She was the widow of James Lynn, who
in 1978 became the first black county commissioner in Falls County.

Mrs. Lynn was a good cook, Mr. Setzler said. He recently wrote a cooking column
about her and her broccoli casserole, a dish she said she liked to make for Mr.
Temple.

Mrs. Humphrey was a nurse's assistant at the Marlin Veterans Administration
Medical Center.

In Copperas Cove, a town of nearly 20,000 people a few miles west of Killeen,
many people knew the veterinarian, Dr. Griffith, simply as "Dr. G."

On Wednesday he and a friend, Kirby Lack, the pastor of the Lutheran Worship
Center, went to lunch at Luby's Cafeteria in Killeen.

The two men had both coached the Burger King boys baseball team over the summer,
and they were frequent lunch partners. Mr. Lack remains hospitalized, in serious
condition.

Dr. Griffith, who was in his late 40's, was a 1978 graduate of Texas A&M
University. He was a former president of the local Rotary Club and a former
school board member, and he coached baseball and basketball.

"He never had a minute to say 'I'm bored,' " said Christel Faulkner, a
technician at his clinic, the Hill Country Animal Hospital.

On Thursday she and other technicians in the clinic wore black ribbons in
mourning. A black wreath with white silk flowers hung outside the door of the
one-story stone building that houses the clinic.


LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

GERMAN STUDY TIES DIOXIN TO CANCER

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 768 words


Exposure to high levels of dioxin-laced herbicides substantially increased the
rate of cancer deaths among workers at a German chemical plant, a new study has
found.

The study, being published in tomorrow's issue of The Lancet, a British medical
journal, is the latest round in a continuing debate about the relative toxicity
of dioxin, an environmental contaminant. Research has indicated that even small
doses cause cancer in laboratory animals. The issue of dioxin toxicity for
humans, however, has been hotly contested amid ambiguous or conflicting research
results.

The latest study found that cancer deaths were higher among workers at the
now-dismantled Boehringer-Ingelheim herbicide manufacturing plant in Hamburg
than the rates for a comparison group of workers with similar medical profiles
at a nearby gas supply company or for the German population.

Among male herbicide workers, or three-quarters of the sample, the risk of dying
from cancer was 39 percent greater than the risk to workers in the control
group. Among men with 20 or more years of employment at the herbicide plant, the
risk was 82 percent higher than that for the control group.  Those who faced the
most extensive exposure to dioxin, before the plant revised its production
process in the late 1950's, were three times more likely to die from cancer than
those in the control group.

113 Died of Cancer

The study was conducted by Dr. Alfred Manz of the Center for Chemical Workers'
Health in Hamburg and his colleagues. The researchers examined records for 1,184
men and 399 women who worked at the plant, which was heavily contaminated with
dioxin, between 1952 and 1984. They found that 93 men and 20 women died of
cancer, including lung cancer and cancers of the blood and lymphoma system.

Dr. Manz said heavy doses of dioxin over many years seem to stimulate tumor
growth in a generalized way, The Associated Press reported. There was no
specific increased risk of one type of cancer, like lung or stomach cancer.

The findings add substantially to the case for linking dioxin exposure to
overall cancer risk, said Dr. James Dwyer, an associate professor at the
Institute for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Research at the University
of Southern California School of Medicine. Dr. Dwyer, who took part in the
research, said the detailed medical records made available for the German study
provided researchers with stronger evidence than previous studies linking dioxin
exposure to cancer in humans.

Dr. Dwyer said some scientists remain skeptical about the causal link between
dioxin and cancer because a number of types of cancer have been attributed to
dioxin. "They really want to see an elevation of incidences of tumors in a
specific site," he said. "They want to see a cluster."

The study does not address the issue of exactly how much dioxin is required to
cause cancer.

The researchers said the plant workers were also exposed to other chemicals that
are known or suspected carcinogens, but they said that these exposures could not
explain the increased mortality from all cancers.

Standard Is Revised

In recent months, the World Health Organization has revised its standard for
acceptable dioxin intake upward, and officials of the Environmental Protection
Agency have started a one-year review of data on dioxin to determine whether its
danger has been overstated.

"I would hope that this study would give them pause," Dr. Dwyer said. He said
the latest findings would provide a clarification of the controversy over the
toxicity of dioxin.

"For many people, I think it would kind of be the nail in the coffin," Dr. Dwyer
said. "I was on the fence as to whether or not we would find anything and when
we did I guess I was quite surprised. I didn't expect the findings to be quite
this strong."

A recent Federal study suggested that dioxin may cause cancer in people when
they are exposed to high levels, but may not pose a substantial risk of cancer
at lower levels. Those findings, among others, have led Federal officials to
consider revising the safe limits for dioxin, which now stand at 13 parts per
quintillion in water, and one part per billion in soil.

The Deptartment of Veteran Affairs agreed last year to award compensation to
1,600 Vietnam veterans suffering from various diseases they contended were a
result of exposure to Agent Orange, a dioxin-contaminated defoliant used in the
Vietnam War.

Research has shown that dioxin may pose a threat to humans by mimicking steroid
hormones, extremely potent chemicals that occur naturally in the human body.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 18, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Art;
At the Modern, Works Unafraid To Ignore Beauty

BYLINE: By ROBERTA SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1371 words


FOR those who still see art and the art museum as respite from the pressures and
problems of everyday life, "Dis locations," the Museum of Modern Art's latest
foray into the contemporary, is going to be hard to take, at least at first.
This exhibition, which is the first one organized by Robert Storr, the
museum'snew curator of painting and sculpture, is devoted to challenging,
discomforting installation pieces, created especially for the show.

The seven artists Mr. Storr has selected represent a consciously varied mix of
sex, race, generation and viewpoint, but are all well-known excavators of the
substrata of late 20th-century life: the Americans Chris Burden, Louise
Bourgeois, David Hammons, Bruce Nauman and Adrian Piper, the French artist
Sophie Calle and the Russian Ilya Kabakov.

The exhibition formed by their efforts is at once moving and infuriating,
one-sided in its esthetic approach but encompassing in the issues it tackles.

The museum has been unusually generous in giving itself over to this often
difficult art, allowing the artists free rein in the lower gallery, on the third
floor and even in the hallowed permanent collection itself. This show reflects
an increased sensitivity to contemporary art and a heartening desire to respond
to its special needs, although it is in fact not unprecedented at the museum. It
should be remembered that its 1970 "Spaces" exhibition presented installations
by five artists and one artists' collaborative in specially designed galleries.

Like "Spaces," "Dislocations" celebrates the determination to move beyond the
portable art object, supposedly making art more real and engaging, closer to
life itself. In keeping with the fashions of the moment, which favor clear-cut,
preferably political, subjects, the show comes at you from all sides, often with
the tribulations of war, colonialism, racial prejudice, childhood pain, memory
and simple human existence utmost on its mind.

The show's flaws stem from the fact that these efforts sometimes have a
streamlined, simplifed quality, as if all wrinkles had been ironed out for the
museum's large public. Mr. Nauman's video installations are better when they
also include his sculptures; Mr. Hammons's efforts are more visceral when they
emphasize discarded or psychologically charged materials, from bottle caps to
human hair. In addition, there is often a sense that the message and medium are
out of sync in these pieces, that the concept has been emphasized at the expense
of form with results that can be earnest and preachy, or that don't seem
inevitable. It's not clear, for example, why the three million names in Mr.
Burden's piece, "The Other Vietnam War Memorial," had to be etched on copper;
the impact of their great numbers would have been much the same had they been
printed on paper covering the walls.

Adding to the earnestness is a consistent and rather puritanical disdain for
simple visual pleasure as an important experience in itself and vehicle for
understanding the world. At certain points, the exhibition, which opens on
Sunday, swings between extremes of art-as-funhouse and art-as-tutorial, bent on
making each viewer a better citizen or a more self-aware person. (It can convey
the rather creepy feeling that art is now going to spend the 90's doing penance
for the 80's.) But with time, the show becomes engrossing -- especially in the
ways the individual works play off one another -- even though a steady diet of
this type of art would leave one extremely undernourished.

In the museum's downstairs galleries, one can be harangued by Mr. Nauman's
"Anthro/Socio," in which a bald white man, seen in enormous video projections,
half-shouts and half-sings, in relentless repetition: "Feed me. Help me. Eat me.
Hurt me." A hellish onslaught of sound that suggests a Gregorian chant by way of
"Mad Max," it can send one running from the room or force an inner confrontation
with one's own conflicted desires to be independent but also protected.

The barren assault of the Nauman piece is juxtaposed with the silent, abandoned
stage set that is Mr. Kabakov's "Bridge," another of the crowded, evocative
scenes for which this Conceptualist is well known and the most purely magical
work in the show. This installation re-creates a Moscow meeting hall in
disarray, weaving an elaborate narrative about a display of unofficial Russian
art interrupted by the arrival of a horde of tiny white figures. With the art
and benches pushed chaotically against the walls, these nearly infinitesimal
beings drift across the room's center like migrants across the steppes or
workers across Red Square. From a wooden bridge that traverses the room,
visitors can watch their progress through binoculars, experiencing fact and
fiction, real space and the imaginary kind in a single child-like instant.

Childhood takes hold in a more nightmarish way in Ms. Bourgeois's "Twosome," a
monster machine made of two oil tanks whose added doors and windows suggest a
playhouse for children, but whose incessant coupling evokes something more
parental, as well as a dangerous trap.

Upstairs, the contrast between the theatrical and the austere continues. Like
Mr. Nauman, Mr. Burden offers brutal simplicity: his installation "The Other
Vietnam War Memorial" pays homage to the Vietnamese who died during the United
States involvement in Southeast Asia with a giant card carousel. Its 12 big
copper leaves are engraved front and back with three million names, far more
than the 58,000 names on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington.

Next door is Mr. Hammons's densely theatrical concoction "Public Enemy," a
humorous diatribe against politics, great white warriors past and present, and
the acquisitive nature of museums, all rolled into one. At its center is a
nearly life-size photographic re-creation of the equestrian statue of Theodore
Roosevelt that guards the entrance of the American Museum of Natural History on
Central Park West, while Indian and African companions cling to his stirrups.
Here it is seen under siege, surrounded by sandbags, dynabeginning. Balloons,
streamers and confetti evoke the hysteria of a political convention and enormous
aromatic piles of damp leaves conjure an odd assortment of associations: the
passage of time, autumn elections and, somehow, a sense of thousands and
thousands of people trampled underfoot by war, by politics, by imperialism.

Sharpening and purifying the anger implicit in Mr. Hammons's piece is Adrian
Piper's "What It's Like, What It Is, No. 3," a bright, clinically white
amphitheater in which the viewer can watch a black man on a video monitor intone
"I'm not sneaky; I'm not lazy; I'm not noisy; I'm not vulgar; I'm not rowdy," as
if peeling away layer upon layer of stereotype and false accusation.

The award for the show's lightest touch goes to Ms. Calle, whose "Ghosts"
occupies the display spaces left empty by five paintings temporarily relocated
from the permanent collection to the frame shop or outside exhibitions. (Georges
Seurat's "Evening, Honfleur," for example, is uptown at the Metropolitan Museum
of Art's Seurat retrospective.) Ms. Calle asked 10 members of the museum staff
to draw pictures and write descriptions of these works from memory, and their
words and pictures have been elegantly transferred to the walls where the
paintings usually hang. As these descriptions unfold, full of admiration,
personal memory and sometimes dismissal, one is reminded, with some relief, that
the pleasures of art are no less varied than art itself.

Somehow Ms. Calle's piece ends up reconciling the disparate subversive strands
of "Dislocations" with the very tradition that many of its artists seem to
disavow. This unexpected denouement underscores the probability that none of
these installations could have quite the same impact alone that they have
playing off one another. In the end it is simply the experience of seeing the
Modern open its doors to so many different artists and, by implication, so many
different art worlds that makes the most lasting impression.

"Dislocations" opens on Sunday and remains at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West
53d Street, Manhattan, through Jan. 7.

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Detail of "Anthro/Socio," by Bruce Nauman, in "Dislocations" at
the Modern. (Scott Frances/Museum of Modern Art) (pg. C1); Detail of Adrian
Piper's "What It's Like, What It Is, No. 3." (Peter Moore/The Museum of Modern
Art) (pg. C18)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAMESE RESIST REPATRIATION PLAN

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Oct. 18


Vietnamese refugees who fear they may be forcibly returned to Vietnam from Hong
Kong have been staging demonstrations inside the largest of this British
colony's detention camps and have been making plans for armed resistance should
Britain and Hanoi conclude an agreement on the repatriations.

Officials here had confidently expected an agreement on the mandatory return of
tens of thousands of Vietnamese to be signed in Hanoi this week.

But late today a British Foreign Office spokesman in the colony said: "We have
indicated we are ready to sign, and they have indicated they are not. We don't
know for certain at this stage what's causing the delay."

Tension in the Camps

Inside the gritty camps, which house 59,000 Vietnamese refugees, the suspense
and tension over their fate has grown "almost unbearable," said a relief worker
who requested anonymity.

"The people inside are afraid they will go to sleep one night, and without
warning, the guards will come to take them away," the worker said. "Even the
sensible people are so afraid they can't think very straight anymore."

For three years, the Hong Kong authorities have insisted they had a right to
deport Vietnamese who have been classified as nonrefugees through a screening
process monitored by United Nations officials. But the process has been
criticized by human rights groups as being unfair and inaccurate.

In 1989, the British authorities carried out the first forced return of
Vietnamese from Hong Kong, using riot police to herd 51 refugees, most of them
women and children, onto an airplane in what they hoped would be a secret
nighttime operation. But news of the action was reported and photographed, and
it led to an international outcry that so embarrassed Hanoi it refused to accept
any more refugees who were forced to return.

Hong Kong officials said the delay over the new agreement has been because the
Vietnamese were trying to work out the logistical problems of reintegrating the
thousands of returnees.

One Western diplomat said, however, there could also be internal political
problems in Hanoi, with some officials there opposed to the agreement because of
the American opposition.

The United States led the protest over the 1989 incident, arguing that it was
wrong forcibly to return people to a repressive government that might persecute
them for their original flight. Hanoi is currently sensitive to American opinion
because it wants to establish diplomatic and economic ties with the United
States.

United States Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon said today that
America's position "has been clear for a long time. We are opposed to the forced
repatriation of people from Hong Kong to Vietnam, particularly given the current
circumstances in that country."

U.S. Response Critical

But it is uncertain how strongly Washington would protest a new
British-Vietnamese deal on forced repatriation, and officials in Hong Kong have
said the American response will be critical to the accord.

Whatever the cause, the delay has only added to the wrenching tensions in the
Hong Kong camps.

In Whitehead Detention Center, the largest and most volatile camp, thousands of
refugees have been staging peaceful demonstrations for the past two weeks, and
some of their leaders said some have begun to plan hunger strikes, armed
resistance and even suicide if guards come to take them away.

Whitehead, which houses 25,000 people, is populated largely by Vietnamese who
have been through the screening process and were told they do not qualify as
genuine refugees fleeing persecution.

Reporters are not allowed inside the detention camps, but they can sometimes get
close enough to see the demonstrations at Whitehead, where as many as 15,000
Vietnamese march in circles behind high mesh fences looped with barbed wire. The
protesters carry homemade banners and signs that read "Freeworld Save Us,' and
"Dead Better than Red."

"So far the demonstrations have been peaceful and orderly, but everyone is very,
very anxious, and some extremists are pushing for more violent actions," said
David Liu, a spokesman for Refugee Concern Hong Kong, an umbrella organization
of relief groups that work inside the camps.

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Guam: Equal in War, but Not in Peace

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 557 words


To the Editor:

I applaud "Free the Government's Plantation" (editorial, Oct. 6), which called
for statehood for the District of Columbia. In essence, you seem to argue that
simple justice requires that the legitimate desires of the people of the
District for self-determination be met. I agree wholeheartedly.

I had just finished writing a message for the veterans' organizations in my
Congressional district (Guam) in which I referred to two young Guamanians who
had lost their lives fighting for America during Operation Desert Storm. I
mentioned further that Guam's tradition of service to the United States has seen
it -- in both the Korean conflict and the Vietnam War -- suffer more casualties
on a per capita basis than any other American community.

Our casualties of war go far beyond those who have died in uniform. As the only
American civilian population held by the enemy during World War II, the
atrocities and daily humiliations of that time are burned forever into our
psyches. Yet the loyalty and love my people feel for the United States remains
unabated.

I can attest to this because first as a 13-year-old forced laborer during World
War II and later serving in both the Korean conflict and the Vietnam War during
the course of a 30-year marine career, I have seen the testimony of their faith
in the United States written with their blood.

Yet the people of Guam -- Americans all -- remain second-class citizens. Like
the people of the District of Columbia, they are denied the fundamental rights
afforded their counterparts elsewhere. At least the 23d Amendment gave the
people of the District the right to vote for President. We on Guam were not.

Ironically, American expatriates enjoy more rights than their fellow citizens
living in the District and in the territories. Through the absentee ballot, they
remain fully enfranchised while, with the exception of the Presidential vote,
the people of the District share with their counterparts in the territories the
dubious status of being absentees in their native land.

The inequities of Guam's current status are perhaps best highlighted by this
simple fact. An American citizen living on Guam is disenfranchised from voting
in Federal elections. In that regard, he has no more rights than a green-card
holder. Should he, however, fly to California or Hawaii and establish residency,
he miraculously gains all the rights of citizenship. He can be enfranchised by
an airline ticket. And he can be disenfranchised by a ticket as well, should he
return to his birthplace.

Currently, Guam is seeking to forge a closer union with the United States
through the adoption of commonwealth status. When it does so, it will mark the
first time in the almost 100 years that Guam has been an American territory that
the people will have determined for themselves what their relationship with the
Federal Government should be.

Yet even when Guam achieves commonwealth status, the Federal Government will not
give us the same constitutional rights enjoyed by our brothers and sisters in
the states. We still will not have the Presidential vote; our delegate will
still lack a vote on the House floor. Sadly, an old saying on Guam remains as
true now as ever: We are equal in war, but not in peace.

BEN BLAZ
Member of Congress, Guam
Washington, Oct. 8, 1991

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: October 20, 1991

SECTION: Section 7; Page 50; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1346 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   2   SCARLETT, by Alexandra Ripley. (Warner, $24.95.) The sequel to
                Margaret Mitchell's "Gone With the Wind."

 2          1   NEEDFUL THINGS, by Stephen King. (Viking, $24.95.) A newcomer
                opens a shop in Castle Rock, Me., bringing bargains as well as
                nightmares and disasters to the town.

 3      2   9   THE SUM OF ALL FEARS, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) Middle
                Eastern terrorists edge the world to the brink of nuclear war.

 4      4   3   NIGHT OVER WATER, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $23.) High drama on
                a trans-Atlantic flight after the outbreak of World War II.

 5      3   6   THE DOOMSDAY CONSPIRACY, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $22.) An
                American naval officer has to contend with a mysterious force.

 6      5  82   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.)
                Verse and pictures.

 7      7   4   THE DECEIVER, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Sam
                McCready recalls his years in the British secret service. (LP)

 8      8  32   THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $19.95.) A young lawyer
                learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal
                activities.

 9      9   7   FLOWERS IN THE RAIN, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St. Martin's,
                $20.) A collection of short stories, many of them set in
                Scotland.

10      6   7   SAINT MAYBE, by Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) The struggles of a
                young man to atone for the wrong he feels he has done his older
                brother.

11     13   3   THE DRAGON REBORN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor, $22.95.) The fate of
                a man doomed to save and then destroy the world; part of a
                fantasy series.

12     12  17   THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE, by Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A
                Chinese-American matriarch tells the harrowing story of her
                life.

13     10   4   THE DUCHESS, by Jude Deveraux. (Pocket, $21.) An American
                woman, in Scotland to marry a duke, finds a mysterious stranger
                more attractive.

14          1   HARLOT'S GHOST, by Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) The
                world's events of the past few decades as seen by three Yankee
                aristocrats who work for the C.I.A.

15          3   IMAJICA, by Clive Barker. (HarperCollins, $23.) A fantasy in
                which three residents of Earth seek to reunite it with four
                other Dominions.

16 *   14   2   GONE WITH THE WIND, by Margaret Mitchell. (Macmillan, $21.95.)
                The 1936 novel about Scarlett O'Hara and Rhett Butler.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5   ME: Stories of My Life, by Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) The
                actress's memoirs. (LP)

 2      2   8   UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Reflections on life's
                commonplaces. (LP)

 3      3   5   LA TOYA, by La Toya Jackson with Patricia Romanowski. (Dutton,
                $19.95.) Growing up in a leading show business family.

 4      4  48   IRON JOHN, by Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $19.95.) The passage
                of the male from boyhood into manhood, as practiced in various
                cultures.

 5      7   4   J. EDGAR HOOVER, by Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) The career
                of the longtime Director of the F.B.I.

 6      5  23   FIRE IN THE BELLY, by Sam Keen. (Bantam, $19.95.) A philosopher
                explores the changing role of the male in today's society.

 7     10   4   EXPOSING MYSELF, by Geraldo Rivera with Daniel Paisner.
                (Bantam, $21.50.) The autobiography of the television
                personality.

 8      6  18   PARLIAMENT OF WHORES, by P. J. O'Rourke. (Entrekin/Atlantic
                Monthly, $19.95.) A humorist's attempt to explain the Federal
                Government.

 9          1   DEN OF THIEVES, by James B. Stewart. (Simon & Schuster, $25.)
                How Ivan Boesky, Michael Milken, Martin Siegel and Dennis
                Levine plundered and created havoc on Wall Street.

10 *    9  16   TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $20.) The charms of
                rustic Provence, as savored by a London advertising man who
                moved there.

11     11  18   CHUTZPAH, by Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A
                prominent law professor's reflections on the lot of Jews in
                America.

12 *        1   CRUEL DOUBT, by Joe McGinniss. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) The
                ordeal of a North Carolina woman whose son was accused of
                planning the murder of herself and her husband.

13 *   13  13   WHEN YOU LOOK LIKE YOUR PASSPORT PHOTO, IT'S TIME TO GO HOME,
                by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) The tribulations of
                travel suffered in all parts of the world. (LP)

14      8   6   HARD COURTS, by John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A
                journalist's behind-the-scenes look at a year of professional
                tennis.

15     12   7   ANNE SEXTON, by Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Davison/Houghton
                Mifflin, $24.95.) The life of a gifted poet who was hampered by
                mental illness.

16 *   14   3   THREE BLIND MICE, by Ken Auletta. (Random House, $25.) How ABC,
                CBS and NBC lost their dominance of the television world during
                the 1980's.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  10   FINAL EXIT, by Derek Humphry. (Hemlock Society/Carol, $16.95.)
                The case for suicide in instances of terminal illness and ways
                to accomplish it.

 2          1   IS THIS YOUR CHILD? by Doris J. Rapp. (Morrow, $23.) How
                children's troublesome allergies can be prevented and treated.

 3      3  90   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown,
                $12.95.) A book of illustrations in which the game is to find a
                fellow named Waldo.

 4 *    2  49   WHERE'S WALDO? by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A
                book of illustrated games.

 5 *    4  32   FIND WALDO NOW, by Martin Handford. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) A
                book in which the game is to find the ubiquitous chap as he
                travels from ancient Egypt to the present.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.



AND BEAR IN MIND



(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BROTHERLY LOVE, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $22.) The tragic life story, told
with vividness and force, of a working-class man condemned by fate and the rules
of his society -- a South Philadelphia neighborhood where life is brutal and
unforgiving.

IN MORTAL COMBAT: Korea, 1950-1953, by John Toland. (Morrow, $25.) A
distinguished military historian's examination of a war so humiliating for the
United States that attention to avoiding the same mistakes may have contributed
to defeat in Vietnam.

TALKING IT OVER, by Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $21.) Mr. Barnes's sixth novel --
credible, moving, funny and frightening -- concerns an impossible love triangle
and raises, like his previous books, some risky questions about the nature of
fiction itself.

THE INVENTION OF ARGENTINA, by Nicolas Shumway. (University of California,
$34.95.) An absorbing discussion of Argentina's founding fathers, arguing that
their failure to agree on a model of the national destiny led to national
collapse.

PRIDE OF FAMILY: Four Generations of American Women of Color, by Carole Ione.
(Summit, $19.95.) The captivating story of a black aristocratic clan and the
mother-daughter conflicts within it, fought out with spunk, energy and
resourcefulness.

THE CULTURE OF PAIN, by David B. Morris. (University of California, $29.95.) A
sensitive literary scholar's fascinating tour of what hurts, both mentally and
physically, and of what is, and has been, thought about pain in Western culture.

BEYOND DESERVING, by Sandra Scofield. (Permanent Press, $21.95.) This
intelligent novel circles around the pains and joys of a family of macho men and
the women who are married to them; it suggests that rogues may indeed be
amiable, or at least tolerable.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Life and Loves of Marguerite Duras

BYLINE: BY LESLIE GARIS;  Leslie Garis writes frequently about the arts.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 44; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4673 words


NOVELIST, PLAYWRIGHT, FILM MAKER, COMMUNIST, outrageous social commentator,
Marguerite Duras has awed and maddened the French public for more than 40 years.
Considering her impoverished childhood in Vietnam, her participation in the
French Resistance, her Communism and ultimate disaffection with the Party, her
two marriages and many liaisons, the near-fatal cure she underwent for
alcoholism in 1982, and, especially, her miraculous recovery from a five-month
coma induced by complications from emphysema in 1988, it is reasonable to
suggest that Marguerite Duras is a force of nature.

Her 48th work, "The Lover," published in 1984 when she was 70, was a best seller
not only in France and throughout Europe, but in the United States as well.
According to the French publisher Jerome Lindon, whose Les Editions de Minuit
brought out "The Lover," it is one of the few contemporary French books to have
an international impact. He knows of at least 29 foreign editions, including 3
in separate Chinese dialects. It won France's most prestigious literary award,
the Prix Goncourt.

Set in prewar Indochina, where Duras spent her childhood, "The Lover" is a
despairing, sensuous novel about an affair between a 15-year-old French girl and
a 27-year-old Chinese man. The consuming infatuation and brutal shifts of power
between the lovers echo many issues of modern colonialism. Although Duras's work
is avidly followed by a coterie of intellectuals, and her 1960 film script of
Alain Resnais's "Hiroshima Mon Amour" has become a cult classic, it wasn't until
"The Lover" that she reached a mass audience.  Duras stated publicly that it was
completely autobiographical -- an assertion that made her a media star.

Now, at 77, she has again captured center stage by publishing "L'Amant de la
Chine du Nord" ("The North Chinese Lover"), a book the newspaper Le Point calls
"stunning and diabolical." With the audacity for which she is famous, this book
is an end run around the film director Jean-Jacques Annaud, who has shot his
version of "The Lover," scheduled for European release in January. Until she and
Annaud argued, Duras was the screenwriter; eventually Gerard Brach, whose
credits include the screenplays for "The Name of the Rose" and "The Bear,"
adapted the novel with Annaud. (Annaud will not speak to the press about the
film.) Meanwhile, Duras recast her best seller into a new version, which is a
fuller telling of the original, including many new shocking details, and --
always mischievous -- camera angles and directions for the soundtrack. Duras
says her new book is more true than "The Lover."

Truth, in the Durasian universe, is a slippery entity. After "The Lover," Duras
said, in Le Nouvel Observateur, that the story of her life did not exist. Only
the novel of a life was real, not historical facts.  "It's in the imaginative
memory of time that it is rendered into life."

Between "The Lover" and "The North Chinese Lover," Duras has written and
directed her 18th film and published a collection of essays, three novels and
"The War," a vivid account of waiting for her husband, Robert Antelme, to return
from Dachau during the Liberation, then nursing him back to health from near
starvation.

Keeping in mind her special relationship to truth, I visited her in her
apartment in Paris to talk about her work and her long life. At that time she
had almost completed "The North Chinese Lover." Monique Gonthier, a bilingual
French journalist, accompanied me for linguistic emergencies.

IN THE DARK, CRAMPED HALLWAY OF THEIR apartment stand a tiny woman bent with age
and a handsome, middle-aged man -- Marguerite Duras and her companion of 11
years, Yann Andrea. She wears a plaid skirt and green stockings, he wears
leather pants and has a mustache; together they evince images of whimsy,
intellect and danger.

We walk into a small, dusty room filled with strange objects: a broken
candleholder that is a model of the Eiffel Tower, a box of old postcards, little
tins of tea next to a piece of curled red ribbon. There are piles and piles of
paperback books and a round table in the middle of the room where Duras seats
herself in front of some blank pages and three pens.

Her head is so large that her cheeks spread out toward her narrow shoulders. She
must be less than five feet tall. She wears many rings and bracelets.

"Let me tell you something," she says. Her voice is gruff, energetic and frank.
"I am finishing a book. I am going to pick up the story of 'The Lover' without
any literature in it. The fault I have found with 'The Lover' was its
literariness, which comes very easily to me because it's my style. But you won't
understand that."

"Even I am struggling to understand," says Yann, smiling. "Another version of
'The Lover' without the style of 'The Lover'? It's the same story."

"Not exactly. Another novel. It is between the little girl and the Chinese."

"Why go over the material again?" I ask.

"Because there is a film maker who is one of the greatest in the world, whose
name is Jean-Jacques Annaud, who took on 'The Lover.' He told a story that I
didn't recognize, so I said: 'Now you're going home, it's finished.  I don't
want to work with you anymore.' I was a little nasty."

The film is being made in English with two unknowns playing the leads: an
English girl and a man from Hong Kong. Duras waves her hand in dismissal when I
ask her if she will watch the shooting. "It doesn't interest me," she says. But,
of course, she has her new book, which more or less throws down the gauntlet to
Annaud.

As Yann plays with a piece of ribbon like the one on the table, twisting it
through his fingers, she looks at me expectantly, and I begin by asking about
early literary influences. She denies having any. "My mother was a farmer," she
says bluntly. "She had no idea what literature was all about."

"Did you know you were a writer when you were young?"

"I never doubted. I wrote when I was 10. Very bad poems. Many children start out
writing like that, with the most difficult form."

The form of a typical Duras novel is minimal, with no character description, and
much dialogue, often unattributed and without quotation marks. The novel is not
driven by narrative, but by a detached psychological probing, which, with its
complexity and contradictory emotions, has its own urgency.

I ask her why she has said in interviews she feels suffocated by the classical
novel, especially Balzac.

"Balzac describes everything, everything. It's exhaustive. It's an inventory.
His books are indigestible. There's no place for the reader."

Yann says gently: "There is pleasure too, in reading Balzac. You're very
reassured."

"If you read it at 14," Duras barks back. "Balzac was my earliest nourishment.
But I am a part of my own time, you have to be a part of your own time. One can
no longer write as Balzac does. And Balzac could never have written 'Lol Stein.'
"

"THE RAVISHING OF LOL STEIN" (1964) IS ONE OF DURAS'S seminal works.
Nineteen-year-old Lol Stein is engaged to Michael Richardson.  They go to a ball
in S. Tahla, an imagined town on the north French coast, similar to Trouville,
where Duras owns a house. Anne-Marie Stretter, a glamorous older woman, arrives
and steals away Michael Richardson. Lol Stein goes mad. Ten years later she is
back in S. Tahla as a married woman. She walks incessantly, seldom talking. One
day she follows a man who has a clandestine meeting with a woman from Lol
Stein's youth. Later, the three of them meet socially, and eventually Lol Stein
lies in a field outside a hotel in which the man and woman are making love. She
occasionally sees her woman friend, naked, cross in front of the window,
oblivious of being watched. The man, however, knows, which heightens Lol Stein's
pleasure. An odd, obsessive longing she had felt to follow Michael Richardson
and Anne-Marie Stretter when they left the dance is now fulfilled by this act of
voyeurism.

I ask her what sort of state she was in when she wrote "Lol Stein," and she
tells me a curious story.

"With 'Lol Stein,' I screamed. I was by the sea, in a house in Trouville. I was
in the living room, and at a little distance was my lover. I heard a cry. I
leaped up. I went to see the young man. I said, 'What's the matter?' He said:
'What are you talking about? I'm the one who should ask why you screamed.' I'd
cried out, without even . . . it's funny."

"Have you ever known someone like Lol Stein?"

She picks up the papers before her, stands them upright and taps the edges to
align them. She is so small that her face disappears behind the pages. I hear a
deep sigh.

"One day I took care of a madwoman. I went to a psychiatric hospital and asked
for a young woman who had attracted me. She was very beautiful, very elegant. I
took her out in the car. She didn't say anything. We simply went to a cafe. She
ate and ate and ate -- like a clochard, crudely, with her hands. At her core she
was very sick. I wanted to see it physically. I saw it in her.  The gaze. That's
Lol Stein.

"I've been thinking about this character for 10 years. I have an image. Not
another book. Maybe a film. She is on the beach at Trouville. She is in a
rickshaw. There's no roof, she's exposed. She is very made up, like a whore.
She's wearing dirty dresses, and it's as if she grew old in an asylum. And you
know where she's going? She's going to the dance."

"Terrific!" says Yann.  "You have to do it! Write it!" She turns to him with a
distant look in her eyes and a faint smile. Silence prevails.

MARGUERITE DURAS WAS born in Giadinh, near Saigon, in 1914. Her father, Henri
Donnadieu, was a professor of mathematics at a school in what was then French
Indochina. He died in 1918, leaving Marguerite, two brothers and her mother
practically destitute.

Until she went to the Sorbonne in France in 1932, Duras lived like an Asian
child and spoke fluent Vietnamese.

In 1924 her family moved to Sadec, then to Vinhlong, villages on the Mekong
River. In Vinhlong a new French governor arrived from Laos with his wife, a pale
beauty named Elizabeth Striedter. It was rumored that the wife had a young lover
in Laos who killed himself when she went away. The news of this suicide had a
searing effect on the imagination of Duras, for whom the woman came to represent
a dark, mythic feminine power. She was the model for Anne-Marie Stretter (who
reappears in "The North Chinese Lover").  "Many times I have said to myself,"
Duras told the critic Michelle Porte, "that I am a writer because of her."

There was another event in Vinhlong that changed Duras forever. Her mother, the
daughter of poor French farmers, had saved for 20 years to buy arable land in
Indochina. At last she purchased a farm from the French colonial government, not
realizing that without a bribe she would be cheated. With the help of her
children, she built a bungalow and planted rice. But as soon as the rainy season
started, the sea rose to the house, flooding the fields, ruining the crops.
Every penny of her savings was lost. She fought against the sea for years,
building dikes that washed away, until finally her health was broken.
Marguerite, herself, at age 12, had an emotional crisis serious enough to be
called madness. After that, for the rest of her life, she was preoccupied by
insanity and convinced that the world was fundamentally unjust.

Her childhood was also full of a wild freedom. With no supervision she played in
the rain forest and hunted for birds and small game that, in her extreme
poverty, she brought home to eat.

IN A 1974 booklength interview with Xaviere Gauthier, Duras said: "I have a
bedazzled memory . . . of the night in the forest when we'd walk barefoot,
barefoot while everywhere it was teeming with snakes! . . . I wasn't afraid at
12, and then, as an adult, I've said to myself, 'But how did we get out alive?'
We would go to see the monkeys, and there were black panthers too. I saw a black
panther fly by a hundred meters away. Nothing in the world is more ferocious
than that."

Thinking about that panther, I ask her: "There seems to be a chronic underlying
panic in your books. Did that come from your childhood?"

"Who can say? It's true that it exists. Endemic, as they say."

During another long silence I gaze at a strange tableau on a table. A mirror
with dried flowers drooping from the top is propped against the wall. In its
reflection is a poster of "Destroy She Said," her first independent movie.
Leaning against the mirror is another, smaller mirror.

"There was a sexual fear, fear of men, because I didn't have a father. I wasn't
raped, but I sensed rape, like all little girls. And then afterwards I had a
Chinese lover. That was love."

Yann serves us grenadine.  I remember French friends telling me, with eyebrows
raised, that between them is un vrai amour, even though he is a homosexual.

"Do you think most people live with continual fear?"

"Only the stupid are not afraid."

FEAR, DESPAIR, alienation are themes that seized her in her childhood; later
Duras became fascinated with crimes of passion. In the 1958 novel "Moderato
Cantabile" -- Duras's first major success -- a crime is committed: lying on the
woman he has just killed, a man sobs: "Darling. My darling." Two witnesses, a
man and a woman, later drink together and reconstruct in repetitious and
incantatory dialogue a passion so intense that its climax was murder. This mix
of eroticism and death runs through her work like a river that feeds everything
it passes. Certainly one of its sources was the French governor's wife, but an
even stronger one was a savage conflict within her family circle.

Duras passionately loved Paulo, the younger of her two older brothers (both of
whom are now dead). Paulo was slightly retarded and was deathly afraid of
Pierre, the older brother, who tormented and physically battered Paulo. One of
the most jarring revelations in "The North Chinese Lover" is that Duras had sex
with Paulo. In the book he begins to crawl into her bed when they were both very
young, precipitating terrifying rages from Pierre.  That intimacy eventually
leads to consummation, just before the family leaves Vietnam. This new slant on
her childhood might explain why she hated Pierre so much that she wanted to kill
him.

"I should have," she cries today. "There was only one solution. That was murder.
And one didn't adopt that solution. And it went on throughout my whole
childhood. Hate grows. It's like a fire that doesn't go out. When he was 17 and
I was 13, during a nap one day I got a knife to kill him."

"Why?"

"For everything, for the sake of killing him. So he wouldn't beat the little one
anymore. I can't talk about the little one because I'm going to cry."

"Why didn't you kill the older one?"

"He woke up. He laughed." She imitates horrible laughter. It's a bizarre
moment."He got hold of the knife. He flung it away. I picked it up.  He called
my mother. He told her. They laughed uproariously. And I cried, I cried."

"What did your mother do?"

"She was very hard on me.  She didn't love us, the little one and me. I've never
seen anything like it in my life, my mother's preference for my older brother.
She was proud of me because I did well in school. My little brother wasn't
altogether normal, and that's why my older brother persecuted him. And as for
me, I was going mad with pain because above all I loved my little brother. I
wanted to kill myself when he died."

Self-destruction for love is a particularly Durasian obsession. "You destroy me.
You're so good for me," repeats the woman in "Hiroshima Mon Amour" to her lover.
I ask her today why sex and death are always entwined for her.

"It's difficult to articulate.  It's erotic." She takes a deep breath. "I had a
lover with whom I drank a lot of alcohol." She pauses, staring straight at me.
Her face is expressionless, her dark eyes are absolutely still.  "I'm acquainted
with it, the desire to be killed. I know it exists."

In "Practicalities," a 1987 book of essays, Duras writes about a violent affair.
"We took a room by the river. We made love again. We couldn't speak to one
another any more. We drank. He struck me . . . in cold blood. We couldn't be
near one another now without fear and trembling. . . . We were both faced with
the same strange desire." It was after that experience that she wrote "Moderato
Cantabile."

Is Duras's attitude toward eroticism an anomaly, or is it particularly French?
Jennifer Wicke, an associate professor of comparative literature at New York
University, told me that while the English may write about a languid
conversation in front of a fire, the French are entirely different.

"Duras's writing is always at an extremity, and that is quite French," she said.
"I see her as carrying on the tradition of l'amour fou, the crazed love. It's a
bleak world view, the opposite of a lyrical text. It proposes a tragic end,
because desire can't be sustained. It will either turn into obsession and, thus,
ultimately destroy its object, or it will see itself be deflated by the very
cruel contingencies of history, or death."

Duras is associated with the Nouveau Roman (literally "new novel"), a movement
born in the 50's, whose members include Nathalie Sarraute, Alain Robbe-Grillet,
Michel Butor and Claude Simon. The Nouveau Roman rejects the classical novel as
an inappropriate medium to express the chaotic, morally ambiguous postwar world.
Although Duras shares many of the movement's stylistic hallmarks -- the free
flow of time and the use of silence -- she is the least obsessed with literary
principles, and the most inspired by her own inimitable sensibility.

Peter Brooks, the Tripp Professor of Humanities at Yale University, commented to
me that the other Nouveau Roman writers got more attention than Duras when the
movement began because there was "something more technicolor about their
technique. Their theorizing and their break with the traditional novel were
overt and total. But Duras is the one from that whole generation who really is
going to last."

DURAS LOOKS AT YANN, and he takes her hand. During our conversation he has been
shuffling around, walking in and out of the room, one hand on his hip, flipping
his hair back with a toss of his head -- a movement that must be, in other
circumstances, flirtatious. I ask how they like to spend their time.

"The thing we like most in life is to be in a car together," she says, "to go in
bistros, cafes, and make stories from what we see."

"Do you ask a lot of questions?"

"All the time. People talk to us. I go out every day in the car." Then she adds:
"I had chronic bronchitis. You can hear my voice very well, even so. I still
have vocal cords. I was in a coma for five months."

In October 1988, Duras fell into a coma from which she miraculously awoke
intact.  She now has a tracheostomy and wears a necklace of wire with a silver
button in the middle. At times she adjusts it, which seems to alter the force of
her voice.

The most difficult storm Duras weathered was her cure from alcohol in 1982.
Yann wrote a harrowing account, which has not yet been translated into English,
called simply "M.D." She tells me Yann's book is "magnificent."

"I drank because I was an alcoholic. I was a real one -- like a writer. I'm a
real writer, I was a real alcoholic. I drank red wine to fall asleep.
Afterwards, Cognac in the night. Every hour a glass of wine and in the morning
Cognac after coffee, and afterwards I wrote. What is astonishing when I look
back is how I managed to write."

Her small, bejeweled hands lie on the table before her, one resting on the blank
paper.

THE NEXT DAY, WE talk about criminals. Duras has never shunned conflict -- as a
Resistance fighter, as a Communist or as a woman who speaks out in defense of
murderers if she imagines the killer is an anti-establishment figure.

"I became great friends with Georges Figon," she tells me. "He had stolen
diamonds and he had killed people. And afterwards he had kidnapped people, with
ransom. He was a dear friend. I got him a television interview. He was amazingly
intelligent. I even went away for the weekend with him."

"A romantic weekend?" Monique immediately asks.

"No. We never slept with each other. Never. And he never tried to sleep with
me."

What is the allure of a criminal for her?

"It exerts a fascination for me -- all the people who abandon the golden rule of
good conduct. Criminals are heroes for me."

In 1985 Duras wrote an article about Christine Villemin, who was accused of
murdering her child. Although conceding Villemin's guilt under the law, she
justified the murder as a natural result of social injustice. The article caused
a furor.

Duras's pronouncements in the press have given her a notorious reputation. In
1988 she was interviewed on television for some four hours.  Duras alternately
spoke and stared speechlessly into the camera. Very little of it was
comprehensible to the general public. It was just before her coma.

During my interview I was disconcerted by her habit of jumping disconnectedly
from subject to subject, and it wasn't until I was back in America and spent
many weeks studying the transcript of the interview (which Nancy K. Kline, of
Barnard College, translated for this article) that I gradually understood the
connections she was making. In New York I spoke to Tom Bishop, chairman of the
French department at New York University, a Beckett scholar and a friend of
Duras's for 25 years. It had occurred to me that she had sustained brain damage
in the coma.

"She was always like this," he declared. "I don't think she was ever any
different. I would doubt that it's the coma." He described the scattershot
exchanges of ordinary friendship, which often went something like this:

Bishop: "Let's have lunch."

Duras: "I never have lunch."

Bishop: "O.K."

Long pause.

Duras: "Where would you want to have lunch if we had lunch?"

Bishop: "I was thinking of the Rue de Dragon."

Duras: "Well, O.K., fine, let's do that."

"I think she's a fabulous writer who should just write and not talk about what
she's thinking," Bishop said.  Like her talk, her work doesn't make "a lot of
sense," but it does "something else. It allows me to have an insight into the
human psyche that I have found unique. I have learned things about humanity
through her that others don't teach me."

A good example of meaning in ambiguity is Duras's work in the cinema, where she
is almost as important to 20th-century experimental film as she is to
literature. Annette Michelson, a professor of cinema studies at New York
University, told me that one of Duras's most important contributions is her
realization that "the cinema is made of relations." "And when you change the
relations between sound and image," she says, "you have something new."

In "India Song" (1975), the actress Delphine Seyrig and various men walk through
a room furnished only with a grand piano. They dance, lie down, sleep, weep,
while off-screen voices comment on the unbearable heat, a man shrieks and sobs,
a woman chants in Cambodian and jazz melodies pulse. Sounds never emanate from
the actors.  And yet the audience feels despair, longing, sensuality, the
presence of death, colonialism, the impossibility of human communication -- a
welter of specific impulses that elude verbal definition.

Of course, a writer who concerns herself with disjunction and alienation is
difficult to pin down in conversation. She used to say that as a film maker she
wanted to "murder the writer," and recently she said she wants to "kill the
image." I wonder how it is possible to make a film without image.

She answers: "With words. To kill the writer that I was."

All right. Suddenly she picks up the pen that has been in front of her for two
days and begins to write on the paper. "I'm thinking of something." She looks
up.  "Sensitivity depends on intelligence. It's completely connected. There's an
innocence also. Luckily." She puts down the pen. I record it as it happened. I
do not fully understand.

To ground us a little, I introduce the subject of politics. Her hatred of de
Gaulle springs to the surface.

"When de Gaulle arrived in France, I became an anti-Gaullist instantly. I saw
through his power game. I saw he was an arriviste, with a special gift for
language. And at just that moment they opened the camps, and my husband had been
deported. I never got over it, the Jews, Auschwitz. When I die, I'll think about
that, and about who's forgotten it."

"De Gaulle never said a word on the Jews and the camps," Yann adds quietly.  "If
de Gaulle had not been as big as he was," Duras says angrily, "no one would have
noticed him. Because he was taller than everyone, he was boss. But why this
arrogance? As far as I'm concerned, he's a deserter. He's horrible, horrible."

In "The War," Duras describes her days in the Resistance, working with Francois
Mitterrand, keeping records of deportees, trying to coax information from
Germans stationed in Paris. It was Mitterrand who went to Germany with Dionys
Mascolo, the man who would be her second husband and the father of her son,
Jean. They rescued Antelme from Dachau in the first days after the German
surrender. Antelme, nearly unconscious, was consigned to a quarantined section
for hopeless cases. Mitterrand and Mascolo smuggled him out.

"MITTERRAND IS wonderful. I worked with him in the Resistance. I protected him
in the street. We never met in a house or a cafe. We liked each other so much we
could certainly have slept with each other, but it was impossible. You can't do
that on bicycles!" She laughs.

"Are you still a Communist?"

"I'm a Communist.  There's something in me that's incurable."

"But you left the Party."

"The Party is not Communism." Her mouth hardens into a straight line across her
wide face.

"Has there been any true Communist government over the years?"

"Not one. There was one Communist year: 1917."

"Do you hope to see that sort of Communism return to the world?"

"I don't know. I don't want to know. I am a Communist within myself. I no longer
have hope in the world."

Yann begins to laugh.  "And the other?" he asks.  "Do you have hope for the next
world?"

She is not amused by his question. "Zero. Zero."



A DURAS SAMPLER

She says, I'd rather you didn't love me. But if you do, I'd like you to do as
you usually do with women. He looks at her in horror, asks, Is that what you
want? She says it is. He's started to suffer here in this room, for the first
time, he's no longer lying about it. He says he knows already she'll never love
him. She lets him say it. At first she says she doesn't know. Then she lets him
say it.

He says he's lonely, horribly lonely because of this love he feels for her. She
says she's lonely too. She doesn't say why. He says, You've come here with me as
you might have gone anywhere with anyone. She says she can't say, so far she's
never gone into a bedroom with anyone. She tells him she doesn't want him to
talk, what she wants is for him to do as he usually does with the women he
brings to his flat. She begs him to do that. -- The Lover (1984)

The sound of the violin ceases. We stop talking. It starts in again.

"The light went on in your room, and I saw Tatiana walk in front of the light.
She was naked beneath her black hair."

She does not move, her eyes staring out into the garden, waiting. She has just
said that Tatiana is naked beneath her dark hair. That sentence is the last to
have been uttered. I hear: "naked beneath her dark hair, naked, naked, dark
hair." The last two words especially strike with a strange and equal intensity.
. . . The intensity of the sentence suddenly increases, the air around it has
been rent, the sentence explodes, it blows the meaning apart. I hear it with a
deafening roar, and I fail to understand it, I no longer even understand that it
means nothing. -- The Ravishing of Lol Stein (1964)

NAME: Marguerite Duras

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Duras, at the age of 13, in Indochina, 1927. Duras with her
mother, circa 1931. (Sygma)(pg. 44); At her Paris home, January 1991. (Julio
Donoso/Sygma for The New York Times)(pg. 45); Duras with her companion of 11
years, Yann Andrea, in Paris, 1989. His book "M.D." details Duras's near-fatal
treatment for alcoholism. (Jean Mascolo/Sygma); With her second husband, Dionys
Moscolo, in France, circa 1947. Duras and her first husband, Robert Antelme, a
survivor of Dachau, in 1946, at Bocca di Magre, "the beach of leftist
intellectuals in Italy." (Sygma)(pg. 46)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Executive Life;
The Satisfying Silliness Of the Paintball Wars

BYLINE: By Mary Billard

SECTION: Section 3; Page 27; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


On a recent rainy Sunday, Christopher Siedman was running through the woods in a
strange half crouch, climbing over low stone walls and hiding from enemy fire.
Decked out in camouflage pants, he and two friends were holding black metal
guns. They thought they were closing in on their objective, a heavily guarded
compound at the other end of a wooded field. But in fact, they were going around
in circles in a swamp, thick brush blocking their passage.

Just then, the quiet was pierced by unmistakable Rambo-like screams of skirmish.

"We gotta get out of here," Mr. Siedman yelled, sounding like a warrior. Then,
like the banker he really is, he howled: "We are all zero assets if we get stuck
here."

Paintball war is hell.

Mr. Siedman, an analyst at a large Wall Street rating agency, was recently at a
camp called Survival: New York, in Newburgh, N.Y., with friends from the Federal
Reserve Bank and other Wall Street offices. Like many other people who work
9-to-5, they have discovered the thrill of paintball war, a game in which teams
fire gelatin shells filled with paint at one another. The sport picked up
momentum when the stock market crashed in October 1987, grew more popular during
the recession and won even more players after the Persian Gulf War, said Jerry
Braun, co-owner of Survival: New York.

The players obviously revel in being able to let off steam. "It's a bunch of
nerds -- accountants and bankers -- screaming their heads off," said Mr.
Siedman. "It's great."

Golf and tennis are the traditional ways for co-workers to bond, but the
adrenaline released in paintball war is so intense that it transcends those
placid playing fields.

The appeal could be attributed to the men's movement -- the poet Robert Bly's
theory that the modern male has become alienated from his masculine nature and
needs to reconnect with that "wild man" within his soul.

Paintball does indeed fulfill the call of the child, if not the wild. It is a
game where grown-ups run around playing a very competitive game of tag.

"It was a thrill to wake up at 5 A.M. to run around outside all day long, like
when you were a kid at camp," said Russ Paparo, a commodities trader playing in
Newburgh recently. Added Joe Haley Jr., a data sales executive at the White
Plains office of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company: "I loved diving
and rolling around on the group. How often do you get to do that?"

And that's not to mention all the dressing up: For roughly $40 at the Newburgh
field, a combatant gets a full-day session, complete with ammunition, a gun,
goggles and a frightening face mask.

No one needs a management consultant to tell the player firing a gun at a
co-worker that it provides a cathartic release, and it is perhaps for that
reason that many companies actually sponsor paintball war sessions for
employees. "It was a great release," said Laura Sayegh, director of sales
administration at HBO Video, who joined co-workers at a company-sponsored
session. "Our senior vice president of sales was a decoy. It was his idea."

David Reitz, manager of equipment development at Pepsico Inc., was not with a
company-sponsored group recently, but "the boss got hit quite a few times," he
said.

The game is straightforward -- simply an armed version of capture the flag. A
team, with anywhere from 10 to 30 players, guards its flag at one side of the
field while trying to grab the other side's flag and take it back to its home
base.

But things are not so simple that people don't prepare. The night before the
battle, one of Mr. Siedman's playmates trained by reading "The Art of War," by
Sun Tzu, the bible of corporate raiders in the 1980's; another watched the
grisly Vietnam War movie, "Platoon."

The game is becoming so popular that soon amateurs will be able to start
cribbing chesslike strategies from professional tournaments. Pro paintball is
scheduled to run on the Sportschannel in November and on the ESPN cable network
early next year.

But even weekend warriors know that attitude is key. The language seems to come
straight from a lifetime of John Wayne movies buried deep within their psyches.
"Take the ridge," one player screamed in Newburgh, his voice hoarse. "Good D,"
said another, meaning good defense. "Shoot to kill," yelled yet another.

Strategies develop during the session. "We found hunkering down better than
being too aggressive; if you are aggressive you get knocked out early," said
Pepsico's Mr. Reitz.

Daniel Rappaport, a commodities trader and member of the board of the New York
Mercantile Exchange, hid with teammates in the bushes, then rushed the
opponent's flag to a barrage of fire. When the smoke cleared, six enemy guards
were dead. "They all fired at the first guy," said Mr. Rappaport. The strategy
had worked.

But not everyone can learn to work together. On a recent A.T.& T. Computer
Systems outing, the team from the sales side could never agree on a master plan,
Mr. Haley said. "The judge would count down, the whistle would blow, no one
would agree what to do and everyone would run in their own direction," he said.

Still, like an old soldier, he came out with a good story. "We were all pumped
up and talking about it in the office," said Mr. Reitz.

"We still talk about it," said Ms. Sayegh from HBO Video. "It's very
competitive, but no one gets left out. Everybody played. It's great for team
spirit."

Despite all the thrills, however, nothing is perfect. "There was no
hand-to-hand," said Mr. Rappaport, sounding a bit wistful.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Managing;
Soldiers Return to the Workplace

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA H. DEUTSCH

SECTION: Section 3; Page 27; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 942 words


KENTUCKY FRIED CHICKEN has a formal program to recruit junior military officers
as area restaurant managers. "They are accustomed to managing the kind of young,
inexperienced people that we employ," said Richard M. Detwiler, director of
public affairs.

The Harris County Sheriff's Department in Houston held a job fair at nearby Fort
Hood to encourage departing soldiers to apply for guard work at its new jail.
"Military people are drug-free, disciplined and used to abiding by rules and
regulations," said H.R. Barrera, the department's recruiting officer.

Schneider National Carriers, the huge Green Bay, Wisc., trucker, has hired more
than 1,500 ex-soldiers as drivers. "An over-the-road trucker has to be away from
home a lot, and that's a life style that many soliders are used to," said Thomas
E. Vandenberg, the company's general counsel.

Apparently, skills shortages and employment dislocations make even stranger
bedfellows than politics. After nearly 20 years of mutual indifference bordering
on disrespect -- a legacy of military bungling during the Vietnam War, and of
industry's greed-stained handling of environmental issues and defense contract
padding -- industry and the Army are again eying each other as allies. "We
realized we're hammering the same nail," said Frank P. Doyle, senior vice
president of the General Electric Company.

Indeed, while industry girds for a critical shortage of skilled workers, the
Army is poised to pour thousands of trained soldiers into the workplace. Over
the next few years a Washington-mandated downsizing of the Army will result in
the "involuntary separation" -- military talk for firing -- of some 50,000
enlistees and 18,000 officers. More than 300,000 others are expected to take
early retirement or otherwise not re-enlist. Cuts to the Navy, Air Force and
Marines will be miniscule in comparison.

All told, about 400,000 soldiers will be job hunting. The Army's immediate goal
is to help all of them find jobs. And, its long-term goal is to permanently
position itself as a great jumping-off point for a career.

"If we prove that we can transition people to civilian life, we'll have an
easier time recruiting," said G. Kim Wincup, Assistant Secretary of the Army for
manpower.

Thus, the Army has mounted an all-out publicity blitz. It has tapped CBS
correspondent Charles Osgood to narrate a promotional film about soldiers. And,
two weeks ago it co-hosted, with the Committee for Economic Development, a
day-long seminar for business people at which it touted such statistics as the
$1.3 billion it spends each year on training, and the fact that 98 percent of
Army people have high school diplomas.

"Remember, these are the same people who so dazzled and impressed the world
during Desert Storm," Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney told the seminar.

The Army has also set up mechanisms to hook employers up with jobless soldiers.
It has sent a book to professors teaching military science to students in the
Reserve Officer Training Corps, that lists companies interested in hiring the
students.

It also has 61 Army-run transition assistance offices, which offer Army people
and their families career counseling and assistance with job-hunting skills. And
it has contracted with private companies to run 55 Job Assistance Centers, both
fixed and mobile, at various Army bases. In addition to counseling, these
centers offer computer access to hiring requirements and names of primary
contacts at more than 2,000 companies.

By the end of the year there will be an electronic bulletin board that soldiers
and their families can check for news of job fairs or anything else pertinent to
job-hunting.

And when all else fails, it is willing to apply subtle pressure to get its
people jobs. Global Associates, a technical support company in McLean, Va.,
recently received a contract to train Army reserve medical units to use new
types of equipment. It plans to staff the project with a high proportion of Army
people, for three reasons:

"They know Army equipment, they know Army rules -- and we got a strong hint from
the wording in the contract about who we should hire to do the training," said
Walter Berry, the project's training manager.



THE FITS, AND POSSIBLE MISSES

On the surface, the fit between Army experience and corporate jobs seems right.
Army people have relocated families, run foreign outposts, competed globally,
managed diversity, worked with advanced technology, handled joint ventures with
foreign partners -- many of the very problems that business now faces. And there
is a lot of transferability between the technical training the military
provides, and the technical knowhow that industry needs.

But cultural fit is less obvious. Some executives question whether military
people, who are trained to give and follow orders, can adapt to private
industry, where the trend is to empower workers to do what the customer, not
necessarily the boss, wants. "I'm not sure the Army breeds creative thinkers,"
said the personnel chief of a chemical company, who insisted on anonymity.

Pentagon honchos find that kind of skepticism galling.

"Our soldiers make instantaneous decisions whether to shoot at a tank or not,
yet we still have this Beatle Bailey image," said Col. Robert Magruder,
executive officer to the assistant secretary of the Army for manpower and
reserve affairs.

Lieut. Gen. William H. Reno, deputy chief of staff for personnel, expects that
the good publicity reaped by Desert Storm will dissipate that image. "Sergeants
in the desert made more decisions each hour than a general makes in a week," he
said.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army troops at Fort Bliss, Texas, gaining talents and attitudes
upon which industry smiles. (Marty Katz)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN TREATY TO BE SIGNED SOON

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 19


After tortuous negotiations, Cambodia's four warring factions have at last
agreed to sign a peace accord here on Wednesday to end their 13-year conflict
and prepare the devastated nation for free elections.

The agreement will require the United Nations to play perhaps its biggest
peacekeeping role ever, with thousands of foreign soldiers and civilians due to
assume responsibility for monitoring a cease-fire, disarming combatants,
organizing elections and insuring that they are fair.

Indeed, more than in any other country where the United Nations has tried to
settle a bitter internal conflict with foreign ramifications, the organization
will effectively co-govern Cambodia, sharing power with a coalition of the four
factions until a new government is elected.

A Result of Cold War's End

The accord is seen as a another fruit of closer cooperation between Washington
and Moscow and other changes in the international climate that have already
resulted in solutions, or progress towards settlement, of disputes in Namibia,
Angola, Afghanistan and El Salvador.

In this case, the United States, the Soviet Union and China all played a pivotal
role by supervising negotiations and nudging their respective political clients
in Cambodia to accept the risks of democracy over continuation of a war that
none seemed likely to win.

But the deep distrust dividing the Phnom Penh Government and its three guerrilla
enemies was still evident even as delegates from 19 countries gathered here for
a conference on Cambodia that is to begin on Monday and culminate with the
expected signature of the peace accord on Wednesday.

At a meeting of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund in Bangkok this
week, members of a combined Cambodian delegation exchanged insults. Khmer Rouge
guerrillas were also accused of trying to push more than 40,000 refugees from
camps in Thailand into areas under their control.

Recalling that the last major peace conference on Cambodia in Paris broke up in
disarray two years ago, Western officials involved in the new negotiations have
cautioned against excessive optimism.

Crucial Role of the U.N.

And it is for this reason, they said, that the role of the United Nations is
crucial, even though it may cost the organization as much as $2 billion during
the estimated 18 to 21 months before elections are held, a new constitution is
written and a legitimate government is appointed.

Yet if peace finally comes to Cambodia, it will bring its eight million people
their first respite since the nation was drawn into the Vietnam War in 1970,
when American and South Vietnamese troops invaded its territory to combat
Vietcong and Khmer Rouge rebels.

In April 1975, the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, seized Phnom Penh, beginning a
reign of terror that left more than one million people dead before it was driven
from power in late 1978 by Vietnam, which installed a new Government, led by
Heng Samrin, in January 1979.

Since then, backed and armed by China, the Khmer Rouge has continued to control
territory in western Cambodia and has maintained its warfare against the Phnom
Penh Government.

Two other rebel groups appeared, one headed by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was
ousted as head of state in 1970, and the other, the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, led by a former Prime Minister, Son Sann, who was backed by
the United States.

A Divided Coalition

Although the three opposition forces formed a loose coalition, it was always
deeply divided, with followers of Prince Sihanouk and Mr. Son Sann almost as
eager to prevent the Khmer Rouge from returning to power as they were to oust
the Government in Phnom Penh.

On Thursday, in preparation for the future elections, Mr. Heng Samrin's party
dropped its commitment to Communism, accepted political pluralism and
free-market economics and changed its name.

Under the peace agreement, which is to go into effect as soon as it is signed on
Wednesday, the 12-member Supreme National Council, formed from the four factions
and led by Prince Sihanouk, will assume the powers of government. But it will
also surrender enormous power to what will be known as the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, or Untac.

This week, the Security Council approved the dispatch of the first peacekeeping
unit to Cambodia, comprising 268 military officers and civilians under the
command of a French officer, Brig. Gen. Jean-Michel Loridon. It will be in
charge of monitoring the initial cease-fire and recommending the size of the
main United Nations contingent.

Some estimates have put the eventual United Nations presence as high as 20,000
soldiers and civilian administrators.

Before the United Nations can begin preparing for elections by organizing voter
registration and drawing up an electoral code, it faces the intimidating task of
securing a cease-fire, insuring the withdrawal of the remaining Vietnamese
troops, gathering the warring armies in designated areas and taking charge of
their weapons.

The United Nations will also assume responsibility for assisting the return to
Cambodia of some 350,000 refugees living in camps across the border in Thailand.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
For Democratic Hopefuls, Race Turns to a Sprint

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1322 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


If the marathon was the metaphor for the Presidential campaigns of the 1980's,
the 50-yard dash might be the most appropriate comparison for the Democrats of
1992.

In the four months between now and the New Hampshire primary, this campaign will
be a sprint for money, organization, name recognition and support.

Forget about the long months of campaigning in Iowa, the first caucus state.
With time so short and with Senator Tom Harkin, a native son, in the race, along
with neighboring son Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, none of the other candidates are
expected to mount the kind of expensive, all-out campaign for the Feb. 10
caucuses that were de rigeur in 1988 and 1984.

Trying to Attract a Crowd

"It's becoming more and more clear that nobody's coming to Iowa," said Joe
Shanahan, spokesman for the Iowa Democratic Party, which recently moved back its
scheduled Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner to try to increase turnout -- by the
candidates.

Instead of the so-called Iowa bounce, which helped produce Jimmy Carter as the
Democratic nominee in 1976, the candidates in 1992 will be looking for a New
Hampshire jumpstart. It is no accident that most of the candidates have
descended on that state, which holds the first primary on Feb. 18.

The Big Democratic Test

"New Hampshire is absolutely the key," said Thomas E. Donilon, a lawyer and
longtime Democratic strategist. "Because they're starting so late, and with Iowa
less important, New Hampshire will be the first point in the process where we
have concrete winners and losers."

In fact, this may be the first Presidential campaign in years in which the
voters do most of the work in sorting out the field. By this time four years
ago, the race for the Democratic nomination had already lost its front-runner,
Gary Hart, to accusations of womanizing, and a rising star, Senator Joseph R.
Biden Jr., to allegations of plagiarism. Debates and polls and handicapping
journalists had created a series of hot candidates and troubled campaigns long
before the voting began.

There is no time for a complicated early campaign this year, thanks to the war
in the Persian Gulf, the general troubles in the Democratic Party and all the
other factors that froze Presidential politics for months and ultimately
produced a little known and closely packed Democratic field.

Front-Runner Is Lacking

Four of the five major candidates for the Democratic nomination have entered the
race within the past month; a sixth, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California, will officially join them on Monday.

There is no obvious front-runner, unless Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York jumps
in, a possibility that would utterly remake the race and has kept the party in
high suspense in recent days. Another wild card is the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who
is still considering whether to run. Most of the current candidates are still in
the earliest stages of strategy, fund raising and organization.

Consider their fund raising: Four years ago, when Michael S. Dukakis filed his
Sept. 30 report with the Federal Election Commission, he had raised $8.1
million, while Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri had raised $3.5
million.

Last week, when the same reports were filed, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas had
raised $201,319; Senator Kerrey had raised $223,720; Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of
Virginia had raised nearly $220,000; Senator Harkin had raised $713,857, and
former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who entered the race in April,
had raised $767,010.

A combination of the late start, the recession, the aura of President Bush's
invincibility and the always-grueling mechanics will make fund raising
particularly demanding for the candidates over the next few months. "That's a
large part of what's driving our schedule right now," said Lorraine Voles, a
spokeswoman for Mr. Harkin.

Nathan Landow, the chairman of the Maryland Democratic Party and an influential
fund-raiser, said, "From now until Jan. 1, most of their time has to be spent
raising money to get through New Hampshire and hopefully have a little nest egg
for Super Tuesday." Adding to the worries over money is the possibility that
Federal matching money could dry up, temporarily, in February and March.

The campaigns are just beginning to jockey for strategic position; so far, they
have been remarkably gentle to one another. As they head toward November, when a
series of candidate forums and debates begin, one of the earliest rivalries to
emerge is between Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey, both of whom present themselves as
new generation centrist Democrats.

For example:

"Bill Clinton has a reason and a rationale and a clear message that connects
with middle-class voters," said Frank Greer, Mr. Clinton's media consultant. "I
don't believe Bob Kerrey has a rationale or has figured out what his message
is."

Bill Hoppner, Mr. Kerrey's campaign chairman, counters, "The question is, is
there substance in the claim for substance?" He argues that Mr. Kerrey's health
care proposals are far more detailed than Mr. Clinton's.

Clinton in Polished Campaign

At this point, Mr. Clinton, who traveled the country for the past year as
chairman of the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of centrist and
conservative Democrats, has the more developed message and the more disciplined
and polished campaign style.

But Mr. Kerrey, who began moving toward a campaign only in late summer, has a
compelling life story (Congressional Medal of Honor in Vietnam, a long recovery
from the loss of a leg, a meteoric political career and a romance with the
actress Debra Winger) and a raw political appeal that, in the view of many
Democrats, could make him take off.

Mr. Kerrey will also be a player in Iowa, whether he likes it or not; because he
comes from a neighboring state, he is almost forced to compete in Iowa, or risk
the high political sin of doing worse than expected in his own backyard. It is
not clear, however, how much a second-place finish in those caucuses would mean
to Mr. Kerrey as the campaign moves into New Hampshire.

Mr. Clinton may have less to worry about in the expectations game, since the
first contest is so far from his home, but he does have to rack up some early
successes, somewhere, or risk the fate that befell his fellow Southerner,
Senator Al Gore of Tennessee, in 1988. Mr. Gore did well on the Super Tuesday
primaries in the South but never broke out of his region.

Liberal Standard-Bearer

Mr. Harkin, meanwhile, has staked out a clear market position in his party, as a
proud standard-bearer for traditional liberals. Some centrist Democrats have
already begun to worry that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Kerrey could carve up the middle
ground and leave an opening for Mr. Harkin to scoot up the field -- just as Mr.
Carter did against a field of liberals in 1976.

There are many other variables. Some Democrats warn that Mr. Brown, with his
angry anti-politics-as-usual message, should not be discounted in a year when
the voters may not feel kindly toward Washington. Mr. Wilder could give Mr.
Clinton problems in the South. Mr. Tsongas is always on the lookout for an
opening. Any of these candidates could decide to wage a late guerrilla campaign
in Iowa to generate a little pre-New Hampshire momentum.

In general, most of these campaigns are so young, and the candidates so
unaccustomed to the white heat of a Presidential election, that any number of
stumbles are possible. At the same time, someone could get very hot and wrap up
the nomination early, something that many Democrats devoutly wish. The shortage
of money could be a powerful factor in forcing an early decision.

Still, the latest round of tinkering with the Democratic nominating rules has
created a system of strict proportional representation that, in a
multi-candidate field without a clear front-runner, could produce a lengthy
process, once the voting begins.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
The Power of the Peace Prize May Be Lost on Myanmar

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words


Repressive regimes collapse not only from their own weaknesses, but also from
the accretion of falsehood -- rendered obvious and thus humiliating by
truthsayers. The Nobel Committee clearly hopes that its award of this year's
Peace Prize to the imprisoned Burmese dissident Daw Aung San Suu Kyi will
encourage the Burmese people to feel less alone and will hasten the collapse of
a deeply repressive and mendacious regime. It is the same reasoning that lay
behind the seemingly futile awards, in earlier years, to Soviet literary and
political truthtellers like Pasternak, Solzhenitsyn and Sakharov.

In 1988 and 1989, when Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi was swept to the front of Burmese
democratic resistance to the regime of U Ne Win, it was not only because she
represented the legacy of her father, U Aung San -- regarded as the founder of
modern Burma, and assassinated in 1947 on the eve of independence from Britain.

She was also the only political figure to speak openly, naming names, about the
damage done to what was the richest country in Southeast Asia by the eccentric
rule of Mr. Ne Win and his army acolytes.

It was for that sin, above all, that the Burmese military leaders put Mrs. Aung
San Suu Kyi under house arrest in July 1989 and keep her incommunicado. By
isolating her from any contact with even her husband and teen-age sons, the
military hopes to convince her to abandon her political goals and leave the
country.

Appropriately, it was President Vaclav Havel of Czechoslovakia, a former
dissident himself, who nominated Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi for the award. Mr. Havel,
author of absurdist plays and a moving prison diary in the form of letters to
his wife, understands as well as anyone the impact of political symbolism, the
stunning sound of spoken truth in the midst of general submission to the lie,
and of the quiet and finally intimidating nature of sustained nonviolent
resistance to arbitrary and selfish power.

Anti-Foreign Autocracy

But repressive Asian regimes have proved hard to crack, and the collapse of the
Soviet empire may prove to be misleading as a precedent. As the Soviet-American
poet Joseph Brodsky, himself a Nobel literature laureate, has noted, the Soviet
political system was "as much a product of Western rationalism" as of "Eastern
emotional radicalism."

The Burmese system, as advanced in Mr. Ne Win's bizarre tracts, has few such
Western roots. It is an intensely xenophobic and anti-colonialist military
autocracy with a quasi-Buddhist and quasi-socialist face. As such, it purports
to feel little vestigial guilt over values of individual human and political
rights, represented by the Nobel Peace Prize but perceived as Judeo-Christian
and Western, and hence un-Buddhist and un-Asian.

So the Nobel Prize is being labeled by the Burmese leaders as Western
ideological, cultural and political meddling, honoring a woman whom they
perceived as more Western than Asian. She was, after all, educated abroad in the
former colonial power, Britain, and had lived there for many years and married a
Briton.

In November 1990, in a rare response to Western criticism of human-rights
violations in Myanmar, as Burma is now called, Gen. Saw Maung, chairman of the
ruling committee, said baldly: "I tell you, if anyone wants to enjoy the human
rights they have in the United States, England and India, provided that country
accepts, I will permit them to leave. But in Myanmar, I can only grant human
rights suitable for the Myanmar people."

At the same time, it must be understood that such feelings are also common among
Myanmar's Asian neighbors to the north and east, and not merely in Vietnam and
China. The so-called democracies of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
-- Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, the Philippines and Brunei -- also
express concerns about Western meddling and the inappropriateness of Western
political models.

Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew, who retired as Prime Minister but who, like Deng
Xiaoping or Mr. Ne Win, exercises ultimate political control, warns of a
creeping "Westernization" that is undermining the society and the government by
an overemphasis on individual rights as opposed to collectivist and family
obligations, which are supposedly Asian in character. Mr. Lee, a combative and
articulate man, is nonetheless treated with much obsequiousness by Western
leaders who admire his commitments to anti-Communism, corporate profits and free
trade. But his themes are not very different from those of the Burmese military
and he has moved quite openly to harass and intimidate his political opposition
and the Western press.

The talk is similar in Malaysia and Indonesia, and some Thai officials openly
criticized the Peace Prize; in Thailand, the military staged a coup last
February without even the excuse of public unrest, and is busily fashioning a
new and less democratic Constitution while keeping up warm ties with Burmese
fellow officers.

Arms and Currency

So it is no surprise that China is Myanmar's main arms supplier, with
Singaporean middlemen providing ammunition and smaller weapons, or that the
Thais, South Koreans and Singaporeans are keeping the regime supplied with hard
currency through purchases of fishing, timber and oil-drilling rights.

Or that when American Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d and his Under
Secretary, Robert Zoellick, harshly criticized Myanmar at the last Asean summit
meeting in Kuala Lumpur in July, and called for Asean members to promote
political change and human rights there, Asean representatives merely looked
down at their feet.

They may have done so in the knowledge that numerous Western oil companies are
also paying the Burmese regime to look for oil. Still, as a former American
Ambassador there has said, "Burma is one place where the United States, with no
strategic interests except limiting the opium crop, has the luxury of its
principles."

The Nobel Committee has now exercised a similar luxury. No one expects the
Burmese military, with its xenophobic instincts and skill at repression,
suddenly to collapse or to feel very much shame. But the Prize may serve to
embarrass the countries of Asean and slow their accommodation with Myanmar. And
it may at least protect Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, as it did Solzhenitsyn and
Sakharov, and prevent the military from ridding themselves of this turbulent
woman, who in their own minds represents not merely a threat to their power, but
the knocking of Western values against the pagoda door.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Daw Aung San Suu Kyi campaigning in 1989. (Sandro Tucci/Black
Star)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'Indians,' an Echo of Vietnam

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 13; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON


IN 1968, "Indians" was Arthur Kopit's attention-grabbing attempt to open up the
real savage story of how the West was won, to demythologize that old game of
cowboys and Indians, the one that leaves out the genocide of nearly all the
Indians and the slaughter of more than 4,000 buffaloes.

Clearly, parallels to the Vietnam War were rife. In fact, it was a newspaper
account of a shooting in Saigon that inspired Mr. Kopit to draw a startling
analogy, making connections to an historic American arrogance in perpetuity.

A year after the world premiere at London's Royal Shakespeare Company and an
American opening at Washington's Arena Stage, during a crowning period of the
regional theater movement, Mr. Kopit's play had a brief Broadway life (October
1969 through January 1970). It would be invigorating to now welcome "Indians" in
what is being called "a first major revival" and a re-investigation, at the
McCarter Theater, as a newly resonant theater piece, rather than a 1960's
artifact.

But the McCarter staging by George Faison, customarily a choreographer and
director of musicals, is a strident version of a playwright's well-intentioned
theoretical vision that, now as then, remains theatrically formed but otherwise
hollow.

Camouflaged by ritualistic techniques once considered risk taking, "Indians"
comes off as more diatribe than drama. Mr. Kopit's intrinsic comments about the
lack of respect between cultures, the insinuation of values -- and the need to
rationalize that -- exploitation marketed as show business and the glorification
of violence do not take hold. If this be the flip side of "Annie, Get Your Gun,"
-- yes, Annie Oakley and Wild Bill Hickock are in the cast, along with Jesse
James and Billy the Kid -- it's stuck in its own expositional groove.

The work is conceived, to use Mr. Kopit's word, as a "nightmarish" rodeo, a
hallucinatory collage of effects that used to be fashionably referred to as
"total theater," often at the expense of dramatic structure, coherent plot and
developed characters.

Juxtaposing the touring "Buffalo Bill Wild West Show" with an 1866 United States
commission to investigate Indian grievances, mostly expressed by Sitting Bull
("At stake are lives, not just grievances"), with the audience presumably
switching from the spectators to the accused, "Indians" has a distinct shape
that simply fails to work on any level.

It would be facile to fault the McCarter's proscenium theater for the
production's confining air or the remoteness of Mr. Kopit's writing, but the
fact is Mr. Faison's staging doesn't transcend that barrier, and obligatory
entrances down the aisle that have all the bite of a stock "Barnum" retread
won't do. Originally written in one act, the play is being performed with a
break, awkwardly placed but welcomed nonetheless.

As a display piece, the role of Buffalo Bill can be fascinating. The faded
"fearless" hero is making a "two a day" comeback in a ghost town, aware of the
destructive cost of the heroism he insistently proclaims. While he isn't the
good guy he's been cracked up to be, he's not a bad guy either. Wanted to be
remembered in his glory, he's a complicated, paranoid mix of self justification
and self awareness -- a sort of seedling liberal within a tired frame of
bombast. Robert Joy gives a lightweight account of a character in outline. The
dimensions are open for an independent acting tour de force, and if only as an
exercise, the role has bravura potential, here untapped.

Given ostensibly rending lines that the playwright turns into windy polemic ("It
is not right that we should be living in poverty. And be treated like beasts"),
Mel Duane Gionson as Sitting Bull does them with dignity, asserting his chiefdom
while the white committee condescends. Under direction of unvarying tone, the
cast is undistinguished by degree, the stage is all dressed up with planks and
platforms and stairs and multicolored curtains and activated by tribal dances, a
massacre and all manner of flash. Through it all, "Indians" is perhaps most
unsettling for being so relentlessly penitential and uninvolving.

"Indians," by Arthur Kopit, at the McCarter Theater Center for the Performing
Arts, 91 University Place in Princeton. Performances through next Sunday. Box
office: (609) 683-8000.

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Joy, as Buffalo Bill, and Paul Lemos, as Spotted Tail, in
"Indians." (T. Charles Erickson)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Now Playing: Real Life, the Movie

BYLINE: By NEAL GABLER;  Neal Gabler, the author of "An Empire of Their Own: How
the Jews Invented Hollywood," is at work on a biography of Walter Winchell.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 4304 words


Fade in on New York Harbor off The Battery on a muggy June day. A young man
jumps from a launch into the roiling water and disappears beneath the surface.
Within seconds divers in scuba gear plunge in after him. Boats converge on the
scene. A helicopter hovers overhead. But the man never surfaces.

Fade in on five toughs rampaging down the mean streets of Washington one night.
The gang encircles a dazed man. One of them rears back and unleashes a savage
punch. The victim falls stiffly, like a tree being felled.

Fade in on a snowy slope in fashionable Aspen. We see two figures in ski parkas
silhouetted against the sky: a man and a woman. Suddenly, another woman appears.
She wheels on the first woman and hisses, "Stay away from my husband!"

These are all scenes from recent movies, but you wouldn't have seen any of them
at your local theater. The first was a rescue drill conducted by the New York
Harbor Police; according to some accounts, the policeman playing the victim had
foregone a life jacket to make the rescue look more authentic for a German
television crew shooting the action. The young man drowned. The second was a
video made by a gang of Washington youths during a so-called wilding. And the
third was the famous confrontation on the slopes between Ivana Trump and Marla
Maples. The reason you wouldn't have seen any of these scenes at your local
theater is that they were playing on a different kind of screen. These movies
were playing on the screen of life.

Reality has always had a way of challenging fiction and frequently outflanking
it. But by the "screen of life" I mean something much more self-consciously
theatrical than chance invention. I mean that life itself is gradually being
transformed into a medium all its own like television, radio and print. And we
are becoming both performance artists in and audiences for a grand, ongoing
entertainment that is often richer, more complex and more compelling than
anything in the conventional media. Or, as Philip Roth put it in his story "On
the Air": "What if the world is some kind of -- of show! . . . What if we are
all only talent assembled by the Great Talent Scout Up Above! The Great Show of
Life! Starring Everybody! Suppose entertainment is the Purpose of Life!"

Philip Roth was writing more than 20 years ago, but the evidence has steadily
mounted ever since that politics, religion, news, education, warfare, crime,
everything are really branches of, well, call it show biz. Everywhere the
fabricated, the inauthentic and the theatrical have gradually driven out the
natural, the genuine and the spontaneous until there is no distinction between
real life and stagecraft. In fact, one could argue that the theatricalization of
American life is the major cultural transformation of this century. Devoured by
artifice, life is a movie.

Reality Management
Enter Fantasy, Riding a TV Set

It is difficult to pinpoint precisely when the process began. Surely as soon as
America first emerged as a mass industrial society there were individuals who
saw no reason to let the vagaries of life govern when one could orchestrate life
to one's benefit. Soon public relations experts were manufacturing events and
manipulating reality, and over the decades these small contrivances, established
on a thousand fronts from business to news to politics, metastasized. Before
long everyone in public life had a P.R. rep and everything in public life seemed
the product of premeditation.

It was this sort of image-mongering and reality management that the historian
Daniel Boorstin deplored in his path-breaking 1961 study "The Image: A Guide to
Pseudo-Events in America." For Mr. Boorstin, Americans increasingly lived in a
"world where fantasy is more real than reality." And he warned, "We risk being
the first people in history to have been able to make their illusions so vivid,
so persuasive, so 'realistic' that they can live in them." Mr. Boorstin believed
that by letting artifice displace experience, we were debasing our culture.
Still, he assumed that if one lifted the scrim, one would find a reality behind
the counterfeit. What he could not have foreseen was that the scrim would become
the reality.

Partly, he underestimated the extent of the theatrical in America because he
underestimated the power of television to dictate the terms of our discourse. As
Neil Postman has observed in his powerfully argued screed against television,
"Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business," "We
are now a culture whose information, ideas and epistemology are given form by
television, not by the printed word." And Mr. Postman went on to say that
television, unlike print, "has made entertainment itself the natural format for
the representation of all experience." Television not only welcomes artifice, it
demands it. Inherently visual, inherently visceral, television abhors dead air.
It requires that everyone on it -- newsmakers, authors, generals, criminals,
academicians -- keep us entertained or we'll tune out.

Television certainly has contributed to the frenzy of role-playing in America,
if only because the lone standard to which television holds anyone is the
standard of performance. (Mr. Postman says that Richard Nixon was done in by
television not because he was a liar but because he looked like one.)

In a famous commercial a few years back, a soap opera star announced, "I'm not a
doctor but I play one on TV." Today, when it seems everyone is engaged in one
sort of performance or another, that could serve as the nation's motto. "I'm not
a hero but I play one," says Oliver North. "I'm not a football star but I play
one," says Brian Bosworth. "I'm not a journalist but I play one," says the local
news anchor. "I'm not a President but I play one," says Ronald Reagan.

Since the media transmit these performances, it is tempting to blame them for
the theatricalization. But doing so is mistaking symptoms for causes. Life is
the medium, television an important but component part. And life hasn't become a
form of entertainment because P.R. men learned to stroke our cultural G-spots or
because wily television executives learned how to lobotomize us into grinning
idiots. We have been complicit in the whole process and for good reason. It
works.

If theatricalization accelerated at roughly the same time that America was
emerging as a mass industrial society, it was also a time when American life was
becoming less manageable, more complex. With the old verities of 19th-century
small-town America suddenly under siege, people needed techniques to help them
understand the changing social order and possibly dominate it.

A painless way to make sense of this new world was suggested by one of the
modernizing forces itself: the movies. The movies offered many forms of guidance
to confused Americans, particularly to immigrant urban dwellers; they became a
virtual manual for acculturation. But one of the most important and most subtle
services the movies offered was to serve as a popular model of narrative
coherence. If reality was overwhelming, one could always carve it into a story,
as the movies did. One could bend life to the familiar and comforting formulas
one saw in the theater.

Beginning in the 1920's, the tabloids and then magazines and television provided
dozens of real-life plots, from kidnappings and murders to political scandals,
to crimes in executive suites, to election campaigns, to World War II, to the
cold war, to Watergate, to the recent Soviet coup attempt. Today, virtually all
the news assumes a narrative configuration with cause and effect, villain and
hero, beginning, middle and provisional end, and frequently a moral. Events that
don't readily conform, the savings and loan scandal, for example, seem to drift
in foggy limbo like a European art film rather than a sleek commercial American
hit.

That is why reading the news is just like watching a series of movies: a hostage
crisis is a thriller, the Milwaukee serial murders a morbidly fascinating
real-life "Silence of the Lambs," the Kennedy Palm Beach case a soap opera, a
fire or hurricane a disaster picture.

One even suspects that Americans were riveted by the Clarence Thomas-Anita Hill
hearings last week not because of any sense of civic duty but because it was a
spellbinding show -- part "Rashomon," part "Thelma and Louise," part "Witness
for the Prosecution."

But as with movies, if "formularizing" reality is a way of domesticating it, it
is also a means of escaping it. Michael Wood in his book "America in the
Movies," described our films as a "rearrangement of our problems into shapes
which tame them, which disperse them to the margins of our attention" where we
can forget about them. By extending this function to life itself, we convert
everything from the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby to the marital
misadventures of Elizabeth Taylor into distractions, cheap entertainments that
transport us from our problems.

But before disapproving too quickly, one is almost compelled to admit that
turning life into escapist entertainment has both a perverse logic and a
peculiar genius. Why worry about the seemingly intractable problems of society
when you can simply declare, "It's morning in America" and have yourself a
long-running Frank Capra movie right down to an aw-shucks President? Why fret
over America's declining economic might when you can have an honest-to-goodness
war movie that proves your superiority? Movies have always been a form of wish
fulfillment. Why not life?

When life is a movie, it poses serious questions for those things that were not
traditionally entertainment and now must accommodate themselves. Politics, for
instance. Much has already been made of the fact that Ronald Reagan came to the
White House after a lifetime as a professional actor. Lou Cannon, in his
biography of Mr. Reagan, "President Reagan: The Role of a Lifetime," details
just how central this was to Mr. Reagan's concept of the Presidency and what it
suggests about the new political landscape.

Performance Politics
Good Vibes From the Oval Office

"What he wanted to be, and what he became, was an accomplished presidential
performer," writes Mr. Cannon. Everything was scripted for Mr. Reagan, from
press conferences to quips; even in personal conversations he read from note
cards. When the President did wing it, he was vague and often incoherent.

Of course President Reagan was not the first politician to have been a
consummate performer. One thinks immediately of Franklin Roosevelt. But for
Roosevelt the performance was always a function of the Presidency -- a means to
sell his policies. For Mr. Reagan, the Presidency was a function of the
performance. What the Administration was selling was what movies sell: good
vibes.

None of this was lost on Mr. Reagan's advisers. They knew that his primary
function was to star in the movie of his Presidency and offer genial reassurance
that everything would be O.K. In this escapist entertainment there would be no
racial divisiveness, no economic calamity, no education crisis, no AIDS.

We acquiesced not because we were deluded but because it was a pretty good movie
as movies go: well executed, thematically sound, deeply satisfying, fun. "You
believed it because you wanted to believe it," President Reagan once told a
columnist who insisted he had seen the young actor on the set of the movie
"Brother Rat," even though Mr. Reagan had not been there. "There's nothing wrong
with that. I do it all the time."

Psychologically speaking, the President may have been right. Politically
speaking, though, the Presidential movie is a far more vexing proposition for a
democracy. In the first place, turning the Presidency into performance art
changes the way we measure the Presidency from the efficaciousness of the
Administration's policies to the power of its performance -- that old TV gauge.
In this the media were happy to collaborate. Throughout the Reagan years one
heard ad nauseam about the effectiveness of the President's delivery, about his
popularity, about his charm until, as Professor Kiku Adatto noted of the press
corps during the 1988 Bush-Dukakis campaign, the reporters had become theater
critics, dissecting the stagecraft of the campaign rather than its substance.

In the second place, if performance art turns the Presidency into a movie, it
also turns Americans into an audience. "You like the audience," Mr. Reagan once
mused after his Presidency. "You want to please the audience." But audiences,
unlike citizens, have neither responsibilities nor obligations. There are no
minority rights either. The majority rules, and if you don't enjoy the movie you
can just skedaddle. Anyone who has the temerity to stand up during the show and
criticize it for not being relevant is likely to seem irrelevant himself. This
movie isn't about relevancy. This movie is about escape.

Were President Reagan the author of this phenomenon, one might pass it off as a
weird blip on the political screen. But, again, Mr. Reagan is the symptom, not
the cause. From now on every President will be drafting the script of his
Presidency. For President Bush it is the story of a self-effacing American
Everyman, half Yankee, half Texan, whose common demeanor belies a steely
toughness.

War: The Mini-Series
Casting for the Gulf Was Impeccable

Just as every movie blockbuster comes with its own set pieces, the movie within
the movie, so the Bush Administration devised its set piece: a staggeringly
successful mini-series called the gulf war, which demonstrated on an
unprecedented scale how events might be given the narrative shape and heady rush
of a good action picture.

It is odd, unseemly even, to describe a war as "telegenic," but that is
precisely what the gulf war was. Each network introduced its war coverage with
music, a logo and a title -- "Crisis in the Gulf" on ABC; "Showdown in the Gulf"
on CBS before the hostilities and "War in the Gulf" after the hostilities had
begun; "America at War" on NBC. For them it was a new series, and even the
correspondents, notably CNN's Peter Arnett and Wolf Blitzer and NBC's "Scud
stud" Arthur Kent, gained a star's celebrity.

Certainly the gulf war was a lot more telegenic than Vietnam. Vietnam was a
long, logy hallucination of a movie -- the good guys indistinguishable from the
bad, the plot dribbling away to entropy. The Pentagon had learned that if it
were to control the media front it couldn't let that happen again. The next war
was going to be short, sharp, its narrative lineaments clean, happily unconfused
as to heroes and villains. The next war was going to be an entertainment.

The casting was impeccable. Articulate, brilliant, rugged, sensitive, heroic H.
Norman Schwarzkopf was a figure of Herculean proportions, especially when placed
beside the Vietnam commanders William Westmoreland and Creighton Abrams. On the
other hand, Saddam Hussein resembled the evil mastermind from a Saturday
afternoon serial. As for actual combat, the action we saw, primarily bombs
hitting targets, was antiseptic and precise.

Formulated like a World War II movie, the gulf war even ended like a World War
II movie, with the troops marching triumphantly down Broadway or Main Street,
bathed in the gratitude of their fellow Americans while the final credits
rolled. Nor did the movie analogy end with the parades. The gulf war, like "Star
Wars," had its ancillary markets: trading cards, T-shirts, video cassettes of
the action.

Nevertheless, there is one distinction between this "movie" and the conventional
movies that helped keep the home fires burning during World War II, other than
the obvious one that those played in theaters and this one played in the medium
of life. Those movies had a purpose besides entertainment. They were designed to
mobilize support and forge a consensus for the real war being fought overseas.
But when the war itself is a movie, when its real-life objectives are murky and
mercurial, the war "movie" mobilizes support for . . . what?

For itself, one supposes, which is why the real point of this war may not have
been to liberate Kuwait, insure the flow of oil or eliminate Mr. Hussein. It may
have been to restore our confidence, to make us feel good -- which is, of
course, traditionally not the function of warfare but of the movies or TV.
"General Sherman had it all wrong," editorialized The Nation earlier this year.
"War ain't hell -- it's entertainment."

When Life Upstages Art
Elizabeth Taylor's Celebrity Theory

When life itself is an entertainment medium it also forces adjustments from the
stars of films, TV, records and the rest of the conventional media. How do you
hold your own in the life movie when the President, businessmen like Donald
Trump, alleged mobsters like John Gotti, the Kennedys, even mass murderers
compete for public attention? When everything is entertainment, what can you
provide that these new entertainers cannot?

The answers come from an unlikely source: Elizabeth Taylor, who may be as close
to a theorist of the life movie as there is. Ms. Taylor's life has long seemed
like real-life soap opera of the most lurid hue. A childhood in Hollywood,
marriage after marriage, the tragic death of her one true love, bouts with
illness, obesity, drug addiction, recovery -- the list goes on.

All these things had kept Ms. Taylor in the public view. More, they had kept her
a first-rank celebrity. In fact, Ms. Taylor's life was so much more entertaining
than anything she could do on screen that she didn't have to work in movies or
TV to hold our interest. She just had to live.

In "The Image," Mr. Boorstin noted that the celebrity "will be destroyed, as he
was made, by publicity," the idea being that publicity is perishable; once the
celebrity passes from public view there are no lasting accomplishments to
survive him. But Elizabeth Taylor understood that one never need pass from that
view; that one could keep unraveling the long skein of one's life; that one
could make of one's own life a movie and that so long as it was entertaining,
one would never be passe. "I am my own industry," she once declared, and she was
absolutely right. (A marketing executive recently described an in-store
promotional movie Ms. Taylor made for her new White Diamonds perfume as "a
theatrical event," complete with tickets and popcorn.) When was the last time
you went to see a real Elizabeth Taylor movie? When was the last time you read
about her?

In the old days of celebrity, we seldom went to see a movie solely because we
were curious about a star we had read about; on the contrary, we were curious
about stars because we had gone to see their movies. Today the life is almost
always a teaser for the work -- when there is any work to tease. No one I know
rushes out to see a Mickey Rourke picture, few were tempted by the recent Farrah
Fawcett-Ryan O'Neal sitcom, and Dolly Parton hardly rivals Madonna's popularity
-- to name some recent cover subjects of Vanity Fair, the chronicle of the
celebrity life movie. But they each have stories to tell and lives to sell.

Demi Moore, the actress-wife of Bruce Willis, didn't even have a picture in
release at the time of her controversial Vanity Fair cover, but the magazine
aptly described her yet-unborn child as "her next project." Julia Roberts did
have a movie in release when she suddenly aborted her impending marriage to the
actor Kiefer Sutherland. The picture, "Dying Young," did disappointing business.
But as Caryn James pointed out in these pages, Ms. Roberts's life movie was
booming. The tabloids and People got everyone gossiping about the young woman's
romances just as they once did about Ms. Taylor's.

In effect, the life now is always usurping the work just as one suspects that
for the celebrities themselves the life movie is always usurping whatever "real"
life there is. "It's not easy being Cary Grant," the actor was once alleged to
have said, meaning, presumably, that it wasn't easy for an ordinary mortal to
live up to his screen image. Grant was assuming, of course, that there was a
difference between the man and the image. It is much easier being, say, Cher
because that assumption doesn't hold. When life is a movie, image and life
conflate. The stars aren't projecting anymore. They seem to be living for us,
opening their lives to public inspection, letting us in on their secrets,
entertaining us.

But "entertainment" may be too limiting a word for these life movies. As
mindlessly voyeuristic as all this may sound, the stars are also providing a
kind of art as well as entertainment. Semioticians who study language and signs
have long held that culture itself could be "read" as a vast text. Similarly,
lives can have themes as well as plots, and these themes can be a major part of
their appeal: the content that informs the story.

One of the appeals of Elizabeth Taylor's life is that it forcefully conveys the
theme of survival. No matter what happens to Liz, she always triumphs. One of
the appeals of Cher's life is that it conveys the idea of self-renewal: from a
motley-dressed rock-and-roll star to a sex object to a serious actress.
Sylvester Stallone's life has had the thematic amplitude of a Greek myth. He is
the shepherd (actually deli waiter) who becomes the gods' (actually Hollywood's)
favorite and then, succumbing to his overweening pride and to Circe (actually
Brigitte Nielsen), must be punished for his hubris. Now, according to last
year's Vanity Fair profile, "Sly's Cry From the Heart," he is chastened and
newly sensitive.

No doubt stars could keep recycling the formulas if there weren't someone to
push the edge of the celebrity envelope. Madonna's life is as soap operatic as
the best of them, and it is ripe with thematic possibilities: sexual role
reversal, hedonism with impunity, the wages of celebrity, to name a few. But
Madonna has added a brilliant Pirandellian wrinkle to the old formula. She has
made her life work about her life movie.

In the documentary "Truth or Dare," Madonna admits that she is not the best
singer, dancer or actress and adds disingenuously, "Who do I think I am, trying
to pull this off?" But Madonna knows exactly who she is. She is a conceptual
performance artist whose truest art is the art of manipulation. That alone might
not make her any different from Cher, Mr. Stallone, Ms. Taylor or the rest, save
this: Madonna gleefully reveals her manipulation to us. She luxuriates in it.
Like the magicians Penn and Teller, who are constantly debunking their magic,
she invites us to see the mechanisms behind the tricks, until all we see are the
mechanisms. It is the shamelessness of it that makes her so appealing to her
fans.

"She doesn't want to live off-camera, much less talk," her then-boyfriend, the
actor Warren Beatty, complains in "Truth or Dare." Mr. Beatty himself has always
pretended to be secretive. He lurks at the edges of the frame here as he has
lurked at the edges of the press for decades. Yet lurk he does. Not for nothing
do we know not only Mr. Beatty's romantic entanglements, but even his
love-making techniques. It is part of his life movie as legendary Lothario. What
he cannot see is that Madonna is Mr. Beatty without the hypocrisy.

In fairness, though, not even Madonna always gets it. In "Truth or Dare," Kevin
Costner saunters backstage to pay his respects after a concert. Flashing that
big lopsided Costner grin, he tells her the concert was "neat," then apologizes
for having to get back home to the kids. No sooner has Mr. Costner left than
Madonna is sneering incredulously, "Neat?" and sticking her finger down her
throat to gag. Madonna didn't seem to realize that she had momentarily become a
guest star in Mr. Costner's life movie, believing instead that he was a guest
star in hers. "Neat" was deliberate and probably ironic. It is the sort of thing
one expects Mr. Costner to say. And the excuse about getting back to the
children is as central to the Costner "movie" as sex is to the Beatty "movie."

Life couldn't be a movie if it were limited to the famous and powerful.
Americans have always emulated their stars in fashion, behavior, attitude. Now,
consciously or not, they are emulating the stars' theatricalization. Recently I
heard about a party where the hosts' 8-year-old daughter roamed about with a
video camera. As the party was breaking up, the girl called the guests to
attention, popped a cassette in the deck and showed them the edited video
version of their party, complete with titles, effects and soundtrack.

Ordinary People
Cultural Footprints Exit Into the Video

And a recent article in The Times reported what must surely be the frontier of
this domestic theatricalization: a young man asked his divorced parents to step
in front of the camcorder and re-enact happier times so that their granddaughter
could see how it was before the breakup.

These are the new entertainments and the new arts, spun in life from life. It is
even conceivable that these, more than our novels, films and paintings, may be
the cultural footprints we leave behind. Someday, perhaps, future generations
will be retelling the sagas of Elizabeth Taylor, the Kennedys, Nancy Reagan,
Donald Trump and Sylvester Stallone, or watching the videos of that divorced
couple playing themselves in better days. Someday they may be parsing the
meanings of these narratives as we interpret Greek myths.

Meanwhile, we edge ever closer to Philip Roth's dark, prophetic vision -- ever
closer to the time when entertainment will be the only purpose of life and
everything else will be dispersed to the margins and forgotten.


LOAD-DATE: October 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:That's Entertainment: The gulf war even ended like a World War
II movie, with troops parading down Broadway (Angel Franco/The New York Times);
Marketing as Theater: Elizabeth Taylor sells scent, and herself. (Parfums
International) (pg. 32); The Man, the Myth: Someday, perhaps, future generations
will be retelling the saga of Donald Trump (Angel Franco/The New York Times)
(pg. 33)

Drawing (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge's Plan to Move Refugees Back Into Cambodia Creates Panic

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: SITE 8, Thailand, Oct. 19


The letters from the Cambodian refugees, written in a panicked scrawl and pushed
into the hands of foreign relief workers along the Thai-Cambodian border, say
the old, terrible fear has returned.

"The ghost of 1975 is coming back," one frantic letter said, referring to the
year that the Khmer Rouge overran Cambodia and began a nearly four-year reign of
terror that left more than a million Cambodians dead in a total population of
seven million and ended with an invasion by Vietnam.

"Please help me!" the writer said.  "I cannot stay. I don't know how I can
escape."

Another note, written in Khmer, the Cambodian language, on a small, mud-stained
paper wrapper, pleads: "Save my children from another Cambodian nightmare. The
Khmer Rouge is capable of anything."

Scores of such letters -- some in Khmer, others in English, French or Thai --
have been quietly passed to foreign relief workers in the three weeks since the
Khmer Rouge made known its plans to move thousands of Cambodian refugees back
across the border into malarial, mine-strewn stretches of the Cambodian jungle.

An Eye to Elections

Diplomats, relief workers and the refugees themselves -- in their letters and in
interviews near the central border camp in Thailand -- say the Khmer Rouge is
determined to quickly repopulate areas of Cambodia under its control, whatever
the dangers posed by disease or mines, and then to use intimidation to control
voting in elections called for under terms of a United Nations peace plan for
Cambodia.

The United Nations peace treaty, intended to put an end to Cambodia's long civil
war, is scheduled to be signed in Paris on Wednesday.

The Khmer Rouge appears willing to hold off on its repatriation plan long enough
to see the treaty signed -- but, it is suspected, not much longer.

Of the more than 350,000 Cambodian refugees now living in Thailand as a result
of the Cambodian civil war, 70,000 are in border camps administered by the Khmer
Rouge with the assistance of the United Nations.

Elected Leaders Detained

Late in September, the Khmer Rouge lured 16 elected civilian leaders of its
largest camp in Thailand, known as Site 8, into Cambodia, detained them, and
announced plans to move the rest of the camp's 44,000 residents back to Cambodia
within days.

The civilian leaders, who are still being held in Cambodia, were replaced with
Khmer Rouge military officers, a move that created panic among refugees. "People
are shaking with fear," one refugee wrote a few days later.

Among foreign relief workers, it is believed that the camp's civilian leaders
were seized because of their reluctance to violate the United Nations accord by
encouraging other Cambodians to cross the border without international
supervision, and before border areas could be swept for mines.

The leaders of the Khmer Rouge, still insisting that the well-documented mass
killing of the 1970's never took place, are preparing for their return to
Cambodia -- this time with international approval, as part of a coalition
government to be installed this year in Phnom Penh, the capital, under the terms
of the United Nations treaty.

12-Member Council Planned

Under the treaty, the 12-member Supreme National Council -- formed from the
Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government, the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge and the
two other Cambodian guerrilla groups in an uneasy alliance with the Khmer Rouge
-- will assume the powers of government. But it will also surrender enormous
power to a United Nations transitional authority backed by thousands of
peacekeeping troops that is to oversee disarmament, the repatriation of refugees
and free elections within 18 to 21 months.

Even as its officials vow to adhere to the dictates of the accord, the Khmer
Rouge continues to espouse an ideology that blends a radical strain of Marxism
with fanatical disdain for the educated classes of people and also for any
foreign influence. Its leader, Pol Pot, is believed to be in hiding in Thailand.

"It's not safe for the refugees to go back yet, and it won't be safe for
months," said a senior foreign relief worker at Site 8. "The Khmer Rouge don't
care about that. They are willing to have many of the refugees blown to bits by
mines or killed by malaria or die without food."

After an international outcry over the plan to move the refugees across the
border, Khmer Rouge leaders said on Friday that they would hold off on
repatriating the residents of Site 8 until the United Nations has declared it
safe for them to return, as required by the peace settlement.

But foreign relief workers -- and some refugees, in their letters and in brief
interviews on the perimeter of Site 8 -- say they do not believe the Khmer
Rouge, and that the refugees could be forced back into Cambodia at any time.

"I don't believe their plans have changed," said Susan Walker, regional director
of Handicap International, a European-based charity group that has huelped
thousands of Cambodians in the camps who lost arms and legs to mines in the
civil war. "They may delay the departures until after the Paris accords are
signed, when international attention turns elsewhere. The people in the camps
have reason to be frightened."

"

Fear of Being Forced Back

In a letter shown by a foreign relief worker, one Cambodian at Site 8 said he
was convinced that "we will be forced back over the border where people now lack
food and are threatened by malaria and land mines."

Foreign refugee workers say the Khmer Rouge has created a climate of fear in the
camp. They say many Cambodians have refused to be seen in their presence in
recent weeks, fearing that they would come under suspicion by the Khmer Rouge.

"Please don't send any foreigners to see me," a refugee pleaded in a letter
slipped to a relief worker.

An American reporter visiting the camp was denied permission by the Thai
authorities to interview refugees or the Khmer Rouge administrators. Yet even
when approached on the red-dirt roads that surround the camp, the refugees
expressed fear of talking with any foreigner.

"It is very dangerous," said a former Cambodian soldier who lives in the camp
and who lost a leg to a mine several years ago. In a whisper, he added: "But
please know that we do not want to go back to Cambodia now. Too many mines. No
food."

Foreign Reading Condemned

Adding to the worries of the refugees and the camp workers at Site 8 is what
they describe as the return among Khmer Rouge officials of the xenophobia that
characterized Pol Pot's leadershipfrom April 1975 through late 1978.

In an incident this month described in one of the refugee letters, an armed
Khmer Rouge soldier came across a group of camp residents reading from foreign
books.

The soldier warned them to stop reading foreign books.

"It is not in the interest of our people and nation, because you don't know that
these ideologies are being sucked into your heart and you may forget your loving
people and country," the soldier was quoted as saying.

There are also reports in the camp that the 16 detained civilian leaders were
ordered to write their life histories, a technique used by the Khmer Rouge in
the past to identify its enemies, real or imagined, and then to imprison or
execute them.



LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Three weeks ago, the Khmer Rouge made known its plans to move
thousands of Cambodian refugees back across the Thai border into malarial,
mine-strewn stretches of the Cambodian jungle. At the refugee camp known as Site
8, Cambodian children played in a mud pond recently. (Kraipit Phanvut for The
New York Times)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Site 8, across the border with Thailand

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 21, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Reading Mario's Mind

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


When I was in Tokyo last month, they asked me what the possibility was that I
would run for President. I told them that question was too easy.

If they had asked me, "Do you think there is a possibility that while the
Governor of New York is in Japan there will be an earthquake and a typhoon in
two days?" I would have said, "Not likely." But of course -- there was an
earthquake and a typhoon in those two days. So the unlikely sometimes happens.

But I can't get away with this cuteness routine forever. I've been saying I have
no plans to run, and no plans to make plans, but now it's a year to Election Day
and it's time to stop playing Hamlet and start playing for keeps.

Of course I'm running, and not just for the exercise; this thing gets more
winnable every day.

The media are so naive. They phrase their questions in convoluted ways to be
first to drag an announcement out of me, and they miss the opening of the
campaign that's been going on for months in California.

That's where the nomination (and the election) will be won. It's the biggest
state, plenty of ethnics and minorities, where I can win big. I want the
California primary to be moved up early in the spring, so I can put the
nomination on ice quickly and focus on Bush.

Of course, the President knows that, and wants me to lose a few Southern
primaries, which is why his California Republicans are trying to keep their
primary in June. That's the first skirmish of the campaign of '92, and the
pundits, typically, are waiting around for a press release.

I like the Democrats now in the field running to be my running mate. Rockefeller
or Gore might have been trouble, but these new guys are perfect for clearing out
the political underbrush.

Harkin of Iowa, the old-line liberal, doesn't have a chance, but he has the best
one-liner so far. "George Bush was born on third base and thinks he hit a
triple." Great line, not only about Bush's rich childhood, but about taking
credit for seven Presidents' battle against Communism. I'll give Harkin full
credit, but I'm the one who played semi-pro baseball and that gag belongs in my
stump speech.

Clinton of Arkansas is the best organized, and he has his centrist message
together. Him I like, and I need a Southern WASP, but he's another Governor, and
the damn gossipmongers will be all over him. Be a good campaign chairman, nice
contrast to Sununu or Mosbacher.

My man is Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska. Lost part of his leg winning the Medal
of Honor -- untouchable. Can you just see my Kerrey up against Bush's Quayle?
Let Bush try to wrap himself in the flag again; "my running mate Senator Kerrey,
who doesn't have to remind you that he won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam . . ."

Now about strategy. We'll jujitsu Bush on his claim to foreign policy
experience: America doesn't need a President of the World, we need a President
of the United States. And his foreign policy has been overrated: he totally
misread the breakup of the Soviet Union, and after all the fuss about defeating
Saddam Hussein, the dictator is getting more dangerous because George Bush
choked up at the end.

I'll hit him with the "Dirty Dozen." Bush's veto of the unemployment insurance
bill was one; his veto of the bipartisan civil rights bill will be two. The
Democratic leadership should pass 10 more bills the people need and want --
health, housing, education -- let the no-man in the White House do his "dirty
dozen vetoes." I'll pledge to sign those 12 bills on Inaugural Afternoon -- and
I'll keep my promise, unlike that phony no-tax promise that he won on and broke.

Let him try his Dukakis stuff with me, sailing around New York harbor and
whatnot -- he'll never know what hit him. George Bush stole $6 billion from the
states this year, on top of being the slowest-growth President since Hoover. Are
you better off than you were four years ago with "Mr. Veto" in the White House,
paralyzed in the face of recession?

You think I'd sit tight like those bozos when Bush's hatchet men smeared Anita
Hill? Not a chance. Americans like a scrapper, an underdog in the polls who will
stand up against the smug no-men, and just watch those polls turn around when I
make my prime-time speech at the convention in New York, and when I get to him
in those televised debates.

I can hardly wait. Then what am I waiting for?


LOAD-DATE: October 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1192 words



International A3-15

An American hostage was set free in Beirut by his pro-Iranian kidnappers, hours
after Israel and its Lebanese allies freed 15 Arab prisoners, the U.N. reported.
Jesse Turner, a 44-year-old professor, had spent nearly five years in captivity.
Page A1 The Palestinians going to peace talks were prepared to declare openly
that they are Palestine Liberation Organization members, the delegation's chief
said, brushing aside Israel's warning that it will not negotiate with anyone
tied to the P.L.O. A14 Iraq's child mortality rate has grown as a result of the
Persian Gulf war, civil strife and international sanctions, a new study by
Western experts in Iraq concludes. Such an elevated mortality rate could mean
tens of thousands of additional deaths. A6

Christians and Muslims in Cairo are engaged in a festering dispute in one slum.
The police now guard the squalid streets of Imbaba after Coptic Christian
churches were set afire, and a Muslim was shot by a Christian butcher. A12 U.N.
says Iraq admits to research on atomic bombs A7

Vietnam will let refugees be returned against their will from Hong Kong under an
agreement forged by the British Government involving 222 boat people. British
officials hope to persuade Vietnam to take back tens of thousands of the
refugees. A8

News analysis: The coup in Haiti is being explained -- even by supporters of the
ousted President, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide -- by pointing to the insular
and menacing ruling style Father Aristide implemented in his first eight months
of rule. A10

India ferries aid to quake victims A9

Africans pressing bid for U.N. post A11

Gorbachev warns republics on armies A3

Soviet Union may get foreign debt deferral A3

Keeping Soviet enterprise afloat D1

Autonomy issue turns Slovak agains Slovak A15

National A16-20, B6

A law limiting abortion was upheld by a Federal appellate court. The endorsement
of the restrictions in Pennsylvania could set up a direct test of the Roe v.
Wade decision in the Supreme Court. A1

American discontent has grown in recent months, a New York Times/CBS News Poll
found. Respondents said they were concerned about the state of the nation in
general and the economy in particular. A19

Republicans fret over David Duke, saying that his claiming to be a leader of
their movement is deeply embarrassing. Democrats are reaching for the moral high
ground, saying that Mr. Duke's success in Louisiana is the outgrowth of
Republican efforts to build on racial divisions. A1

Edmund G. Brown Jr. will run for President in 1992, his third campaign for the
Presidency. Mr. Brown, a Democrat, staked out an anti-establishment theme,
criticizing both major parties for what he said was the corruption of
incumbency. A18

News analysis: Talk about tax breaks is just talk A19

The destruction in Oakland by a fire was so total in some areas that no
residents bothered to hike to see what was left. It was as if they already knew
the horrible answer to their question: There are no homes left, not a one, and
it is nearly impossible to imagine that there ever were. A1

Oakland fire rates as California's worst A16

Private psychiatric hospitals, part of a fast-growing industry, are being
investigated by health authorities who say there are many complaints about the
treatment at the facilities. There is a fierce argument about the hospitals'
care, rising costs and attempts to balance the needs of patients with the search
for profits.  A1
 Historically black colleges lobbied successfully for President Bush to reverse
a position his Administration had taken in a major desegregation case now before
the Supreme Court. Mr. Bush ordered the Solicitor General to support increased
state aid to black public colleges. B6

A ruling protecting judges from suits for virtually anything they say or do from
the bench was handed down by the Supreme Court. The Court ruled that a
California judge who is accused of ordering a public defender to be dragged from
a nearby courtroom cannot be sued for damages. B6

A suit to block Houston's elections for City Council was filed by the Justice
Department, which said the districts discriminated against Hispanic voters and
that the city violated the Voting Rights Act by going ahead with the election
despite objections by the Attorney General. A16

Appeals court strikes down major parts of asbestos ban A20

Regional B1-5

Mario Cuomo's Presidential plans are becoming increasingly clear, as he
indicates that he really is considering entering the 1992 race and that his
primary obstacle is the political burden of serving as Governor during a
campaign. A1

New York City's hospitals chief resigned amid harsh criticism of his management
of the nation's largest hospital system and investigations into his personal
finances. Dr. J. Emilio Carillo's resignation was announced by Mayor Dinkins. A1

Filled with enthusiasm, but often short of cash B5

Budget cuts ravage hospital care, report says B5

A plan for commuter railroads offered by transit officials would eliminate the
proposed fare increases for the Long Island Rail Road and the Metro-North
Commuter Railroad. The plan does not address New York City subway and bus fares,
which may have to rise. B1

Ferry commuters from New Jersey are a small but growing part of the city's 3
million commuters.  B1

A tension-ridden Queens firehouse is experiencing a run of transfers, four days
after a female firefighter charged harassment by male colleagues. Five men have
been granted transfers and officials say more transfers will be coming.  B1

The University of Bridgeport voted to reject a takeover by a group founded and
largely financed by the Unification Church and its leader, the Rev. Sun Myung
Moon. B1

More women complain to New York rights unit B4

Nassau unions dismiss moves for pay freezes B2

School district in chaos over asbestos removal B2

Budget cuts ravage hospital care, report says B5

Killing linked to bear gallbladders B3

Business Digest D1

 Science Times

Pentagon's technology wizards consider bigger civilian role C1

Biologists discover new immune "switch" C1

Sexual harassment is about power, not sex C1

Personal Computers C7

Arts/Entertainment

Men Dancers celebrate a founding father C13

The battle for Kyoto's skyline and soul C13

Music: Chamber group opens season C13

 Fashion Page B7

 Obituaries B8

J. Graham Parsons, career diplomat

 Sports B9-15

Baseball: Can little guys rescue Braves? B9

Football: Giants special teams hit with injuries B9

Basketball: Answers soon for Knicks B15

Horse Racing: Belmont ends on declining note B15

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A22

The Thomas connections

What defense defends: waste

Municipal saving by sharing

A third special election?

 Letters A22

A. M. Rosenthal: The double standard A23

Russell Baker: Return with us now . . .  A23

Barry Nalebuff: The Democrats' best ticket A23

Flora Lewis: End nuclear tests? Yes. Now.  A23

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Says Hong Kong Can Return 222 Refugees by Force

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 21


The British Government announced today that it had persuaded Vietnam to let the
authorities in Hong Kong fly 222 boat people back to Vietnam against their will
next month, and that it would keep trying to persuade Hanoi to take back tens of
thousands more.

Britain had hoped last week to announce an agreement in principle with Vietnam
accepting involuntary repatriation. This would permit the authorities in Hong
Kong to begin deporting most of the 64,000 Vietnamese who are being held in 12
camps after arriving by boat and asking for asylum. Few have any prospect of
being admitted to the British crown colony as refugees from political
persecution.

Officials here in London offered no explanation for the failure so far to reach
this broader agreement.

"Discussion on the detailed arrangements for repatriating other non-refugees in
Hong Kong continues," the Foreign Office said today. "The Vietnamese Government
has confirmed that no illegal immigrant who returns to Vietnam will face
persecution and that it will continue to facilitate the monitoring of returnees
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and others to insure that
these guarantees are fully respected."

'Just the First Step'

"This was just the first step," a British spokesman said, adding that the Hong
Kong Government would probably wait until November to give the Vietnamese a
chance to make arrangements for receiving the 222 to be returned.

The desire of London to send them back has put it at odds with Washington, which
opposes involuntarily repatriations to Vietnam for any reason. The British argue
that most of the boat people these days are fleeing economic conditions, not
political repression. "Frankly, I find the American opposition to be
incomprehensible," Alistair Asprey, the Hong Kong Government official in charge
of security, said at a news conference there today.

Some British officials also point to recent decades of Vietnam's military
history in making their arguments.

American forces withdrew from South Vietnam in 1973 after eight years of combat
intended to prevent a military takeover by the Communist North. Two years later,
the North Vietnamese Army swept down through the central highlands and then
captured Saigon, ending three decades of civil warfare and uniting Vietnam under
a Communist Government in Hanoi.

Sir Peter Blaker, a senior member of Parliament from the governing Conservative
Party, recently described the American opposition to a forced return of
Vietnamese from Hong Kong as an irrational reaction to that military defeat.

Talks With Washington

But Britain's Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, said this month that officials
were discussing the situation with Washington and hoping to persuade the Bush
Administration to acquiesce in an involuntary repatriation if they went ahead
with it.

Today's agreement, the Foreign Office said, covers only Vietnamese who had come
to Hong Kong once before, had been returned, and had then re-entered Hong Kong
illegally a second time. Of a total of 322 people in this category, 92 have
volunteered to return and 8 are awaiting screening, leaving 222 subject to
return against their will, the Foreign Office said.

Of 64,000 Vietnamese asylum seekers now in Hong Kong, only 5,000 have been able
to convince authorities in the overcrowded colony that they fled their homeland
for political rather than economic reasons and thus qualify for refugee status.
Of the rest, 41,500 are awaiting screening and 17,500 have been classified as
non-refugees. The British want the Vietnamese to agree to accept them all back
even if they do not want to go.

Reports from Hong Kong over the weekend said that passions were running high in
the camps and that some refugees had threatened to commit suicide rather than go
back to Vietnam against their will.

Britain deported 51 boat people from Hong Kong to Hanoi in December 1989,
provoking protests from the United States and violence in the camps in Hong
Kong. The British authorities then suspended involuntary repatriations, and
began negotiating with the Vietnamese on procedures to make the process less
painful.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 94 words



Shift on Black College Aid

Reversing the Administration's position on a major desegregation case, the
President ordered the Solicitor General to support increased aid to black public
colleges. Page B6.

Houston Election Challenged

The Justice Department has gone to court to block Houston City Council elections
on Nov. 5, saying the districts are discriminatory. Page A16.

222 Boat People to Go Home

Britain said it had persuaded Vietnam to let the authorities in Hong Kong fly
222 boat people back to Vietnam against their will. Page A8.


LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Time Runs Backward To Point Up a Moral

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 828 words



Time's Arrow
Or, The Nature of the Offense
By Martin Amis
168 pages. Harmony Books. $18.

The idea behind Martin Amis's latest novel, "Time's Arrow," is this: the life
story of a former Nazi doctor named Tod T. Friendly is told in a reverse
chronology, beginning with his incognito existence in an American suburb in the
present and moving back to the days when he was a doctor in the medical section
of Auschwitz. The story is narrated by Tod's "soul," a curiously naive
consciousness that seems powerless to affect Tod's behavior or understand the
implications of his actions.

This gimmick of an inverted time scheme has been used before, of course: Harold
Pinter used it to chronicle a love triangle in "Betrayal," and Stephen Sondheim
and George Furth (working from an old George S. Kaufman and Moss Hart play) used
it to chronicle the show business careers of three longtime friends in "Merrily
We Roll Along." But whereas these stories moved from the disillusionment of time
present back to the idealism and hopefulness of time past, Mr. Amis's story
moves from phony innocence to a past of unrelieved horror. The emotional effect
of the story is thus subverted: instead of seeing how youthful expectations were
betrayed, we simply see how one man's sins were whitewashed and concealed.

In fact, much of the narrative of "Time's Arrow" feels incongruously comic in
tone. Like a movie run backward, Tod Friendly's life is presented in fast
rewind, giving Mr. Amis lots of opportunities to indulge in his penchant for
sexual and scatological humor. Tod finds love letters in the fireplace or trash,
fights with women before going to bed with them and eats and defecates in
reverse. He makes love backward and eats and drinks backward, too.

Every day that passes leaves Tod feeling younger and healthier -- his body grows
firmer and stronger, progressively shedding infirmities and ills. And as a
doctor, his work, too, defies logic and biology: he implants tumors and aborted
fetuses, breaks casts and limbs, heals cuts with a knife and always makes sure
he sends patients away in worse shape than when they arrived.

For that matter, the whole world, seen from the narrator's skewed perspective,
seems wacky and out of kilter. Garbage men arrive every morning to dispense the
trash, and every night pimps give their call girls plenty of cash. Gas gets
cheaper and cheaper, while cars become slower and less efficient. "People all
have jobs now, at the steel mill and the auto plant," the narrator observes.
"They wash the wind. Just as they clean up all the trash and litter, they also
clean up the earth and the sky, transmogrifying cars, turning tools, parts,
weapons, bolts into carbon and iron. They've really got to grips with their
environmental problems, facing them squarely, with common purpose."

Time passes. The Vietnam War gives way to the Korean War and the Korean War to
World War II. Tod Friendly changes his name to John Young, and later to Hamilton
de Souza and Odilo Unverdorben. He leaves America for Portugal, and Portugal for
Germany, where he becomes a member of the Nazi command at Auschwitz. The Nazi
dream, the narrator tells us, is: "To dream a race. To make a people from the
weather. From thunder and from lightning. With gas, with electricity," with
excrement and fire.

In the crematories, smoke is turned into corpses, and the corpses are given
life. Gold is placed in the mouths of these bodies, and hair is put on their
heads. Families are assembled -- the narrator marvels at the perfect matchmaking
skills of the Nazis; and the Jews are "channeled back into society." The ghettos
disappear, and people are ferried back to their village homes.

What's more, the narrator reports, all the medical experiments at Auschwitz are
a success: "A shockingly inflamed eyeball at once rectified by a single
injection. Innumerable ovaries and testes seamlessly grafted into place. Women
went out of that lab looking 20 years younger." Suddenly, for the first time in
the narrator's existence, the world "makes sense."

With such shocking passages, Mr. Amis creates a devastatingly specific portrait
of the Nazis' warped mentality: only in a completely upside-down, backward
world, he suggests, are their actions comprehensible.

Unfortunately, the bulk of the novel seems like an extended setup for this
emotional payoff -- pages and pages of sophomoric humor laid as groundwork for
one huge philosophical point. As a result, the reader must wade through the
first three-quarters of the book, which reads like a virtuosic but mannered
performance by a writer eager to exploit the comic possibilities of a structual
gimmick, before getting to the heart of the matter.

Perhaps this is exactly what Mr. Amis intended, but it's a risky narrative
strategy more suited for the short story form than a novel. As it is, the
top-heavy jokey part of the book overshadows its somber conclusion, blunting its
larger moral ambitions.

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin Amis (Cheryl A. Koralik)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 22, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Says Hong Kong Can Return 222 Refugees by Force;
Broader Accord Predicted

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Oct. 21


Officials of this British colony said today that the agreement between London
and Hanoi to allow the involuntary return of 222 Vietnamese was the first step
of what they expect will be a broader accord that will send tens of thousands of
Vietnamese back to their homeland.

However, the flow of people still coming in -- nearly 500 a day this month --
and 20,000 so far in 1991 -- means that the swelling of Hong Kong's population
will not be stemmed, let alone reversed, until such a broad accord is reached
and carried out. Compared with this year's steady flow, in all of 1990 only
5,000 Vietnamese sought new lives here.

There was "a blip of Vietnamese after the talks," an informant said, because
Vietnamese feared that their emigration chances would be cut off by an agreement
between London and Hanoi.

Those covered by the accord today are known as "double-backers," Vietnamese who
went to Hong Kong, then volunteered to accept United Nations aid payments and
return home, only to come back to the colony again. They are the group of
Vietnamese who evoke the least sympathy here.

Officials said they would be returned on chartered flights sometime in November
"under normal international arrangements" for illegal immigrants, which means
that armed guards will accompany them.

Clinton Leeks, Hong Kong's refugee coordinator, said that an agreement covering
all boat people deemed not to be refugees "is still being discussed."

"There are contacts between the British and the Vietnamese almost daily now,"
Mr. Leeks said at a news conference with Mr. Asprey, Hong Kong's security chief.
They called this latest development a "first step" and said they hoped that a
full repatriation agreement would be reached soon.

British and Hong Kong officials say the delay in concluding that broad agreement
results from Vietnam's demand for more time to arrange for the reintegration of
those going back.

A senior official of Hong Kong's Government said that with the announcement
today, security had been stepped up in the camps, where some Vietnamese have
been demonstrating almost daily, vowing to fight any attempt to return them to
their homeland.

The "double-backers," however, are all housed together in a small camp, Nei Kwu
Chau, on a remote outer island more than an hour by boat from Hong Kong. The
camp is also some distance from the larger detention centers, where opposition
to repatriation is outspoken and organized.

In Nei Kwu Chau, the Vietnamese have been urged to return voluntarily, and that
will be intensified now, authorities said, so that the actual number to be
forcibly repatriated may wind up being smaller than the 222 agreed to today.

With commercial airlines here reluctant to lease planes for the controversial
returns, Hong Kong officials confirm that they are discussing chartering
transport planes from an Indonesian company.

                             --------------------



U.S. Confirms Its Stand

WASHINGTON, Oct. 21 (Special to The New York Times) -- The State Department
today repeated its position opposing the forcible repatriation of Vietnamese
boat people, but it did not specifically protest Britain's plan to send back 222
Vietnamese emigres now in Hong Kong.

A spokeswoman said the United States understood Britain's decision to send back
those boat people who had initially fled to Hong Kong, then agreed to return to
Vietnam and finally gone back to Hong Kong.

But State Department officials said they hoped that force would not be used, and
they hinted that the Bush Administration would not acquiesce in the involuntary
return of other Vietnamese. "We would not expect force to be used," the
spokeswoman said.

President Bush's national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, said in a letter to
Senator Claiborne Pell, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, on Oct.  9
that "we remain opposed to forcible repatriation to Vietnam under current
conditions in Vietnam." The State Department affirmed that position today.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Peter Watrous

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 996 words


Taylor on Aging

There has long been an idea that pop culture is disposable, that once the thrill
has been sucked out of a product, it's best to leave it behind. The idea is
predicated on the notion (being proved incorrect daily) that the age range of
the pop market is roughly 12 to 25. As rock and soul performers age, their
audiences, who are also growing older, keep going to the shows and buying the
records.

James Taylor, who recently released his 14th album, "New Moon Shine" (Columbia),
is performing this week and next at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden. His
run was originally to be three nights, which sold out; three more were added and
are nearly sold out.

"The big question is how long to stay at it," Mr. Taylor said. "Do you feel you
have to put on a hippie costume to go to work? How long can you stretch a career
out and feel like you're alive? I don't know the answer. I'm a fan of John Lee
Hooker, Ray Charles and Tony Bennett, and I'm not saying they should give it up.

"At the beginning of my career," he continued, "sex and death, which basically
motivate people to write songs, forced me to write. But that impulse doesn't
last; it's not the same at 43 as at 18. When you're young, you mean to escape
and create your own path, and instead you arrive. Your life fills up, and where
there were lots of possibilities early on, later you know who you love and who
you don't, who your kids are and where people work. Life takes on a different
quality. But it's not any less noteworthy."

"New Moon Shine" is perhaps Mr. Taylor's most overtly political work, and it
takes him out of his characteristic self-absorption. One song deals with the
legacy of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.; another is about a Vietnam
veteran.

"I'm just as surprised as anybody else about the topics," he said. "I don't
really direct my writing that well. I don't say, 'Here's a good topic,' and
write about it. Usually I write about more emotional stuff, but I think I'm
reacting to a political process that has been eaten by the media and is show
business and marketing. The Reagan-Bush era is characterized by a fever of
denial. But when I hear myself saying things like that, they sound dry and
patrician. To try and hold forth this way is much less interesting than doing it
through a song. Songs do it better. They celebrate the stupidity of what's
happened."

Jazz Meets Rap

Discussions about the connection between jazz and rap have produced fights,
windbaggery and even an occasional intelligent comment. The analogy between the
two is one of the minor themes running through much of the writing and thinking
about less commercial forms of rap; many young groups, especially in England,
are trying to meld hip-hop and jazz. A Tribe Called Quest, a young New York rap
group, has put out its second album, "Low End Theory" (Jive), which has already
sold more than 250,000 copies, according to the record company. A Tribe Called
Quest uses samples from jazz records and has even hired the bassist Ron Carter.

"We hired Ron Carter because now that Mingus is gone, we wanted to have the next
best thing," said Jonathan Davis, known as Q-Tip, one of the group's rappers.
"We wanted that straight bass sound, and Ron Carter is one of the premier
bassists of the century. He was cool; he was with it. When he came in, we told
him to emphasize certain things and it worked out, so we're going to use him
again.

"We also sampled the sound of an acoustic bass from an Art Blakey record, 'Chant
for Bu,' " Mr. Davis said. "We fooled around with it. The reason we're doing it
is because that's what I grew up on, that music, because of my father, who had
records around. We grew up on it, and that's what we know. It's too bad more
people don't use jazz, but groups like Gang Starr, Main Source and Black Sheep
are doing it. I like making the connection because jazz was, like, intimidating
music, and they pitched it underground. The music industry made it underground,
which is the same thing with hip-hop."

Young's 'Arc Weld'

Yesterday Neil Young released a three-CD set called "Arc Weld" (Reprise), which
has a limited pressing of 25,000 copies. The set includes the two-CD "Weld,"
which has been released separately and consists of live material taken from Mr.
Young's last tour, and "Arc," a CD of manipulated electronic feedback that will
be issued on Nov. 12. Mr. Young is one of the few musicians from the 1960's who
have kept critics on his side, and he has done so by feeding his love for the
sound of the electric guitar and all its nasty textures.

"I've been dreaming of doing a feedback project for the last five years," Mr.
Young said. "Feedback is very sensual. It's also a brutal form of music, but
it's also delicate in some ways. The expressive tip of the iceberg has just been
touched. But there's no call for it, other than I love it, which is enough for
me."

"Weld" has its share of songs from Mr. Young's most recent album, "Ragged
Glory," but it also includes older material like "Cortez the Killer" and
"Powderfinger." Although Mr. Young and his band, Crazy Horse, had planned to
perform more new pieces, the Persian Gulf war broke out while they were
recording, and he changed his set list to incorporate songs that touched on war
or violence.

"When we made the record, the war was raging, and the album reflects my
anxieties, and an attempt to exorcise the demons of my own comprehension of the
people who were dying as we were playing," he said. "So it was a serious thing.
You can't be out there entertaining. It was a delicate time to go on the road.
'Powderfinger,' 'Love and Only Love,' 'Cortez the Killer' and 'Blowin' in the
Wind' were songs that related to conflict, how people have dealt with it. I
figure that the guitar playing was a soundtrack for CNN. That's what 'Arc,' the
feedback album, is really about: the brutal energy that comes from hearing the
women screaming and seeing our own coffins."

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Taylor (Camera Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
America's Story in Alphabetical Order

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


The Reader's Companion to American History
Edited by Eric Foner and John A. Garraty
Illustrated. 1,226 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $35.

"The Reader's Companion to American History" arrives at a moment when historical
literacy about the United States is sadly neglected, and there is continuing
debate about the enshrinement of a European-centered version of the past, while
excluding other cultures.

This companionable reference work is cause for celebration because it's
readable, opinionated and even controversial: some traditional historians may
challenge the notion that sexual harassment in the workplace, abortion rights
and homosexuality should have such prominent places in a book that must cover
the entire American cavalcade.

There are two long essays on the feminist movement. One is rooted in the first
women's rights meeting, held in 1848 at Seneca Falls, N.Y., which capitalized on
the experience of women in antislavery organizations. The other begins with the
revival of feminism in the 1960's, including the emergence of the National
Organization for Women and its drive for the equal rights amendment.

Related essays on feminism cover abortion (with a summary of the 1973 Roe v.
Wade decision); women and the work force; the Triangle Shirtwaist fire (in which
146 sweatshop workers, mostly women, died in 1911), and portraits of Elizabeth
Cady Stanton, Susan B. Anthony, Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem.

Unlike the standard dry-as-dust histories, the book addresses venturesome
subjects. The entry on homosexuality, by John D'Emilio, reads:

"One result of the changes wrought by the gay movement was the gradual
recognition that gay men and lesbians had made important contributions to
American society, culture and politics in previous eras. The work of such
literary figures as Walt Whitman, Willa Cather and Langston Hughes was
reinterpreted in the light of their homosexuality." And: "The civil rights
leader Bayard Rustin, the songwriter Cole Porter, the Depression era journalist
Lorena Hickok and many other notable Americans of the past were gay men and
lesbians whose homosexuality, though hidden, deeply influenced their
sensibility, their values and their career."

The profiles and theme articles in the book cover today's concerns and
yesterday's milestones. Many are about people and events the general reader may
want to look up or simply know more about: Ralph Nader and Ralph Ellison;
Jackson Pollock and Stonewall Jackson; the Berlin blockade and Irving Berlin;
Dorothea Dix and the Dixiecrat party; Billy Graham and Martha Graham. Plus the
Presidency, Supreme Court decisions and many of the basic documents of American
history.

The nature of historical writing itself -- a matter of dispute among historians
-- is included in one of the most revealing essays. In history as in other
fields, there's often a radical and a conventional way of interpreting the past.
A signed essay on history and historians by Abraham S. Eisenstadt, a Brooklyn
College professor, makes a distinction between the "patrician historians" and
the "new historians."

Historical writing took a new turn in the 1960's. To the younger historians, the
United States was a land of conflict rather than consensus; they emphasized
pluralism. The Vietnam War and the civil rights movement made historians aware
of the conditions and statuses of different classes of people.

The essay notes, "American historians now wrote about prisons, churches,
hospitals, mental institutions, mobility, kinship systems, social structure,
public places, private places, sexuality, food, the bedroom and the nursery --
indeed every aspect of family life."

Some of the new historians use computers to quantify past and present
statistics, but the essay fails to add that other historians challenge the
conclusions drawn from inhuman raw data. One school of computer-minded
historians, for instance, has compared certain plantation records on cotton
production and concluded that slaves must have been happy with their lot in the
antebellum South. But no historian using the most powerful computer can punch up
and quantify the hidden power of the lash.

What are this generation's historians saying about the major themes running
through American historical writing?

"They have retreated from celebrating America's Providential role among the
nations, its mission as a city on a hill and the singularity and exceptionalism
of its society," the essay says. After watching the recent confirmation
free-for-all for a new Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, the book seems
prescient about Washington's lost exceptionalism.

One reason this new encyclopedia is so readable is that many of its essays are
signed and not hidden behind a wall of editorial anonymity. There are some 400
well-known contributors, among them Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. on Franklin D.
Roosevelt, Paul A. Freund on the Constitution, Robert L. Griswold on divorce,
Alvin M. Josephy Jr. and Dee Brown on Indians, Kenneth T. Jackson on public
transportation, Eric Foner on Thomas Paine, John A. Garraty on British
colonialism, James M. McPherson on the Emancipation Proclamation.

Inevitably, there are surprising omissions, even considering a one-volume
reference book's precious space. Jack Kerouac and Henry A. Kissinger are given
their own entries, but there is none for E. B. White or Adlai E. Stevenson. By
comparison, whose writings and political meaning have greater permanence?

"The Reader's Companion to American History," edited by Mr. Foner and Mr.
Garraty, Columbia University professors and authors, is sponsored by the Society
of American Historians, an organization that encourages literary distinction in
the writing of history and biography. In an introduction, the editors emphasize
that the encyclopedia is designed to be read for enjoyment as well as
enlightenment. Remarkably, it achieves both aims.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Blocks Solution to Vietnam Refugee Crisis

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


To the Editor:

In "Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered" (editorial, Oct. 8), you go to great
pains to point out the obvious fact that no country can let in everyone who
wants in, and that governments are constantly forced to make decisions on
returning illegal immigrants to their homeland. The difficulty in this case lies
in the fact the "homeland" happens to be Vietnam.

On this very distressing issue the United States wields a triple-edged sword:
the United States will not accept "economic migrants," strongly condemns and
opposes any move to return "economic migrants" to Vietnam, and at the same time
obstructs Vietnam's attempts at improving its economy, which is the root cause
of "economic migrants."

Although armed hostilities between the United States and Vietnam ended more than
18 years ago, the United States continues to wage war against Vietnam by
maintaining an economic embargo on Vietnam. It has not been a war to protect our
national security interest: it is a war of retribution. It has not been a war
against the Government of Vietnam but against the people of Vietnam. Governments
do not feel pain; people do. More than half of Vietnam's 67 million people were
not even born when the last United States troops left Vietnam, yet we continue
to punish them.

Vietnam is one of the poorest countries in the world. Over the last five years,
Vietnam has been pursuing a policy of economic reform. However, today Vietnam's
reforms are at risk.

Over the last several years, Vietnam has painstakingly followed the rigid
structural readjustment program prescribed by the International Monetary Fund
with such success that most members of that institution are ready to resume
lending activities to Vietnam. The single voice that prevents this type of
assistance and coerces other countries to follow its lead is the United States.

Six months ago (not "last year," as you stated), the United States presented
Vietnam its plan for normalization. The United States plan conditions
normalization on peace in Cambodia and on progress on the issue of servicemen
missing in action.

There is every indication that the tragic war in Cambodia will formally end with
the signing of a peace agreement in Paris within the next few weeks. Members of
the United States M.I.A. team in Hanoi have been given permission to travel to
any province or village in Vietnam in search of remains and to have access to
Vietnam's military archives. (One can only imagine the Pentagon's response if
the Vietnamese asked to look at our archives with the hopes of finding some
information on their hundreds of thousands of servicemen missing in action.)
What more do the Vietnamese need to do before the United States releases its
stranglehold on their economy?

You support forced repatriation while absurdly stating that the prospect of
normalization ought to be an incentive to Vietnam to treat its returnees
decently. Of the more than 13,000 (not 6,000, as you say) Vietnamese asylum
seekers who have returned since 1989, there is no evidence whatsoever that
Vietnam has not been treating them humanely and with dignity. Indeed,
international organizations that monitor the returnees have not reported any
instances of returnees being treated as anything less than decently.

The most humane course of action open to the United States is clear: lift the
embargo and allow the international financial institutions to assist Vietnam.
Through increased economic opportunities and an end to Vietnam's economic
isolation, the incentive to flee would be greatly diminished. By doing this the
United States becomes part of the solution and ceases to be an obstacle to
resolving this issue.

ROBERT O. MULLER
Washington, Oct. 11, 1991

The writer is executive director of the Indochina Project, a Vietnam Veterans of
America Foundation program.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Blocks Solution to Vietnam Refugee Crisis;
Flawed Procedures

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 393 words


To the Editor:

"Vietnamese Refugees, Reconsidered" (editorial, Oct. 8) draws a distinction
between Vietnamese refugees who have a "well-founded fear of persecution" and
those boat people who are simply "seeking to escape poverty," advocating asylum
for the former and return to Vietnam, even forced, for the latter under the
terms of United Nations arrangements made in Asia in 1989. Yet the flawed
determination procedures of many of the countries in the region render them
incapable of making this important distinction, which derives from international
refugee law.

A report issued this month by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights cites
radical discrepancies in approval rates for first-instance decisions on refugee
claims, ranging from 13 percent in Hong Kong to 43 percent in the Philippines.

Lack of legal counseling and assistance for refugee applicants; inadequate
monitoring of interviews by impartial observers; problems with double
interpretation (from Vietnamese to Cantonese to English and back in Hong Kong);
failure to read back notes of interviews to applicants, and inadequate
statements of reasons for negative decisions are among the flaws that seriously
distort screening procedures in the region, particularly in Hong Kong and
Thailand.

Similar deficiencies led a judge of the Hong Kong High Court earlier this year
to find that an individual Vietnamese boat person had been denied a fair hearing
because of "procedural irregularity" and subjected to a "breach of natural
justice" in the procedure used in the colony.

No single person within the United States Government is currently assigned to
monitor the determination procedures for Vietnamese boat people in Asia. There
must be a formal assessment by United States officials that considers the
findings of nongovernmental organizations, such as Amnesty International, that
have been critical of the procedures used in the region.

Deportation, always a harsh measure, clearly cannot be countenanced until
procedures are fair and capable of recognizing those who are true refugees in
need of legal protection and those leaving for other reasons. The procedures in
the region do not yet meet these basic human-rights standards.

ARTHUR C. HELTON
New York, Oct. 10, 1991

The writer is director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights' Refugee
Project.

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-17

A peace treaty for Cambodia, brokered by the U.S., China and the Soviet Union,
was signed. A cease-fire in the civil war that began in 1978 went into immediate
effect, and several other steps are to be taken by mid-1993. Page A1

News analysis: The Cambodian peace treaty grants the Khmer Rouge a degree of
power and legitimacy that many diplomats and Cambodians find frightening. A1

U.S. and Vietnam may restore ties, Secretary of State Baker said. The U.S. is
prepared to begins talks with Hanoi to normalize relations next month, and their
progress could hinge on Vietnam's willingness to furnish information on American
soldiers missing in action. A17

North Korea adds barriers to A-plant inspections A11

Israel will send a hawkish delegation to the Middle East peace talks, led by
Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. Mr. Shamir bumped his relatively dovish foreign
minister from the delegation and said he would bring an Israeli settler from the
occupied territories with him. A1

Arab diplomats seek unity for peace conference A14

U.N. backs plan to destroy Iraqi arms plants A7

A new spiritual leader has been chosen for the Eastern Orthodox Christian
church. He is Metropolitan Bartholomew of Chalcedon, 51 years old, who will be
known as Patriarch Bartholomew I. A10

Top Serb leaders back proposal to form separate state A17

Violence broke out in Soweto railroad stations. Nine people were killed and 36
were wounded in what authorities believe were revenge attacks by migrant workers
who were angered over the death of a comrade.  A3

Appointment by Mobutu in Zaire enrages a foe A3

The Sphinx's latest riddle: its own age A15

Three Latin American presidents urge reform in Cuba A14

NATIONAL A18-22, B8-9

The fund that protects bank deposits will have a 1992 deficit three times
greater than had been expected, Federal regulators said. The new estimates raise
questions about whether the industry will be able to repay a $30 billion
taxpayer loan that the Administration has proposed to protect depositors. A1

White House Memo: President Bush and his advisers, concerned about the
President's image on domestic policies as the 1992 election season grows nearer,
will sharpen their focus on economic issues. A1

White House attacks compromise rights bill A22

Fed finds the "recovery" has stalled D1

Thomas hastily sworn in as 106th Justice A18

Female cadet in Texas says she made up story of her beating A18

Man arrested with 34 guns reportedly threatened Bush A18

A $151 billion transportation bill was passed overwhelmingly by the House. But
the Senate and Bush Administration are likely to differ with the House on
whether to spend money on major highway projects and how to divide the money
among the states. B9

Consultant wants old cars off the road A20

Bush sets rules to curb U.S. lawyers' litigation A22

Inquiry sought on ex-Bush aide A22

Guatemalan Indians in Florida are mourning the deaths of seven farm workers who
drowned in a car accident last week. About 5,000 descendants of the Mayan
Indians have settled near Lake Okeechobee, and their sense of security has been
shattered by the accident. A18

The dream of solar energy may be reinvigorated by two scientists who have
borrowed chemical principles to create a new kind of cell which they believe can
be used to harvest electrical energy from the sun. B8

The fire in Oakland and Berkeley was officially brought under control, but the
toll of death and destruction continued to mount. B9

Doctor who created suicide machine is arrested A1

Federal agents to join inspectors after poultry plant fire A22

Computer firm assailed for anti- Semitic messages A21

Study finds exercise doesn't stop bone loss B9

REGIONAL B1-7

New York State faces a huge deficit of $500 million to $800 million, Cuomo
administration officials said. The deficit is a result of higher spending on
welfare and Medicaid and of a falloff in projected tax revenues. A1

Cuomo doesn't talk politics, for a few minutes B4

The Kings Highway Boys gang has been menacing the Kings Highway area in
Brooklyn. Through the years, the group's suspected misdeeds, including an attack
on five black youths two weeks ago, have grown to almost mythic proportions. A1

A violent Washington Heights gang has been smashed, law-enforcement officials
said. Twenty-three members of the Jheri-Kurl Gang were indicted and arrested
after a seven-month investigation into their activities, which authorities said
included murder and drug-dealing. B6

News Analysis: Mayor Dinkins has been hurt by Emilio Carillo's resignation as
head of the city's hospital system -- not just because he must confront a
managerial mess, but because he has once again disappointed Hispanics, one of
the shakiest components of his electoral coalition.  B1

Hospitals' leadership in doubt again B7

Road work will clog Brooklyn traffic until the end of the century,
transportation officials said. Major repairs will continue on the Brooklyn
Bridge -- closing all three Manhattan-bound lanes this weekend -- and will begin
on the Gowanus Expressway within two years. B1

Gov. Jim Florio is trying to prevent a Republican takeover of the New Jersey
Legislature. Although many Democrats are shying away from him, the Governor has
hit the campaign trail. B1 Midtown Journal: Tibetan monks and Franciscan friars
have been living together in a monastery during the Dalai Lama's visit to New
York. The religious leaders have a lot in common: flowing robes, vows of
chastity and poverty, and an enthusiasm for cornflakes. B1

Baby fed tainted food dies, but cause is unclearB3

Lawyer wants to question jurors on sexual preference B3

Cyclists and roller skaters object to park speed limit B3

Layoffs jolt Connecticut state police B2

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section

The lowdown on curtains C1

Prices to high to build? Remodel.  C1

Fashion: Playing it safe in Paris C1

Parent & Child C2

Currents C3

"The Great Doonesbury Sellout" C9

A garden evolves in the shade C10

Arts/Entertainment

Theater: "Beggars in the House of Plenty" C17

Art: Power relationships examined C17

Music: New composer at the Y C17

Pop and Jazz in Review C18

Dance: Susan Hefner C14

Paul Taylor's "Company B" C20

Word and Image: "Smart Schools, Smart Kids" C21

The women who make viewers laugh C22

Home Video C22

Obituaries B24

Henry M. Schachte, headed advertising agency

Mary P. Garin, innovator in economic and statistical work

Sports B11-19

Baseball: Braves win Game 4 and even Series B11

Yanks delay naming Showalter because of Series B11

Series analysis B13

Aguilera a victim of circumstance B13

Game 3 was one for all seasons B14

Notebook B14

Column: Anderson on a classic game B11

Horse Racing: Season opens at Aqueduct B17

Hockey: Rangers win, 7-2 B16

Notebook B16

Soccer: Rutgers is ranked No. 1 B19

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

Fight crime, not liberty

High price of Cambodia peace

A real boss for city hospitals

Letters A24

Tom Wicker: Time for action A25

William Safire: Pepys of the future A25

Thomas L. Neff: A grand uranium bargain A25

Benjamin Tucker: An apology on Biko A25

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Open to Talks on Ties to Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 23


Eighteen years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam in humiliation,
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today that the United States was
prepared to begin talks with Hanoi next month to normalize relations.

Mr. Baker said progress in the talks would depend on Vietnam's willingness to
furnish information that Washington has long sought about 2,300 Americans who
were prisoners of war or are listed as missing in action.

With the Soviet Union cutting its aid to Hanoi, Vietnam's Communist Government
has been eager to restore diplomatic relations with the United States to end an
American trade embargo and get international aid to rebuild an economy ravaged
by war and mismanagement. Vietnam is also eager to end its international
isolation.

But the United States has refused to normalize relations as long as a
Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia resisted a negotiated settlement to its
civil war. After Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 to oust the Khmer Rouge, the
United States supported a rebel movement that sought to topple the regime in
Phnom Penh.

Baker May Visit Vietnam

In Paris today, for the signing of a 19-nation peace treaty intended to end two
decades of civil war in Cambodia, Mr. Baker said he was taking into account
Hanoi's support for the settlement in agreeing to pursue normalized relations.

American officials have said it is possible that Mr. Baker will visit Vietnam at
the end of November as part of a previously scheduled trip.

"The scope and pace of these discussions of course will be governed by the
degree with which Vietnam continues to cooperate with the United States on the
very, very important issue of our prisoners of war and our missing in action,"
Mr. Baker said.

Re-establishing relations with Vietnam remains a sensitive issue for many
Americans who remember the wrenching war in which more than 58,000 Americans
died. Many Americans accuse Hanoi of continuing to conceal information about
Americans missing in Vietnam as a result of the war.

Timing for Normalization

In 1975, two years after American troops withdrew, the Communists captured
Saigon, now called Ho Chi Minh City, putting an end to America's efforts to keep
a non-Communist Government in what was then South Vietnam.

Mr. Baker said the normalization talks could begin "in the next month or so."
Showing how sensitive the subject is, Mr. Baker talked in gingerly terms, saying
Washington was "prepared to begin discussions with Vietnam concerning the issues
and modalities that would be involved in normalizing relations."

One American official said normalizing ties could take several years, but
Vietnamese officials said they hoped diplomatic relations could be established
much sooner.

After decades of battling the Japanese, French and Americans, Vietnam is one of
the world's poorest countries, with a per capita income of about $200 a year.
Vietnamese officials were irritated last week when the United States blocked a
French proposal calling for the International Monetary Fund to lend money to
Vietnam.

'Progress' Needed on M.I.A.'s

Washington's icy relations with Hanoi thawed a bit in July when Hanoi allowed a
M.I.A. liaison office to open in the Vietnamese capital. In addition, there have
been several joint American-Vietnamese searches for the missing soldiers.

An American official said today that in meeting Vietnam's Foreign Minister,
Nguyen Manh Cam, Mr. Baker said "substantial progress" in the missing-in-action
issue was needed as a condition for normalizing ties.

Signaling the improvement of relations, Mr. Baker said today that he would ease
the trade embargo against Vietnam by allowing "U.S.-organized" travel to Vietnam
by individuals and groups like veterans, journalists, business executives and
tourists. Washington began the embargo against North Vietnam in 1964, and
extended it to the whole country in 1975.

He also said he would lift the travel ban that prohibits Vietnamese diplomats to
the United Nations from traveling more than 25 miles from New York.

A Four-Step Process

Mr. Baker said the moves toward normalized relations would be a step-by-step
process. In April the State Department outlined a four-step process for
normalizing relations with Vietnam. The signing of a Cambodian peace agreement
was the initial step required to begin normalization talks. For the second step,
after a cease-fire was begun in Cambodia and the United Nations transitional
administration was established in Phnom Penh, Washington would partially lift
its trade embargo.

The department said the third phase would start after six months of United
Nations administration in Cambodia. In this phase, the trade embargo would be
lifted, and Hanoi and Washington would exchange diplomatic missions.

In the fourth phase, Washington would establish full diplomatic and economic
relations after elections in Cambodia, scheduled for early 1993, were held under
the supervision of the United Nations.

Mr. Baker also met today with China's Foreign Minister, Qian Qichen. An American
official said Mr. Baker had discussed weapons policy, human rights and trade
policy. The officials said Mr. Baker had voiced his concerns about China's plans
to sell missiles to Syria and about China's practice of selling goods made by
prison labor.

Mr. Baker told reporters that he was keeping open the option of visiting China,
a position that American officials say helped make the Cambodian peace treaty
possible.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d with Foreign Minister
Nguyen Manh Cam of Vietnam yesterday in Paris, where Mr. Baker announced a
willingness to begin talks with Hanoi to normalize relations. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cause for Alarm?;
The Peace Treaty Brings the Khmer Rouge Into Government, and That Frightens Many

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 950 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 23


The Khmer Rouge, which was responsible for the deaths of more than one million
Cambodians in its genocidal four-year reign in the 1970's, is granted a degree
of power and legitimacy under the United Nations peace treaty signed today that
many diplomats, and certainly many Cambodians, find frightening.

The peace treaty, signed in Paris by 19 countries, including the United States,
allows the Khmer Rouge to share power in a coalition government that is
scheduled to convene next month in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital.

The United Nations treaty makes no provision for punishment of Pol Pot, the
secretive Khmer Rouge leader, and his murderous deputies. Nor does it require
the complete disarmament of Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who remain scattered in
large numbers throughout the Cambodian countryside. Nor does it force the Khmer
Rouge to abandon its goal of one day returning to absolute power in Cambodia.

After listening to news reports today about the signing ceremony in Paris, a
senior Western diplomat in Bangkok, the main listening post for Cambodia in that
nation's long civil war, said, "I find myself a little queasy."

"We all assume that Pol Pot and his henchmen will not find their way back to
power," he said. "But we have no guarantee of that, none at all."

Indeed, over the next several weeks, many of the same Khmer Rouge leaders whose
savagery led to the execution or starvation of so many Cambodians in a reign of
terror more than a decade ago will return to Phnom Penh to join, once again, in
running the nation.

Pol Pot Believed Alive

Diplomats and intelligence officials say Pol Pot, whose plans for a Marxist,
racially pure Cambodian society were conceived while he was a student in Paris
in the 1950's, is still alive, hiding out, at least until recently, at a jungle
camp in northern Thailand, near the Cambodian border.

While Pol Pot has not been in seen in public for more than a decade, he is still
widely believed to control the Khmer Rouge.

Pol Pot has long been tolerated by the Thai Government, which has seen the Khmer
Rouge, the largest and best armed of the guerrilla forces in the civil war, as a
useful counterweight to Vietnam and the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom
Penh. The Vietnamese Army ousted the Khmer Rouge in an invasion in 1978.

With protection in recent years from the Thais and heavy armament and diplomatic
support from China, its principal backer, the Khmer Rouge emerged as an
indispensible participant in the negotiations that ended today with the signing
of the peace treaty.

'Khmer Rouge 'Had to Be Part'

"No matter how distasteful it is to do business with the Khmer Rouge, you cannot
ignore the fact that there are 40,000 well-armed Khmer Rouge troops in Cambodia
and Thailand," a European diplomat said. "Even if you managed to cut off the
Khmer Rouge arms supply entirely, their guns will not rust overnight. They had
to be part of the peace negotiations."

Diplomats say the United States and other Western powers supporting the peace
treaty are hopeful that China and Vietnam, which recently renewed diplomatic and
trade ties after years of hostility, will forestall any attempt by the Khmer
Rouge to reassert itself on the battlefield.

The Bush Administration has said it is seeking to remove Vietnamese influence
over Cambodia and allow the Cambodian people to select their own form of
government, despite the risk of a return to power by the Khmer Rouge.

Under the peace accord, foreign arms suppliers have agreed to cut off weapons
shipments to the Khmer Rouge and to the two major non-Communist rebel factions
involved in the peace settlement: the followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
one-time King of Cambodia, and the National Liberation Front of former Prime
Minister Son Sann.

The United States supplied tens of millions of dollars in aid to the two
non-Communist factions in the civil war, although there were repeated assertions
by human rights organizations and others that American aid ended up in the hands
of the Khmer Rouge.

Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France said this week that it would have been
impossible to exclude the Khmer Rouge from the peace negotiations, whatever its
reputation as an international pariah.

"An accord without them would have meant a rapid resumption of fighting," he
said. "We thought it more intelligent to bring them to effective disarmament."

Yet diplomats tracking the peace process say they fear that the Khmer Rouge will
circumvent the treaty's disarmament provisions -- all sides are required to
reduce their arms and troop strength by 70 percent -- by hiding weapons and
soldiers in remote jungle areas under its authority, far from the view of United
Nations peacekeeping troops that are expected to enter Cambodia this year.

The Khmer Rouge will also retain the option of buying weapons on the black
market. Because it controls areas of Cambodia rich in gems and timber, the Khmer
Rouge has few concerns about money; its annual revenues are estimated to top $80
million a year.

For their part, Khmer Rouge officials describe as misplaced international
concern any idea that they might consider staging a military takeover of
Cambodia. The Khmer Rouge, they suggest, has hopes instead of returning to power
without bloodshed, through the free elections called for under the United
Nations plan.

In a secret 1988 speech to colleagues that has circulated in Bangkok, Pol Pot
outlined a strategy in which the Khmer Rouge would be restored to power through
political organization -- winning over Cambodians one by one with Khmer
Rouge-sponsored public works projects and through an image-building public
relations campaign.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Discuss Ties With Vietnam Soon

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 77 words


Eighteen years after American troops withdrew from Vietnam in humiliation,
Secretary of State Baker said the United States was prepared to begin talks with
Hanoi next month to normalize relations.

He said progress would depend on Vietnam's willingness to furnish information
about 2,300 Americans who were prisoners of war or are listed as missing in
action.

With Moscow cutting aid, Hanoi has been eager to end its isolation.

Article, page A17.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The High Price of Peace in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 489 words


Even in real life, horror stories can have sequels. There's a worrisome
possibility that one entitled The Return of the Khmer Rouge might now be about
to unfold in Cambodia.

The Cambodian peace treaty signed yesterday in Paris provides for a cease-fire,
demobilization, repatriation of refugees and elections for a new democratic
government -- all under international supervision. But it also allows Pol Pot's
gang of murderers to return to Phnom Penh in what is supposed to be a limited
role.

Enforcement will depend on an ambitious but unproved new United Nations
operation. And looking over the U.N.'s shoulder will be China, a permanent
member of the Security Council and long the principal patron of the Khmer Rouge.

The cynicism of outside powers, Washington included, helped shape this
unsatisfying peace. China and Vietnam both backed the Khmer Rouge when it ousted
a U.S.-sponsored regime in 1975. China maintained that support even as the Khmer
Rouge organized genocide, murdering a million or more Cambodians.

But Vietnam quickly became estranged and, in 1978, sent its armies across the
border to topple the Khmer Rouge regime. Hanoi's troops remained for a decade,
installing a somewhat less brutal Communist Government led by Khmer Rouge
defectors.

The Khmer Rouge survived the 1980's because of China's continued military
support and Washington's hostility to the new Cambodian regime and its
Vietnamese sponsors. Washington never directly supported the Khmer Rouge. But
its policy of supporting non-Communist guerrillas fighting side by side with
Khmer Rouge forces came shamefully close.

Last year, under Congressional pressure, the Bush Administration moved closer to
true neutrality. But by then the Khmer Rouge had again become such a significant
military factor that it could not safely be excluded from any peace.

The treaty could not have been achieved without the new cooperative relationship
between Washington and Moscow. But this summer's reconciliation between China
and Vietnam was the decisive factor. Neither of these dictatorships can be
counted on to support the treaty's democratic features. That will be up to the
U.N.

So will be containing the Khmer Rouge, which has already resumed its brutal
course. In recent weeks it has tightened its grip on refugee camps along the
Thai border, threatening to move the inhabitants into malarial zones of Cambodia
under Khmer Rouge control. That has now been suspended at the urging of the
Secretary General's office. But China opposes any stronger measures; pressure on
the refugees could resume any time.

The treaty is the best solution now available for a conflict that has already
brought 21 years of cruel war. Peace in Cambodia also seems likely to speed the
overdue normalization of America's relations with Vietnam. Had that happened
sooner, Cambodia might have had a chance at peace unencumbered by the Khmer
Rouge's bloody hand.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

4 PARTIES IN CAMBODIAN WAR SIGN U.N.-BACKED PEACE PACT; KHMER ROUGE SHARES RULE

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1714 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Oct. 23


With mutual distrust still lingering between longtime enemies, Cambodia's
warring factions signed a peace treaty today aimed at ending a nightmare of war,
mass murder, foreign occupation, starvation and exile that has devastated the
Southeast Asian country over the last 21 years.

Under the agreement -- brokered by the United States, the Soviet Union and China
-- a cease-fire in the round of civil war that began in 1978 went into immediate
effect. It is to be followed by the demobilization of rival armies, repatriation
of 350,000 refugees and elections by mid-1993.

But while the agreement today may offer Cambodia the hope of a respite from its
pain, it also resurrected the specter of a return to power of the Communist
Khmer Rouge movement. The Khmer Rouge was -- and is -- headed by the infamous
Pol Pot, and under his leadership it was responsible for more than one million
deaths in a total population of seven million from the time it seized power in
April 1975 until it was ousted at the end of 1978 by Vietnamese troops.

Khmer Rouge Strongest Faction

The Khmer Rouge remains easily the strongest of three Cambodian rebel factions,
with an estimated 50,000 to 100,000 armed followers. And it now has two
representatives on a new Supreme National Council and will be able to
participate in the elections.

The two other rebel factions are the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a
conservative group headed by Son Sann, and a faction led by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, Cambodia's former head of state, who is to head the Supreme National
Council during the transition to democratic elections.

The three rebel groups, ideologically disparate, have made an uneasy alliance to
fight the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh, now headed by Prime
Minister Hun Sen.

The United Nations has been given the central role in insuring that the accord
is respected. It is to send thousands of troops and civilians to help run
Cambodia and share power with the 12-member Supreme National Council, which has
been formed by the warring factions as a transitional administration until a
democratic government is in place.

At the signing ceremony here today, a sense of perspective was provided by the
French President, Francois Mitterrand, who said: "A dark page of history has
been turned. Cambodians want peace, which means that any spirit of revenge would
now be as dangerous as forgetting the lessons of history."

'Magnitude of the Suffering'

The agreement was also hailed by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d. "What
makes the case of Cambodia so extraordinary -- and its claim for international
support so compelling," Mr. Baker said, "is the magnitude of the suffering its
people have endured."

Western diplomats said peace in Cambodia was made possible mainly by changes
taking place outside the country -- both new cooperation between Washington and
Moscow to settle regional conflicts and moves by China and Vietnam to encourage
their Cambodian political clients to negotiate in good faith.

In return for Hanoi's support of the Cambodian peace, the United States
announced plans today to seek a gradual normalization of its relations with
Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in 1978 and installed its client government in
Phnom Penh.

Mr. Baker also said that the Administration intended to move toward such ties
with Cambodia and with Laos, where Washington now stations not an ambassador but
only a charge d'affaires in Vientiane, the capital.

He said that the United States would now lift its trade embargo with Cambodia
and support aid projects through a new liaison office to be opened in Phnom
Penh.

Washington, along with other Western governments, decided not to establish full
diplomatic relations with the Supreme National Council but rather to await
election of a democratic government. In the interim, American officials said the
liaison office would try to insure that American humanitarian aid does not help
the Khmer Rouge.

Representatives of the 18 other nations that signed today's accord warned of the
need to insure that Cambodia's nightmarish history is not repeated. But none was
more scathing than Mr. Baker in condemning the Khmer Rouge for violence against
its own people "that has few parallels in history."

Noting that both the United States and Cambodia have signed the United
Nations-sponsored Genocide Convention, he added that "we will support efforts to
bring to justice those responsible for the mass murders of the 1970's if the new
Cambodian Government chooses to pursue this path."

Britain's delegate, Lord Caithness, also said it would be "incomprehensible and
unacceptable" if Pol Pot, Ieng Sary and other Khmer Rouge leaders identified
with the period of massacres were to try to return to power. "That must not be
allowed to happen," he said.

The Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, was nonetheless one of four Cambodian
leaders to sign the peace agreement. The others were Prime Minister Hun Sen; Son
Sann, leader of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, and Prince
Sihanouk.

Sihanouk Urges Support of Pact

Prince Sihanouk, who was the only Cambodian to address today's gathering at the
Kleber Conference Center here, said he considered the agreement a charter to
"put an end to the suffering and misery of my people," and he called for "loyal
and scrupulous implementation" of its terms by all parties.

Prince Sihanouk governed the nation through much of the 1940's, 50's and 60's,
and was deposed in 1970 by officers led by Lieut. Gen. Lon Nol. The previous
year, General Lon Nol had cut back Prince Sihanouk's power and become Prime
Minister. Prince Sihanouk's ouster was also played out at a time of intense
American bombing in Indochina and ground incursions into Cambodia.

Today's agreement consists of three separate documents -- one covering "a
comprehensive political settlement"; a second guaranteeing Cambodia's
sovereignty, independence and neutrality, and a third committing the signers to
aid the country's reconstruction.

The peace accord is written to govern the factions that have fought each other
since the Vietnamese invasion of 1978.

U.S. Began Legacy of Death

But Cambodia's legacy of suffering dates back to the American incursions of
1970, described at the time as an effort to attack Viet Cong sanctuaries and
supply routes. It had the effect of drawing the small country into the larger
Indochina war.

American bombing in Cambodia continued until 1973, but Washington was unable to
prevent the toppling of the Lon Nol Government by the Khmer Rouge in 1975.

Years later in 1989 -- after both the Khmer Rouge terror was over and all
factions seemed to be aware that the civil war was tearing apart what remained
of Cambodia -- a first Cambodian peace conference was conducted in Paris, but it
failed.

Then, beginning in 1990, the five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council -- the United States, the Soviet Union, China, Britain and
France -- joined the negotiations. This eventually set the stage for an accord
by committing the world organization to play a major role in the transition to
democracy.

China and Vietnam Joined

Moves toward an agreement accelerated this summer when China and Vietnam, both
eager to end their international isolation and apparently ready to put aside
their traditional enmity, began leaning on the Khmer Rouge and Phnom Penh
respectively to show flexibility.

After today's ceremony, however, the focus turns back to Cambodia itself. Prince
Sihanouk has announced that he will return to Phnom Penh on Nov. 14, and Prime
Minister Hun Sen has said he will accompany him. Khmer Rouge representatives,
including Mr. Khieu Samphan, are also soon to arrive in the Cambodian capital.

Similarly, the first, 268-member contingent of United Nations military and
civilian personnel is expected in Phnom Penh before the end of this month with
the mandate of observing the cease-fire and recommending the size of what will
become known as the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia.

Western diplomats have estimated that 20,000 to 30,000 soldiers and civilian
administrators will eventually be needed. They also believe that the cost of the
21-month operation will be $1 billion to $2 billion, requiring the United
Nations to establish a special fund.

The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, described the
peacekeeping mission in Cambodia as "probably the most important and most
complex in the history of the United Nations." It is also the largest-scale by
far. The Secretary General will shortly name a special representative who will
exercise enormous authority under the terms of the accord.

The immediate task of the United Nations force is to regroup the rival armies in
special "cantonment" areas, where they are to surrender their weapons and help
locate millions of land mines. The factions are also committed to demobilizing
at least 70 percent of their forces before the voter registration period is
completed.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is to oversee the voluntary
repatriation of 350,000 refugees in camps along the Thai-Cambodian border,
although the Khmer Rouge has already been accused of violating the spirit of the
accord by trying to force some refugees to move into areas under its control.

During preparations for elections for a 120-member assembly, involving adoption
of an electoral code and voter registration, the United Nations force will also
be authorized to run Cambodia's foreign affairs, national defense, finance,
public security and information in order to guarantee a fair vote.

Elections Within 18 Months

After the elections, expected to be held within 18 months, a constituent
assembly has been given a further three months to draft a new constitution, to
be approved by a two-thirds vote. It will then transform itself into a
legislative assembly and elect a democratic government.

In theory, the role of the United Nations ends at this point but, because of the
grim record of Cambodian violence, both the United Nations and other signers of
the agreement pledged today to continue monitoring human rights in Cambodia
after the end of the transitional period.

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 31, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A credit line in some editions last Thursday with a picture of Pol Pot, the
Cambodian leader, bore an erroneous date. The picture was taken in 1977, not
1985. As the article noted, Mr. Pol Pot has not been seen in public since the
late 1970's.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, center, who will be president of
Cambodia's Supreme National Council, at treaty signing in Paris with other
delegates, including Khieu Samphan, right, a leader of the Khmer Rouge. (Agence
France-Presse) (pg. A1); Delegates to the conference in Paris yesterday at which
a Cambodian peace treaty was signed. (Agence France-Presse) The forests of
Cambodia known as the "killing fields," where thousands were massacred.; A
guerrilla soldier marching into Phnom Penh, as it was being overrun on April 17,
1975. (pg. A16)

Chart: "The Peace Settlement"

Main points of the agreement signed yesterday by representatives from the
Cambodian Government, three guerrilla factions and 18 other nations.

* Administration: The United Nations will take over administrative tasks of the
Cambodian Government, and will work with the Supreme National Council, which
includes representatives from the Cambodian factions. The United Nations has the
power to run ministries, including defense, foreign affairs, finance and
communications.

* Elections: The United Nations adminstration will help organize free elections
in early 1993 to elect a constitutional assembly charged with drafting a new
national charter guaranteeing human rights.

* Cease-fire: A cease-fire is in place. Three main guerrilla factions and
Government troops will withdraw. Under United Nations supervision, 70 percent of
their effective forces will be demobilized. Foreign military support will halt.

* Refugees: The United Nation's administration and its High Commission for Human
Rights will oversee the return of 350,000 refugees from camps along the Thai
border.

* Sovereignty: The independence sovereignty, neutrality and territorial
integrity of Cambodia are recognized.

* Reconstruction: The signers of the treaty commit themselves to financially
supporting reconstruction efforts. (Source: Associated Press) (pg. A16)

Chronology: "Years of Torment, Steps Toward Peace"

Early History: At the height of its reach and power between the 9th and 13th
centuries, the predecessor of modern Cambodia, the empire of Angkor, was a
strong and culturally advanced civilization. At various times, it controlle
territory from the Burmese border to the Mekong Delta, and south to the South
Chia Sea. But by the second quarter of teh 15th century, the empire was
declining and was attacked on either side by Thailand and Vietnam.

1863: Again under pressure from his neighbors, Cambodia requests French
protection to stave off national extinction, and the French transform Cambodia
into a protectorate. By the end of the 19th century, Cambodia is incorporated
with Laos and a divided Vietnam into an Indochinese union under French rule.

1941: The French install Prince Norodom Sihanouk, then 18 years old, as King of
Cambodia.

World War II: Japanese forces enter Cambodia in 1941. Japan permits Vichy France
to continue administering the country until late in the war, when it dissolves
the French colonial administration. In response, King Sihanouk declares
independence in March 1945. An anti-colonial government is formerd, but allied
occupation forces depose it in October.

1946: After the war, France grants increased autonomy to Cambodia, but
nationalists, led by King Sihanouk, demand full independence.

1953 -- November: France grants independece to Cambodia. At the Geneva
Conference of 1954, Cambodia, like Vietnam and Laos, is declared a neutral
state.

1955 -- March: King Sihanouk abdicates the throne in order to play an active
role in day-to-day politics. He sets up a national front.

1963 -- November: Prince Sihanouk severs economic and military reations with the
United States, citing the increasing American activity in Vietnam, and he
accuses the American forces of carrying out border incursions into Cambodia.

Late 1960's: Important groups grow restive under Sihanouk's rule. Military
officers resent his policy of permitting North Vietnamese armed activity in the
border area, business people oppose his refusal to accept American economic aid,
and urban intellectuals criticize his political dominance.

1970 -- March: While Prince Sihanouk is abroad, civilian and military officals
overthrow his Government and turn over power to Prime Minister Lon Nol, an
American-backed general involved in a limited move to eclipse Prince Sihanouk
the previous year. In October, the monarchy is abolished.

1975 -- April: Communist guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge seize the capital, Phnom
Penh, after a string of victories in provincial cities, and oust Lon Nol's
Government. Under the titular leadership of Khieu Samphan and leng Sary, and the
underground control of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge impose a brutal reorganization
of society in which more than a million people die. City dwellers are forced
into harsh labor in the countryside, members of educated or merchant classes are
put to death, and a reign of terror coupled with an extreme form of agrarian
Marxism previals. Prince Sihanouk, the virtual prisoner of the Khmer Rouge, is
declared the titular head of state.

1976: Prince Sihanouk resigns and goes to Beijing. Pol Pot emerges from the
Khmer Rouge's underground leadership to become Prime Minister, taking full
charge.

1978 -- December: After a year of incursions into Cambodian territory the
Vietnamese Army mounts a full invasion of the country. It consolidates its
powwer and in January 1979 installs a new Government led by Heng Samrin.

1982 -- June: Under pressure from China, the United States and other countries,
the three Cambodian guerrilla factions form a coalition government in exile with
Prince Sihanouk as president, Khieu Samphan as vice president and Son Sann of
the conservative Khmer People's Liberation Front as prime minister. Washington
recognizes the rebel coalition.

1985 -- September: The Khmer Rouge announces the retirement of Pol Pot as
military leader, but Western governments say he is still the real leader.

1987 -- May: Prince Sihanouk steps down for a year as head of the coalition
agter attacks on his men by the Khmer Rouge, and he pursues his own peace
initiative.

December: Hun Sen, now Prime Minister in Phnom Penh, and Prince Sihanouk hold
talks in France. This and four other rounds in the next 18 months proves
inconclusive.

1988 -- February: Under Chinese pressure, Prince Sihanouk returns to lead the
rebel coalition.

1989 -- April: Vietnam announces that all its troops will leave Cambodia by the
end of September, even if no settlement is reached.

August: Peace talks in Paris involving 18 nations and the waring Cambodian
factions collapse.

September: Vietnam says all its troops have now been withdrawn from Cambodia,
although guerrilla groups charge, and Vietnamese officials later confirm, that
some remain.

1990 -- January: The five permanent members of United Nations Security Council
draft a peace plan calling for a U.N.-supervised administration to run the
country while elections are organized.

February: Hun Sen and Prince Sihanouk meet in Bangkok and agree in principle to
the United Nations role.

July: The Security Council members issue a plea to the factions to set up a
Supreme National Council that would prepare the way for elections. Washington
reversing a nearly decade long diplomatic position, announces that it is
withdrawing recognition of the rebels and is ready to renew a dialogue with
Vietnam to help the peace effort.

August: The Security Council members announce the main elements of a settlement.
The agreement provides for an interim administration combining elements from the
United Nations and all four Cambodian factions to run the country until United
Nations-supervised elections can be held. Factional armies would be disarmed and
kept apart by U.N. troops.

September: The four factions meet in Jakarta and agree to accept the United
Nations plan, and they select a Supreme National Council.

The 12-member council meets in Bangkok but breaks up when the faction fail to
agree on the chairmanship, the size of the United Nations delegation, a
cease-fire and other important issues.

November: The Security Council's permanent members agree on the final draft of
the peace settlement. The plan calls for the use of thousands of United Nations
administrators and peacekeepers during the transition period to elections.

1991 -- May: A temporary cease-fire among the factions begins, but the
Government in Phnom Penh and the rebels accuse each other of violations.

June: The Supreme National Council agrees to an indefinite cease-fire. It also
agrees to stop receiving foreign arms.

August: Meeting in Thailand, the Supreme National Council agrees to disband 70
percent of the military forces in Cambodia and put the rest under United Nations
supervision.

September: In talks in New York, the Cambodians clear a major hurdle to a peace
pact by agreeing to a compromise system for election. The compromise calls for a
system of proportional representation that would allow each faction places in
Parliament based on its share of the popular vote.

Oct. 23: Leaders in Cambodia's warring factions and the foreign ministers of 18
nations sign a peace treaty ending decades of civil war. (pg. A16)

Map of Cambodia highlighting Phnom Penh (pg. A16)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. RAISES HOPES ON 'BOAT PEOPLE'

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 612 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 24


The announcement by Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d on Wednesday that the
United States was ready to seek normal relations with the Hanoi Government has
raised hopes among diplomats and officials of international refugee agencies
that a turning point is at hand in the unceasing flow of "boat people" from
Vietnam.

They believe that the ending of Vietnam's virtual international isolation could
alter a mood of hopelessness and encourage Vietnamese to see their future at
home.

Officials at the headquarters here of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, as well as representatives of humanitarian organizations, have long
held a view that by boycotting Vietnam, the United States has strongly
contributed to the economic deprivation that has prompted many Vietnamese to
flee.

Successive American Administrations have ascribed their hard line to Vietnam's
invasion of Cambodia and the continued uncertainty over the Americans missing in
action since the Vietnam War. Some international officials have detected an
emotional resistance to come to terms with the Communist Government that
humiliated the United States in the war.

Hong Kong Is the Goal

Indonesia shelters 20,000 Vietnamese, Malaysia and Thailand 12,000 each, and the
Philippines 7,400. But the present focus of the "boat people" problem is Hong
Kong, which since last year has become virtually the sole goal of those fleeing
Vietnam. About 64,000 Vietnamese are housed in detention camps there.

Britain and Vietnam are involved in protracted negotiations over the return of
about 20,000 of the refugees who have been ruled to be economic refugees without
legitimate fear of persecution at home, and therefore not entitled under
international law to refugee status.

In an unusual congruence of views, the United States and Vietnam oppose any
forcible return. A forcible repatriation in 1989 brought an international outcry
led by the United States. Since then, only those who volunteered have been sent
back. They number 14,000.

The Bush Administration has asserted that Vietnam's human-rights record raises
doubt that Hanoi will respect its international pledge not to punish those who
fled. But aides of the High Commissioner asserted that their visits had made
them confident that there is no ground for fear.

"We get incredible cooperation," an official said. "They do anything we want."

A Liberalized Atmosphere

The official, who accompanied a group of representatives of refugee-aid
organizations from the United States and other Western nations to Vietnam in
May, said they had found a greatly liberalized atmosphere in which ordinary
Vietnamese were no longer afraid to criticize their Government to foreigners.

"Those among the team who had visited Vietnam previously remarked how they were
surprised and impressed with the considerable progress the country was making
toward becoming a more open society," the delegates said in their report.

The High Commissioner's aides said that almost none of the Vietnamese who are
fleeing now would qualify for immigration to the United States. They said that
only 4 or 5 percent originate from the former South Vietnam and had been
connected with the American-backed Saigon government or had relatives in the
West.

American and international officials said southern Vietnamese were now leaving
largely legally, under a system called the Orderly Departure Program. An
American official said American immigration aides interviewed 10,000 applicants
a month in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, and a High Commissioner's aide
said legal immigration to the United States would reach about 100,000 this year.

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News: Norodom Sihanouk;
The Prince of Survivors

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 24


Fifty years ago this year, the Vichy French occupiers of Cambodia searched for a
new, pliable Cambodian monarch, and they passed over more seasoned candidates
among the country's royalty in settling on Prince Norodom Sihanouk, an
18-year-old lycee student who seemed to prefer horses and moviegoing to
statecraft.

In the half-century since assuming the throne of the Angkor kings, Prince
Sihanouk has not only outlasted the French -- he led Cambodia to independence
from France in the early 1950's -- he has also somehow managed to survive a coup
by rightists, years of imprisonment by maniacal leftists, a civil war and more
than a decade in exile.

Now, Prince Sihanouk, once called the "changeling prince" because of his
inconsistency and indiscretion, is preparing for what is expected to be a
triumphal homecoming in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, under the auspices of
a United Nations peace plan that may yet return him and his entourage to power.

"I want to die on Khmer soil -- I am a Cambodian," the 68-year-old Prince said
in the midst of peace talks held last summer in Thailand, insisting that his
only goal was to help peace take root in Cambodia after 13 years of civil war.

By all accounts, it was Prince Sihanouk's tireless coaxing and impish charm --
he liked to bring his French poodle to the negotiating table -- that made
possible a peace agreement among the seemingly irreconcilable Cambodian
factions. The peace treaty was signed in Paris on Wednesday.

"Prince Sihanouk is responsible for this," a senior Western diplomat said. "His
performance in these negotiations has been utterly brilliant."

What is sometimes forgotten in the midst of the praise for the Prince is that he
bears some of the blame for the horrors that have befallen the nation since he
was ousted as Cambodia's quasi-regal chief of state in a coup in 1970.

After the coup by Cambodian rightists, Prince Sihanouk lent his name to a
guerrilla movement that was controlled by the Communist Khmer Rouge and its
mysterious leader, Pol Pot.

When the Khmer Rouge overran Cambodia in 1975, the Prince served for a time as
its de facto spokesman and apologist as it undertook a revolution of terror that
left more than one million Cambodians dead, including several members of Prince
Sihanouk's family.

Under Arrest for 3 Years

The Khmer Rouge rewarded Prince Sihanouk for his support by placing him and his
wife, Monique, under what amounted to house arrest for three years, freeing the
royal couple only days before invading Vietnamese soldiers overran Phnom Penh in
January 1979 and ousted Pol Pot.

Prince Sihanouk, grandson of King Norodom of Cambodia, was born on Oct. 31,
1922, and sent to schools in Saigon, now called Ho Chi Minh City, and Paris. His
schooling left the Prince fluent in Khmer, English and French, which he still
speaks today in a high-pitched staccato voice.

In 1955, 14 years after he was crowned as King, the Prince abdicated in favor of
his father and assumed the role of Prime Minister, a move that enabled him to
run in nationwide elections that year. He swept the balloting.

During the Vietnam War, Prince Sihanouk become a master of tightrope diplomacy,
trying somehow to keep Cambodia from being drawn too deeply into the conflict.
His aim was to keep both the American-backed South Vietnamese forces and the
Vietcong insurgents from overwhelming neighboring Cambodia, and he often played
the two sides -- and their respective backers in Washington and Beijing --
against one another.

Deposed by the Military

In 1970, the Prince was in Moscow when word came that he had been deposed by his
handpicked military leader, Gen. Lon Nol, who would himself be replaced five
years later by the Khmer Rouge.

After he was freed by the Khmer Rouge Government in 1979, the Prince took up
exile in lavish homes in Beijing and Pyongyang, North Korea, and established his
own non-Communist rebel faction in Cambodia.

Although he has compared Pol Pot to Hitler and at one time accused the Khmer
Rouge of "the bloodiest, most cruel and most inhuman tyranny in world history,"
Prince Sihanouk agreed to join with the Khmer Rouge in the formation of a
coalition government in exile in 1982. The coalition's goal was the ouster of
the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh.

In a later interview, the Prince described the Vietnamese to a crocodile and the
Khmer Rouge as a tiger, and said that in a battle between the two he would
reluctantly have to choose the tiger, "for while it too is man-eating, it is
purely Cambodian."

NAME: Norodom Sihanouk

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Norodom Sihanouk (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
McCartney On Tour On Screen

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 619 words


Paul McCartney can still do cute things with his eyebrows, and he still has the
kind of hair that can be tossed. But "Get Back," the stitched-together concert
film documenting Mr. McCartney's 1989-90 world tour, is enough to shake the
faith of even the staunchest fan. Compiled so soullessly and arbitrarily from a
variety of live shows that Mr. McCartney often appears to change outfits during
the same song, "Get Back" also draws upon scrambled, incoherent news clips to
bolster its performance scenes. All this is the doing of Richard Lester, who
still has "Help!" and "A Hard Day's Night" to his credit but hereby forfeits any
claim he ever had to being the Fifth Beatle.

It must be said, to Mr. McCartney's credit, that there are times when viewers
can close their eyes and hear very solid renditions of old Beatles songs, and
some of his more recent compositions sound even better. It must also be said
that as soon as the eyes open there are disastrous problems. The film is
desperately busy, not only in its cobbled-together musical numbers but also in
the appallingly glib material that has been thrown in to accompany them.
Although the star is noticeably hoarse and off key in places, he would have come
across better without these distractions.

When Mr. McCartney first makes reference to the 60's, the camera presents
notable figures, including Richard Nixon, Muhammad Ali and the Beatles, as if
the Beatles had to be identified or validated. After that, when Mr. McCartney
launches into "The Long and Winding Road" -- not everyone's idea of a 60's
anthem -- the film provides a thumbnail history of the Vietnam War, complete
with napalm, burning villages and the Paris peace conference. Since Mr.
McCartney, who used "Scrambled Eggs" as a working title for "Yesterday," never
rested his popularity on his role as spokesman for a generation, this attention
to world affairs seems especially ill advised.

Some of the film's other choices are so thoughtless as to border on the
diabolical. "Can't Buy Me Love," though well performed here, can't help seeming
inappropriate when delivered by so formidable a businessman. "I Saw Her Standing
There" sounds dated enough in its reference to a 17-year-old heartbreaker, and
loses all vestigial traces of romance when Mr. Lester cuts to Linda McCartney,
seen thumping away dutifully at her keyboards. Mr. McCartney's decision to
invoke John Lennon with a rendition of "Let It Be" is even more unfortunate,
thanks to film clips from the documentary of the same name. That film was made
when the Beatles could barely be coaxed into the same room with one another.

Along with the other clutter that impedes "Get Back," which opens today at the
Baronet, there are silly sets (a hammer and sickle for "Back in the U.S.S.R.,"
the old familiar dancing-amoeba images for a mock-psychedelic number), unsightly
lighting effects and audience shots that will be a deep embarrassment to all
concerned. Note to die-hard rock fans of baby-boom age: never come within camera
range at a live show. If you are filmed shaking your fists, mouthing lyrics,
swooning idiotically or engaging in middle-aged break-dancing, you're certain to
be sorry in the morning.

"Get Back" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes  mild
profanity.

Get Back

Directed by Richard Lester; director of photography, Robert Paynter; edited by
John Victor Smith; produced by Henry Thomas and Philip Knatchbull; released by
Seven Arts. At the Baronet, Third Avenue at 59th Street, Manhattan. Running
time: 89 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Paul McCartney, Linda McCartney, Hamish Stuart, Robbie McIntosh, Paul
(Wix) Wickens and Chris Whitten

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul McCartney

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 25, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Magic Act of a Novelist (Contd.)

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 29; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words



Odd Jobs
Essays and Criticism
By John Updike
919 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.

"From earliest childhood I was charmed by the materials of my craft," John
Updike writes in his latest collection of nonfiction, "by pencils and paper and,
later, by the typewriter and the entire apparatus of printing. To condense from
one's memories and fantasies and small discoveries dark marks on paper which
become handsomely reproducible many times over still seems to me, after nearly
30 years concerned with the making of books, a magical act, and a delightful
technical process. To distribute oneself thus, as a kind of confetti shower
falling upon the heads and shoulders of mankind out of bookstores and the pages
of magazines is surely a great privilege and a defiance of the usual earthbound
laws whereby human beings make themselves known to one another."

That delight in the magic of writing lies at the heart of this impressive new
collection of essays and reviews. The book represents the last eight years of
Mr. Updike's nonfiction work (a period that, remarkably enough, also witnessed
the publication of four novels, a collection of short stories, a volume of
poetry, and an autobiography) and it attests, once again, to his prodigious
energy and his prodigal talents as an essayist and critic, roles he insists he
has come to see as an "aberration" in his literary career, a detour from his
real work as a writer of fiction.

Like his previous volumes of nonfiction ("Assorted Prose," "Picked Up Pieces"
and "Hugging the Shore"), "Odd Jobs" serves as a kind of commodious grab bag for
thoughts, observations and descriptions that Mr. Updike never managed to squeeze
into a novel. Scraps of experience -- a trip to Finland, a march in a parade
(also recycled in "Rabbit at Rest"), a visit to the movies, an appearance on
television, a ride on the local commuter train -- all are transformed into
shapely, finely hammered essays, as are random meditations on such matters as
architecture, women's bodies, the Boston Red Sox, the Fourth of July and the
"urban muchness" of New York City. Mr. Updike even includes an appendix with his
written answers to magazine questions like: "What is your favorite spot in and
around Harvard?"

Indeed, the reader cannot help but sense that the author feels a compulsion to
document every possible fragment of his life, as though it might evaporate or
become meaningless were it not anchored down in reassuringly orderly columns of
type: I write, I publish, therefore I am.

The bulk of "Odd Jobs," however, is devoted not to personal reminiscences, but
to book reviews and literary essays, pieces that display, in Mr. Updike's own
words about V. S. Pritchett's criticism, "a marvelous acquaintance with
literature as both a body of works and a branch of professional activity." There
are learned essays on Benjamin Franklin, William Dean Howells and Emerson that
situate their achievements within the context of American history, and a series
of fresh, almost tactile portraits of the author's own contemporaries and their
books.

Mr. Updike remembers John Cheever as "a courteous fidgety man with a rapid laugh
that ended in a blend of hum, snort, and sigh, as jazz singers used to end a
chorus with 'Oh, yeass.' " He observes that Joyce Carol Oates "needs a lustier
audience, a race of Victorian word-eaters, to be worthy of her astounding
productivity, her tireless gift of self-enthrallment." And he hails Saul Bellow
as "our most exuberant and melodious postwar novelist," "the most viable
combination of redskin and paleface in our specialized, academized era."

In addition, Mr. Updike has tackled the works of a startling array of foreign
writers -- from Latin America, the Soviet Union, China, Africa, Europe and the
Middle East. Iris Murdoch, Mario Vargas Llosa, Umberto Eco and Robert Pinget --
a decidedly eclectic group of authors -- appear to exert a particular magnetic
pull on his imagination, eliciting successive essays.

In his reviews of individual books, Mr. Updike writes as an industrious and
precocious student, eager to learn more about developments in his field.
Although he's not shy about pointing out perceived weaknesses -- for instance,
he notes the "danger of cuteness" in some of Gabriel Garcia Marquez's later
stories -- he writes primarily as a tour guide and celebrant, describing
characters, plots and effects as vividly as if they were real people and events.
He compares Sherwood Anderson's portraits of small-town life in "Winesburg,
Ohio" to Edvard Munch's paintings of the Norwegian middle class; and he compares
Ann Beattie's articulation of the post-Vietnam mood to Hemingway's depiction of
his generation's disenchantment in the 1920's.

In the introduction to "Odd Jobs," Mr. Updike observes that his "purpose in
reading has ever secretly been not to come and judge but to come and steal"; and
the reader occasionally feels, in these reviews, that he's checking out the
competition -- not in any hostile, covetous manner, but as a means of sharpening
his own skills and honing his esthetics.

Considerable attention is paid in these essays to the technical means by which
other writers achieved their effects: from Philip Roth's ability to lend a
scrupulously self-aware text "a surface of colloquial relaxation and even
dishevelment" to Tolstoy's ability to shape his prose sculpturally through "a
series of self-critical blows, a succession of energetic corrections." The
result is an exceptionally intelligent study of writers and their work that
illuminates both the pleasures of literature in all its many guises and the
alchemical transactions that go on behind its pages.

By the end of "Odd Jobs," the reader has a firm sense of Mr. Updike's own
theories on the art of fiction. He admires novels that "give us, through the
consciousness of characters, a geography amplified by history, a chunk of the
planet"; and he believes that the creative imagination is "wholly parasitic upon
the real world," that "the wish to do justice to the real world compels language
into those semi-transparent layers that make a style."

In Mr. Updike's own case, that style -- lyrical, pictorial and laden with
precise metaphors -- has been immediately recognizable throughout his
three-decade career as a novelist, and it's evident on every page of this
dazzling volume of nonfiction as well.


LOAD-DATE: October 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John Updike (Richard Kalvar)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Radio Station Offers Everything But Consistency

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words

DATELINE: By ANDI RIERDEN


NEARLY 22 years ago Bill Nolan was cruising down Interstate 95 in his apple-red
Mustang flipping the radio knob and searching for the answer to his prayers. Mr.
Nolan's passion was 50's rock and roll, which at the time had all but faded from
the American memory, he said. As a record collector and devotee of music from
the early-rock era, he said, he knew he could help spark new interest in it if
only he could find a station that would allow him to broadcast his message.
After switching to 89.5 on the FM dial, WPKN at the University of Bridgeport,
Mr. Nolan said, he knew his search had ended.

"I remember they were playing some pretty hot acid rock," he said, "real
controversial, pre-Woodstock stuff that the commercial stations wouldn't touch."

Soon after, Mr. Nolan, who works for the Ansonia Copper and Brass Corporation,
became the station's first volunteer program host with a Sunday evening program
called "Antique Blues." Using his record collection, he sought to educate as
much as entertain, he said. By the mid-1970's "Antique Blues" had attracted a
faithful audience, and Mr. Nolan founded an organization for lovers of
rhythm-and-blues music, the R. & B. Society, which he called the first group in
the country devoted to promoting rock and roll. The society now has 50,000
members worldwide, he said.

'Hobgoblin of Little Minds'

Mr. Nolan's debut also changed the character of WPKN, which had been a training
ground for broadcasting students. Now operated by 120 volunteers with a drive to
promote music and points of view not often covered by the commercial media, WPKN
has built its reputation on its eclectic and often unpredictable approach, said
the station manager, Harry Minot.

"Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, 'A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of
little minds,' " said Mr. Minot, the station's only paid employee. "Here at WPKN
we have made it a point to take our listeners down roads they normally wouldn't
travel."

Two years ago when the university, faced with mounting financial problems, cut
the station's $90,000 budget, WPKN's listeners came to its rescue. With the help
of its staff and more than 150 more volunteers, the station raised $100,000
during a monthlong on-the-air fund-raising campaign that has since become an
annual event held each October. As part of its independent status, said Mr.
Minot, WPKN has become the only listener-supported radio station in New England,
and perhaps the country, that accepts no program underwriting, commercial
advertising, grants or membership dues. He added that WPKN's transition to
self-supporting status has unified the station and brought its personalities
closer to their listeners, who often drop by for coffee, attend monthly meetings
and come on the air to oppose the views expressed in commentaries.

"We've never abandoned our commitment to the community," said Mr. Minot, who
estimated that the station had an audience of more than 30,000. "And I think
that's why our listeners feel a great responsibility to keep the station and its
message alive." Like a number of the station's 65 staff members, Mr. Minot said
he started as a volunteer in the early 1970's after working in commercial radio.
Mr. Minot, who was a disk jockey on a commercial station in Danbury, recalled
tuning to WPKN for the first time and hearing Ray Terlaga, whose specialty is
international music and readings of scientific news stories and prose.

"I had always been programmed to be up and bubbly and uncontroversial on the
air, no matter what," said Mr. Minot. "Then I found myself listening to this guy
who was talking very freely about how depressed he was, in between poetry
readings of Armand Rauband, who committed suicide, and I thought, 'Now here's a
station that does not compromise its artistic integrity.' "

One of WPKN's best assets, say staff members and listeners, is its relaxed, non
sequitur style. Programs segue from Latin jazz, classical music, rockabilly and
Cajun zydeco to discussions on topics like catching bluefish, art events,
natural hygiene and prison issues.

"There's probably many listeners who may not like all of what goes on at the
station but who listen anyway, to find out what happens next," said Cliff
Furnald, a freelance writer and musician whose Monday afternoon program offers
music from around the world. "I mean, where else are you going to hear Bulgarian
electronic experimental music, unless some character gets on the air and plays
it?"

Rod Ross, who has been as an announcer at WPKN since the early 1970's and has
worked at stations in New York and Connecticut, started volunteering at WPKN 15
years ago. His program, which is heard twice a month on Saturdays, includes
occasional journeys into the marine life and fishermen's lore of Long Island
Sound. "The station's genuine and honest approach gave me a totally new insight
into radio," he said. "Not only does it introduce you to various types of music,
at its heart WPKN is a complete social structure where your listeners become
your friends."

Mr. Ross's mother, Ruth Lampland Ross, a longtime arts reviewer in Fairfield
County, is 84 years old and the oldest member of the station staff. She augments
her roundup of the region's cultural events with personal reminiscences.

The 10,000-watt station first went on the air in the early 60's and now
broadcasts to most of Connecticut, Long Island and parts of Massachusetts and
Rhode Island. In those days, like many college radio stations, it trained
students who would later pursue work in commercial radio. Yet when Mr. Nolan and
other community announcers came on board, they began charting new ground.

Mr. Nolan recalled scouting black churches in New Haven, Hartford and Bridgeport
for gospel groups to perform live on his program in the 1970's. "Some of these
people had sung together for 40 years," he said, "and I can tell you that there
isn't anything like gospel music performed on the air live. It just knocked us
out."

He started the R. & B. Society after an on-the-air round-table discussion with
20 listeners on the social and cultural impact of rock and roll, he said. Over
the years, he said, his organization has lobbied the music industry to promote
dozens of American blues artists like Johnny Copeland and Memphis Slim, whose
careers had been stymied by the British rock movement of the 1960's and 1970's.

In between music sets, Mr. Nolan embellishes the records he plays with anecdotes
about the artists and their contribution to American music and often refers to
his listeners as cats and kittens. Over the harmonies of the Hollywood Flames
singing "Ride, Helen, Ride," Mr. Nolan told his audience recently: "Yessiree,
rock and roll, just as fresh today as it was 30 years ago. It changed the social
life for me and for you. Lest we never forget it."

As a student at the university in the 1970's Ruth Eddy found that listening to
"Antique Blues" inspired her to create her own style of radio show, which she
described recently as a spontaneous rendering of what's on her mind. "My
philosophy is based more on what stirs the heart," said Ms. Eddy, now a massage
therapist. "Often my programs reflect where I am in my life."

Her theme song, "Everything Reminds Me Of My Dog," by Jane Siberry, a folk
artist, opens her Thursday afternoon program. While Ms. Eddy conducts
interviews, reads essays, plays music or discusses health issues, her two dogs,
Lucy Carmichael and Fred Mertz, snooze at her feet.

"I don't refer to them as my pets," she tells her listeners. "Rather, I'm their
human companion."

Robust Opinions

Since the late 1970's the station has also offered a range of public affairs
programs that have included forums and listener call-ins on the Vietnam War, the
civil rights movement, nuclear power plants, United States policies in Central
America and, most recently, the Persian Gulf war. The public affairs
coordinator, Scott Harris, a pretrial intervention counselor for Norwalk
Economic Opportunity Now, said the station is planning to hold a forum on urban
problems later this fall and has invited the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Jack Kemp,
the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, to participate.

To have their own programs, volunteers must have Federal Communications
Commission operator's licenses and go through a training session at the studio
before presenting an audition tape, Mr. Minot said. If approved, the volunteers
often fill in for colleagues until a slot opens. In general, he added, those who
audition are musically sophisticated and hold robust opinions.

"There's no question that the personalities WPKN attracts are anything but
dull," he said.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ruth Eddy (with her dog Fred Mertz) and Bob Shapiro, left, are
among 120 volunteers at WPKN-FM at the University of Bridgeport. Harry Minot,
right, is manager of the station. (David LaBianca for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 43 words


A listing of cruises on Oct. 13 omitted a condition for voyages calling at Ho
Chi Minh City between Jan. 9 and Feb. 29 aboard the Caledonian Star of Salen
Lindblad Cruising. The voyages are subject to approval by the United States
Treasury Department.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Camera

BYLINE: By John Durniak;  John Durniak is a freelance writer, editor and
consultant on photography.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 55; Column 1; Style Desk; Pastimes Page

LENGTH: 620 words


John Loengard, a writer and photographer, has challenged the definition of what
a portrait is in his new book, "Life Faces." His thesis: a portrait is a picture
that captures a revealing face, or part of a face.

So here it is surprising to see John Olson's 1968 photograph of wounded American
troops on top of a tank during the Tet offensive in Vietnam. Ralph Crane's 1953
photos of the cavernous Hofbrauhaus in Munich, filled with small faces of
waitresses and beer-drinking customers, is a surprise, too.

The book, priced at $29.95 and published by Bob Adelman in conjunction with the
Macmillan Publishing Company, is a treasure of pictures shot over the past 55
years for Life magazine. Mr. Loengard's choices were made from more than a half
million pictures in the Time Warner Picture Collection.

If the Loengard book is any guide, there are as many ways to photograph faces as
there are photographers. And if every picture of the human face is a portrait,
Mr. Loengard makes a good case for his presentation. His examples run from the
Ralph Morse shot showing an astronaut being measured for a space helmet to W.
Eugene Smith's Spanish village death scene.

For people brought up with Life magazine as a weekly window on the world, this
book is a reminder of Life at its best. The photographs both tell stories and
ask questions. A great part of Life's strength was its staff's dedication to
showing the human face under all sorts of conditions.

Mr. Loengard is one of the major photographers shooting today. Once a Life staff
photographer and later the picture editor of the magazine, he included two of
his own pictures in his book, and they, too, push the definition of the portrait
to new ground.

The first is an extreme close-up showing Louis Armstrong's lip; the second, a
semi-silhouette of Bill Cosby, carries the detail and line of his eyeglasses,
floating them mysteriously on the featureless face.

"This book is not a collection of flattering portraits whose subjects have one
eye cocked toward posterity," Mr. Loengard writes in his introduction. "Most of
the pictures are candid in their description of a person. Few were made in a
studio. Many show people doing things that were more important than having their
pictures taken."

Following this philosophy, Mr. Loengard opens all kinds of new possibilities for
shooting and selecting portraits. And the portrait as news is of special
interest to the author. For example, we see Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower's reaction
to the news that President Harry S. Truman had dismissed Gen. Douglas MacArthur.

Most of the portraits were taken under pressure: pressure of a deadline,
pressure of events happening right before the photographer's eyes. The recording
of split-second expressions make this volume special.

One of the best ways to teach yourself photography is to select a great picture,
figure out the lighting, transpose the idea into your own surroundings and copy
the shot. I would like to offer five of Mr. Loengard's selections for such an
exercise.

First, Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's self-portrait; Lufti Ozkok's portrait of the
writer Samuel Beckett, looking pained and stern; Philippe Halsman's 1988 color
portrait of Elizabeth Taylor; Ken Heyman's portrait of three little girls acting
like adults, and Bruce Davidson's double portrait of teen-agers in Manhattan.

If Mr. Loengard's concept should catch hold, those who run picture contests
would wind up with only two categories: the first, portraits, and the second,
other pictures. In portraits, the subcategories would list every other category
we now have: studio, spot news, underwater, scenics, sports, and so on.
Photography would be a very different world.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Victoria Smith Has Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 49; Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


Victoria Elizabeth Smith, the daughter of Geoffrey N. Smith of Princeton, N.J.,
and Mary Whalen Newman of New York, was married yesterday at her mother's home
to Philip MacHale, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs. Theodore MacHale of White
Plains. Louis I. Kaplan, a retired justice of State Supreme Court in Manhattan,
performed the ceremony.

Mrs. MacHale, 27 years old, is an international tax consultant at Price
Waterhouse in New York. She graduated from Georgetown University. Her father is
the editor of Financial World Magazine in New York. Her mother is a vice
president of the Corcoran Group, a New York real-estate company.

Mr. MacHale, 47, of New York, is an actor who appears in television dramas and
commercials. He graduated from Colby College and received a master's degree in
international relations from the University of Southern California. He was a
Marine captain in Vietnam. His first marriage ended in divorce. His father was a
contract administrator for IBM in New York.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
In Southeast Asia, Reasons for Hope - and Caution

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Even as the Cambodians proclaimed the end to 13 years of civil war and signed a
peace treaty in Paris, there were reports of new fighting along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

Even as as the United States announced it would open talks to restore diplomatic
ties with Vietnam 16 years after the end of the Vietnam War, there was fear in
Hanoi that memories of American soldiers still missing from the war could extend
Vietnam's diplomatic and economic isolation for months, or years.

In Paris last week to sign the Cambodian peace treaty and also to meet with his
Vietnamese counterpart, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d declared "the
prospect of a new era in Southeast Asia," but he, too, was hedging his bets.

The Cambodian peace agreement, he suggested, was fragile "and I don't think
anyone can tell you there will for sure be lasting peace."

On Vietnam, Mr. Baker said the pace of the normalization talks was dependent on
Vietnam's help in determining the fate of 2,300 Americans still missing in
action from the war -- a provision that, the Vietnamese charge, has been used
before by Washington to delay.

"There's reason for optimism that perhaps this generation of war in Southeast
Asia is ending," said a senior Asian diplomat in Bangkok, the central diplomatic
listening post for Indochina. "I still think, however, that there are twists and
turns in this process -- and dangers -- that we cannot imagine."

One predictable danger continued to lurk in the jungles of Cambodia and in
border regions of Thailand in the guise of the Khmer Rouge, which, when it ruled
Cambodia under the leadership of the mysterious Pol Pot in the 1970's, unleashed
a revolution of genocidal terror that left more than one million people dead
from murder, starvation or disease.

Under the United Nations-sponsored peace treaty, the Khmer Rouge becomes a full
member of the coalition government that will rule Cambodia until free elections
can be held.

The Western and Asian nations that brokered the peace treaty said that, since
the Khmer Rouge was the largest and best-armed rebel group in the civil war,
there was no option but to bring the Khmer Rouge into the negotiations.

Yet there was little reassurance from the Khmer Rouge that it had mended its
ways. There was evidence, in fact, that Pol Pot, who is believed to be in hiding
at a jungle base in Thailand, was once again willing to sacrifice Cambodian
innocents for his revolution -- in this case, refugees under the Khmer Rouge
control in Thailand. The Khmer Rouge threatened to push the refugees back across
the border into malarial, mine-strewn stretches of Cambodian jungle, apparently
in hopes of intimidating them into voting for Pol Pot or his proxies in a
national election.

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Collapsed Cambodian Government propaganda sign extolling the
virtues of soldiers and workers and their socialist struggle to build a
Communist on USSR Boulevard near the outskirts of Phnom Penh. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Garment Makers Find New Home in Brooklyn

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 959 words


Beyond a sprawling storage room piled high with fabrics and filled with rack
upon rack of skirts, scores of mostly Chinese workers attend to the meticulous
but mind-numbingly repetitive tasks of attaching zippers and pockets with row
upon row of Japanese-made Juki sewing machines.

The scene, at first glance, is familiar to anyone who has ventured into the
small garment-making shops that have been a fixture for generations in crowded
Chinatown and in commercial buildings in lower Manhattan. But this garment
contractor, called the Metropolitan Fashion Center, neither fits the Jacob
Riis-like image of a brutalizing sweatshop nor is it in Manhattan.

The center, which is in the historic Brooklyn Army Terminal in Sunset Park, is
only the most prominent of a growing number of garment manufacturers and
contractors that have moved to the 97-acre terminal, which is being
rehabilitated as an industrial park. The terminal, which was the embarkation
point for millions of American troops during World War II, has become a magnet,
particularly for Chinese-owned garment-makers because of its proximity to New
York's third and newest Chinatown, in Sunset Park.

Economic Success Story

Although it accounts for only a small part of the city's garment trade, the
terminal is a rare economic success story for Brooklyn in 1991, and a major
provider of jobs for Sunset Park.

"We moved here in February because Manhattan has become more expensive, and this
gives us more space," said Edison Wong, managing director of this consortium of
22 Chinatown-based garment-makers, explaining why they have set up shop on the
fifth floor of the terminal's Building B.

Indeed, Mr. Wong's consortium is far from alone in the 5 million-square-foot,
eight-story building. Two floors below Metropolitan Fashion, at E. B. Design,
dozens of women in white frocks and caps laminate thousands of earrings a day,
while others glue rhinestones to pieces of costume jewelry. And on the fourth
floor, at J. Abouchar & Sons, women fold and staple pricing bar codes onto
mountains of multicolored towels that are embroidered next door in a room filled
with the relentless din of 100 sewing machines.

"This is the cleanest and best-developed factory I've worked in," said Sean
Reagan, a designer for E. B. Design, whose 160 employees, mostly of Chinese,
Hispanic or Russian descent, reflect the polyglot population of southwestern
Brooklyn. The company had moved from Coney Island.

2,000 Jobs at Terminal

About 40 garment- and apparel-making companies, with about 2,000 employees, have
moved into the partially renovated waterfront complex in the last few years,
said Ira N. Brophy, the terminal's director of industrial business development.

And because of economic need, demographic change and city planning, the Army
Terminal is rapidly becoming a new hub for New York City's garment industry.
Small manufacturers have been attracted to the building not only because of its
comparatively low rents but also because of its proximity to the expanding
community of Chinese immigrants who have settled in Sunset Park, largely since
the mid-1980's -- and who provide a convenient labor pool for an industry that
has long employed many Chinese workers.

Other apparel-related companies that have moved in include Crest Shoulder Pads,
True Colors Sportswear, with a $10 million-a-year business in medium-priced
sportswear, and Frank Mode, which makes women's coats and employs about 200
sewing-machine operators.

Specialized garment contractors, like Gem Knitting, Lazer Beam and A & T
Stitching and Pleating, also rent space in the terminal, as do even more
esoteric fabric-related businesses, like Linen Star, which buys close-out sheets
from manufacturers and remakes them to fit the needs of hospitals.

Also typical of the many light-manufacturing tenants are Lowell Light, which
makes photographic lighting equipment, and C & W Sewing Machine Attachments,
founded by Felix Salganik, a Soviet emigre.

Among the other tenants are the in-house printing divisions of
financial-services companies, like Smith Barney and Salomon Brothers; the New
York Railcar Corporation, a renovator of subway cars, and a repair shop for the
Circle Line sightseeing boats.

But space, rents of about $5 a square foot and a nearby population desperately
in need of jobs are not the only reasons that this mammoth, indoor industrial
park is among New York's relatively few economic success stories in 1991. The
landmark building has been transformed into a futuristic complex that, as Mr.
Reagan said, "is like something out of 'Blade Runner.' " In fact, the Ridley
Scott movie, as well as episodes of the television series "Kojak" and music
videos by performers like the Rolling Stones have been filmed here.

More than 3 million American soldiers passed through the terminal en route to
combat during World War II, but it fell into disuse in the late 1960's after
serving as an Army postal building and as a site where bodies of American
servicemen killed in the Vietnam War were brought.

The city bought the terminal in 1981 for $8.5 million, renovated the northern
half of Building B by 1987 and the southern half last fall at a cost of $77
million. Renovation of part of Building A is to begin soon, but a timetable for
work on other buildings in the complex has not been set, Mr. Brophy said.

Despite New York's economic problems, Mr. Brophy said the city's investment has
been vindicated by the terminal's growth into a center for the garment industry
and other light manufacturing. "Our public purpose has been to stop the
industrial out-migration from New York," he said. "The 40 companies here are 40
companies that probably would have left the city."

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A growing number of garment manufacturers and contractors have
moved to the Brooklyn Army Terminal in Sunset Park. Although it is still a small
part of the city's garment trade, it is a major provider of jobs for the area.
At E. B. Design, workers laminated costume jewelry; The terminal has attracted
Chinese-owned businesses because it is near a Chinatown in Sunset Park.
(Photographs by Keith Meyers/The New York Times)

Map of an area of Brooklyn, indicating Brooklyn Army Terminal.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Debate on Abortion, 2 Girls Make It Real

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words


Gianna Jessen, the girl who lived when she was supposed to die, and Becky Bell,
the girl who died when she was supposed to live, have become the symbols of the
nation's bitter debate over abortion -- poster girls whose stories are being
shrewdly marketed by their supporters to keep passions high.

To sell anything in America, even an idea, it helps to have a human face and
story to make it real.

For anti-abortion groups, who are trying to make the case that each of the 1.6
million abortions performed in this country each year kills a living being, the
face is that of Gianna Jessen. The California teen-ager's mother tried a saline
abortion 14 years ago and it left Gianna with cerebral palsy, but did not kill
her. Gianna has become a regular on the anti-abortion circuit, telling her story
and singing Christian contemporary songs.

One Story's Power

For abortion-rights groups trying to show the hardships women suffer when
abortion is restricted, the face is that of Becky Bell, a 17-year-old
Indianapolis girl who died in 1988 from a botched abortion because she was
afraid to get her parents' consent, as the state law required. Since Becky's
death, her parents, Karen and Bill, have traveled to 23 states to testify or
lobby against parental notification laws, and advocates say it was largely the
power of the Bells' personal appearances that persuaded Oregon voters to defeat
a referendum on such a law last year.

Gianna, who lives in San Clemente, Calif., is described by the National Right to
Life Committee as an "abortion survivor" who was scheduled to die when her
mother, then 17, decided to have an abortion almost seven months into her
pregnancy.

The baby was left with cerebral palsy from the injection of saline solution into
the womb, but she was born alive, taken to a hospital by a nurse at the abortion
clinic, and finally adopted by an abortion opponent who told her the
circumstances of her birth two years ago, on Christmas Day.

Ever since then, Gianna and her adoptive mother, Diana DePaul -- Jessen is a
stage name the girl concocted last year in honor of her "all-time best friend,
Jessie" -- have spent much of their time on the road, with Gianna telling her
story and singing at concerts and for church groups and right-to-life
conventions.

Since the two appeared at the National Right to Life convention in Atlanta last
spring, bookings have been fast and furious, with a taping for the "700 Club"
Christian television program last month, another for the Maury Povich show this
month, and, in between, concerts in Mexico and dozens of right-to-life events in
this country. The Warren Duffy Organization, which handles their schedule and
that of other Christian groups, says Gianna and her mother are booked through
December, usually receiving a $500 honorarium and expenses.

'I Will See Them in Heaven'

Gianna sings some of her own compositions and some Christian contemporary songs,
which she dedicates to "the little babies that die every day from abortion,
because they are my friends and I will see them in heaven someday." A
spokeswoman for the Right to Life Committee says their appearances are extremely
powerful.

"Everyone gets tears in their eyes when Gianna stands there and says how glad
she is to be alive," said Nancy Myers, a spokeswoman for the Right to Life
Committee. "She's really an amazing person, very up, and it means something when
this really cute, outgoing teen-ager says she's not a lump of tissue, that this
is what abortion is all about -- real people."

Like Gianna Jessen, Mr. and Mrs. Bell, the former Homecoming King and Queen at
their Indianapolis high school, have a wholesome, all-American appeal. He plays
golf, served in the Army Reserves and worked as a salesman; she was a full-time
homemaker after their children were born, and volunteered as a teacher's aide at
a local elementary school.

But since their daughter's death, they have spent most of their time working to
spread her story, telling how they would once have supported parental
notification laws, certain that in their tight-knit family, Becky would want to
tell them if she were pregnant and considering an abortion.

Then they tell of the Saturday night she came home ill, her refusal to see a
doctor until the following Friday, the rush to the hospital where Becky lost
consciousness and died, and the shock of being told she had died from a septic
abortion. They have appeared on "60 Minutes," walking through their daughter's
graveyard and talking about how they blame the law for their daughter's death.
Their story has appeared in a variety of publications, including Seventeen
magazine and Rolling Stone.

Mrs. Bell tells, vividly, about finding a note from Becky, after her death,
saying that she wished she could tell her parents everything, but that she had
to "deal with it" herself because, "I can't afford to lose you, too."

The Becky Bell Campaign

For a year, ending in July, the Bells were under contract with the Fund for the
Feminist Majority, receiving $500 a week for their efforts to prevent parental
notification laws. Last fall, the Fund started The Becky Bell Campaign, selling
bracelets with her name on them, like the ones worn after the Viet Nam war to
keep alive the fight to recover prisoners of war.

The Fund credits the Bells for the defeat of the Oregon referendum last year,
the nation's first state referendum on parental notification. A few months
before the election, polls had shown opposition at 22 percent to requiring
parental notification, but after the Bells' tour, including rallies, television
appearances and talk shows, 52 percent of the voters supported teen-agers' free
access to abortion.

Like Gianna Jessen, the Bells often move audiences to tears and standing
ovations when they tell with raw and obvious pain how they had lost the daughter
who sought to spare them the pain that she thought her pregnancy would cause
them.

The Bells see the telling of Becky's story as a mission: shortly after the Becky
Bell Campaign began, Mrs. Bell told a reporter, "I feel I have an obligation to
tell people what happened to my daughter so it won't happen to them."

Mrs. Bell said earlier this month that despite the $500 a week from the
abortion-rights group, she and her husband have used their savings and no longer
have enough money to pay their son's college tuition, so Mr. Bell is now looking
for a job. But Mrs. Bell says that she will keep making speeches and
appearances.

"It's in my soul and in my heart," she said. "And every time I think that my
little girl died because of a law I probably would have voted for, I know I must
never be quiet about this again."

Questions About Their Stories

Both the Bells' story and that of Gianna Jessen have been questioned. The
National Right to Life Committee says that doctors who have examined Becky
Bell's autopsy report dispute the conclusion that she died of a botched
abortion. Abortion-rights advocates, for their part, stress that it is
impossible for them to verify that Gianna was aborted because her birth
certificate and other records are confidential.

Ms. DePaul will not identify Gianna's birth mother, the doctor who performed the
abortion, the clinic or the nurse who, she said, rescued Gianna by transferring
her to a hospital nursery.  But to support her story she released some of the
medical records from the adoption, including a section called "Complications of
Birth," which has the notation, "Born during saline abortion."

Like the Bells, Ms. DePaul and Gianna see their work as their mission.

"We do what we do because we feel called to do it, to educate people," said Ms.
DePaul. "We're not out to sensationalize anything or raise anybody's ratings or
have debates about abortion, because there's nothing to be debated."

Ms. DePaul said she had always worried about how to tell Gianna about the
circumstances of her birth, feeling that it was part of her medical history,
something she ought to know as she faced repeated surgery to help restore free
movement to the limbs tightened by cerebral palsy.

"Gianna's always known how I feel about abortion," said Ms. DePaul. "I always
explained everything to her, when I was going to talk to pro-life groups, or why
we had fetuses in formaldehyde around the house. I wanted to tell her before she
was dealing with adolescence. So two years ago, when it was Christmas and she
said, 'Mom, why do I really have cerebral palsy, what really happened to me?' "

But Ms. DePaul said she never had to tell Gianna.

"She looked straight into my eyes and said, 'I was aborted, right?' And once she
had digested it, she felt kind of like, 'If I've got to have this problem, at
least it's for a really good reason.' "

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gianna Jessen, left, who was born handicapped after her mother
tried to abort a pregnancy, with her adoptive mother, Diana DePaul (Monica
Almeida for The New York Times); Becky Bell, right, a 17-year-old Indianapolis
girl who died in 1988 from a botched abortion, is seen with her mother, Karen.
(CBS)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 28, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 5; Style Desk

LENGTH: 331 words


JOSEPH A. CALIFANOhas come up with a new answer to a question that intrigues
students of the pivotal political year of 1968: Did Lyndon B. Johnson sabotage
Hubert H. Humphrey's chance of succeeding him?

Mr. Califano, who was often at President Johnson's side from the time he
awakened until he went to bed during his second term, believes he did not work
directly to undermine Mr. Humphrey's campaign, The Associated Press reports.

But he also suggests that at one point President Johnson schemed to be succeeded
by neither Mr. Humphrey, his vice president, nor Republican RICHARD M. NIXON but
another Republican, Nelson A. Rockefeller.

Mr. Califano says President Johnson "despised" Mr. Nixon and became furious at
Vice President Humphrey for not making use of wiretap information that would
have portrayed Mr. Nixon as trying to undermine efforts to end the war in
Vietnam.

That's not the way CLARK CLIFFORD remembers it.

In his memoirs last spring, Mr. Clifford, an L.B.J. confidant, says President
Johnson felt "ambivalent" toward his vice president, and delayed a bombing halt
in the closing days of the campaign to Mr. Humphrey's detriment and Mr. Nixon's
benefit.

Mr. Nixon won by a hair. The election ended a succession of Democratic
presidencies and turned the Government away from a social activist course and
onto a more conservative track.

Historians say the nation's course would have been dramatically different had
Mr. Humphrey won -- as he might have if relations between Mr. Johnson and Mr.
Humphrey had played out differently.

Mr. Califano's newly published memoir is "The Triumph & Tragedy of Lyndon
Johnson." He says President Johnson, after withdrawing as a candidate in March,
maneuvered to get Mr. Rockefeller, then Governor of New York, into the race.

"While both Rockefeller and Humphrey would attempt to nourish the Great Society
programs, Johnson seemed to believe that Rockefeller had a greater chance of
success," Mr. Califano wrote.

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

The Middle East peace talks begin today in Madrid under a mood of guarded
optimism after both Israeli and Palestinian leaders issued encouraging
statements. Page A1

News analysis: The conference has already highlighted new relationships between
Arabs and Arabs, between Israel and the United States and most importantly
between the United States and the Soviet Union. A11

Two scholars serve as Palestinian's data base A12

At Israel funeral, mood is defiant A12

Mubarak warns Israelis on East Jerusalem issue A12

Peace talks offer a maze of issues A11

Presidents Bush and Gorbachev met, and later Mr. Bush praised his "friend" and
urged the restive Soviet republics to give him power to negotiate foreign aid
programs. A10

The Ukraine's independence drive no longer seems like an improbable, passing
whim. Presidential candidates staunchly support independence, and the Parliament
has authorized the formation of an army and a central bank. A1

President Walesa offered to serve as his own Prime Minister over Poland's
fragmented legislature, a move that was immediately condemned by some as a step
toward one-man rule. A1

Medieval Dubrovnik confronts life under siege A5

"Boat people" would be returned by the tens of thousands from detention centers
in Hong Kong to Vietnam under an agreement reached by the British and Vietnamese
governments. A1

A U.S. trade ban on Haiti was announced by the Administration, sharply raising
the pressure on the hemisphere's poorest country to return to constitutional
rule. A3

Tokyo Journal: A TV idol unclothed A4

Belgian troops, defying Mobuto, stay in Zaire to help foreigners A6

NATIONAL A16-23

A far-reaching anti-smog program, based on California's rules requiring cleaner
cars, would be adopted by nine Eastern states and the District of Columia under
an agreement reached by the states' governors and the Mayor of Washington. A1

U.S. unveils rules to limit acid rain A23

The economy expanded for the first time in a year during the July-September
quarter but the recovery was already losing momentum by Labor Day, the Commerce
Department reported. A1

Despite billions in tax increases, states cut back A16

House leaders say compromise possible on jobless benefits A20

A former senior White House aide said he had terminated a $600,000 legal
contract to represent the former head of Saudi Arabian intelligence who is under
scrutiny in the investigation of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
D1

Charges that the Reagan campaign struck a deal with Iran in 1980 to delay the
release of American hostages until after the election will be investigated by an
inquiry authorized by the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. A22

A Pennsylvania Senate candidate, Harris Wofford, has made sharp gains in voter
polls by being a strong advocate of national health insurance. His opponent is
former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh.  A16

U.S. and states head for clash over medicaid A21

Strikes cripple six Los Angeles hospitals A20

The suspect in the assassination of Medgar Evers, the civil rights leader, has
been linked by prosecutors to a little-known racist group whose members are said
to consider themselves "God's executioners." Prosecutors are seeking to block
his release from jail on bond. A18

New radar images of Venus reveal that the planet has apparently been resurfaced
by volcanic eruptions and its second-highest mountain covered with lava from an
active volcano, scientists reported.  A21

Computer is pushed to edge to solve old chess problem A18

Split on homosexuality, church rejects a prospective leader A19

REGIONAL B1-6

New York City's public hospitals, their direction and the quality of care they
provide are greatly influenced by large private medical schools, which provide
them with many doctors. This influence is at the heart of a simmering
controversy.  A1

Leonard Jeffries's reappointment as chairman of the black studies department at
City College was denounced by Governor Cuomo, even as Dr. Jeffries complained
that he had not been given a chance to defend himself before a decision was made
to limit his term. B1

Governor Florio urged voters to "send a message" to President Bush by voting
against Republicans in the elections next Tuesday for control of the New Jersey
State Legislature.  B1

The Suffolk County Executive, Patrick Halpin, is a Democrat in a county thick
with Republicans. But in his re-election bid he seems to be running more against
the area's poor fiscal shape than against his Republican opponent, Robert
Gaffney.  B1

Weicker in a deal to restore jobs B3

Support for needle-exchange plans to combat AIDS has been growing on many
fronts, as reflected by acquittals for those arrested for giving out needles
illegally, studies indicating the programs are effective, and an endorsement by
the National Commission on AIDS. B1

The mother of a Utah tourist who was slain during a subway robbery testified
that her family had hoped to see her son alive at the hospital where he was
taken but that he had died on the way there. B3

Two are killed in a shootout at a Harlem gambling den B3

Bias cited in beating of two blacks B3

Public hearings will take input on shelter issue B4

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Living Section

Few people will eat whatever crawls onto the plate C1

I'll have my milk with cream, and pass the butter C1

Eating Well C1

At hash houses, which fork?  C3

In Nepal, artichokes teach a lesson C10

Wine Talk C12

Arts/Entertainment

Parisians flock to "Les Mis" C15

Theater: "The White Rose" C15

Film: "Black Robe" C15

Music: The Pop Life C15

Dance: Works by Meredith Monk C14

Word and Image: Two views of the Bill of Rights C19

Two looks at Paul McCartney C20

Education Page B7

Science centers help schools bring classes alive

To teach distant pupils, educators in Kentucky turn on TV

Obituaries D25

Ben Hill Willingham, executive in apparel and textile field

Dr. Joseph F. Fletcher, pioneer in field of medical ethics

Frederick G. Frost Jr., architect

Sports B8-13

Baseball: It's Showalter for Yanks B9

Columns: Anderson on Steinbrenner and Showalter B9

Smith on Baseball B11

Football: Discussing tapes, Dye is anxious but firm B9

Hockey: Rangers edge North Stars B9

Islanders top Sharks B13

Marathon: New York organizers look ahead B10

Health Page C13

Simplifying surgical removal of precancerous lesions

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials A24

Momentum in Madrid

Why the delay on Dr. Jeffries?

Computer speech, also free

Mary Cantwell: Downtown

Letters A24

Anna Quindlen: Things that don't go bump A25

Leslie H. Gelb: Mideast tricks or treaties?  A25

Arthur Hertzberg: Not love but marriage in Madrid A25

Raghida Dergham: A call for candor by Arabs A25

Stephen Breyer: Russian judges want real justice A25

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Britain and Vietnam to Force Refugees to Return

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 29


Britain and Vietnam signed an agreement today opening the way for the forcible
repatriation of tens of thousands of Vietnamese refugees now being detained in
Hong Kong.

The agreement comes one week after Hanoi agreed to accept the return of 222
Vietnamese "doublebackers," people who had come to Hong Kong once before, been
paid a cash incentive to return to Vietnam and then re-entered Hong Kong
illegally a second time.

Officials said the first of those people would be returned to Vietnam sometime
next month. They will be flown from Hong Kong on chartered planes under armed
guard.

Under the terms of today's accord, the authorities in Hong Kong will begin
proceedings immediately to turn back any new illegal immigrants who arrive there
from Vietnam. Later, the two Governments say they will extend the plan to deport
many of the 63,500 Vietnamese who are confined in detention centers in Hong
Kong, and cannot prove they are entitled to asylum as refugees from political
persecution.

At Odds With U.S.

The agreement, reached after months of negotiations, seeks to resolve the fate
of people whose plight has become one of the more enduring legacies of the
Vietnam War. The Vietnamese who ended up in Hong Kong in recent years are among
the final wave of the so-called "boat people," the more than one million who
fled Vietnam's Communist Government by raft and boat after the war ended in
1975.

But in signing the agreement, London appears to have put itself at odds with the
United States, which continues to oppose forced repatriations to Vietnam for any
reason. Officials in London said they had consulted closely with Washington
during recent weeks, but refused to discuss what, if any, agreements or
understanding had been reached prior to signing the agreement with Hanoi.

Earlier this year, President Bush and Prime Minister John Major exchanged
letters on the boat people, and the British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd,
said earlier this month he was hoping to convince the Bush Administration to
acquiese in the matter.

Officials in London have argued that most of the boat people are not fleeing
political repression in Vietnam, but rather are economic refugees who left
Vietnam because they are seeking a better life in Hong Kong, the British colony
that will revert to China in 1997.

Opposition parties in Britain have also said they would oppose any agreement
that would require people to be repatriated against their will. George Foulkes,
a Member of Parliament and spokesman for Britain's Labor Party, expressed fears
that the agreement will mean that Vietnamese will be repatriated "at the point
of the gun."

A spokesman for the Foreign Office here refused to say whether the Government
was prepared to use force against Vietnamese who do want to return to Vietnam.
But in Hong Kong, Alistair Asprey, Secretary of Security for the colony, said
the police were authorized to use force if necessary.

"We will attempt to let them return home with dignity," he said. "Whether they
do so in the final analysis depends on their behavior."

In an attempt to calm fears among the Vietnamese in Hong Kong's detention camps,
the Foreign Office issued a statement today saying that Hanoi had "confirmed"
that no illegal immigrant who returns to Vietnam under the terms of the
agreement will face persecution. The statement also said that Vietnam promised
"to facilitate the monitoring of those who return by United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, to insure that those guaranteeds are fully
respected."

In recent weeks, thousands of Vietnamese inside the camps have staged peaceful
demonstrations against the repatriation plan and have threatened hunger strikes,
suicides and armed resistance should the Hong Kong authorities try to force them
to return to Vietnam against their will.

In 1989, when Britian forcibly returned 51 boat people, most of them women and
children, to Vietnam, the action touched off riots in the detention camps and
brought sharp protests from the United States.

Under today's agreement, any new arrivals will undergo screening immediately, a
process that takes about six weeks, to determine whether they qualify for
refugee status. If they do not, they will be returned immediately.

By dealing first with the new arrivals, officials say they can freeze the
population already in the camps, a number that has grown by about 20,000 this
year alone.

Of the estimated 63,500 Vietnamese currently in the Hong Kong camps, about 5,000
have qualified for official refugee status, meaning they fled Vietnam for
political rather than economic reasons, and are eligible for resettlment. The
others are awaiting disposition of their requests for asylum.

About 18,000 others have been classified as illegal immigrants rather than
political refugees, and are therefore subject to deportation. The status of
40,500 more has yet to be determined, and the disposition of all the cases could
take two to three years, officials in Hong Kong say.

A spokesman for the Foreign Office said the details on the deportation of those
already in the camps in Hong Kong had not yet been worked out, and discussions
were still continuing.

                             --------------------


U.S. Repeats Opposition

WASHINGTON, Oct. 29 (Special to The New York Times) -- Responding to the British
announcement, the United States repeated today that it opposed the use of force
to return boat people to Vietnam.

"We oppose forced or mandatory repatriation," the spokeswoman said. "We expect
that under this agreement there would be no use of force."

The United States officials were vague about what steps the United States might
take if Britain used force to return boat people to Vietnam.

Administration officials said that they understood the problems Britain faced in
Hong Kong, with the thousands of boat people who do not qualify for refugee
status. But the American officials said that, as far as they knew, President
Bush had not given Prime Minister John Major any reason to expect the United
States to acquiesce if Britain uses force.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Adirondack Park Land Swap on Ballot Threatens Environment

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 490 words


To the Editor:

On Nov. 5, the people of New York State will be asked to accept or reject a
proposal to trade a tract of Adirondack Forest Preserve for a parcel of private
land. Since 1894, Article 14 of the New York State Constitution has forbidden
the sale, lease or exchange of forest preserve. Ballot Proposal 2 is an
amendment to the constitution to allow the transfer of 50 acres of forever-wild
Adirondack Forest Preserve from the people of New York to the town of Arietta.

In exchange, Arietta would transfer to the state 53 acres of "true forest land."
According to the ballot language, the purpose of the amendment is to "provide
for the extension of the runway and landing strip at the Piseco Airport."

This land-swap proposal is ill conceived, unnecessary and contrary to the very
existence of the forest preserve. The proponents of the amendment are seeking
Federal funds to expand the Piseco Airport for the benefit of a handful of
users. This airport, in the southern Adirondack Park, is bordered on three sides
by state wilderness and wild forest areas, and is adjacent to the
Northville-Lake Placid trail. Expansion of the airport will degrade the quality
of the wetlands and clear streams that feed Piseco Lake. The proposed amendment
would facilitate this airport expansion, yet no environmental study of any kind
has yet occurred.

Proponents claim that the amendment is related only to safety. They state that
they only wish to remove trees on the forest preserve that are in violation of
Federal Aviation Administration criteria. Yet if this were true, why does the
amendment language allow the expansion of the airport and not merely an easement
for tree trimming?

According to the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, of the 144 airports in
the state, 104 have trees that are obstructions according to F.A.A. regulations.
We had the opportunity to fly into Piseco Airport last June with an experienced
commercial pilot and Vietnam War veteran. We landed and took off safely in a
four-passenger Cessna 172 with more than 100 feet of clearance above the trees
on the forest preserve. There has never been an accident or even a close call
related to these trees.

The 53 acres of private land to be traded are in no way of equal value to the
state land. They are behind an industrial plant and consist of lands recently
logged and steep ledge. In contrast, the forest preserve is ecologically rich
wetland and provides watershed and filtration for the principal feeders of
Piseco Lake.

Article 14 of the State Constitution and its forever-wild provision is the very
heart of the Adirondack Park. The weakening of Article 14 is not the way to
celebrate the park's 100th anniversary.

SHELLEY L. KATH
THOMAS R. KLIGERMAN
Albany, Oct. 21, 1991

The writers are with the Sierra Club as, respectively, legislative director of
its Atlantic chapter and chairman of its Adirondack committee.

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Refugees in Hong Kong Appeal to U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 399 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Oct. 30


Vietnamese refugees at Hong Kong's biggest camp for boat people appealed to the
Bush Administration today to prevent their forced repatriation to their
homeland.

Three refugee leaders at the Whitehead detention center said by telephone that
they were depending on the United States to block Hong Kong's plans to deport
more than 50,000 boat people.

Under an accord signed by Britain and Vietnam on Tuesday, Hanoi dropped its
resistance to forcible repatriation and agreed to take back all refugees who
were believed to have fled poverty rather than political persecution. Many of
the refugees have said they would prefer death to returning to Vietnam.

"If we had a chance to talk to President Bush, we would appeal to his humanity
to save our lives in this terrible situation," a refugee leader at the Whitehead
camp said today, speaking through an interpreter.

More than half of the camp's 24,000 Vietnamese have already been refused refugee
status and face the prospect of being sent home.

[A brawl involving 200 refugees began before dawn at the Whitehead camp, The
Associated Press reported. Camp officials said that guards had fired tear gas to
break up the melee.]

In Washington, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon reaffirmed American
opposition to the forced repatriation of Vietnamese refugees.

Asked if the Bush Adminstration had any plans to prevent Hong Kong from acting
on the agreement to return the Veitnamese, Mr. Solomon said, "Let's just say
there have been, and I'm sure will continue to be, high-level exchanges between
our Government and the British authorities on this issue."

The refugees in the Hong Kong camps were among the final wave of the so-called
boat people, citizens who fled Vietnam's Communist Government by boat and raft
after the war ended in 1975.

More than 20,000 of the more than 63,000 boat people in Hong Kong have already
been classified as non-refugees, according to criteria set by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

"The United States is the very country which we place most hope in," another
Vietnamese leader at the Whitehead camp said by telephone. He asserted that the
refugees who face deportation were even considering mass suicide.

"If armed police enter the camp to force us back," he said, "we will tie our
hands and legs together so we are unified, and we will kill ourselves."


LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA LETS GO 442 FROM ITS JAILS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 30 (AP)


The Cambodian Government said today that it had freed 442 political prisoners
this month and that more releases were planned.

It was the first significant release of prisoners in years by the
Vietnamese-installed Government. Until recently, the Phnom Penh Government would
not directly confirm that it was holding political prisoners.

The official Cambodian news agency S.P.K. said in a report monitored here in
Bangkok that the 442 political prisoners were among 1,034 prisoners released in
October.

Mandated Under Accord

The rapid release of political prisoners was mandated under a peace accord
signed last week in Paris ending the Cambodian civil war. The treaty, signed by
the Cambodian Government and three guerrilla factions, . provides for
disarmament and power-sharing under United Nations supervision and paves the way
for elections in 1993.

The Cambodian Government had said it would release all political prisoners once
the treaty was signed to end the civil war, which began when the Vietnamese
invaded in late 1978.

Could Be Up to 2,000 Prisoners

The official news agency's report quoted a Home Ministry official, Sal Sakhan,
as saying that more prisoners -- "especially political ones" -- would be freed
in accordance with the recent developments in Cambodia.

No firm estimates are available on the total number of political prisoners in
Cambodia. A report in March by the human rights group Amnesty International
named 235 political prisoners, but experts have estimated that up to 2,000 are
imprisoned.

Human rights groups have accused Phnom Penh of widespread human rights abuses,
including the detention of people who backed the guerrillas politically or
espoused anti-Communist views.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 31, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
On an Iowa Farm, a Tragedy With Echoes of Lear

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1026 words


A Thousand Acres
By Jane Smiley
371 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.

Does this sound familiar?

At the opening of Jane Smiley's latest novel, "A Thousand Acres," the narrator,
a woman named Virginia Cook Smith, describes the farm in Zebulon County, Iowa,
that she and her two younger sisters, Rose and Caroline, have grown up on: "Paid
for, no encumbrances, as flat and fertile, black, friable and exposed as any
piece of land on the face of the earth."

And then comes the shock of recognition. In 1979, the three sisters' father,
Laurence (Larry) Cook, decides to form a corporation out of his farm holdings
and give each of his daughters a third of it. What do they think of the plan?
"It's a good idea," says the oldest, who is called Ginny. "It's a great idea,"
says the second daughter, Rose. "I don't know," says the youngest, Caroline, who
is a lawyer.

"You don't want it, my girl, you're out," says Larry to Caroline. "It's as
simple as that." So the farm is divided into two instead of three, with Ginny
and Rose to take turns looking after Larry. And a tragedy of ingratitude,
madness and generational conflict begins.

Now of course upon reading this, the reader's mind divides. Part of it remains
absorbed by the foreground, whose domestic details and bucolic rhythms Ms.
Smiley has the skill to dramatize effectively, as readers of such earlier books
of hers as two collections of novellas, "The Age of Grief" (1987) and "Ordinary
Love and Good Will" (1989) can attest.

Up to this point, these details and rhythms have focused on Ginny's devotion to
Rose and Rose's two daughters, toward whom she feels ambivalent since she
herself has suffered five miscarriages, and on the return to a neighboring farm
of Jess Clark, who ran off 13 years earlier to avoid having to serve in Vietnam
and to whom Ginny now finds herself strongly attracted.

But the other part of one's mind flies away to Shakespeare and wonders just how
far Ms. Smiley is going to take her story's parallels to "King Lear," as well as
what point the exercise serves, particularly telling the story from the
putatively evil sisters' point of view.

As it turns out, the author seems intent on taking the parallel surprisingly
far. Larry, the father, grows steadily more eccentric and demanding, ordering
expensive new furniture that he insists on leaving out in the rain and driving
his pickup truck around at night while drunk. When Ginny and Rose try to rein
him in, he curses them viciously, wanders off into a stormy night and later
shows up at the home of Jess Clark's father, Harold, who, like the Earl of
Gloucester, on whom he is roughly modeled, has two sons, Loren and Jess, in
rivalry with each other.

You feel a growing apprehension that Ms. Smiley may be going all the way, that
Harold Clark is somehow going to be blinded ("Out, vile jelly!"), that Ginny and
Rose will eventually be poisoned and stabbed, and that Caroline will end up dead
in Larry's arms. It is admittedly an abstract sort of trepidation, detached from
the immediate and always compelling experience of "A Thousand Acres." But you
never for a moment lose it.

As for what the point of this experiment may be: "King Lear" is so thematically
rich and complex -- bursting the bounds of the theater, as Charles Lamb observed
-- that any number of possibilities may be seen in what Ms. Smiley is trying to
do. But two in particular seem to this reader to be especially insistent.

In commenting on the rituals of farm life, she keeps emphasizing how important
appearances are to a rural community. "Most issues on a farm return to the issue
of keeping up appearances," Ginny observes deep into her narrative.
Paradoxically, although the reader sympathizes with Ginny and Rose, the
community they live in takes their father's side and regards them almost exactly
as a reader of "King Lear" sees Goneril and Regan. One thing that Ms. Smiley
succeeds in demonstrating in "A Thousand Acres" is that the reality of
Shakespeare's play could have been different from its outward appearance.
Although she is never even faintly ideological about it, what she has written
can even be seen as a feminist's version of the Lear story.

The novel is also deeply concerned with human society's relation to nature, just
as Shakespeare was in questioning whether Lear was doing the natural thing by
deeding his kingdom to his daughters, or whether Gloucester's bastard son,
Edmund, was nonetheless more a natural than unnatural son. In "A Thousand
Acres," much of the evil that is set loose is a result of humans attempting to
exert control over nature. It could be said that the poison that ended up
killing Regan harms the whole community in "A Thousand Acres." So, at least,
Jess Clark, an apostle of organic farming, believes.

Ms. Smiley has taken daring risks with her tragedy in a cornfield. There are
moments when the results are grating. It seems too much to have made Larry Cook
a sexual abuser of Ginny and Rose in their childhood. Lear himself is hugely
egotistical, but to push his selfishness into pathological monstrosity insults
him retroactively and robs him of majesty.


And words are sometimes put in characters' mouths that seem like mindless
parodies of Shakespeare's language. "Daddy's not much for untamed nature," Ginny
tells Jess in one scene. In another, she says, "I know shooting stars and wild
carrots . . . and all that other noxious vegetation that farmers have to kill
kill kill." And in a scene where he is losing his mind, Larry raves: "She was
the sweetest, lightest, happiest little girl. All day long she was singing some
little song. Just like a little bird."

In general, Ms. Smiley's stolid prose serves as a needed tether to such lapwing
flights. Conversely, Lear's ghost in these pages serves the exalted purpose of
lending what might have seemed a lurid prairie melodrama the dimensions of a
classical tragedy. The novel runs the grave risk of reminding us what a titanic
work of art its model is. But in the end, the book gains more than it loses from
the comparison, if only because we read it with two minds that eventually mesh
in a satisfying way.

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jane Smiley (Stephen Mortensen/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph Papp, Theater's Champion, Dies

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2714 words


Joseph Papp, director of the New York Shakespeare Festival and one of the most
influential producers in the history of the American theater, died yesterday at
his home in Greenwich Village. He was 70 years old.

He died of prostate cancer, said Richard Kornberg, his press representative. All
Broadway theaters will dim their lights at 8 tonight in tribute to Mr. Papp.

Mr. Papp rose from a childhood in the slums of Brooklyn to found the New York
Shakespeare Festival, through which he presented free Shakespeare in Central
Park for more than three decades. In the 1960's, he took over the old Astor
Library and turned it into the Public Theater, a huge six-theater complex in
which he presented and championed the work of many young playwrights, including
David Rabe, Thomas Babe, Ed Bullins, Caryl Churchill, David Hare, David Henry
Hwang, Wallace Shawn, Vaclav Havel, Miguel Pinero, Ntozake Shange, Michael
Weller, George C. Wolfe, David Mamet, Tina Howe and John Guare.

The Public was the birthplace of two landmark American musicals, "Hair" and "A
Chorus Line," the longest-running show in Broadway history. Mr. Papp also helped
build the careers of many actors, among them James Earl Jones, Meryl Streep,
Raul Julia and Kevin Kline.

'Most Important Force'

To many in the theater world, Mr. Papp was the most significant figure in
noncommercial and institutional theater in the United States over three decades.
Indeed, Bernard Jacobs, president of the Shubert Organization, Broadway's
biggest theater owner, said in 1977, "Joe Papp is the most important force in
the English-speaking theater today." Writing about Mr. Papp in The New York
Times in September, Frank Rich called him "the only giant left in the field" and
said that he had left "the New York theater an almost completely different place
than he found it."

Mr. Papp took Shakespeare to the schools and to the city streets. He exercised a
profound influence in bringing to the attention of the public the work of many
important black, Hispanic and Asian-American playwrights and actors. He was
among the first to use minority actors in major Shakespearean and other classic
roles.

He had many triumphs. Three plays he produced won Pulitzer Prizes: Charles
Gordone's "No Place to Be Somebody," Jason Miller's "That Championship Season"
and "A Chorus Line." His plays also garnered more than 20 Tony Awards. His
production of "A Chorus Line," which was directed by Michael Bennett and won a
Tony as best musical in 1976, cost $1,145,000 to take to Broadway and grossed
almost $150 million for his New York Shakespeare Festival. It ran from 1975
until April 28, 1990, a total of 6,137 performances.

Transfers, Triumphs And Disappointments

"A Chorus Line" was a prime example of a practice in which Mr. Papp engaged
often and well, one in which he was a pioneer: moving a play to Broadway from
Off Broadway. In 1972, he achieved perhaps his greatest success with transferred
works, winning both major Tony Awards: best play, for "Sticks and Bones," David
Rabe's harrowing tale of a Vietnam War veteran, and best musical, for a tuneful
version of Shakespeare's "Two Gentlemen of Verona," which starred Raul Julia and
was first performed in Central Park. The next year, "That Championship Season"
won the Tony for best play.

But Mr. Papp also had his share of failures and detractors. He was an outspoken
public figure, and his statements were rarely intended to be diplomatic. He was
quick to anger at those with whom he disagreed, or who disagreed with him. He
was assailed on one hand as too avant-garde, and on the other as too commercial.

Perhaps his biggest defeat was at Lincoln Center. He ran its theater company
from 1973 to 1977, when he abruptly decided to give up the job, uncomfortable
with the institutional and financial strictures that came along with the post.

In recent years, many critics sensed a decline in the quality of the Public's
output; at his death, he was in the middle of an ambitious project that has
received mixed critical reaction, a cycle of all of Shakespeare's plays.

In May 1990, weakened by illness and seeking to attract new audiences and to
infuse what he termed "fresh creative blood," he made major changes in his
theater's artistic structure. In August, he named JoAnne Akalaitis, a founding
member of the experimental troupe Mabou Mines, as his successor as artistic
director of the Shakespeare Festival.

An Outsider Who Moved In

Mr. Papp was a man of contradictions. He prided himself on being an outsider and
a radical, and he was long a scathing critic of what he called "that old whore
Broadway."

But as he began moving his plays uptown, and with his success of the early
1970's, from "Sticks and Bones" to "A Chorus Line," he was embraced -- and
allowed himself to be embraced -- by the commercial theater.

Mr. Rich, summing up Mr. Papp's career in The Times, observed: "Paradoxically
enough, he beat Broadway at its own game by reviving the lost arts of
high-stakes artistic gambling and nonstop promotion that had once made the Great
White Way an electrifying venue." In proving -- with shows like "Hair" -- the
commercial viability of work being done by the nonprofit theater, he continued,
Mr. Papp "started a complete reversal of the power equation of the New York
theater."

To Mr. Papp, theater was always more than theater. "Theater is a social force,"
he once said, "not just an entertainment." His goal, he said, his guiding force,
was to bring theater to the people and to "radicalize the environment."

He seemed to care deeply about his proteges. When one, Miguel Pinero, an
ex-convict who wrote "Short Eyes," an explosive look inside prisons, was
arrested, Mr. Papp went to the police station to post bail. Yet he also often
fought with his writers, becoming involved in long-term disputes with Mr. Rabe
and Sam Shepard.

He fought bureaucracy, unions, foundations, audiences, critics and even the City
of New York. In the beginning, he successfully fought a weekly battle to obtain
the money to present his park performances. Then he took on the most powerful
politician in New York at the time, Robert Moses, for the right to continue his
free Shakespeare performances in Central Park. He battled his playwrights, and
he battled the critics.

Self-Made Mogul And Old-Time Showman

One of his greatest talents was as a fund raiser, using his very public persona
as a prime means of soliciting contributions. He made television commercials for
the festival, affecting the swaggering stance of a self-made mogul, talking out
of the side of his mouth and gesturing grandly with a cigar. He appeared in ads
for the telephone company, on billboards, on the sides of telephone booths, in
black tie and scarf, off for a night at the theater.

Joseph Papp was born on June 22, 1921, in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn
to Samuel (Shmuel) and Yetta Miritch Papirofsky. His parents spoke Yiddish, and
Yosl Papirofsky, as he was named, began to learn English only when he was old
enough to play in the streets and go to school.

His childhood was spent in poverty, "surrounded by terror," he once recalled. "I
got beat up regularly," he said.

His father was a trunk maker. To help the family make a living, Yosl would shine
shoes, pluck chickens and, with his father, sell peanuts from a pushcart. His
family would move several times a year, often in the middle of the night,
because they could not pay the rent.

During World War II, he served in the Navy and had his first real encounter with
the stage. "I put on shows on a flattop," Mr. Papp wrote in a 1970 reminiscence.

After the war, he went to California, to the Actors' Laboratory, which included
many people from the Group Theater. After two years, he became managing director
of the lab, graduating in 1948. The lab, however, split apart because of
political disputes: Many of his colleagues, he wrote, were members of the
Communist Party.

Back in New York, Mr. Papp began working as a television stage manager for CBS.
He changed his name from Papirofsky to Papp because, he said, Papirofsky was too
long to fit on the television screen during the credits. In 1954, in a church on
the Lower East Side, the Emmanuel Presbyterian Church, he began staging free
Shakespeare.

In 1956, he received the backing of the New York City Parks Department and its
commissioner, Moses, and moved his free Shakespeare to the 2,000-seat East River
Park Amphitheater on the Lower East Side. The season was produced for about
$20,000, a figure that eventually expanded to the $16 million it cost to keep
the Public Theater afloat in 1987. (Recession cutbacks brought the budget down
to $10.5 million this year.)

That first season, there were two productions, first "Julius Caesar," directed
by Stuart Vaughan, which opened on June 29, 1956, and then "The Taming of the
Shrew." The casts performed without pay, and included, as the shrew, the young
Colleen Dewhurst.

The next year, what was becoming the New York Shakespeare Festival Company
toured the five boroughs with a mobile theater, then settled in Central Park, by
West 81st Street near the Belvedere Castle, on the site that would later become
its permanent summer home, the Delacorte Theater.

In 1958, Mr. Papp, who had continued working for CBS, was called before the
House Committee on Un-American Activities. He denied that he had been a member
of the Communist Party after June 1955, but he took the Fifth Amendment and
declined to say anything about his activities before that date. CBS dismissed
him, but he was reinstated after an arbitration ruling, the first person to be
rehired by a television network after having been let go because of testimony
before the House committee.

Mr. Papp had his famous battle with -- and victory over -- Moses in 1959. As
Robert A. Caro tells it in "The Power Broker," his biography of Moses, it was
Stuart Constable, Moses's top aide, who started the dispute while Moses was on
vacation. What happened, Mr. Caro wrote, was this: Constable, who was
politically very much on the right, found out about Mr. Papp's testimony -- or
lack of it -- and became upset at the idea of a leftist producing Shakespeare
for the masses. He decided that Mr. Papp would have to go and told the producer
there would be no more Shakespeare unless the public was charged a fee. Mr. Papp
refused. When Moses returned, he upheld his aide's decision.

The producer took the case to trial, and although a lower court ruled in favor
of Moses, the Appellate Division decided unanimously that imposing unnecessary
admission charges was "in violation of the public's parks rights." The season
went on, free of charge, and the next year plans were made to construct a
permanent theater near the Belvedere Castle site. The new theater, named for
George T. Delacorte, who donated $150,000 toward its $400,000 cost, opened in
1962, with "The Merchant of Venice."

Expansion And Discoveries

In 1966, Mr. Papp decided to expand. In a pioneering example of architectural
recycling, he took over the landmark Astor Library on Lafayette Street in Lower
Manhattan as his new headquarters, renaming it the New York Shakespeare Festival
Public Theater. He turned the building into a six-theater complex that showed
plays and classic films. He let the sun shine in with "Hair," the prototypical
rock musical for the Age of Aquarius, which went on to become a major hit on
Broadway. He discovered David Rabe with "The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel."

In the mid-1970's, at the same time "A Chorus Line" was being created, Mr. Papp
took over Lincoln Center Theater, while continuing at the Public and in the
park. Meanwhile, "A Chorus Line" opened at the Public, moved to Broadway and
became the biggest hit in Mr. Papp's career.

But at Lincoln Center attendance declined.  In 1977, in his fourth and most
successful season -- with productions of "The Threepenny Opera," "The Cherry
Orchard" and "Agamemnon" at the Vivian Beaumont Theater and Mr. Rabe's
"Streamers" at the Mitzi I. Newhouse Theater -- Mr. Papp suddenly announced that
he was leaving Lincoln Center. He declared that he felt "trapped in an
institutional structure both artistically and fiscally."

For the rest of the 1970's and throughout the 80's, Mr. Papp continued to
produce Shakespeare and works by new playwrights, many of them dealing with
social issues. Among them were plays like Larry Kramer's "Normal Heart" and
Harry Kondoleon's "Zero Positive."

He also continued to transfer plays and musicals to Broadway from the Public and
Central Park, sometimes successfully and sometimes not. The hit transfers
included his Central Park production of "The Pirates of Penzance," which starred
Linda Ronstadt and George Rose; "The Mystery of Edwin Drood," which won the Tony
Award for best musical in 1986; David Hare's "Plenty," and "Cuba and His Teddy
Bear," starring Robert De Niro.

Mr. Papp never hesitated in speaking out. In 1973, outraged that CBS had
postponed its planned presentation of "Sticks and Bones," he denounced the
network as perpetuating a "cowardly cop-out" and canceled a $7 million contract,
refusing to produce the 11 more plays he had agreed to do.

Last year, outraged by obscenity restrictions imposed by Congress on recipients
of grants from the National Endowment for the Arts, Mr. Papp rejected endowment
grants totaling $373,000 and called the restrictions "unacceptable,
reprehensible and insidious."

His relationships with his writers could be volatile. Mr. Papp and Mr. Rabe did
not speak for four years after Mr. Papp, the playwright said, told him that if
Mr. Rabe had not become a writer he would have been a murderer. In 1981, Sam
Shepard left the Public after a dispute over the handling of his play "True
West" and vowed that Mr. Papp "would never see another play of mine." Mr. Papp
never did.

Many playwrights and actors, however, had an abiding love and respect for him.
"He speaks from the heart," Wallace Shawn once recalled. "He has a quite amazing
access to his own irrational side. So you don't get an academic response from
him. You always get an unexpected response, which makes you feel that the
encouragement is based on something he feels."

Despite all his success, Mr. Papp lived modestly with his wife, Gail Merrifield,
in an apartment three blocks from the Public. "I help make millionaires," he
once said, "but I'm not a millionaire."

Mr. Papp was married four times; the first three marriages ended in divorce. He
is survived by Ms. Merrifield, who is director of plays and musicals at the
Public, and by four children from his first three marriages: Susan, Barbara,
Michael and Miranda. Another son, Tony, died of AIDS in June at the age of 29.

There will be a private funeral service for Mr. Papp at the Public Theater
today. A public memorial service will be announced.

Mr. Papp once remarked that he loved to walk through the Public just before
curtain time. "It's just a matter of touching base," he said, "letting them know
I'm alive, I care. When I walk through the theater, I try to make sure the
public toilets are clean, the lights are on properly. It's like it's my own
place, so I have a great deal of concern for how it looks." For many years, he
would show up at the Delacorte at show time almost every summer evening to watch
the crowds entering the theater and taking their seats.

"When the moon is out and the wind begins to whisper," he said, "it's theater at
its best. You can't beat it."

Prolific Impresario With High Impact

Joseph Papp brought more than 350 plays to the stage in the course of his
35-year-long career. Here are some of his major productions.

Hair (1967)

The Memorandum (1968)

No Place To Be Somebody (1969)

The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel (1971)

Sticks and Bones (1971)

That Championship Season (1972)

Short Eyes (1974)

A Chorus Line (1975)

For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf (1976)

The Pirates of Penzance (1980)

Plenty (1982)

Top Girls (1982)

The Mystery of Edwin Drood (1985)

The Normal Heart (1985)

The Colored Museum (1986)

Serious Money (1987)

Talk Radio (1987)

Machinal (1990)

NAME: Joseph Papp

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Joseph Papp in his office at the Public Theater last year.
(Cori Wells Braun) (pg. A1); 1959: Joseph Papp watching a rehearsal of "Julius
Caesar" alongside Belvedere Lake in Central Park. (The New York Times); 1956:
Jack Cannon and Colleen Dewhurst in "The Taming of the Shrew." (Avery Willard);
1976: Janet League, left, and Ntozake Shange in "For Colored Girls Who Have
Considered Suicide/When the Rainbow Is Enuf."; 1990: Mr. Papp joined cast
members on the stage of the Shubert Theater before the final performance of the
Pulitzer Prize-winning musical "A Chorus Line," the longest-running show in
Broadway history. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times); 1985: D. W. Moffett
portrays an AIDS sufferer in Larry Kramer's impassioned drama "The Normal Heart"
at the Public Theater. (Martha Swope); 1967: The New York Shakespeare Festival
Public Theater in lower Manhattan is formally dedicated. (Jack Manning/The New
York Times) (pg. D19)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Policing New Haven: Patrols and Politics - A special report.;
Chief With High Profile Uses Streets to Test New Theories

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL with M. A. FARBER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2873 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


Talking about himself, which he clearly relishes, Nicholas Pastore slips easily
into the third person. Nick Pastore, he will tell you, was "an outstanding
patrol officer," a "super crime-fighting cop," "a good cop with the Mafia,"
"Sherlock Holmes."

Most of all, the man who has been police chief here for the last 20 months
portrays himself as someone who inherited "a city out of control" and led it out
of an iron-fisted law-enforcement tradition into the promised land of
community-based policing.

Campaigning on Crime

"I'm not a cop's cop," he said. "I'm a people's cop. You understand what I'm
saying?"

But turmoil over the Chief's flamboyant leadership as well as an ominously
rising murder rate and random nightly gunfire -- including a shootout on the
steps of police headquarters only weeks ago -- have led many to question whether
this city of ivied Yale towers and concrete-block slums is on the right course.

On Tuesday, the city's first black Mayor, John C. Daniels, seeks a second term
after a campaign in which crime has been the most volatile issue. Although
figures show major crime down about 10 percent for much of this year compared to
last, New Haven in 1990 ranked sixth in violent crime per capita in American
cities with more than 100,000 residents. In October New Haven had an average of
six reported gunfire incidents a day.

In effect, New Haven will also be choosing between two approaches to handling
crime: whether to entrench, citywide, Chief Pastore's experiment with
"problem-solving" foot patrols, an experiment on which the verdict remains out,
or revert in large part to reactive policing by emergency-response radio cars
and SWAT teams, as advocated by the Republican challenger, Alderman Jonathan J.
Einhorn.

Perhaps in no city in America is the dichotomy in policing more clearly drawn,
with the outcome of importance to departments around the country. Dean M.
Esserman, a disciple of the guru of community policing, Police Commissioner Lee
P. Brown of New York City, recently took the job of assistant chief here, with
Mr. Brown attending his swearing in.

But the argument over the best way to fight crime in New Haven has been clouded
by what amounts to warfare between the freewheeling Chief and his many
disgruntled officers, backed by their union. He is treating them, they say, the
authoritarian way he doesn't want them to treat the public.

"The cops clearly hate the Chief and they say it," said Mr. Esserman, a former
counsel to the New York City transit police, who has been working furiously to
repair relations and win officers over to Chief Pastore's program.

In many ways the 53-year-old Chief has made himself, as much as his program, the
issue. Describing the department he took over in February 1990 as "brain dead,"
he has proceeded to turn it upside down, staging what he called a "coup" aimed
at "ventilating" the 417-member force and wiping out the command echelon and a
fifth of the ranks.

A popular commander was literally dispatched to the doghouse as head of the
department's animal shelter. From banning leather gloves as too intimidating to
ridiculing officers who lingered in doughnut shops to secretive motel room
meetings with a shadowy "Mafia informant," the irrepressible Chief has put his
stamp on New Haven.

To protest disciplinary action against two officers whose shots killed a fleeing
drug suspect, more than 60 officers came down with the "blue flu," calling in
sick on a weekend in September. Citing a "thunderous" no confidence vote in the
Chief's leadership, the police union demanded his resignation, adding, "Please
reserve a table at your retirement for the union executive board."

The Troubled Years
Politics, Wiretaps And a 'Stud Bus'

The confrontation in this ethnically diverse city of 130,500 on Long Island
Sound, a city of communal neighborhoods and small-town familiarities, springs
from years of political maneuvering and personal ambitions and animosities.
Politics and the police, in particular, have long been intertwined.

In 1977, it was disclosed that the police had illegally wiretapped thousands of
phones during the heyday of demonstrations against the Vietnam war, especially
after the Black Panthers helped turn Yale into a center of protest. Mr. Pastore,
who had joined the force in 1962 and briefly ran the wiretaps in 1968, was a
star witness before a police board inquiry, an act for which some members of the
force never forgave him.

By 1981, Mr. Pastore concluded he could not serve under the new Police Chief,
William F. Farrell, a former Marine Corps officer. They were just incompatible,
he recalled recently. Suffering from a kidney ailment and wary of what he said
were "all those people around who were going to get Pastore," he left the
department as Chief of Operations after applying unsuccessfully for a medical
disability pension.

Increasing Violence

Under Chief Farrell, whose office was adorned with military regalia and who
still flies a Marine flag at his home near the coast, the department epitomized
the reactive style of American policing of the time. Patrol cars raced from one
emergency to another as officers fought a battle of containment against rampant
drug-fueled violence. Cocaine was sold openly although New Haven was spared the
epidemic of low-priced crack that devastated New York City starting in the mid
1980's.

Between 1987 and 1989 alone, complaints of robbery and aggravated assault each
rose by about 50 percent. The number of murders annually rose from 23 to a
record 34.

Yet the Police Department collected virtually no intelligence of its own and
mounted no significant undercover operations. The existence of drug gangs,
though well known to police officers, was officially denied, even in the face of
a downtown gun battle between rival factions that had passers-by ducking bullets
on the courthouse steps.

Meanwhile, a hard-pressed Police Department developed its own reputation for
harsh tactics. A squad of officers hidden in a van known as the "stud bus" often
descended on youths gathered on street corners, seizing or roughing up many
without cause, according to widespread complaints. The unit was referred to on
the streets as "the beat-down posse."

Mr. Farrell, in an interview, said he believed in "being firm" but denied
tolerating improper force. "You didn't have to have notches in your gun to go
forward with me," he said.

One incident in September 1989 -- never publicized -- occurred especially close
to home: in the jail adjoining police headquarters downtown at One Union Avenue.


Despair Over Crime

A jail clerk reported seeing an officer grab a handcuffed prisoner, a young man,
by the neck and push him to a desk. "As I looked through the window I observed
the police officer punching the prisoner in his back left side, the area of his
kidney, and then punch him in the front portion of his left side," she said in a
complaint. At first she thought the officer was using brass knuckles. Police
officials now say it was his keys.

An assault charge against the officer was dropped after the victim declined to
testify. The officer, granted "accelerated rehabilitation" by the court, remains
on the force.

Such incidents, coupled with despair over rising criminal violence, led in
November 1989 to a new city regime espousing the politically catchy gospel of
"community based" policing. Mr. Daniels, the new Mayor, was a State Senator and
former Alderman who operated a plumbing company.

A report later written by two graduate students from the Yale School of
Organization and Management quoted a senior Daniels adviser as saying that the
campaign had advanced the idea of community-based policing to provide "a patina
of technocracy" for the mayoral platform to appeal to New Haven's "progressive,
intellectual community."

Behind the scenes was Mr. Pastore. He spent the 1980's selling costume jewelry
and, staked by large bank loans, investing heavily in real estate, including an
ice cream parlor with a video game arcade in Madison, Conn. But when the
real-estate downturn hit, he was sued by a variety of creditors for more than $2
million. Today, by his count, he owes $1.3 million and, hoping to avert
bankruptcy, is looking for "a workout with the banks."

Moving for 'Ventilation'

During the 1989 campaign, Mr. Pastore quietly advised Mr. Daniels, a friend from
high school days. And the following February, after what was proclaimed to be a
broad search, Mayor Daniels stunned New Haven by bringing Mr. Pastore back to
the Police Department as chief.

Chief Pastore embarked quickly on his "ventilation." He removed the shield of
bulletproof glass separating the public from desk officers in the fortress-like
police headquarters, made a show of throwing open his office door to members of
the department and replaced martial symbols with a photograph of himself and Lee
Brown. A large mural of police activities, done by a police artist and prized by
Chief Farrell, was unceremoniously painted over on a weekend.

Among his first targets were some of the highest-ranking commanders, five of
whom received a "golden handshake" giving them 75 percent of their pay as well
as full health benefits for life -- well above the norm.

The sixth, former Comdr. Leonard Gallo -- who had been supervisor of patrol
services, the street crime and drug unit, the harbor patrol, and was a graduate
of Federal Bureau of Investigation and Secret Service programs -- suffered a
more ignominious fate.

Refusing to be, as he put it, "pushed out" after 21 years -- even at $43,000 a
year for life -- he was reassigned to the New Haven Animal Shelter and required
to "stay abreast of trends in animal epidemiology" and design a system of
"intake-to-release paperwork for all dogs."

The Chief also earned the enmity of many officers by ejecting them from desk
jobs to street duty. Some quit.

A One-Man Operation
The Chief Meets In the Shadows

In the spring of 1990, the Chief began an unusual operation of his own, one that
would arouse the curiosity of a department lawyer and the Connecticut state
police but was never made public. He rented rooms at the Holiday Inn in nearby
Milford and met there with someone he later described as an informant on Mafia
activities.

At the same time, he said last week, he used other rooms at the motel for
personal purposes, putting up friends at a special rate he was granted and using
the swimming pool, sometimes with his granddaughter.

According to bills reviewed by The New York Times, the informant operation cost
the department thousands of dollars. The Chief said he never told anyone whom he
was meeting with -- he gave conflicting descriptions of the person -- and never
stayed overnight. He saved no notes or other record of the meetings but, he said
last week, passed on to his aides information that became the basis of a
continuing undercover operation into mob control of several small New Haven
businesses. That operation produced several drug buys and would lead to arrests,
the Chief said. But Assistant Chief Esserman said in a separate interview that
the operation had been of little value and should be shut down.

An inquiry into the motel expenses began last fall after a lawyer for the Police
Department was shown some of the bills by a disaffected police major, Thomas P.
Muller, who questioned whether the chief was using the rooms for personal
reasons. The lawyer, Glenn Coe, a former state prosecutor now in private
practice in Hartford, was concerned enough to pass the matter on to the state
police.

Bernard Sullivan, who was then State Police Superintendent, said recently that
at a meeting in his office last November, he was told in general terms by the
New Haven State's Attorney that Chief Pastore was engaged in a law-enforcement
operation and so, before starting an investigation, dropped the matter with the
questions unresolved. The New Haven prosecutor, Michael Dearington, declined to
comment on the matter last week, and it remains unclear what he knew of Chief
Pastore's use of the rooms.

If some officers question the wisdom of a police chief meeting on his own with
mob informants, Chief Pastore has no qualms. He boasts he had 108 informants
when he was detective commander years ago.

"I go anywhere in this community and speak to anyone at any time," Chief Pastore
said. "A Mafioso, a drug dealer, a whore, a pimp."

The Future
Nightsticks To Plowshares

The Chief created a sensation by giving an interview on drugs to a journalist
who later sold the article to High Times, a magazine about the drug culture. In
the interview, published in the August 1990 issue, the chief dismissed
interdiction as a failure and urged: "Let's decriminalize and medicalize the
problems." Going further, the Chief has discouraged his officers from arresting
first-time drug offenders, attempting to steer them toward treatment while
helping to clear clogged court calendars.

"To this day," he said in an interview in his office, "we don't police with
tenderness, kindness, understanding. In fact, much of the problem in American
society has been caused by mean policing that exacerbates, perpetuates and
results in mean streets."

'Service-Oriented' Officers

So the Chief is looking for more than a few good women -- along with more black
and Hispanic recruits. The department now has 77 vacancies out of 417 slots, and
the Chief has told the union he would welcome another hundred openings -- jobs
that generally would not be filled, he said, with "young white males from the
suburbs" or "adventure-type individuals."

The Chief's aim is to fill the ranks with "service-oriented" officers who would
staff the 12 permanent police substations he intends to open throughout New
Haven -- the heart of his community policing program. From here, the officers
would fan out through the neighborhoods, getting to know the residents, winning
their trust and spotting problems before they fester.

In Chief Pastore's vision of "21st century policing," Yale would replace jail.
"You're not going to spend $30,000 for one black inmate," he said. "You're going
to send him to Yale. You're going to send him to the University of New Haven.
Quality of life, that's the change."

"Talk about the criminal mind," he said. "If we could rechannel that into
positive behavior. That's what I try to do all the time, modify people's
behavior."

After less than two years, the payoff from the Chief's approach is difficult to
read from crime figures, which can be skewed by inaccurate reporting and are
subject to differing interpretations. But overall the data show complaints are
down.

With the 28th murder of the year on Monday, the city's homicide toll may top
last year's 31 and approach or surpass 1989's record 34. On the positive side,
reported robbery complaints were down 24 percent, rape complaints were down 21
percent and burglary complaints were down 14 percent, comparing the first eight
months of 1991 to 1990. Assault complaints were level.

But in recent years the percentage of robberies with guns has increased from
about a fifth to over a third. And the high number of assaults, 2,008 in 1990,
contributed to making New Haven the most violence-ridden American city of
100,000 or over, per capita, after Miami, Atlanta, Newark, St. Louis, and Tampa,
according to figures supplied to the F.B.I. New Haven had 3,059 reported violent
crimes -- homicides, rapes, robberies and assaults -- per 100,000 people. New
York City was far down on the list, with 2,384.

The Chief's program, real on the streets or still on the drawing board, has
heartened many New Havenites. John R. Williams, a defense lawyer and longtime
police critic who represented the plaintiffs in the wiretapping suit, has become
-- somewhat to his amazement -- an admirer of Chief Pastore, calling his
appointment "a brilliant move." The Chief returns the compliment by saying that
without Mr. Williams "us scoundrels would be out of control."

To Bea Dozier-Taylor, a gallery and bookstore owner in the crime-scarred
Dwight-Kensington neighborhood, where community policing has already started,
the officers on patrol are forging "a unity with the community." In the past,
she said, the police were seen only in emergencies.

Sgt. Achilles Generoso, who supervises her area, said he was "no bleeding-heart
liberal" but he had become a convert to community policing, describing it as
"nothing more than common sense." Nevertheless, Sergeant Generoso admits to
dismay over the way he said Chief Pastore had stereotyped many officers as
laggard. "I was angry with him," he said.

Sergeant Cavalier, the union president and a 25-year-police veteran, said the
anger against the Chief runs deep. "He puts officers in an area riddled with
shootings and tells them to approach drug dealers to seek a better life," he
said. "The drug dealers are laughing at the police."

In his office, still unpacking his papers from New York, the new assistant
chief, Mr. Esserman, shrugged. He had heard the complaints, he said. He knew the
problems. And he had advised the Chief to get closer to his officers. "Great men
have great faults," he said.

NAME: Nicholas Pastore

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Refusing to be pushed out of the Police Department by a new
administration, Capt. Leonard Gallo, the former supervisor of patrol services,
was reassigned to monitor dogs at the New Haven Animal Shelter.; Chief Nicholas
Pastore of the New Haven police portrays himself as someone who led the city out
of iron-fisted law-enforcement tradition and into community-based policing.
Chief Pastore, left, spoke in his office with Assistant Chief Dean M. Esserman.
(Photographs by Stephen Castagneto for The New York Times) (pg. B2)

Graphs: "Reports of Violent Crime" shows average reports per month of violent
crimes in New Haven (Source: New Haven Police Department) (pg. B2)

TYPE: Biography; Special Report

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 1, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
A Journalist, His Novel And Trouble In 70's Rome

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 10; Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 653 words


A story of political intrigue can be set almost anywhere, provided the locale is
sufficiently deceit-ridden to motivate each character to do the others in. But
the late-1970's Italian setting of John Frankenheimer's "Year of the Gun" is
especially piquant, since it allows the story's hero, an American journalist
named David Raybourne (Andrew McCarthy), to move between the angry,
slogan-filled halls of an Italian university and the comfortable living quarters
of Lia Spinelli (Valeria Golino), his well-heeled lover. There is also much
beautiful Roman scenery to accompany the film's scenes of rioting, raids by
ski-masked guerrillas and other acts of violence in the street.

The story of "Year of the Gun" unfolds briskly and methodically against this
vibrant backdrop, which is as it should be from Mr. Frankenheimer, whose forte
has always been the political thriller (among his credits are "Black Sunday,"
"The Manchurian Candidate" and "Seven Days in May"). But this film's casting
problems work against the authenticity of its larger atmosphere and do a lot to
trivialize the material. The smoothly unctuous Mr. McCarthy is never convincing
or sympathetic as the rakish, much-in-demand American writer whose activities
eventually stir the Red Brigades into a frenzy.

Rivaling him in the improbability department is tawny, glamorous Sharon Stone,
who is supposed to be Alison King, a tough, world-famous photojournalist. "My
job is to bring back the bad news and keep the body count," she says knowingly.
Alison also leans toward remarks like, "First time I put my life on the line to
get a picture was in Saigon." This latter thought is accompanied by the story of
how Alison bought herself an expensive wristwatch after completing a
particularly grisly assignment, which from Ms. Stone winds up sounding giddier
than it should. The film's claims to political authenticity evaporate whenever
it moves from background action to the behavior of its several scheming
principals.

Much of the film's suspense stems from these characters' real or putative links
to either the Central Intelligence Agency or the Red Brigades. And Mr.
Frankenheimer duly reveals secret after secret in the process of unmasking his
principals. But the plot, from a screenplay by David Ambrose based on Michael
Mewshaw's book, turns out to be dizzyingly overcomplicated, and far too much of
it hinges on the American journalist's supposed power to make trouble with his
novel, which he says will be a "Day of the Jackal"-like mixture of real and
fictitious characters. It is this journalist's advance knowledge of the plot to
kidnap Aldo Moro, a former Italian Prime Minister, that makes so many waves.

Among the actors, only the exceptionally natural Ms. Golino seems comfortable or
convincing, although John Pankow is somberly effective in the role of Italo,
Lia's cousin (especially impressive in view of the fact that this actor was born
in St. Louis). The seriousness of the film's other characters can perhaps be
gauged by the fact that one of them is last seen wearing a New York Yankees cap
in Beirut, and another winds up on the Dick Cavett show.

"Year of the Gun" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes considerable violence, brief nudity and sexual
situations.

Year of the Gun

Directed by John Frankenheimer; screenplay by David Ambrose, based on the book
by Michael Mewshaw; photography by Blasco Giuarto; edited by Lee Percy; music by
Bill Conti; production designer, Aurelio Crugnola; produced by Edward R.
Pressman; released by Triumph Releasing. Running time: 111 minutes. This film is
rated R.

David Raybourne . . . Andrew McCarthy
Lia Spinelli . . . Valeria Golino
Alison King . . . Sharon Stone
Italo Bianchi . . . John Pankow
Giovanni . . . Mattia Sbragia
Pierre Bernier . . . George Murcell
Round-Faced Man . . . Lou Castel

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andrew McCarthy (Paul Ronald Pellet/Triumph)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE MIDDLE EAST TALKS;
A Quarrel Obscured

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: MADRID, Nov. 1


No matter what the diplomats say, the dispute about the site of continuing
Middle East peace negotiations, which threatened tonight to disrupt the whole
process, is neither a technical matter nor a question of picayune detail.

It cuts to the very heart of the dispute that has poisoned relations and caused
violent strife between the Arabs and the Israelis for 40 years.

As has so often been the case in the past, whether the subject was peace in the
Middle East or the Vietnam War or control of nuclear weapons, the negotiators
have seized on procedural questions as proxies for substantive ones, thus
starting the fight even before policy questions are reached.

Sometimes the theoretically procedural disputes have been about the agenda or
the order of speakers or the shape of the bargaining table. Earlier this week,
there was a dispute here about whether the Palestinians and Jordanians, part of
the same delegation, should each be allowed a full 45 minutes to state their
cases -- a dispute that grew out of Israeli reluctance to do anything that might
eventually buttress a Palestinian statehood claim.

Cloaking a Disagreement

In each instance, the squabble about "modalities," as Secretary of State James
A. Baker 3d likes to call them, has cloaked a deep-seated substantive
disagreement. And so it is in the wrangle about where the negotiators should
hold their private sessions now that the television spectacular has concluded
here in Madrid.

For the Arabs, traveling to Israel or welcoming Israeli delegates to their own
countries would go much farther than they are willing to go, at this early
stage, toward acknowledging Israel and its right to exist. They might be willing
to do that, they say, but only in return for territorial concessions and other
gains.

For the Israelis, as Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said on Wednesday, that
recognition is the sine qua non for any successful peace conference.

And for the Palestinians, it would be particularly humbling to visit Israel,
because Israel occupies what they consider their rightful homeland, so they have
no place to which they could invite the Israeli negotiators or hold secure
consultations of their own.

Relative Strength

On another level, the argument is about relative strength. Just as a military
commander seeks to concentrate several of his divisions against a single enemy
unit, thus gaining a local preponderance of force for an attack, Arab diplomats
believe they do better when several Arab countries are in the same room with an
Israeli delegation, as they were for three days here this week, or at least in
the same city, as they would be with a series of face-to-face talks in Madrid or
another "neutral" city like Cairo or Washington.

Israel would rather divide to conquer, meeting with the Syrians alternately in
Israel and in Syria, the Lebanese alternately in Israel and in Lebanon and so
on, to avoid the tendency of the most extreme Arab elements to set the basic
tone and force their more malleable brethren to toe their line.

But the problem poses a public-relations problem for Israel and Syria, the most
truculent of the Arab participants: It makes them look petty in the eyes of the
world. The problem is particularly difficult for the Israelis, who are more
dependent than the Syrians on the good will of the major Western countries and
therefore much more worried about their image.

Still, Syria, probably the most reluctant of the participants in this whole
effort, will come under some pressure from more moderate Arab states, especially
the Palestinians, who are sufficiently eager to start talking that at least some
of their delegates would readily agree to a compromise site.

An Indirect Approach

So an obvious question arises: Will Israel, finding itself so close to achieving
genuine face-to-face talks with its foes, which it has sought for so long,
actually jeopardize the peace process by holding out for the site that it
prefers? Asked that question at a news conference this afternoon, Benjamin
Netanyahu, an Israeli Deputy Foreign Minister who has acted as his country's
spokesman here, could only parry it by telling the questioner to ask the Syrians
the same thing.

Clearly reluctant to try to impose a solution to the impasse because it would
almost certainly alienate one side or the other, Mr. Baker tried an indirect
approach. He sought to increase the discomfort of all of the disputants by
reminding them that much of the world was watching them and that they risked
looking foolish.

"From the perspective of most of the rest of the world," he said in his steely
concluding speech, "it would be very difficult to understand how a party could
now refuse to attend bilateral negotiations simply because of a disagreement
over the site."

At a subsequent news conference, Mr. Baker said, as he always does, that he was
not going to negotiate in public, that he would try to sort out the site problem
in private talks later. He made a great show of refusing to characterize any of
the individual speeches or indeed the speeches as a group.

Honest Broker's Role

But he was not above giving the Arabs and Israelis a lecture about
responsibility and initiative, warning them plainly that they would pay a heavy
price in the coin of international respect if they made it impossible to reach
an agreement this time.

"Each of you needs to get off the mark and get off it quickly," he said. "You
must not let this start become an end. If you do not seize this historic
opportunity, no one else can, no one else will, and no one will blame anyone
outside your region."

President Bush and Mr. Baker can exert what the Secretary called "quiet,
behind-the-scenes influence and persuasion." They can privately propose formulas
or pieces of formulas, though that is riskier because it can undermine the
honest broker's role they seek for themselves. They can promise financial aid
for good behavior and threaten isolation for bad behavior.

But public diplomacy has its uses, as Presidents from Franklin D. Roosevelt to
Ronald Reagan have known full well; one of them is mobilizing opinion as a
sanction on stubborn negotiators. Global television makes it faster and easier,
and the Americans might find that they have no better weapon as they struggle in
the weeks ahead to untangle this intractible problem.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Britain Proposes Curbs on Refugee Flow

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Nov. 1


Joining other Western European nations overwhelmed by a growing tide of
immigration, the British Government proposed strict new rules today to reduce
the number of refugees who would be allowed to settle in Britain.

Introducing the legislation in Parliament, Home Secretary Kenneth Baker said the
new rules would try to close loopholes in British immigration law, and
streamline the processing of migrants' claims so as to reduce a backlog of more
than 60,000 cases.

More than 60 percent of those cases involve immigrants from Africa, mostly
Angola and Zaire, and 21 percent are from South Asia, including India, Pakistan
and Sri Lanka. Only about 3 percent of the total are from Eastern Europe,
according to Home Office statistics.

Under the present law, thousands of these migrants are now able to remain in
Britain, some of them illegally, even though they do not qualify for asylum as
refugees who have fled religious, ethnic or political persecution, the Home
Office said.

A Tenfold Increase

The number of those seeking asylum in Britian has grown tenfold in the last
three years, to an estimated 50,000 for the current year, from 5,000 in 1988.

The move by Britain follows earlier steps by France and Germany to address
recent surges in illegal migration that has a resulted from turmoil and
political dislocation in Yugoslavia, Romania and elsewhere.

On Thursday, Germany gained the approval of 26 Eastern and Western European
governments, including Britain, for its own plan to tighten police controls at
border crossings. German officials estimate that as many as 250,000 people will
seek asylum in Germany this year, many of them from Eastern Europe.

Last summer, the French Government also endorsed tough labor measures to deal
with a surge of more than 50,000 migrants, including many North Africans, who
have come to France over the last year seeking permission to settle.

In Britain, the proposed legislation is likely to set off a heated political
dispute. Members of the Labor Party, which is hoping to capture Parliament in
elections next year, have already accused Mr. Baker and the governing
Conservative Party of making "a squalid appeal to racism" by proposing to
toughen controls on migrants.

Campaign Issue Seen

Some Labor politicians have suggested that the Conservatives are trying to use
illegal immigration as a campaign issue in the coming general election, which
the Government must call sometime before next July.

Labor said this week that it was also opposed to an agreement between Britain
and Vietnam that calls for the forcible return to Vietnam of tens of thousands
of Vietnamese refugees now being held in detention camps in Hong Kong, a British
colony.

British officials say that only a small number of those migrants qualify, under
United Nations definition, as refugees entitled to asylum because they are
fleeing persecution. The Government argues that most of the so-called boat
people are in fact fleeing economic hardship rather than political oppression.

In discussing the proposed legislation here, Mr. Baker said, "Throughout Europe
the institution of asylum is under severe strain from the numbers using it as a
way around immigration controls."

Mr. Baker said the Government estimates that fewer than a quarter of all
refugees who seek asylum are in fact entitled to it. But as many as two of every
three are granted what is called "exceptional leave to remain," usually on
compassionate grounds or because their home country is in turmoil.

Under the new law, Mr. Baker said, only a "substantial minority" would be
granted such permission if they could not prove they were refugees who were
victims of political oppression. But the rules would allow those denied asylum
the opportunity to appeal.

The legislation would also enable the Government to restrict the access to
public housing or free legal aid for people seeking asylum.

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Mid-Life Crisis: Dressing for Prom Night

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: TENAFLY, N.J., Nov. 1


Tenafly High's Class of 1956, the scandalous one, will finally get its senior
prom.

The original was scrubbed by angry school officials after a raucous (for the
mid-50's) class trip to Manhattan when a beer bottle or two -- or was it a
folding chair? -- fell, or maybe was thrown, from a class bus in the Lincoln
Tunnel.

Now in their early 50's, with many counting their grandchildren, the class
members will finally hold their prom, with no illusions about recapturing their
adolescence but full of hopes about filling a gap in their lives and maybe an
empty spot in a heart or two.

"We just figured we're mature enough now for a prom," said Carol Misar Connell,
one of the 12 class members who organized its 10th and 25th reunions and, now,
the prom that almost never was. "Thirty-five years later, we should be able to
handle this."

A Date a Few Decades Late

Obviously, there is none of the usual teen-age fretting about a late date, a
wrong corsage, or clumsy encounters with parents and their cameras.

But pre-prom jitters do exist.

Florence Moschella Faith, mother of three and grandmother of two, says she will
have her eye on Al Alfano, father of four and grandfather of one. And she hopes
his wife, Sheila, doesn't mind.

"I was told he wanted to ask me to the prom in 1956," Mrs. Faith said. "But he
never was able to."

"That changed her whole life," said the committee's wag, Nancy Leach Suglia.

Mrs. Suglia has her own set of concerns. "You want to make sure everyone
recognizes you and you want people not to think you look old," she said.

Margo MacGillivray, who is divorced and has four children aged 23 to 30, has
been given a pep talk from her family.  "My kids want me to come home with a
husband so they won't have to support me," she said.

And Linda Hasbrouck, who is also divorced, wants to dance again with her former
husband, Joe Hasenstab, voted the most fascinating in the class in 1956. Ms.
Hasbrouck said her ex-husband is married now to a former nun and living in
mountains in California. "We're still friends," she said. "Old grievances are
long forgotten."

There's nothing too pompous or philosophical about this prom, and there's no
sense of finally getting even with the school authorities of a generation ago,
Most have long since moved away or died, anyway.

The affair Saturday night at the Clinton Inn in Tenafly is planned more as a
get-together in cocktail dresses and business suits, with chicken and mushrooms,
beef and broccoli and a disk jockey's tapes of 50's music.

"At this stage of the game, we've gotten through the teen-age years and putting
our kids through college, and a lot of us are grandparents now and we just want
to breath a sigh of relief," said another committee member, Gail Stanford
Jewett.

Decorations will be understated. On Thursday night, the committee worked to
finish a trellis, making tissue-paper flowers and leaves from green construction
paper, and making posters with class members' pictures from the 50's, the 80's
and 90's.

The favors will be miniature mugs, big enough for an ounce or so of beer,
wrapped in orange and black ribbons, the school's colors.

How about a prom king and queen?

No.

"That's a nice idea, but we didn't even think of it," said Nancy Modafferi
O'Brien, a committee member.

The questionnaires sent to classmates earlier this year asked nothing about the
fate of gowns unused a generation ago. Little information came back about them.
Most, apparently, are long lost and forgotten.

Jeanette Sieveri Hoffman, however, saved hers, all white, navy and strapless,
until a year or two ago. She thought her three daughters, now 33, 30 and 23,
might wear it.

None ever did. "It wasn't their style," Mrs. Hoffman said.

Of the 232 surviving members of the class (11 have died), 101 are coming. They
have settled across the country and around the world, with little apparent ill
effect from their stormy final month in high school. The class has quite a few
homemakers, nurses, teachers, and business people of all stripes. There are
three police officers, a butcher, a school cook and a school bus driver, two
doctors, a lawyer, a novelist, and a geologist, an archeologist, a chemist,
physicist, and a biologist who studies bald eagles in New Hampshire.

Jay Soukup, a pilot, flew 935 combat missions in the Vietnam war. And Nancy
Hitchman Harian reported she had logged about 90,000 miles on a motorcycle in
North America over the years and enjoyed pistol shooting. All this surprised the
committee, given her quiet nature in high school.

The class guest of honor will be Randall Marshall, a Spanish teacher at the time
who started a save-the-prom campaign among faculty members. It failed. After
leaving teaching in the early 1960's, Mr. Marshall, now 65, worked 25 years as
editor in chief of the foreign-language textbook division at McGraw-Hill. He
said he was honored and dumbfounded at the invitation.

Kathy Lawlor, the high school librarian since 1954, remembers voting to save the
prom in 1956.

"I was a 30ish librarian then and lived in Manhattan," she recalled. "It all
seemed so simple-minded."

What did?

"The discipline -- taking away the prom."

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A 1956 article in The New York Times detailed the prom's
cancellation (pg. 25); Scrubbed by school officials after a raucous class trip
to Manhattan, the Tenafly High School class of 1956 will finally hold its senior
prom. Nancy Leach Suglia and Florence Moschella held a ballroom banner. (George
McNish for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RECORDINGS VIEW;
Revisionist Thinking On the Carpenters

BYLINE: By ROB HOERBURGER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 537 words


How easy it was to revile the Carpenters. In the 70's, this brother-and-sister
duo went against the grain of any self-respecting rock-and-roller: they always
dressed as if they were going to church, and they sang sticky songs about love
(but never sex). Worst of all, parents loved their music. If, outside, the
nation was raging (Vietnam, Watergate), the Carpenters suggested that, inside,
cookies were baking.

Twenty years later, with their music collected on a four-CD set, "From the Top"
(A&M 6875), the Carpenters acquire something resembling depth -- or at least
conviction. Richard Carpenter, the duo's keyboardist and arranger, pitted his
gentle sounds against loudmouths like Led Zeppelin and the psychedelic soul of
Sly and the Family Stone. In comparison, the Carpenters sounded just plain
weird, sort of like the Mamas and the Papas crossed with Lawrence Welk, with Mr.
Carpenter emphasizing frothy melodies and overdubbing his and his sister's
voices into a choralelike swell. Remember the wahs on "(They Long to Be) Close
to You," the duo's first million seller?

Yet America responded to his musical panaceas, as his arrangements became a
prevalent force on AM radio. Note the similarities between the Carpenters' 1970
hit "We've Only Just Begun" and Barbra Streisand's 1973 hit "The Way We Were."

If Mr. Carpenter was the brains of the duo, then its raison d'etre was his
younger sister Karen's voice. Generally portrayed as angelic and sexless, the
Tricia Nixon of the Top-40 set, Karen Carpenter possessed a deep contralto that
actually undercut her brother's saccharine fantasies. It can be a revelation
(some would say "bummer") to listen to the Carpenters' megahits -- "For All We
Know," "Rainy Days and Mondays," "Superstar," "Goodbye to Love" -- and realize
that few had happy endings, as Karen Carpenter was eminently more comfortable
singing about loneliness and uncertainty.

Even "Sing," the "Sesame Street" song, comes off as a forced smile, while the
cozy "Merry Christmas Darling" finds her at her most disconsolate (and
alluring), a Jane Eyre pining away for a Rochester who existed only in her
dreams.

It's probably no coincidence that the Carpenters' run of Top-10 hits ended in
1975; Nixon was out, disco was in and Karen Carpenter began suffering from
anorexia nervosa. As her body grew lighter, so did her voice. No longer was she
the unwitting foil to her brother's aural Disneyland but a willing accomplice.

She did record 23 solo tracks with the producer Phil Ramone in 1979 for an album
that was never released. The arrangements were tougher, but Karen Carpenter,
more self-consciously feminine, ended up abandoning the deep tones that made her
voice so compelling to begin with.  Three of the solo cuts are included on "From
the Top," including a prophetically titled disco song, "My Body Keeps Changing
My Mind."

Since her death in 1983, she has been the subject of Todd Haynes's acclaimed
film "Superstar" and celebrated by the punk band Sonic Youth in "Tunic (Song for
Karen)." But if her illness has legitimized her among the hip, the sound and
image that remain indelible belong to the Karen and Richard of the early 70's,
America's most defiant squares.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Military Spending Binge Got Us Into This Mess

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


To the Editor:

The Republican Party line points proudly to the country's "longest peacetime
expansion" during the Reagan-Bush decade of the 1980's. The intended point is
that the second longest economic expansion of the post-World War II period was
achieved without the stimulus of a wartime buildup, as occurred during the
Vietnam War era, when the longest expansion was recorded.

But a graph of United States military spending in dollars of constant purchasing
power, published in the Sept. 28 issue of The Economist, and based on Commerce
Department and Office of Management and Budget figures, makes it clear to anyone
not wearing Republican-tinted glasses that the spending bulge above the trend
line for 1980-90 is about twice that for 1965-75.

Moreover, since real gross national product did not double between 1970 and
1985, the relative-size argument doesn't wash either.

Of course, it is a blessing that there was no shooting war in the later period,
but does that matter to the economy? If the Republicans are going to claim that
spending on shooting wars imparts a greater economic stimulus than spending for
military hardware that doesn't fire any shots in anger, how do they explain why
the outbreak of the Persian Gulf war brought about our recession? Because it was
fought at nearly zero marginal capital cost and expenses were covered by passing
the hat among our allies?

As the most significant events of the last 45 years are taking place in Eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union, about all the United States can do, because of the
debt piled up during the Reagan years, is offer advice on how to privatize
industry and pray for market miracles.

LARRY COLE
Natick, Mass., Oct. 16, 1991

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Golf? Transcendental?

BYLINE: By Susan Kenney;  Susan Kenney, who is director of the creative writing
program at Colby College, is the author of the novel "Sailing."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 984 words



THE LIES BOYS TELL
By Lamar Herrin.
267 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton & Company.
$19.95.

Over the years, novels (not to mention movies) of the American road have covered
a lot of territory, both literally and figuratively, dealing with issues both
existential and transcendental in modes ranging from grim realism to outright
fantasy. At one end of the scale, we have "The Wizard of Oz," with its oddly
assorted companions who, faced with one seemingly insurmountable obstacle after
another, finally reach their destination through a combination of
gee-whiz-why-not persistence, good old American ingenuity and childlike
sincerity. And then there's "As I Lay Dying," with its marginal but resolute
family members determined to pursue their gruesome mission to its ultimate
conclusion, accompanied by a palpable atmosphere of mortality and decay.

As incompatible as these disparate elements may seem, in his fourth and best
novel, "The Lies Boys Tell," Lamar Herrin has managed to combine them into a
work of unusual lyrical and moral beauty, of challenging metaphorical
complexity. Not only that, along with his narrative of the open road, as the
main vehicle for the novel's intensely moving transcendental meditations about
life and death Mr. Herrin employs that most pedestrian of pastimes, the game of
golf.

Golf? Transcendental? Golf?

When we first come upon him, dying of lung cancer complicated by emphysema at
his home in Welborne, Ky., Ed Reece is asleep and dreaming: his long-lost,
renegade older son, Larry, has returned and is standing "on the front lawn
taking practice swings with his father's driver." Waking from his nap, Ed
recalls vividly the most intense visionary moment of his life: "It was an early
summer evening . . . and as shadows stretched out over the rolling fairways the
green grass came alive at its depth. It looked like beautifully molded water
then, and upon it walked his son, alone, with the swing Ed had taught him,
lifting that ball clean and deep into the evening air." Larry is another one of
those aimless, disaffected post-Vietnam-era men so prevalent in contemporary
fiction, but he may be the only one with a redemptive golf swing.

Desperate in his last days to give his life some meaning, some sense of closure,
Ed has become obsessed with the idea that he must die in the place where he was
born -- and not just in the town, but in the actual bed, in the actual house, in
the actual room. The house, if it still exists, is hundreds of miles away in
Chumleyville, Ala., and the bed, set up in the attic of his only surviving
sister, is even farther away in Savannah, Ga.

Renegade or not, obviously a son who walks on water is the one to fulfill Ed
Reece's final request. That is why Ed has secretly tracked Larry down in Mexico
and sent for him after a six-year absence. Ed knows that, as disgruntled and
alienated as his son is from virtually everyone -- his mother, Sylvia; his
younger brother, Russ; his sister, Nell; his own former wife, Connie, and their
two children -- Larry is the only one he can count on to take him where he wants
to go, no matter what. "I have to make it make sense, Larry," his father
confesses. "I have to find a way to explain it all."

But when Larry starts heading east in the green Dodge van Ed has had him buy
with the cash he's been hoarding, Ed suddenly orders him to drive west instead.
Before he settled down with his own distributorship -- and a permanent foursome
-- in Welborne, Ed was a traveling paper-products salesman throughout the
Midwest. So Ed and Larry spiral their way up through Indiana and Illinois,
across Iowa and back, with Ed giving directions from memory, first from the
passenger seat and then, as he grows weaker, sight unseen from his mattress in
the back of the van. "Where are we going, Dad?" Larry asks early on, as they
near Indianapolis. "From Martinsville to Franklin," comes the reply. "From there
to Shelbyville, Rushville, and New Castle. Route 44 will swing you around."

Though he has told Larry he just wants to "drive around," it turns out that Ed
has an ulterior motive, finally revealed when they head down into Missouri,
which Larry reminds him "had not been his territory." They are on their way to
call on Larry's former wife, Connie, now living with the children and a female
lover, Jan, on a farm between Columbia and Jefferson City. Reluctantly, Connie
and 12-year-old Jeff agree to join up, and the bizarre pilgrimage at last heads
east, encountering not only "smokeys" -- Sylvia and Russ may have reported them
to the police as kidnappers -- and nosy motel operators, but the family living
in the old homestead, whose grasp of social niceties makes the Beans of Egypt,
Me., look like residents of the Philadelphia Main Line.

I'll leave it for the reader to discover how the members of Ed's weird retinue
work together to accomplish their difficult mission, despite numerous obstacles,
and what they make of it along the way, rendered from several points of view in
a graceful and well-sustained omniscience. Although it's not really necessary,
you might want to have a road atlas nearby, for a tracking of the routes yields
another level of meaning beyond mere itinerary -- and may impart the final
revelation of Ed's quest.

And then there's golf. Finally, no one can think of a better epitaph for Ed
Reece than, as his old golf partner suggests, "Here lies a man who could sure
hit that ball." How Mr. Herrin effectively convinces us that this is fitting and
proper, deserving of our respect, is nothing short of miraculous. What Norman
Maclean did for the lyric-elegiac possibilities of fly-fishing in "A River Runs
Through It," Mr. Herrin may very well have done for golf. And for that, we
members of the vast legion of the golf-bereaved -- P.G.A., U.S.G.A. or
otherwise; weekend widows, widowers and orphans all -- should be grateful
indeed.

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
'A Piece of My Heart,' Women In Vietnam

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words


At the end of "A Piece of My Heart," Shirley Lauro's new play about the unsung
American women who served in Vietnam, the characters appear before a replica of
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington and place homely mementos of the war
at its base. It is a powerful tableau -- like every other glimpse of that long,
dark wall -- and it allows Ms. Lauro at last to stir up the feelings of grief
and anger that she has been chasing all night.

Yet, for me at least, the feelings evaporated the moment I was back on the
street, at which point I resented having my buttons pushed so cheaply. Right
until its coda, "A Piece of My Heart," a Manhattan Theater Club presentation by
way of the Actors Theater of Louisville, is embarrassingly cliched in its
efforts to bring home the stories of forgotten survivors of the Vietnam
nightmare.  Are we to applaud a playwright who uses the wall to prop up what is
otherwise an incompetent piece of work?

"A Piece of My Heart" can be called incompetent because it coarsens and wastes
valuable documentary material. Ms. Lauro's source is a 1986 oral history by
Keith Walker in which 26 of the estimated 1,500 American women who went to
Southeast Asia recounted their experiences, whether as nurses, civilian
do-gooders or entertainers. These women had their own distinctive and courageous
war to fight: with their consciences, with the Vietnamese, with the American
military command, with primitive medical facilities and, most pointedly, with
men.

Though the playwright draws on the words of her actual subjects, her play seems
synthetic, like an old-fashioned news-magazine round-up story with archetypal,
if not composite, characters speaking in souped-up quotes. Bizarrely enough,
most of Ms. Lauro's major characters are so generic that they could have stepped
out of the stereotyped male ranks of bygone service comedies like "Mister
Roberts" or "No Time for Sergeants": the tough-talking but big-hearted military
lifer (Novella Nelson), the rich college kid (Sharon Schlarth), the religious
small-town naif (Corliss Preston) and even the immortal Andy Griffith role, that
of the thick-accented yet shrewd country bumpkin (Cynthia Carle) who strums a
mean guitar.

"A Piece of My Heart" never makes the audience feel close to these or its other
characters because Ms. Lauro manipulates them from without rather than observing
them from within. Once the women have shipped off to Vietnam, the action of the
play is not driven by their specific narratives, intimate thoughts or feelings;
instead the players become faceless, symbolic figures in a mural.

Whether appearing individually in didactic vignettes or banding together for
lengthy rounds of group recitation, the women react mechanically to the expected
checklist of red-letter experiences, from their first encounter with the
brutality of combat through their initiations into drugs and booze, sexual
harassment and official duplicity (during the Tet Offensive). When the women
return home to face a series of new indignities in Act II (unemployment,
discrimination, Agent Orange mutations), they go their separate ways but just as
predictably. The alcoholic finds salvation in Alcoholics Anonymous; the idealist
joins Vietnam Veterans Against the War; the true believer becomes a born-again
Christian.

Everything in this play is over-generalized to the point of blandness.  Even the
potentially theatrical idea of assigning all the male roles to a single actor
(Tom Stechschulte) -- a conceit reminiscent of Amlin Gray's harrowing Vietnam
play, "How I Got That Story" -- comes to nothing because virtually all the male
roles turn out to be variations on the same blue-collar white Everyman. The
ideological point of this all-purpose man is clear and unexceptional enough --
"Men wanted that war, men made that war," says one of the women in Act II -- but
the device has the odd and falsifying side effect of completely eliminating
black men from the Vietnam story.

Such lapses are surprising coming from Ms. Lauro. In "Open Admissions," her
searing play about a confrontation between a black male student and a white
female teacher in an urban university, she met head-on the sorts of complex
ideological and racial conflicts that are either oversimplified or sidestepped
here. "A Piece of My Heart" has far more in common with another Manhattan
Theater Club production this year about a neglected patch of American military
history, "Black Eagles," in which the tale of black World War II fighter pilots
was reduced to a lulling pageant of unassailable worthiness and infinitesimal
drama.

Ms. Lauro's play must struggle under the additional handicap of being presented
at the expansive Union Square Theater (until recently the home of the Roundabout
Theater Company) while "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" continues its extended run
at the Manhattan Theater Club's snugger auditorium at City Center.  Under the
direction of Allen R. Belknap, the performers often seem to be inflating their
soliloquies, whether perky or sorrowful, to fill the big house, with the
consequence that both their wartime experiences and sobbing postwar nervous
breakdowns sometimes come across like audition monologues from "A Chorus Line."
Mr. Belknap's staging also boasts an arsenal of cheesy sound-and-light effects
that, like the rest of the evening's sloppy histrionics, say nothing about the
tragedy of Vietnam that can remotely match the eloquence of the wall's mute,
unadorned listing of the names of the dead.

A Piece of My Heart

By Shirley Lauro, suggested by the book by Keith Walker; directed by Allen R.
Belknap; sets by James Fenhagen; costumes by Mimi Maxmen; lighting by Richard
Winkler; sound by John Kilgore; production stage manager, Richard Hester; guitar
and vocal arrangements, Cynthia Carle. Presented by the Manhattan Theater Club,
Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, managing director; by special
arrangement with Roger L. Stevens. Michael Bush, associate artistic director;
Victoria Bailey, general manager. At Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street,
Manhattan.

Martha . . . Annette Helde
Maryjo . . . Cynthia Carle
Sissy . . . Corliss Preston
Whitney . . . Sharon Schlarth
Leeann . . . Kim Miyori
Steele . . . Novella Nelson
All the American men . . . Tom Stechschulte

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from "A Piece of My Heart," Shirley Lauro's new play at
the Union Square Theater. (Gerry Goodstein/"A Piece of My Heart")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 198 words


The voice will have a familiar ring to those who served in Vietnam when ADRIAN
CRONAUER, about whom the movie "Good Morning, Vietnam" was made, makes his
National Public Radio debut in a special Veterans Day program.

Now a communications lawyer in Washington, Mr. Cronauer, who spent several years
after leaving Vietnam in 1966 working in radio, said he would "look at the role
Armed Forces Radio played in the lives of the G.I. in Vietnam."

"I will have excerpts of interviews with people who were there," he said. "I
will play music of that era and public service announcements like, 'Don't forget
to take your malaria pills.' "

How will the show start out, he was asked. "It will be 'Goooood morning Vietnam,
' but done by ROBIN WILLIAMS, not me," he said. "I did it differently, this
way," he said, uttering the word "good" longer than Mr. Williams ever did.

Mr. Cronauer said, "Only now am I beginning to understand the impact the Armed
Forces Radio had on G.I.'s then. It is not unusual to have a Vietnam veteran
come up to me at a speaking engagement and say, 'Thank you for helping me to get
through Nam.' That hits hard. The first time it happened I could hardly speak."

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 4, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Democracy's Lies

BYLINE: By Eric Alterman;  Eric Alterman is a senior fellow of the World Policy
Institute at the New School for Social Research.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: PALO ALTO, Calif.


Remember Elliott Abrams? Just a few short years ago, the former Assistant
Secretary of State was everywhere. The youngest, most visible neo-conservative
in the Reagan foreign policy apparatus, Mr. Abrams logged more time on
"Nightline" than anyone but Henry Kissinger and Alexander Haig. On Oct. 7, Mr.
Abrams pleaded guilty to two misdemeanors of "withholding" evidence from
Congress. The Washington media, preoccupied with Clarence Thomas and Robert
Gates, has once again let Mr. Abrams slip through the cracks.

Elliott Abrams and his fellow young Reaganites were a tough-minded gang. Steeped
in 40 years of cold war myopia, they argued that if the Russians could lie,
cheat and steal to extend their empire, well, then, so should we.

Elliott Abrams was the best of the Rightest. Whenever he appeared before
Congress, it was to tell the members that they were Commie dupes or worse. When
the Nicaraguans shot down a contra supply plane in 1986, Mr. Abrams blamed
liberal Democrats. When asked by the conservative pundits Rowland Evans and
Robert Novak whether he could offer "categorical assurance" that the downed
pilot, Eugene Hasenfus, was not connected with the U.S. Government, Elliott
Abrams smirked, "Absolutely, that would be illegal."

Unbelievable assertions from our public officials are hardly unusual. Did we
believe Clarence Thomas when he said he had never talked about Roe v. Wade? Did
we believe Robert Gates when he said politics never affected his intelligence
reports? Will it matter tomorrow when the Senate votes on his nomination? But
Elliott Abrams lied. And it is important to give his actions their proper name
because following the example of his plea bargain, the media have used the same
subterfuge his lawyers concocted to stave off felony charges. Mr. Abrams
"withheld" the truth. He was not "candid" with Congress. In fact, he lied.

On Nov. 25, 1986, Mr. Abrams told a Senate committee, that "the State
Department's function" in aiding the contras "has not been to raise money other
than to try and raise it from Congress." Yet he had just returned from Brunei
where, lo and behold, he had been raising money for the contras. On Dec. 8, Mr.
Abrams returned to admit the truth, sort of. When Senator Thomas Eagleton
insisted, "You lied to us," Elliott Abrams responded, "I can just reject that,
Senator."

What is most disturbing about his response was that he was essentially correct.
He almost got away with it, too. Even after Mr. Abrams's dishonesty had been
revealed, George Shultz, who as Secretary of State had himself misled the public
and President Reagan on the basis of Mr. Abrams's false statements, insisted
"the country needs people like that."

Mr. Abrams's unmasking also did little to devalue his expertise in the
punditocracy. TV continued to book him and reporters continued to quote him.
Robert Novak told me that he didn't really mind the fact that Mr. Abrams had
lied to him on television. "He had a tough job and there were lots of people out
to get him."

Elliott Abrams was certainly not the first high official to lie to us. Nor were
his lies any worse than those of his forebears. What is new in our culture is
how easily we accept these lies. When Americans found out that Lyndon Johnson
had been lying about Vietnam, they forced him to give up plans for a second
term. After lying about Watergate, Richard Nixon resigned in disgrace and has
still not fully rehabilitated himself.

By the time of the Reagan Administration's secret wars, however, lies had become
just one more weapon in democracy's arsenal. Ronald Reagan invented facts and
figures and everyone seemed to think this cute. And what about George Bush's
assertions? Is Clarence Thomas the best-qualified jurist to sit on the Supreme
Court? Was Saddam Hussein "worse than Hitler"?

A nation that lacks the means to detect lies, noted Walter Lippmann, also lacks
the means to preserve its liberty. The Stalinists may have lost the cold war,
but through the legacy of official mistrust sowed by the likes of Elliott
Abrams, they have achieved a gruesome posthumous victory.


LOAD-DATE: November 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

K.G.B. Pilfered Prize, Bonner Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 238 words

DATELINE: OSLO, Nov. 5


Andrei D. Sakharov's widow said today that the K.G.B. had stolen the gold medal
awarded to him with the 1985 Nobel Peace Prize.

The widow, Yelena Bonner, who has been a Soviet dissident leader, also said that
the Norwegian Nobel Institute had turned down a request she made in January to
delete Sakharov's name from the list of winners to protest the awarding of the
1990 peace prize to President Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

The 1985 prize was awarded to Sakharov for his work as a dissident physicist and
human rights campaigner. He died in 1989.
 Mrs. Bonner asked for her husband's name to be deleted after 14 people died in
Soviet military actions in Lithuania in January. But she said she would not make
any further protest.

"I can't give the medal back; the K.G.B. stole the medal and the diploma long
ago," she told reporters during a visit here this week. She said she would not
try to return the $105,000 in prize money, much of which has been used to pay
medical bills or given to charity.
 "The fact that Sakharov won the prize is a historical fact," said Geir
Lundestad, head of the Nobel Institute, reiterating comments made in January.
"His name cannot be deleted."
 No Nobel laureate has ever returned the peace prize, although the Vietnamese
Communist leader Le Duc Tho turned down the 1973 award which he won jointly with
U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger for efforts to end the Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Not Helping Enough on Missing, Cheney Tells Panel

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Despite improved cooperation, Vietnam could do much more to aid the efforts of
American investigators searching for clues about servicemen unaccounted for in
the Vietnam War, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said today.

The Bush Administration has linked the pace and scope of normalizing relations
between the two former enemies to Hanoi's cooperation in resolving the highly
emotional issue of missing Americans in Southeast Asia.

The other major irritant in American-Vietnamese relations was alleviated last
month with the signing of a Cambodian peace accord; Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d said then that Washington was ready to open talks on restoring
relations with Hanoi, which installed and supported Cambodia's Communist
Government.

Promises Only Partly Fulfilled

Testifying at the first of a series of hearings by a special Senate committee
investigating the fate of missing Americans, Mr. Cheney said that American field
investigators "find that public pronouncements of increased cooperation by Hanoi
do not produce satisfactory arrangements on the ground."

"Promises to cooperate on live sightings, improved helicopter transportation and
complete access to historical records remain only partially fulfilled," said Mr.
Cheney.

"The pace and scope of normalizing relations with Vietnam will depend upon the
extent of cooperation by the Vietnamese on P.O.W.-M.I.A. matters," he said.

Team of Searchers Grows

In the past several months, as Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia have expressed greater
willingness to assist American investigators, the Defense Department has
increased the number of investigators, analysts and other workers assigned to
the cases of missing servicemen to nearly 240 from 134.

Of the 2,273 servicemen still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia, the Pentagon
classifies 1,172 as missing. The other 1,101 are believed to have been killed in
action, but their bodies have not been recovered.

Even with broader access to Vietnamese records and inspections of suspected
crash sites, Pentagon officials repeated their assertion that they have found no
evidence that any servicemen remain in captivity.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

HANOI'S OFFICIALS ARRIVE IN BEIJING

BYLINE: By SHERYL WuDUNN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Nov. 5


Top Vietnamese leaders arrived in Beijing today for five days of talks that both
sides said mark the normalization of relations between the former enemies and
that pave the way for greater economic cooperation.

The visit by the Vietnamese Communist Party leader, Do Muoi, and Prime Minister
Vo Van Kiet ends a rift of more than a dozen years between the two neighbors,
who fought a brief border war in 1979.

"This is a meeting that concludes the past and opens up the future," the
official New China News Agency quoted the Chinese Communist Party leader, Jiang
Zemin, as saying. "The talks mark the normalization of bilateral relations and
will have a profound impact on the development of such relations."

The announcement by Mr. Jiang and tonight's national television news, which
showed scenes of Mr. Jiang and Mr. Do Muoi walking happily side by side, suggest
an effort to highlight the ideological camaraderie between the two countries.

A Major Obstacle Ends

China and Vietnam have been drawn together by the disintegration of Communism
elsewhere in the world, and in the last few months ties have improved with
unusual swiftness. A major obstacle to normal relations was removed last month
in Paris, when the four rival Cambodian parties signed an agreement to end the
Cambodian war.

While territorial and border disagreements still exist, Chinese-Vietnamese
relations have already warmed in a number of areas, like trade and economic
exchanges. During the talks, the two sides are expected to sign agreements
covering trade, transport and communications.

Trade across the 625-mile Chinese-Vietnamese border last year was officially
reported to be $35 million, but there has also been a vibrant underground
business of smuggling goods across the border. In the first half of this year,
Vietnam and China signed commercial contracts worth $113.2 million, a Chinese
newspaper said.

Vietnam is eager to restructure its economy and attract foreign investment as
China has been doing for the last dozen years, and its delegation will visit two
of China's most prosperous areas in the southern province of Guangdong.

The two sides never officially severed ties and still maintained embassies in
each other's capitals. But air, rail and telephone links were cut after 1979,
when China invaded Vietnam border areas in retaliation for Vietnam's ousting of
the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge forces in Cambodia.

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words



International A3-17

ROBERT MAXWELL FOUND DEAD

The body of Robert Maxwell, the flamboyant publisher whose worldwide holdings
include The Daily News, was discovered floating in the ocean off the Canary
Islands. An autopsy will be performed to determine the cause of his death.  Page
A1

Mr. Maxwell, 68, fled the collapse of Czechoslovakia to become a brash and
powerful businessman.  D23

The publisher died just as his grip on his global empire seemed to be slipping.
D22

Mr. Maxwell's death raises serious doubts about the survival of The Daily News,
newspaper executives and industry analysts said.  D22

"I think we are all worried about what is going to happen to this paper," a
Daily News reporter said. "It's just been one calamity after another." D22

FOOD RATIONING IN MOSCOW

With panic shopping gripping Moscow in anticipation of a switch to free-market
prices, Mayor Gavriil K. Popov announced a coupon-rationing system on basic
food.  A10

Moscow agreed to open its entire territory to aerial inspection.  A11

OUTCRY ON JAPANESE CABINET
Kiichi Miyazawa became Japan's Prime Minister and quickly set off an outcry by
swearing in a Cabinet with veteran politicians frozen out of power because of
links to bribery and sex scandals.  A3

NEW WORLD SYMBOLISM

For President Bush, the NATO meeting in Rome this week will be an exercise in
trying to hold together an institution shaken by the same new world order he has
been eager to create, more symbol than substance.  A14

IRAQ'S ECONOMIC WAR ON KURDS

Gasoline, food and jobs are among the weapons in an apparent pressure campaign
by Baghdad on the Kurdish minority.  A16

ELECTION RESULTS IN GAZA

Results from a Gaza Strip Chamber of Commerce election Strip suggested that
Palestinians there have begun to swing away from hard-line Islamic
fundamentalists toward relative moderates.  A17

Secretary of State Baker rebuked Israel for opening a settlement for Soviet
immigrants on the Golan Heights.  A17

A WARNING IN SOUTH AFRICA

A two-day national strike by opponents of the South African Government ended
after demonstrating that black workers could bring the country's economy to a
standstill.  A3

VIETNAM AND CHINA

Drawn together by the disintegration of Communism in other parts of the world,
Vietnam and China began five days of talks.  A7

Hanoi is not helping enough on the M.I.A.'s, Cheney tells a special Senate
committee.  A7

Gonaives Journal: In this northern Haitian port, former President Jean-Bertrand
Aristide is venerated.  A4

Chinese-American scholarly, artistic and business relations are deteriorating.
A6

Pirate radio station adds a voice to Hungary's growing political debate.  A13

The European Community threatens to end its Yugoslav peace effort.  A16

National A18-23

GATES WINS CONFIRMATION

Robert Gates became the 15th Director of Central Intelligence, winning Senate
confirmation on a vote of 64 to 31 and achieving a goal to which he had aspired
for most of his professional life.  A1

ASTUNNER IN PENNSYLVANIA

Senator Harris Wofford, a Democratic appointee who was far behind in the summer
polls, defeated Dick Thornburgh in a race to serve the remaining three years of
the late John Heinz's term.  A1

DEMOCRAT WINS IN KENTUCKY

Lieut. Gov. Brereton Jones, a Democrat, easily won the contest for Governor over
a Republican Congressman, Larry Hopkins.  A22

NEW FOOD-LABEL RULES

The Government will propose regulations to clarify the babel of food-labeling
claims on supermarket shelves. Under the proposals, marketing claims like
"fat-free," "light" and "low calorie" would have to conform to strict
definitions.  A1

BANK BILL'S UNRAVELING

News analysis: Legislation to revamp the nation's anachronistic banking system,
once the President's top domestic priority, fell victim to the competing
interests of powerful lobbies.  A1

BUSH CANCELS ASIA TRIP

Under fire from critics who say he has been spending too much time on foreign
policy and not enough on domestic issues, President Bush cancelled a trip to
Asia and Australia that had been scheduled to begin later this month.  A23

HEARINGS ON PIPELINE

An investigation undertaken by the owners of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline escalated
into a nationwide inquiry that made targets of the oil industry's critics and,
briefly, a prominent Congressman, say documents made public by a House panel.
A18

POSTAL INCREASE REJECTED

The Postal Service refused to raise the price of a first-class letter a penny,
to 30 cents. Six of the agency's nine governors favored the increase, but
unanimity was needed.  A18

Florida churches are again targets of arsonists.  A18

Former associate of Noriega testified against him.  A20

Court said state officials liable for civil rights violations.  A20

G.O.P VICTORY IN NEW JERSEY

New Jersey Republicans seized control of both houses of the State Legislature
for the first time in 20 years, in an election that reflected a tide of voter
anger over a record tax increase enacted by the Democrats 16 months ago. The
Republican victory bodes ill for the programs of Gov. Jim Florio.  A1

Business   Digest, D1

The Living Section

Gospel of a master chef C1
The food gift is in the mail C1
Calvin Klein's tease C1
Metropolitan Diary C2
60-Minute Chef C2
Microwave Cooking C3
De Gustibus C4

Arts/Entertainment

Endowment gives grants to two artists rejected last year C19
Brecht's "In the Jungle of Cities" C19
Word and Image: MTV looks at the twentysomethings C19
"Churchill: A Life" C22
Series on divorce to replace "Sibs" C24

Education Page B9

A Harvard study finds students learn best in small groups

Obituaries D23-24

Fred MacMurray, actor D24

Sports B10-15
Baseball: One-year pact for Yanks' Howe B12
Basketball: Knicks trounce Bucks B11
Boxing: Outling the Tyson case B13
Column: Anderson on Ray Handley B11
Football: Handley won't change quarterbacks B11
Notre Dame-Penn State may be offered for a fee B15

Editorials/Op-Ed

Editorials A24
The law that ate the future
Serbia's spiteful war
Bargain justice in Brooklyn

Letters A24
Anna Quindlen: The war on drinks A25
Leslie H. Gelb: Foreign aid follies A25
Roger Stone: The Mario myth A25
Shibley Telhami: Neutral ground A25

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kiichi Miyazawa, A3 (Reuters)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

An Official Says Some G.I.'s Were Left Behind in Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 6


The head of the United States office in Hanoi told a Senate committee today that
some American servicemen were left behind as prisoners in Vietnam at the end of
the war, but that there is no proof that any of them are still alive.

The official, Garnett E. Bell Jr. of the Office for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, said
that between 1973 and 1975, the United States began receiving reports "that
Americans were still being held, but they were unconfirmed."

Testifying before the Senate committee investigating the fate of the 2,273
servicemen listed as missing in action from the Indochina war, he said evidence
gathered since then convinced him that the initial reports were true.

Asked how many Americans were left behind, Mr. Bell replied, "Possibly 10 or
less."

Mr. Bell's report contradicts statements two decades ago by the Government that
all prisoners of war had returned home and everyone else was presumed dead.

Mr. Bell did not discuss the circumstances under which the Americans were held,
or what has been learned of their fate. However, he said his office has no proof
that any Americans are still alive in Vietnamese captivity.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Beijing to Sign a Pact With Hanoi on Trade

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Nov. 6


China said today that it would sign an economic agreement and a border agreement
with Vietnam before Saturday, moving toward a resolution of a long dispute about
the precise location of their 625-mile frontier.

It was unclear whether that meant that the border has been fully demarcated,
whether troops have been removed from the area or if the two sides are simply
planning to hold further discussions.

The Foreign Ministry spokesman, Wu Jianmin, said the two Governments had
discussed possible joint development of the Spratly Islands, a group of
mineral-producing islets in the South China Sea over which China, Vietnam and
several other nations in the region claim sovereignty. China has troops
stationed on the islands, but Mr. Wu said the two sides did not discuss the
military presence.

The leader of the Vietnamese Communist Party, Du Muoi, is in Beijing for a
summit meeting that led to the announcement on Tuesday that China and Vietnam
would normalize relations. But Mr. Wu emphasized that bilateral relations would
be restored only gradually.

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Substance And Style Criticized In 'J.F.K.'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 6


Twenty-eight years after the killing of John F. Kennedy, a film by Oliver Stone
about the assassination has touched off a wave of controversy and accusations
involving both the movie's conclusions and the way the film was made.

With Mr. Stone working virtually round-the-clock to complete the three-hour
movie, which is scheduled to be released across the nation on Dec. 20, movie
executives say that the project, "J. F. K.," starring Kevin Costner, will be the
most widely discussed movie of the Christmas season. Hollywood is nervous about
the season because an array of expensive films, like "J. F. K.," are being
released, while box office receipts have plummeted over the last year. The
film's producers are plainly uneasy about the audience reaction to "J. F. K."

At issue in the film, written by Mr. Stone and Zachary Sklar, is the contention
that the assassination was the result of a conspiracy and that the Warren
Commission was wrong in its conclusion that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. The
fact that the movie, budgeted at $35 million to $40 million, features Mr.
Costner, one of the top stars in Hollywood, and is supported by one of the more
prestigious studios, Warner Brothers, adds considerable weight to the impact of
the film's thesis, which presents the killing as a conspiracy but does not
pinpoint the conspirators.

Mr. Costner plays Jim Garrison, the District Attorney of New Orleans in the late
1960's, whose investigation and assertions about a conspiracy were, critics
said, fraudulent and driven by a desire for publicity.

'The Vipers' Nest'

"We describe the forces at play at that time," Mr. Stone said in a telephone
interview. "From those forces you can draw your own conclusion.  We deal to a
large degree with why Kennedy was killed and the policy splits then about Cuba,
Vietnam and Laos." Mr. Stone, who won an Academy Award for "Platoon," a Vietnam
War film, said the conspirators were left ambiguous.

"I hope people will respond," he said. "I think people smell a rat in the Warren
Commission. My film certainly opens the floorboards and looks into the vipers'
nest and raises serious questions about the Warren Commission. Whether you
accept my conclusion is not the point. We want people to examine this."

Asked if he was nervous about the impact of the film on the country, Mr. Stone
replied: "Am I scared? Yes, I'm scared."

Beyond the questions about the film's assertions, which have been criticized for
months in The Washington Post, Time magazine and other publications, is
controversy about what Mr. Stone's critics call the use of muscle to thwart
potentially competitive films about the assassination from appearing at the same
time as his own movie. For Mr. Stone, who relishes controversy but prides
himself on his tolerance for freedom of expression, the accusations rankle.

The main allegation is that Mr. Stone and his agents, the Creative Artists
Agency, tried to thwart production of "Libra," a film based on the Don DeLillo
novel about Oswald.  Mr. Stone and the agency strongly deny any such efforts
were made.

"Oliver Stone wanted to make sure he had the only movie coming out on the
assassination, and he did what he had to do to insure that," said Dale Pollock,
the president of A&M films, which owns the film rights to the critically
acclaimed DeLillo book, a fictional exploration of Oswald.

After considerable turmoil over the production of "Libra," the film is expected
to start production in April and is to be directed by John Malkovich, the actor.

It is the contention of Mr. Pollock and several others at the independent
company that the "Libra" film was virtually in place when it unraveled under
pressure. Mr. Pollock said that after the film's original director, Jonathan
Demme, dropped out, a second director, Phil Joanou, a rising 29-year-old film
maker, became involved in the project. But after Mr. Stone had a conversation
with Mr. Joanou -- the two men are clients of the Creative Artists Agency -- the
young director dropped out. At the same time, Home Box Office, which expressed
interest in the project, also dropped out, largely because HBO is owned by Time
Warner, HBO said. Warner Brothers is producing "J. F. K."

Mr. Stone and Creative Artists deny that any pressure was put on Mr. Joanou. And
Mr. Joanou said: "This whole thing has been blown way out of proportion. I was
sent the script of 'Libra.' I found the subject matter interesting. I was toying
with the idea." But after reading a rewritten version of the screenplay, Mr.
Joanou said, "I felt this wasn't the right film for me."

A Different Topic

The director said that he had met Mr. Stone but that they largely discussed a
coming project together, "Panama," about the Noriega regime. "On 'Libra,' " Mr.
Joanou said, "the only thing we discussed was whether Oswald was the lone
assassin. Oliver feels he wasn't. Everyone thinks Oliver prevented 'Libra' from
getting made. It's the most absurd thing I've ever heard."

A widely heard report was that Creative Artists called HBO to stop the film, but
Robert Cooper, a senior vice president of HBO Pictures, said that although the
company considered doing it, "we heard our sister company, Warner's, was
releasing 'J. F. K.' in December and at that point we realized it was foolish to
compete." Creative Artists also denies putting pressure on HBO.

Mr. Stone has also been embroiled in a dispute involving a third film connected
to the assassination. The movie "Ruby," starring Danny Aiello as Jack Ruby, was
filmed in Dallas and was to be released early next year. Its producer, Joni
Sighvatsson, and director, John Mackenzie, have contended that Mr. Stone made
sure that any film project about the assassination would not have access to
important Dallas locations or be able to hire actors used in "J. F. K." until
long after the Stone film was released. The movie is being produced by
Propaganda Films, which has made successful commercials and film videos and
David Lynch's "Wild at Heart."

Mr. Stone vehemently denies these charges and says the criticisms come from
"cry-baby sources." Speaking of the Ruby film as well as of "Libra," he says: "I
can't tell you how many pictures I've been beaten out of. I wanted to do a civil
rights movie, but Alan Parker got there first with 'Mississippi Burning.' I
don't cry over it. This is a very competitive business."

Warner Brothers, meanwhile, has taken the unusual step of hiring Frank
Mankiewicz, the Washington public-relations executive and former campaign
manager for Robert F. Kennedy, to promote the film and seek support in the news
media for Mr. Stone. Last week, Mr. Stone flew to Washington and had dinner with
representatives from The New York Times, The Washington Post, People magazine
and CBS.

Mr. Stone's associates said that Mr. Mankiewicz was hired partly because he has
been identified with the Kennedy family and partly because the news media have
criticized Mr. Stone's defense of Mr. Garrison's conspiracy theories.

"I'm trying to present a legitimate position for Oliver in light of some of the
sensational and hostile stuff about him," Mr. Mankiewicz said.

NAME: Oliver Stone

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Oliver Stone, seated, on the set of "J. F. K.," which he said
"looks into the vipers' nest" of the investigation of the assassination. (Matt
Anderson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

We're Still Training Salvadorans to Kill

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 144 words


To the Editor:

Nov. 16 will be the second anniversary of the brutal slayings of six Salvadoran
Jesuit priests, their housekeeper and her daughter. Five of the nine soldiers
arrested in the case were trained at Fort Benning, Ga., according to a
Congressional task force sent to El Salvador.

Last Nov. 16, Charles Liteky, who received the Congressional Medal of Honor in
Vietnam; his brother, Patrick, who trained at Fort Benning, and I, a Roman
Catholic Maryknoll priest, protested the training of Salvadoran soldiers at Fort
Benning. We were arrested and tried.

I am serving a 16-month sentence in a Federal prison. The Liteky brothers are in
other prisons. Hundreds of Salvadorans still train at Fort Benning, and millions
of dollars in United States military aid still flow to El Salvador.

(Rev.) ROY BOURGEOIS
Tallahassee, Fla., Oct. 28, 1991

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 8, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dhahran Journal;
General's Star Feat: Desert Armies Come, and Go

BYLINE: By YOUSSEF M. IBRAHIM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: DHAHRAN, Saudi Arabia


The gas masks are gone. His office looks decent compared with the shabby theater
at the Dhahran air base that was his headquarters when he first landed. And
Lieut. Gen. William G. Pagonis has three stars now instead of the two he had
when he arrived on Aug. 9, 1990, a week after Iraq invaded Kuwait.

Still, the most senior American commander in the Persian Gulf region speaks
fondly of his first night in Dhahran. Exhausted then from a week of continuous
work, he practically collapsed on a bed, outdoors, in 140-degree heat. Nearby,
American planes were touching down at the rate of one a minute to begin allied
operations in the desert.

General Pagonis, an energetic 50-year-old from Charleroi, Pa., was sent here in
a rush to oversee what turned out to be the fastest and biggest deployment of
United States troops since World War II.

By January 1991, he had brought to Saudi Arabia some 560,000 American soldiers,
along with weapons, tanks and planes, and millions of tons of ammunition, food
and medical supplies. Since March he has been even busier sending them back
home.

"It's been 7 days a week, 18 hours a day," said the general, summing up the
preceding months as "probably the greatest experience of my life."

Indeed, General Pagonis seems more proud of the speed with which he sent
soldiers and equipment home after the cease-fire with Iraq was signed in March
than the mind-boggling job of moving them into Saudi Arabia.

During the pullout there were some complaints from army units about being
"forgotten" in the desert, but army officers here insist there were no
significant delays. "You can't send everybody home the same day," said Col.
Warren Lacy, chief of the public information bureau for the United States Army
in Saudi Arabia. "We tried to get combat units out first."

In his air-conditioned office, General Pagonis, who holds two master's degrees
in business administration, ticked off a set of statistics, revealing the
dimensions of a management job that other American and Saudi officials describe
as a gigantic accomplishment.

Altogether, 350,000 soldiers were sent home in less than 65 days, being
"pumped," as the general puts it, at the rate of 5,000 to 6,000 a day up to
early June. The pace has slackened a bit since, but most of the 560,000 or so
American forces have gone. About 6,000 American troops are still in Saudi Arabia
and 2,000 are in Kuwait. Some 15,000 navy personel are on ships in the region,
and there are about 5,000 Air Force service people to fly the 60 to 70 warplanes
remaining. Most of these are volunteers who chose to stay or arrived after the
hostilities were over.

"At this point we have moved over 100,000 wheeled vehicles either back to the
United States or on the high seas," General Pagonis said. "Over 10,000 tracks,
which are the artillery and the tanks, have been shipped. Over 40,000 containers
and approximately 1,900 helicopters are gone. Every piece of equipment had to be
very carefully cleaned and squared away to meet the agricultural standards of
the United States. On some days we washed 4,000 vehicles a day, 7 days a week,
24 hours a day."

He is most proud of the record set by his 22d Support Command in recovering and
accounting for equipment, an achievement, he says, that far surpasses any
previous experiences in other wars by the American Army.

In World War II, Korea, and particularly in Vietnam, the United States Army left
huge amounts of military hardware behind because of inexperience, or, as in
Vietnam, because of its hasty retreat. In the gulf, the United States military
was intent on avoiding such losses.

"This is the first war in modern times where every screwdriver, every nail is
accounted for," General Pagonis said. "We invented new techniques to search for
things. The desert is a like an ocean: you can lose something there in a
minute."

The effort to empty this country of American troops is evident. At the huge
housing complex known as Al Khobar Towers, where American troops were housed
during the war, scores of buildings have an abandoned look.

The Armed Forces Desert Network Radio, which once beamed music and news to
American troops across the country and elsewhere in the Middle East, is winding
down its operations. As transmitters are disconnected, "Good Morning Saudi
Arabia" is heard in fewer places around the kingdom.

The network's wartime motto, "Keep your head down and the volume up," has been
changed to "Pumpin' the tunes across the dunes," and the area reached by the
broadcasts continues to shrink.

In his office, General Pagonis heatedly disputed those who contend that the
American Army failed to destroy Iraqi forces completely. And he passionately
defends the policy decreed by Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf to refrain from
counting how many enemy soldiers were killed.

A primary lesson of the Vietnam War, he said, was to destroy the equipment of
the enemy rather than kill its men. He says he does not know how many Iraqis
died in the war. Estimates have ranged from 70,000 to 200,000.

"I don't think anybody is going to be able to come up with an accurate count for
the Iraqi dead," he said. "The only person that could give this information is
Saddam Hussein. But we were not going to measure victory by loss of life."

NAME: William G. Pagonis

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "This is the first war in modern times where every screwdriver,
every nail is accounted for," said Lieut. Gen. William G. Pagonis, who
supervised the movement of a half million troops along with tanks, planes and
supplies into and out of the Persian Gulf. (Ricardo Ferro/The St. Petersburg
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words



International 2-6

SANCTIONS AGAINST YUGOSLAVIA

Frustrated at its failure to halt Serbian-led attacks on Croatia, the European
Community imposed broad economic sanctions on Yugoslavia and urged the United
Nations to order an oil embargo.  Page 1

CIVIL WAR BATTERS DUBROVNIK

Dubrovnik, the city on the Adriatic widely recognized as an international
cultural treasure, has become a casualty of the civil war that has torn
Yugoslavia apart.  1




HONG KONG EXPELS 59 BOAT PEOPLE

A plane carrying 59 Vietnamese boat people left Hong Kong for Hanoi under a new
agreement on forced repatriation. Some of the refugees wept and struggled as
they were pushed aboard the plane.  1

NATO WARNS SOVIET REPUBLICS

NATO ended a two-day summit meeting with a warning to the Soviet Union and its
restive republics to bring their nuclear arsenals under central control and curb
the spread of conventional forces.  6

St. Petersburg Journal: The victorious but burdened church.  2

POLISH PRIME MINISTER NAMED

President Lech Walesa asked Bronislaw Geremek, once his mentor in the Solidarity
movement and more recently his critic, to form Poland's next government.4

KOREAS SHOULD BAN BOMB, ROH SAYS

President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea declared that his country will no longer
have American or any other nuclear weapons on its soil, and called on North
Korea not to build a nuclear bomb.  3

U.N. ASKS FUNDS FOR CAMBODIA ROLE

In a bid to speed the end of the Cambodian civil war, the United Nations is
pressing for start-up funds for peacekeeping.4

MAXWELL'S AMERICAN BUSINESSES

The American operations of the Maxwell Communication Corporation have performed
solidly, but the debt incurred to acquire them has undermined the company.  39

The body of Robert Maxwell was flown to Israel for burial.  51

U.S. TO SELL SAUDIS MORE MISSILES

The United States plans to sell 14 more Patriot anti-missile batteries to Saudi
Arabia to reinforce its defenses, Pentagon officials said. 3

The American University of Beirut's main building was bombed. 3

National 8-11

A WAR OF WORDS RAGES ON

President Bush paused between a summit session of the Atlantic alliance and
economic talks in the Netherlands to renew his increasingly defensive battle
with Congress. Had it been up to Democrats, he said, America would be sitting
"fat, dumb and happy with Saddam Hussein maybe in Saudi Arabia." 1

Gephardt attacked the President's foreign policy.  9

A Washington battle is looming over tax cuts as well.  9

CAN COMPUTERS THINK?

Addressing a question that many scientists believe will become a central issue
of the information age, a group of human judges in Boston engaged in a
three-hour battle of wits with a number of computer programs.  1

WHAT BLACKS THINK OF DUKE

To many black Louisianans, David Duke's big following in the campaign for
governor is a sign of deep racial and economic problems that threaten black
progress.  8

MICHIGAN WELFARE RULING

In a decision that could prompt further evictions of thousands of poor tenants,
a Michigan appeals court declined to restore benefits under a welfare program
that the state killed last month.  8

TITLE INSURERS IN TROUBLE

The title insurance industry, which provides protection to millions of property
owners, may not have enough money in reserve to meet a surge in claims.39

CRITICISM FOR A.T.&T.

Using unusually harsh language, the Federal Communications Commission said the
A.T.& T. phone disruption in September resulted from management oversight and
outdated equipment.  39

TURN IN CHEERLEADER CASE

The Texas woman convicted of trying to hire a killer to improve her daughter's
chances of becoming a cheerleader won a new trial.  8

U.S. to speed approval of drugs.  10

Tritium contamination found outside weapons plants.  10

In Texas, deaths by gunshot outnumber traffic fatalities.  10

Sexual-harassment suit faults an ad campaign.  11

A Chicago family of 10 killed, apparently by carbon monoxide.  11

Metropolitan -- Digest, 25

EXPANSION FOR KENNEDY

The first new terminal for Kennedy International Airport in 30 years has been
proposed by three of the biggest international airlines. The expansion comes as
Kennedy tries to maintain its pre-eminence as the country's largest
international gateway.  1


Business -- Digest 39


Sports 31-37


STUNNED ABOUT MAGIC

The news that Magic Johnson is infected with the AIDS virus left teen-agers
across New York and the nation shocked, saddened and touched as if never before
by the knowledge that the disease strikes indiscriminately.  1

Few heterosexuals tested for AIDS. 32

Advertisers indicate support.  32

Johnson continues to be frank.  33

Help for lobbying efforts on AIDS.  33

Leagues remain cautious on AIDS testing.  33

A shock shared by the world.  33

Basketball: Lakers go on.  31

Fitch unhappy with Nets' transactions.  31

Column: Rhoden on Kenny Anderson.  31

Football: Giants Notebook.  37

Jets rookie is hoping to make an impact.  37

Notre Dame's defense is more confident.  37

Hockey: Devils defeat Canadiens.  36

Rangers tie Maple Leafs.  36

Sports Leisure 37

Obituaries 12

Charlotte Moorman, cellist.

Consumer's World 54

"After Christmas" sales, now.

New cars and acid rain.

A versatile ax.

Flu shots for flu season.

Arts/Entertainment

Broadway's future audience.  13

Germany recovers 3 tassels, a possible clue in a vast theft.  14

Music: Fats Domino.  13

City Opera revives "Brigadoon". 13

Roy Gershen plays Louis Jordan. 15

Music in Review16

Dance: Judith Ren-Lay.  17

Editorials/Op-Ed

Editorials 22

Magic Johnson

A trick on poor women.

Voters' anguish on death.

Jail spending.

Letters 22

Russell Baker: Will he? Won't he? Will he?  23

Anna Quindlen: Believe in Magic. 23

Tom McMillen: Magic, now and forever. 23

Steven D. Gold: Taxes aren't fatal. 23

David Holahan: The whining state of Connecticut. 23

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bronislaw Geremek: To form a new Polish government, 4.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 9, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Begins to Transport Vietnam Boat People Back Home

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Saturday, Nov. 9


A group of 59 Vietnamese boat people, some crying and struggling fiercely
against police escorts, were led, pushed, dragged and even bodily carried aboard
a chartered transport plane that took off this morning in the first forced
repatriation under a new agreement with Hanoi.

Unarmed, uniformed police linked arms and formed two tight cordons along the
short path to the plane. Then other police, also unarmed, went aboard the two
buses and began taking the Vietnamese to the plane.

In defiance, several young men, naked from the waist up, linked arms inside the
brightly colored airport shuttle bus that carried them to the airplane. Watching
through the large windows of the bus, reporters could see arms flying,
clenched-fist salutes and tight knots of police surrounding the men.

Struggles broke out inside the first bus, and half a dozen men had to be dragged
or carried onto the plane. An older woman was pushed from behind, and others
were closely escorted, with guards supporting their elbows. Those on the second
bus showed less resistance, although several Vietnamese were draped in red
blankets, which may have been a sign they had stripped themselves in protest.

The 20 men, 16 women and 23 children, 6 under 2 years of age, were moved from
the buses to the aircraft within minutes, and then the Hercules transport plane
took off for the three-hour trip to Hanoi, in what officials here hope will be
the first of hundreds of such return flights.

The British colony now houses about 60,000 Vietnamese, and officials maintain
that only a tiny portion are genuine refugees fleeing persecution from the
hard-line Communist regime in Vietnam. The rest of the boat people, they say,
are illegal immigrants who must be forced to return home.

The journey began on Friday, when the Vietnamese, some sobbing, some faltering
and a few refusing to walk, were moved from a remote island detention camp to
Hong Kong's airport. At Whitehead, the largest detention center here, several
thousand boat people staged an orderly protest on Friday against the
repatriation. Standing behind the high wire fences looped with barbed wire, they
observed a minute of silence in support of the 59 Vietnamese that departed in
the first group.

The United States, which has stated its opposition to forced repatriation "under
the current conditions" in Vietnam, said earlier that it regretted the force
used on Friday, and warned that it would voice stronger objections if similar
force was used today. But several relief agencies, including officials of the
United Nations, said they thought the effort was running as smoothly and as
sensitively as possible.

The Vietnamese spent the night in a temporary shelter set up in an airport
storage building at the colony's busy Kai Tak International Airport. The shelter
was outfitted with beds, toys, even a television set with a videocassette
player.

An official said the Vietnamese were allowed to watch videos, but not newscasts.

The Vietnamese were accompanied by about 40 Hong Kong officials, including the
police, translators, counselors and immigration officers.

The officials, who have tried to give the operation a benign appearance, pointed
out that the Hong Kong police officers involved were unarmed.

On Friday afternoon, under clear, sunny skies, the Vietnamese were ushered
aboard a Royal Navy ferry for the trip to a pier near the airport. The operation
began with a flourish as a guard carried aboard a baby wearing a bright red bow
in her hair.

Clinging to the Railing

But as other Vietnamese were led toward the boat, several men clung to the
pier's railing, and two sobbing women literally had to be carried on board.
Others hesitated, drew back and then, as guards talked to them -- and took them
by the elbow -- they shuffled aboard.

Clinton Leeks, the colony's refugee coordinator, said later that the first phase
of the effort had been "a success." He added, "There has been no question of
force."

Robert Van Leeuwen, head of the Hong Kong office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, said he did not think excessive force was used on
Friday. The group was moved "in the best possible way under the best possible
circumstances," he said. "It's a rather sad business."

Reporters and photographers watched the Vietnamese from aboard a special ferry
supplied by the Hong Kong Government. But as the two women began to kick and sob
and resist boarding, a Marine Department launch motored in front of the
Vietnamese boat, blocking the view, and the press boat backed away.

A Government official later said it was "a snafu, and not a deliberate attempt
to block the press views." Marine officials said the large ferry carrying the
media was drifting too close to the Royal Navy vessel.

Officials meticulously planned literally every step of the group's departure to
avoid the international condemnation that followed Hong Kong's first forced
repatriation operation in 1989.

At that time the police, dressed in riot gear, herded 51 Vietnamese, mostly
women and children, onto an airplane at night in a secret operation. The outcry
that followed so embarrassed the Vietnamese that they refused to accept any more
forced returns, until now.

In a breakthrough agreement last month, Vietnam said it would accept the return
of all boat people not classified as refugees, apparently assured that the new
operations would not embarrass the country.

Rights Groups Assail Returns

But some human rights groups have objected to the mandatory returns, saying that
Hong Kong's screening process to determine refugee status is unfair and
inaccurate and that real refugees may be forced back.

Hong Kong and British officials said the Vietnamese have promised not to
persecute the returning boat people, and the United Nations commission is to
monitor their reception. The first group of boat people to be returned are the
"double-backers" who arrived in Hong Kong. They had volunteered to return and
had accepted cash incentives before returning to Hong Kong.

Officials said a second group of double-backers would be returned at the end of
the month.

The next to be returned will be the latest arrivals, then finally, the thousands
languishing in the detention centers, a process that officials said could take
up to three years. Since news of the agreement on repatriation reached the camps
several weeks ago, there have been almost constant peaceful demonstrations,
along with fights and outbreaks of violence the authorities concede are tied to
heightened tensions in the camps.

Some Vietnamese inside the detention camps have threatened hunger strikes,
suicides and armed resistance should forced returns begin, and in several recent
raids, the police confiscated hundreds of homemade weapons.

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A weeping woman being taken by security officers to a waiting
plane as Hong Kong officials began forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people
yesterday under a new agreement with Hanoi. (Associated Press)(pg. 1); Under a
new agreement with the Hanoi Government, Hong Kong officials yesterday began the
forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat people. A child was taken on board a
police boat in Hong Kong harbor. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 64; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


ALTERED LOVES: Mothers and Daughters During Adolescence, by Terri Apter.
(Fawcett Columbine, $10.) After studying 65 mother-daughter pairs in both
Britain and the United States, Terri Apter, a research fellow at Cambridge
University, concluded that these relationships are characterized more by love
and connectedness than conflict and separation. Last year our reviewer, Carol
Tavris, said she would "heartily recommend" this book "to anyone who is, knows,
was or will be a participant in such a pair."

HOCUS POCUS, by Kurt Vonnegut. (Berkley, $5.99.) Eugene Debs Hartke, a Vietnam
veteran who has become a college teacher and, finally, a prison inmate, narrates
this story of America in 2001, a place less preoccupied with space travel than
with racial segregation and foreign investors. The Japanese have bought up much
of the United States, whose population is suffering increasingly from
tuberculosis and AIDS. This is "the most topical, realistic Vonnegut novel to
date," Jay McInerney said here last year, "and shows the struggle of an artist a
little impatient with allegory and more than a little impatient with his own
country."

THE MIND OF THE SOUTH, by W. J. Cash (Vintage, $12.) This edition celebrates the
50th anniversary of the publication of the original work, long regarded as the
seminal text on the social and intellectual history of the American South. In
1941, Charles Lee Snyder said here that Mr. Cash was "an acute and discerning
critic" who had turned out "a highly readable and illuminating book." Vintage
has also reissued SOUTH TO A VERY OLD PLACE, by Albert Murray ($9), a memoir by
a black author who revisited the South of his upbringing, interviewing a number
of literary figures and journalists along the way. When it was first published
in 1971, our reviewer, Toni Morrison, praised Mr. Murray's work for "its
authenticity, its emotional vigor and its tenacious hold on the intellect."

HAROUN AND THE SEA OF STORIES, by Salman Rushdie. (Granta Books/Penguin, $8.95.)
Begun as a bedtime tale for Mr. Rushdie's son, this children's fantasy about a
tyrant who wishes to put an end to storytelling also comments upon the adult
world and the author's own imperiled situation. Last year our reviewer, Alison
Lurie, called it "entertaining and moving," noting that Mr. Rushdie's own Sea of
Stories "continues to flow as clear and brilliant as ever."

BO KNOWS BO, by Bo Jackson and Dick Schaap. (Jove, $5.99.) This edition of Bo
Jackson's autobiography includes a new chapter detailing his recent hip injury
and release from the Kansas City Royals. The athlete who made a name in both
football and baseball "clearly . . . knows writing, too," our reviewer, Michael
E. Ross, said last year.

THE BOOK OF QUESTIONS: Volumes One and Two, by Edmond Jabes. (Wesleyan
University/University Press of New England, $22.95 each.) These poems by the
Egyptian-born, French-educated Edmond Jabes, originally published in seven
volumes, have been compiled here in two books. Translated by Rosmarie Waldrop,
they are a meditation on the nature of Judaism and literature, representing "a
response to the problem of writing after the Holocaust," Michael Palmer said
here in 1983. He called the collection "a work of great moral authority and
urgency as well as beauty."

THE NEW RUSSIANS, by Hedrick Smith. (Avon, $12.50.) This study of the Soviet
people by a former Moscow correspondent of The Times has been updated with
material on last summer's failed coup and Boris Yeltsin's rise. Last year our
reviewer, S. Frederick Starr, called it "the best work yet on the first
half-decade of perestroika" and "a lively, rich and provocative book."

THE LIVES OF THE DEAD, by Charlie Smith (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $9.) A
failing film maker embarks on an odyssey to seek funds for his latest project
from his ex-wife, just as the movie characters inside his head begin to take on
a life of their own. "Mr. Smith writes with a scalding aortal brilliance that
leaves the reader drunk on dream, unable to resist," Seth Morgan said here last
year.

IN THE ABSENCE OF ANGELS, by Elizabeth Glaser and Laura Palmer. (Berkley,
$5.99.) Elizabeth Glaser, a former teacher and the wife of the actor Paul
Michael Glaser, writes of becoming infected with AIDS through a blood
transfusion in 1981 and unwittingly passing on the disease to both her children.
After her daughter's death, she co-founded the Pediatric AIDS Foundation. Last
year our reviewer, Bettyann Kevles, called this "an absorbing and poignant
memoir" that, "despite its sadness, is upbeat and inspirational."

THE PLAINS OF PASSAGE, by Jean M. Auel. (Bantam, $6.99.) The author continues
her saga of the earliest humans in this novel, whose hero and heroine travel
across ice age Europe. Although our reviewer, Danielle M. Delince, thought the
book would appeal mostly to prehistory buffs, "the steamy love scenes . . .
afford some compensation," she said last year.

BIG BAD LOVE, by Larry Brown. (Vintage, $10.) Larry Brown, a firefighter turned
author, describes the rural landscape and denizens of his native Mississippi in
this collection of short fiction. Last year our reviewer, Bruce Allen, said, "At
his best, he convincingly renders the lives of plain people muddling through as
best they can, and he does it as well as any writer around."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kurt Vonnegut (Jill Krementz)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Education of Paul Wellstone

BYLINE: By Richard L. Berke;  Richard L. Berke is a Congressional correspondent
for The Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4088 words


LIKE MILLIONS OF AMERICANS on a recent Saturday morning, Senator Paul David
Wellstone was glued to the television, following the Senate Judiciary Committee
hearings into the sexual harassment accusations against the Supreme Court
nominee Clarence Thomas. Sitting on the living room floor in his daughter's
apartment in St. Paul, the freshman Democrat watched with mounting anger as
Senator Orrin G. Hatch -- in the Republicans' drive to discredit Anita F. Hill,
Thomas's accuser -- recited a passage from "The Exorcist," the novel about
satanic possession. When the Democrats on the Judiciary Committee simply
listened in silence, Wellstone exploded.

"This is unbelievable!" he shouted to his wife and daughter, who were also
looking on in disbelief. "I can't believe they're getting away with it!"
Wellstone, who had opposed the Thomas nomination in a floor speech even before
Hill's allegations surfaced, took refuge in the kitchen, unable to watch the
rest of the proceedings.

In his senatorial campaign in Minnesota last year, Wellstone had hammered home
this message: Washington was in the grip of a bankrupt political system. So
potent, in fact, was his message that as an outsider he could change things, he
became the only challenger to unseat a senatorial incumbent, Rudy Boschwitz.

The only problem for Paul Wellstone is that he is now one of them.

Wellstone insists he can function as an inside player (he refuses to attack any
of his colleagues by name for their handling of the Thomas nomination) and as an
outsider. "I've reached a pretty firm conclusion that I should be substantive,
be on top of the legislative program, make sure your word is good and stay in
close touch with colleagues, let them know what you're doing, don't blindside
people," he says. "Those are, if you will, insider ethics. But by the same
token, I'm even more convinced than ever that I want to push hard on the agenda.
I want to continue to be a voice here for working with people on the outside of
the process. I want to fight for change. I want to do it both ways."

This is a tall order under the best of times, but Washington today is a town
that demands conformity, where millionaries, astronauts and even populists are
transformed into virtually interchangeable lawmakers all vying for the
spotlight. And the past year has been traumatic for Wellstone, a former
political-science professor who had never before held public office and who had
crisscrossed Minnesota in a battered school bus, portraying Boschwitz as
privileged and out of touch after two terms.

"He's so lost," says John Fox Blackshaw, Wellstone's campaign manager, who quit
as the Senator's chief of staff in August amid reports that he was frustrated by
Wellstone's frenzied pace, heavy demands and efforts to try to do too much too
soon. "He's desperately trying to find himself. He's becoming everything he
wanted not to become. And he's found it a tremendous conflict in himself."

Pat Forciea, a vice president of the Minnesota North Stars hockey team who
helped mastermind Wellstone's campaign, says that since the Senator arrived in
Washington he has acted more like a conventional politician, always fretting
about his image and not wanting to be challenged by his aides.

"I'm troubled with his obsession with polls and the media," Forciea says. "It's
had a very unhealthy impact on Paul the person, and I'm surprised he let it
happen. That's a different Paul Wellstone from the campaign, when Paul was very
good at shutting out certain things that deserved to be shut out."

IN AN AGE WHEN style often counts more than substance, particularly in politics,
Paul Wellstone is out of step.

This is especially noticeable when he appears at functions next to the senior
Senator from Minnesota, Dave Durenberger. Tall and regal, Durenberger looks as
though he has been sent from Central Casting. Wellstone is a 5-foot-5 former
college wrestler. Durenberger wears well-tailored suits. After 20 years of
flannel shirts and turtlenecks, Wellstone has only now taken to suits. During
speeches, Durenberger is cool and self-assured; Wellstone resembles a basketball
player going for a rebound: his arms flail, his hands chop the air and his legs
convulse into deep knee bends.

In other words, Wellstone looks like a 47-year-old fireplug who was yanked from
a demonstration and abruptly deposited in the Capitol, with barely time to think
about his new role, let alone change clothes.

When he first got to Washington, in January, guards were reluctant to let him
into his office, not believing he was a Senator. Now that they know him, the
minions who cater to Senators look on Wellstone more as a lost child. In the
Senate dining room, they quietly remind him he has to don a tie and jacket. And
on a wintry day when Wellstone scampered into the Capitol building in his shirt
sleeves for a classified briefing, a guard put his arm around the Senator's
shoulders and asked: "Where are you going without your coat? We don't want you
to catch cold. We want to keep you here."

Wellstone's stunning upset had made him a news-media sensation and, inevitably,
he was compared to Jefferson Smith, the idealistic, somewhat naive new Senator
played by Jimmy Stewart in the 1939 movie "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington." Before
Wellstone arrived on Capitol Hill, he was offered an elementary piece of advice
from a seasoned politician, Walter F. Mondale, the former Vice President and
Senator from Minnesota. Mondale cautioned him that his extraordinary success at
winning votes did not mean he would easily win over the Washington
establishment. Over breakfast in Minneapolis, he told Wellstone: "Remember, you
have six years in the first term, not six days. Don't be so impatient, charging
into everything."

The Democratic Senator-to-be listened, or thought he did. Then, in the space of
a few days, he managed to offend President Bush, veterans groups, other
Senators, the press and, most important, some of his own constituents.

At a White House reception for incoming members in late December, Wellstone
defied decorum by cornering President Bush and urging him not to drag the
country into war in the Persian Gulf.

The day before he took office in January, Wellstone staged an antiwar news
conference near the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, and veterans groups immediately
attacked him for being insensitive.

At his first black-tie event, the Washington Press Club Foundation's annual
dinner, Wellstone appeared in a bright red tie and brown suit and was stridently
self-righteous when all the other speakers were doing their level best to be
funny. It was hard, he said, to crack jokes in wartime. The audience laughed
several times, thinking he was leading up to a joke. He was serious.

Boldly breaching rules of propriety that govern the Senate, he publicly attacked
a fellow member, Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican, as someone "I
despise."

Barely two months in office, Wellstone paid the price for flouting Mondale's
advice and positioning himself as the most outspoken critic of the gulf war.
"People Against Wellstone" buttons sprouted in Minnesota. Letters attacking him
flooded the state's newspapers.

That Wellstone had sunk so low, so fast, hit home on March 12, when The Star
Tribune of Minneapolis-St. Paul published a poll showing that only 35 percent of
Minnesotans approved of the way he was handling his job. By contrast,
Durenberger, who last year was reprimanded by the Senate on charges that he
broke ethics rules in exceeding speaking-fee limits, had a 49 percent rating.

Wellstone was devastated. "To lose support from people who supported you, people
who I know and like a lot, that hurts," he said the next morning in his office.
Agitator he may be, but Wellstone worries all the time about what people think
of him; he turns to aides, even reporters, for reassurance and evaluation.

Mondale's advice to him finally began to sink in.

Nearly one year after taking Washington by storm, Wellstone is not the combatant
he was. He is still feisty but he is decidedly more senatorial. The man who used
to blanch when people addressed him as "Senator," insisting that they call him
"Paul," now relishes the title. "It makes me feel like there's a real honor to
it," he says.

He has sought to ingratiate himself with senior members, often seeking out
George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate Democratic leader, for advice. He
co-sponsored a trade bill with Senator Helms. He even got his first professional
haircut in 27 years. And Wellstone went so far as to cast a vote -- to oppose
aid to rebuild Iraq -- against his principles out of fear of damaging himself
politically and offending fellow Democrats.

That Wellstone is succumbing will not surprise anyone who knows Washington and
its ways. Wellstone himself is well aware that Washington is a town that puts a
high premium on getting power and keeping it. And his precipitous fall in the
polls carried this painful lesson: Not only do successful campaign tactics
seldom work off the campaign trail, but also in Washington the higher profile
you take on an issue, the worse the political consequences if your position
becomes unpopular.

Washington does not always change people, but it seduces them into playing by
its rules. Those who cannot or will not be seduced -- President Jimmy Carter
being one notable example -- are not re-elected. Wellstone, though, has already
demonstrated that he is willing to deal. He is being embraced by elders who
could only have been embarrassed by his early tactics.

Wellstone once described Senator Wendell H. Ford, a conservative Democrat from
Kentucky, as the epitome of the "crafty, wily insider" he does not want to
become. But Ford, the majority whip, sees himself in Wellstone. "He is a bit
like I was when I first came here," Ford says. "He has a lot of things he
promised his constituents and he wants to do them like yesterday. He gets pretty
tight because things aren't moving the way he thinks they should."

Senator Howell Heflin, an Alabama Democrat, says Washington has refined Paul
Wellstone: "He came in like a storm, and I've noticed a decided change. He seems
to want to get along with every member of the Senate. He'll compliment you on
this and that. He probably took advantage of the media a little too much, and
now he's settling back and given me the impression that he wants to be a
workhorse rather than a showhorse."

Wellstone has also learned to slow down. For the first few months he was in
Washington, Wellstone unconsciously emulated one of his most popular campaign
advertisements, "Fast-Paced Paul," in which he spoke fast to make the point that
he could not afford longer commercials. Before delivering a speech, he would
follow this ritual: ignore the talking points prepared by his staff, panic for
10 minutes, sometimes put his hands together in a mock prayer and then press his
hands over his face to contemplate what he was going to say.

He would take his seat at an Indian Affairs Committee hearing, only to jump up
minutes later and jog to his place at the Labor Committee. He didn't want to
miss out on anything, but admitted that often there was little time for
substance to sink in. "So much to do, so much to do," he repeated in nearly
every speech. But as he settles into the job, what he calls "an adult education
every day," Wellstone is no longer obsessed with trying to be everywhere at
once. He insists, though, that he is not lurching from insurgent to backroom
dealer.

THE SENATOR who views himself as an outsider was actually raised in the shadow
of the Capitol, in the Washington suburb of Arlington, Va. His father, Leon,
immigrated from Russia and worked as a writer for the United States Information
Agency; his mother, Minnie, worked in a junior-high-school cafeteria. It was
while he was a student at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill --
witnessing the civil rights struggles -- that he turned from wrestling devotee
to political crusader. He got his bachelor's degree in 1965 and stayed on at
U.N.C. for his doctorate in political science, his thesis on the roots of black
militancy.

From the day in 1969 when he began teaching political science at Carleton
College, a small liberal-arts school in the rural Minnesota town of Northfield,
Wellstone never fit in. He was often at odds with his colleagues and the
Carleton administration, and was more in his element instigating protests, from
fighting Carleton's investment policies in South Africa to battling banks that
were foreclosing on farms. He was arrested twice.

Wellstone married his high-school sweetheart, Sheila, when they were 19, and
they had three children. He was too busy raising a family, he says, to be part
of the 1960's easy-drugs-and-sex counterculture. In April, he and his wife
became grandparents.

First running for public office in 1982, Wellstone was defeated as a
Democratic-Farmer-Labor candidate for state auditor. Two years later, he gained
a spot as a Democratic national committeeman. In 1988, he was the state
co-chairman of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's Presidential campaign and in the general
election was co-chairman of the campaign of Michael S. Dukakis, the Democratic
nominee.

When Wellstone decided to run for the Senate, even his wife thought he had
little chance of unseating Boschwitz, who spent more than $7 million in his
re-election bid, seven times as much as Wellstone. But with 52 percent of the
vote, Wellstone pulled the upset of 1990 after captivating voters with witty,
even endearing, television commercials depicting himself as the underdog.

Dubbed "Looking for Rudy," one ad was modeled after the film "Roger and Me," in
which the main character tries to get an interview with Roger B. Smith, the
former chairman of General Motors. The ad shows Wellstone desperately trying to
track down Boschwitz for a debate -- even leaving his home telephone number --
but he never made it past two tall Boschwitz workers.

Wellstone himself thought the ads were too risky, but his top advisers pressed
ahead, informing him that an ad would be broadcast only after it was too late to
pull it. The ads, produced by North Woods Advertising, a Minneapolis company run
by a former Carleton student, were a sensation and helped Wellstone capitalize
on the anti-incumbent sentiment last year. He also benefited from turmoil in the
Minnesota Republican Party (the party's gubernatorial nominee pulled out of the
race after he was accused of sexual indiscretions) and missteps by an
overconfident Boschwitz.

If Wellstone had won a seat in the more populist House of Representatives, which
is more accustomed to political extremes, he probably would have felt far more
at home. In the Senate, however, Wellstone stands out not only by his appearance
and manner, but also by his overt liberalism. In his first few months in office,
he made more of a splash -- a negative one at that -- than did Senator Barbara
A. Mikulski, an outspoken liberal Democrat from Maryland who was elected in
1986. Until her eloquent speech taking the Senate to task for its handling of
sexual harassment in the Thomas hearings, Mikulski seems to have purposely kept
out of the national spotlight, determined to prove to her colleagues that she is
serious about her legislative work.

Unlike House members, Wellstone the Senator cannot be ignored. He is one of 100
(instead of 435), and it is politically unwise for any Senator to write off a
colleague whose vote he or she may need. Traditionally, rookie Senators do not
wield a great deal of power; in fact, one of Wellstone's graduate-school
professors, Donald R. Matthews, wrote in the 1960 textbook "U.S. Senators and
Their World": "The new Senator is expected to keep his mouth shut, not take the
lead in floor fights, to listen and to learn."

Wellstone, however, exemplifies the junior lawmaker who is not willing to serve
an apprenticeship. On the day of the Senate vote on Clarence Thomas, when
Senators were vying for precious seconds to air their position, Wellstone was
given two minutes. "The bottom line," he concluded, "is that even beyond this
confirmation vote, the Congress must deal, must face up to problems of sexual
harassment and discrimination against women. And the sooner we do it, the
better."

SENATOR HATCH, THE Utah Republican whose questioning in the Thomas hearings so
riled Wellstone, says he knew the rookie Senator would be a player when, after
anguishing for weeks as a member of the Labor Committee, he voted on March 13 to
confirm Lamar Alexander as Education Secretary. Wellstone's vote assured a
near-unanimous expression of support from the panel, even though he had serious
doubts about the Administration's education policies.

"I was very appreciative of that -- he could have voted the other way," Hatch
says. "It was a very good sign. He's going to be effective around here because
he's sincere and not a phony and he's willing to work."

On March 14, not wanting to be pegged as a sympathizer of Saddam Hussein and not
wanting to vote against every other Senator, Wellstone voted for a resolution
against any funds to rebuild Iraq while Saddam Hussein remained in power. He did
so even though he feared that the action would cut off humanitarian aid to the
country. "I don't believe I showed much courage because I did not vote what I
believed," he says. "I felt real empty, completely depleted afterwards."

The art of the compromise is something Wellstone is trying to learn in a hurry.
Depending on who's doing the observing, he either is maturing as a politician or
he has sold out.

The morning after America went to war in the Persian Gulf, Wellstone was still
working out of a windowless temporary office on the first floor of the Hart
Senate Office Building, somberly searching for a role for himself. "In a strong
antiwar movement I think I can be a pretty strong voice," he said quietly as he
thought out his options. "The opposition has to be with dignity and without
violence. It cannot become the politics of hatred."

If not strong, his was a loud voice as he shuttled from news program to news
program, denouncing the Administration's military policies while trying to make
clear that he supported the troops. But the better the war seemed to be going,
the less eloquent his oratory sounded.

A barrage of negative stories appeared, chronicling his outspokenness on the war
and dive in the polls. Although the accounts left him bitter and hurt for
months, he is convinced he could never have favored the war: "Life is sacred,
and my standard is to do everything you can to avoid loss of life, regardless of
who the people are and the country they live in."

He says he has only one regret about his opposition to the gulf war: his news
conference near the Vietnam memorial. In an emotional speech in April before
Vietnam veterans in St. Paul, he said quietly: "To the extent that I have
offended or angered you, I deeply apologize." Close to tears, Rock Rochelle, a
veteran who moderated the event, stood up and said he had been "very disturbed"
by that appearance at the Vietnam memorial. "I want you to know," he haltingly
continued, "that I accept your apology and I do believe you."

Like any sensitive, and smart, politician, Wellstone was trying to make amends.
But was he compromising his ideals? After his April speech, Ann Sax Mabbott, of
St. Paul, wrote the Senator a letter, chiding him for making the apology: "I
feel like you are starting to behave like a politician who is more concerned
about being re-elected than about what is right."

Wellstone says he won't again trade his ideals for political expedience. He
drafted an amendment requiring some automobiles to get 75 miles a gallon in fuel
economy, knowing it had next to no chance of passing. He has also called on
Israel to be more compromising with its Arab neighbors, even though he knows
this will offend Jewish supporters (he himself is Jewish).

WHENEVER WELLSTONE says his heart is back with the people in Minnesota, he
sounds like the late Senator William Langer of North Dakota, a Republican known
as Wild Bill, who was something of a prairie populist in the 1940's and 50's. He
kept being re-elected not because he was popular in Washington but because he
was beloved back home. In trying to win favor with his colleagues, however,
Wellstone may score points in Washington but, like Boschwitz, he runs the risk
of alienating the voters.

Wellstone is not unaware of Washington's seductive powers: "The one thing that's
real clear to me is that it's very easy to get caught up in the game and the
strategy and to begin to sort of accept it." It is only when he is away from
Washington, he says, that he realizes how the city wears him down, tempers his
idealism. "When I come back from Minnesota, I come back with a new indignation.
I really do notice, I come back with the anger. It's very easy to lose it here."

Indeed, when he is in Minnesota the rebellious side of Wellstone truly surfaces.
As students gathered around him in a lounge at Moorhead State University in
western Minnesota, asking what they could do to get more loans, Wellstone did
not offer pat political promises to push through legislation. What might wake up
Congress, he told them, was confrontational politics.

In what Wellstone called a "moderate plan," students everywhere would "call back
every single Representative and Senator home for an accountability session."
They would give the members a list of specific proposals about the educational
system that they wanted them to respond to. "Demand that they come home," he
urged. "Work with the media. Do it everywhere." Wellstone then offered the
"radical plan." Lowering his voice, he said conspiratorially: "It would be great
if students from all over the country came in buses to Washington, D.C. It would
be massive!" (What this also revealed was Wellstone's lack of understanding of
Washington and demonstrations. Big demonstrations are routine, not radical, and
they almost never spur Congress to action.)

When he left the student lounge, Wellstone was in an anything-can-be-done frame
of mind. Then he got outside and a tearful, middle-aged woman who said her
family was losing its farm grabbed his arm. Ignoring his aides' pleas that they
had to leave for an appointment, Wellstone stopped to console her. The woman
finally left, distraught and frustrated. As an outsider, Wellstone could
organize protests to save family farms. But now that he was an insider, what
could he do?

"I've just got to do something," he said in his car as his entourage pulled
away. "It makes me a nervous wreck because even if I'm there, nothing can be
done. She was in tears and doesn't even know me. But this is the kind of thing
I'll lose sleep over because I don't know what to do yet."

Those are the words of what Wellstone calls "an emotive politician." He's
approachable; he tells you what he's thinking, what he's feeling. In Washington,
frank talk can be a career-killer, but back home it has scored him some points.
At the Red Lake Indian Reservation in northwest Minnesota, he won over the crowd
by hopping around in a tribal dance with little children.

To some people, even those who don't share his political philosophy, the things
that make Paul Wellstone stick out as a politician are refreshing. "He's a
little different," says Dennis Taylor, a truck driver sporting a National Rifle
Association cap, after hearing Wellstone speak in St. Paul. "He's a little
aggressive and cocky. But he wants to get some stuff done for the working guy."
Sounding like an expert on Senate folkways, he adds: "New blood doesn't fit in
well with the old Senators. They know how to get some things through because
they know each other. So I don't know how long he'll last, but at least he's
saying things that should be said."

Sooner or later, Wellstone may find that he cannot continue presenting himself
to Minnesotans as the renegade who challenges conventions in Washington while he
is conforming to the ways of Washington.

For his re-election campaign in 1996, the man who was elected as the outsider
will have to retool his message. But how? "He's going to have to show at the end
of six years that he's had a measurable impact on the process," says Forciea,
his top strategist in the 1990 campaign. "People are not going to accept from
Paul rhetoric about changing Washington. They're going to have to see evidence
that he's begun to change it."

NAME: Paul David Wellstone

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In office for nearly a year, Senator Wellstone has begun to show

he is willing to deal. (David Burnett/Contact for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Family of Peekskill Pilot Lost in Vietnam, the Final Chapter

BYLINE: States News Service

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AMONG thousands of names etched on the cold black-marble wall of the Vietnam War
Memorial is that of Air Force Maj. Robert Harry Irwin. To find him, go to Panel
2-West, Line 107, near the center and close to the bottom of the wall.

Next to his name, where there had been a small cross, is a freshly chiseled
diamond -- an inscription made by the National Park Service to indicate that the
F-4 Phantom fighter pilot and Peekskill native was killed in Vietnam.

Major Irwin's family welcomes the inscription and says that now the world knows
what they learned in 1989: that the career serviceman was killed and not missing
in action, as the family suspected for nearly two decades.

Wilbur and Evelyn Irwin, Major Irwin's parents, and Christopher Irwin, his
oldest son, talked haltingly about the flier on the eve of a Veterans Day
ceremony that will honor him and others whose names have been added or whose
missing-in-action status has been changed on the memorial.

One of 310 Families

The Irwins are among only 310 families that have been told their missing
relatives were killed in Vietnam, said Mary Backley, director of operations at
the National League of Families of POW's/MIA's in Southeast Asia.

"It's an end to uncertainty," she said. "They aren't living in limbo, living
with question marks" like hundreds of other families. "It's very hard for you
and me to comprehend."

The Irwins spend more time thinking about the day -- Nov. 20, 1989 -- when they
buried the major's remains.

The Irwins had agonized over Major Irwin's fate for so long that they would
rather remember him quietly and without a lot of fanfare, they say. For Major
Irwin's widow, Doris, the memories and the years of doubt about his survival in
Vietnam are still too painful. She declined to talk about her first husband. In
1986 she married Kevin Pease.

Christopher Irwin, 29, recalls few details about his father. The pilot's son was
9 1/2 when his father's Phantom jet was shot down in 1972, according to military
reports.

"There are some memories, though I don't remember a lot about him," he said.
"There were big Christmases together, and Thanksgivings. He used to tease the
heck out of his sister. He'd tease Mom and Grandma, too. I think he had a
devilish side."

Despite his sketchy memories, Christopher Irwin says he recalls more than his
brother, Terry, and his sister, Sherry, who were 5 and 8 when their father
disappeared.

Still, the eldest son, a cameraman for a Boulder, Colo., television station,
said his father is always in his thoughts. "I have a picture of him in my
bedroom, and every time I look at it, I think, 'Have I done enough to make you
proud of me?' " he said.

Still Some Bitterness Over War

"It's hard to talk about," he said, admitting some bitterness over the war that
took his father and led to hostility at home for many veterans. None of Major
Irwin's children seriously considered the military for a career, he added.

Wilbur Irwin says he and his wife don't often discuss the war or Major Irwin's
involvement in it, although they often think of their son, the eldest of six
children.

"He was just a regular guy," Wilbur Irwin said. "We were very close. Every time
he hit the States, he was here."

Major Irwin seldom talked about his work, his mother said. "He was very quiet.
He never said anything much. He never wrote that much, either, because a lot of
his work was secret," she said.

"He was a career man," Wilbur Irwin said. "He had two tours in Korea, then he
went to Nam. He was there six months when he died. He was just about ready to
retire, in fact, when he got shot down." No one will know what Major Irwin
thought of combat or if he feared he wouldn't come home, his father said,
adding:

"They're a hard breed, fliers. They expect to die, really."

Major Irwin and his co-pilot, Capt. Edwin A. Hawley Jr., were flying over the
Quang Binh Province in North Vietnam when their jet was shot down on Feb. 17,
1972. Captain Hawley ejected and was captured. Held as a prisoner in camps in
and around Hanoi, he was released nearly a year later.

No Meeting in Honolulu

When he returned to the United States, Captain Hawley told officials that he
believed the crash killed Major Irwin.

At home, news of Major Irwin's crash was particularly difficult for his wife,
his father said. "He was supposed to go on R&R a week after he got shot down,"
he said. "All the arrangements were made for him to meet in Honolulu with his
wife. She had her tickets, she had her clothes, she had everything. But they
never got together."

There are few details available about the major's mission or the plane's
disappearance because military interviews with Captain Hawley are still
classified as secret, according to Homecoming II Project, a veterans
organization that compiles information on the servicemen killed or still missing
in Vietnam.

Despite Captain Hawley's remarks, his survival gave the family a reason to hope
they would someday see Major Irwin again, they said. But after several years
with no word of encouragement, relatives said it became easier to accept Major
Irwin's death.

"You never give up hope that he will be alive, but after a certain number of
years you wonder if they are prisoners, if they are tortured," Evelyn Irwin
said. "You don't want that to happen."

After 17 years, the gnawing doubts were subsiding. So the Irwins were shocked
when the Government notified them that Major Irwin's remains had been returned
by Vietnam and identified. But there was no doubting what the government had
recovered, Wilbur Irwin said.

The military was "pretty sure because of all the evidence," he said. "They had
the dog tags with his remains in '89. That's how we knew that it was Bobby."

Mrs. Irwin added: "We were glad for that because it was such a worry not knowing
where he was. It helped us to know he was back, buried in American soil."

'We Do Think About Him More'

Christopher Irwin flew out to a military laboratory in California and escorted
his father's remains to Arlington National Cemetery.

Reflecting on a man he never got to know, Christopher said he was satisfied that
his father would be pleased with his family. Sherry is expecting a baby soon,
and Terry and his wife are planning to have children as well, he said.

Of his mother's remarriage, Christopher said: "She waited long enough. She
deserves her happiness."

This Veterans Day will be no different from the 19 others the Irwins have had
without the major, Christopher said. "We do think about him more.  And we fly
the flag."

But there aren't many discussions about Vietnam and its great cost to the
family, he said, adding, "Mostly we stay within ourselves."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Air Force Maj. Robert Harry Irwin, listed as missing in action
for two decades, is now listed on the Vietnam War Memorial as killed in action
(Above, Mike Geisinger for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Wilbur and Evelyn Irwin
at their home in Peekskill with photographs of their son Robert (pg. 21)
(Suzanne DeChillo for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
There's a New World Order in Asia; The U.S. Will Have to Catch Up

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words


A handful of Asia-based diplomats are willing to give President Bush the benefit
of the doubt. They are willing to believe that he canceled his trip to Asia this
month for reasons that go beyond opinion polls suggesting that the President's
globetrotting habits have cut into his approval rating among voters.

In fact, some diplomats say, President Bush may have been well advised to stay
home until he knows with certainty how Washington should respond to the
political and economic changes that are sweeping across the Far East, and that
appear destined to alter the American role.  "Everything is fluid in the region
right now," said a senior European diplomat in Bangkok. "Perhaps now is not the
moment for the President to visit Asia. The United States needs time to absorb
it all."

Since World War II, American policy in Asia has centered on -- indeed, tens of
thousands of Americans have sacrificed their lives over -- the two great land
masses on the Pacific rim of China: Indochina and the Korean peninsula. But
consider the news from the region in just the last few weeks: Cambodians
announced the end of their 12-year civil war; Vietnam restored full diplomatic
relations with its chief adversary, China, in hopes of concentrating on economic
development; North and South Korea reported the first substantive progress on a
framework to resolve more than four decades of brotherly hate.

Any one of those developments would have been startling a few years ago. Taken
together at a time when the cold war is all but over, they could be important
evidence of a new era of peace and prosperity, even amid reminders of lingering
suffering like that of the Vietnamese boat people now resisting forced
repatriation from Hong Kong..

Last week Mr. Bush and the other NATO heads of state met in Rome to chart a new
role in a Europe without the Soviet threat that had defined the alliance's
reason for existence. It was a get-together that Mr. Bush, who considers himself
a sort of honorary chairman of the club of world leaders, might well have
relished not only for its reassuring pomp but also for its comparative lack of
ambiguity.

The Bush Administration has made its own Asia headlines in recent weeks by
announcing its willingness to open talks with Hanoi to normalize diplomatic and
trade ties 16 years after the war's end, its plan to remove tactical nuclear
weapons from the region, and its intention to send Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d to Beijing this month. Mr. Baker would be the highest-ranking American
official to visit China since pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananman Square
were put down in a bloody confrontation by Chinese soldiers two years ago.

The American Century in Asia is not over yet, but already the United States is
facing what could be the starkest policy choices since 1898, when President
William McKinley invaded and colonized the Philippines even though he knew it as
little more than a group of islands "somewhere away around on the other side of
the world."

The question for the United States is whether it should continue in the role of
policeman and mediator in a region that is increasingly able to resolve its own
conflicts and that, far from being the home of "little brown brothers" of old,
is now America's fiercest economic competitor. The Bush Administration insists
that the choice has already been made, and that the United States military will
remain in Asia indefinitely, although the Pacific force, which last year
numbered about 140,000 men and women, will be cut by more than 10 percent as
part of worldwide Pentagon reductions.

Defense Secretary Dick Cheney says a complete military withdrawal would almost
surely result in a "series of destabilizing regional arms races, an increase in
regional tensions and possibly conflict."

Yet that has not silenced forces on Capitol Hill and private defense analysts in
the United States who argue that, at a time of domestic austerity, there is no
need to continue defending nations that are able to do it themselves. They say,
too, that American military forces in Asia are seen increasingly as a paper
tiger, since it seems unlikely that the United States, still traumatized over
the war in Vietnam, would ever allow itself to be drawn into another large
regional conflict in Asia.

"This isn't Kuwait -- there's no oil here for the United States to rush in to
protect, and the threat of Communism is dying here as it is everywhere in the
world," said a Thai official. Selig S. Harrison, a senior associate of the
Carnegie Endowment, argues that the American military umbrella in Asia has
subsidized the economies of booming East Asian nations, particularly Japan, by
freeing them from large military expenditures. "We are helping to make Asia safe
for Japanese investment," said Mr. Harrison, who estimates that the United
States spends $42 billion a year in direct and indirect costs for its Far East
military forces. "It's a ridiculous expenditure."

There is one important area of agreement between analysts like Mr. Harrison and
the Bush Administration, and that is over the need for a continued American
military presence in South Korea, which faces an isolated and unpredictable
enemy to the north. Pyongyang is believed to have an active program to develop
nuclear weapons and in the near future could have the bomb. Even in the Koreas,
however, there is hope of finally making peace. Late last month, the two nations
agreed on the broad outlines of a peace plan reported to include a
non-aggression pact, a pledge of respect for each other's political systems and
provisions for reuniting families across the border.

China and Vietnam

In Indochina, the optimism about peace is greater still. Despite apprehension
among their neighbors that China and Vietnam might be contemplating a
destabilizing military alliance, diplomats say the recent warming between
Beijing and Hanoi is instead a marriage of convenience between two still-bitter
rivals wishing to put aside their differences for now to focus on economic
progress.

Closer ties between China and Vietnam may also be the factor that prevents
Cambodia from collapsing into civil war again. Beijing has broad control over
the genocidal, Chinese-armed Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of more
than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, while Vietnam retains influence with
the government it helped install in Phnom Penh under Prime Minister Hun Sen.
Under a United Nations peace treaty, the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Hun Sen and his
political allies, and two other Cambodian factions will share power in what
amounts to a coalition government.

In the expectation that the United States military will gradually reduce its
presence in Asia, countries now living under the American defense umbrella have
begun putting forward proposals for stepped-up regional military cooperation.

Several of the more ambitious proposals have come from Japan, which last summer
recommended to the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations that
they begin regular consultations on military issues. Last week, the new Japanese
Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, expressed his hope that Japan would soon
rewrite its defense laws to permit the use of its troops outside Japanese
borders, as part of United Nations peacekeeping forces.

But with only a month to go before ceremonies to mark the 50th anniversary of
the attack on Pearl Harbor and with memories of Japanese occupation and
atrocities during World War II still vivid across Asia and the Pacific, Mr.
Miyazawa's suggestion met with a decidedly unenthusiastic response outside
Japan.

Said an American diplomat: "Given a choice between an Asian defense umbrella
provided by the United States and one offered by Tokyo, you'd better believe
that we're going to remain the more popular option."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Vietnamese Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet, left, in Beijing last
week with Prime Minister Li Peng of China, right, as full relations were
restored (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 1)

Map of Asia (pg. 4)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 739 words



International 3-19

NORTH KOREAN NUCLEAR PROGRAM

Growing evidence about a mysterious nuclear complex is heightening concerns that
North Korea may be closer to producing a crude nuclear weapon than anyone
thought just a year ago.  Page 1

Agreements against the spread of nuclear weapons show flaws.  10

BUSH ORDERS YUGOSLAV SANCTIONS

Hoping to pressure Yugoslav republics to stop their civil war, President Bush
said the United States would order economic sanctions against Belgrade and call
on the United Nations to impose an oil embargo.  1

Some economists and diplomats doubt sanctions will work.  16

HEAD OF K.G.B. PLANS CUTBACKS

The new chairman of the Soviet intelligence and security agency said the number
of agents abroad should be cut at least by half.  3

VIOLENCE AT A SOUTH AFRICAN MINE

New violence linked to a two-day national strike earlier in the week erupted at
a gold mine in South Africa, leaving 22 mine workers dead and 51 others injured.
7

HONG KONG TO CONTINUE EXPULSIONS

Hong Kong officials said they would continue repatriation flights like the one
on which 59 boat people were forcibly returned to Vietnam.  11

FUNDING RESETTLEMENT OF REFUGEES

The United Nations official charged with caring for the world's 17 million
refugees hopes to persuade wealthy Persian Gulf states to help pay the costs of
resettlement.  14

Food is plentiful in Iraq for those who can pay for it.  14

PRIVATIZATION IN CZECHOSLOVAKIA

In a program to privatize the pillars of Czechoslovakia's economy, citizens are
buying $30 books of coupons convertible into shares.  17

Nicaragua is seeking to mollify former contras who have rearmed.  9

A book by a Chinese emigre in New York is the talk of Beijing.  13

National 22-38

DUKE, THEN AND NOW

David Duke, a white supremacist and anti-Semite for most of his adult life,
stands a good chance of being elected governor of Louisiana next Saturday.  1

The elections of Tuesday exposed weaknesses for Bush.  26

A PROMISE AT RISK

California, the state with the largest system of higher education, may no longer
be able to afford a longtime implied promise: a high-quality and low-cost public
college education for every resident who wants one.  1

Tuskegee University opened a huge fund drive.  36

FOR SALE: HUMAN EGGS

Some medical centers have begun offering infertile couples a new but very
expensive option: lists of healthy young women who, for a fee, will provide eggs
that can be fertilized and then implanted in an infertile woman's womb.  1

A SMALL BUT FORMIDABLE FOE

Many California farmers are besieged by the poinsettia variety of sweet potato
whitefly, whose damaging appetite may soon be reflected in higher produce
prices.  22

NO TO BARE-BONES POLICIES

A major push by health insurers to provide affordable coverage for millions of
uninsured workers is running into unexpected trouble: Employers are not buying.
22

TOUGH TIMES AT THE CAPITOL

New analysis: It has been a tough few weeks for Congressional committees, and
little wonder. Committees and their bills are treated with less deference on the
floor than in the past. Junior lawmakers now act as if their votes and opinions
count for as much as those of chairmen.  23

In private, Democrats expressed fears on bad-check inquiry.  24

Marijuana plot tied to Noriega.  29

Regional 39-53

ROHATYN REJECTS PLAN

The chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation, Felix Rohatyn bluntly
urges Mayor Dinkins to abandon the long-term fiscal plan the Mayor unveiled last
week. It would count on using $1 billion in M.A.C. funds to avoid property-tax
increases. 1

CONFUSION OVER DINKINS TRIP

There is more confusion than curiosity over the Mayor David N. Dinkins's visit
to Johannesburg next week, concerning which few details have been released.  42

S.I. BANK FAILS

The Community National Bank and Trust Company, one of Staten Island largest
banks, has been declared insolvent. Most of its deposits were sold to Chemical
Bank. At its main branch, customers expressed surprise and resignation.  47

Obituaries

Yves Montand, actor 52

Eleanor Pollock Hughes, editor of magazines 53

Arts/Reviews 73

Uta Hagen self-revises.

Campus Life 59-60

 Life Style 61

 Fashion 64-65

 Pastimes 74-75

 Weddings 69-72


LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Poinsettia sweetpotato whitefly, a natural and economic foe, 22.
(Max E. Badgely)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Asia Hand Returns; His Flag Stays at Home

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


Sixteen years after Ambassador John Gunther Dean fled Phnom Penh with the
American flag clutched tightly under his arm, just days before the city fell to
the Khmer Rouge, the United States has begun the return to Cambodia.

Two American diplomats and a small support staff left this week to reopen a
United States mission in the Cambodian capital, which is now preparing for the
installation next week of a new coalition government under United Nations
supervision.

Mr. Dean is going back, too, not the way he hoped to return, as a United States
diplomat bringing back the American flag he still keeps in his home, but as a
special envoy of Unesco under the blue and white banner of the United Nations.

An Offer Declined

He acknowledged today that he had asked the Bush Administration to send him back
to Phnom Penh in a ceremonial act of reconciliation with Cambodia. His offer was
declined. He is leaving his flag at home.

"Why I took the flag down was my Boy Scout way of of protecting it from
desecration," he said in a telephone interview from his new office in Paris. "I
would have loved to have taken it back and hoisted the colors again. But if this
is not what people want, that is fine."

Mr. Dean, who as deputy chief of mission in Laos had brokered a compromise
agreement with the Communist Pathet Lao there that prevented prolonged civil
strife, arrived in Phnom Penh in 1974, too late to repeat his diplomatic feat in
a country far more polarized and violent. He said today that he always believed
the United States had been wrong in abandoning Cambodia.

"You don't walk away and leave people to this kind of fate, when one knew what
that fate was," he said, alluding to the Khmer Rouge's reputation for brutality.
"I was loud and clear in saying at the time what those consequences would be."

Team of Asia Hands

The team that began to leave Washington for Phnom Penh this week is made up of
other experienced Southeast Asia hands -- Charles H. Twining, Jr. chief of
mission, and his deputy, Jim Bruno, both of whom speak Khmer. The United States
is not likely to open a full embassy with an ambassador until after Cambodia
holds national elections, which are tentatively scheduled for 1993. Nor will the
mission offer consular services immediately.

Mr. Twining had been scheduled to go to Phnom Penh in 1975 as political officer
in the embassy, but got only as far as Bangkok when Cambodia fell.

Phnom Penh was once a battered but graceful city that boasted French restaurants
and villas shaded by trees. The Americans who returned this week took all their
supplies with them, from medicines to stationery and telephones to rucksacks. It
looked, someone said, like a camping expedition.

They also took with them the emotional commitment to Cambodia of a generation of
foreign service officers who knew Phnom Penh in better days and could never
forget this tragic country loved by almost all who visited it.

A Prince Returns

The eyes of many will be turned on Phnom Penh on Thursday, when Prince Norodom
Sihanouk returns to the country he once ruled to head a Supreme National Council
made up of the representatives of four long-warring Cambodian factions, one of
them the Khmer Rouge.

A breakaway wing of the Khmer Rouge, originally led by Heng Samrin and Hun Sen,
took over Cambodia in 1979 after Vietnam invaded the country. Mr. Hun Sen is now
Cambodia's Prime Minister, and Mr. Dean today described his administration as
"most eager and willing to work with the countries of the free world."

Mr. Dean, who begins his new job for Unesco in October, is telling Cambodian
exiles that those with talent and means should go back and share their skills,
even for short stays.

"I tell them, do what you can so that the road will be blocked democratically to
the Khmer Rouge," he said.

But Cambodian exiles now settled in the United States are ambivalent.

Kim Chantarit, an anti-Communist former journalist who now lives in Arlington,
Va., heads an organization trying to promote the protection and restoration of
the Khmer temples at Angkor. In an interview Thursday at a Cambodian restaurant
where he was meeting with friends, he explained that Cambodian emigres "have
mortgages now, and kids in school."

"Who doesn't want to go home?" he asked. "But will those people abandon what
they have here to go back and become a candidate in an election?"

A waitress named Mum, who fled Cambodia in 1979 at the age of 13, was certain
about her feelings. "I have tasted the bitter," she said. "I don't want to cry
again."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Refugees Face Minefields on Their Return

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Nov.  8


As hundreds of thousands of Cambodian refugees in Thailand hail a peace
settlement in their country and prepare to return home, many express the fear
that they may be maimed or even die from land mines that were laid across the
Cambodian countryside during the last 12 years of civil war.

No one has a reliable figure on the number of mines laid during the war by
guerrilla factions and by troops of the Vietnamese-backed Cambodian Government
in Phnom Penh. The estimates vary from 500,000 to five million, and specialists
say that it will be several years before the bulk of the mines can be detected
and disabled.

"Because of the mines, the suffering from the war will last for many years after
the war is finally over," said Soeun Mao, a 30-year-old Cambodian who waited
today for his new artificial leg to be sanded down at a prosthesis workshop at
the largest Cambodian refugee camp in Thailand, known as Site 2.

Mr. Soeun Mao lost his left leg in 1982 when he stepped on a mine while on
patrol as a soldier with one of the rebel factions, the rightist Khmer People's
National Liberation Front.

Fears for Family

He said he now fears that his family -- a wife and four young children -- could
also be maimed by mines if they are forced back across the Thai border into
Cambodia too soon.

"It enters my dreams," he said. "In my nightmares, I worry for my family and I
remember the mines. Many people will die because of the mines."

The situation in Cambodia is similar to that of Afghanistan, which as mined by
the Soviet Army during its occupation in the 1980's, and Kuwait, which was mined
by Iraq prior to the American-led invasion in February.

But unlike Afghanistan and Kuwait, Cambodia is covered by dense jungle and paddy
fields that make locating mines difficult. The job is made more difficult by the
fact that many of the mines laid in Cambodia during the civil war were made of
plastic, rendering traditional metal mine-detection equipment useless.

Four Factions

Mines were used by all four factions in the civil war: the Phnom Penh
Government, backed by Vietnam and the Soviet Union; the Khmer Rouge, supported
by China, and two non-Communist groups that had American and other Western
backing -- the Khmer People's Front and a smaller faction headed by Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former head of state and now chairman of a
transitional state council.

The United States says that its assistance to the rebel groups did not include
weapons or ammunition, although it is widely believed that some of the American
aid was converted by the rebels into weapons, including mines.

None of the four factions -- the same groups now forming amounts to a Cambodian
coalition government -- have shown any ability, or inclination, to find the
mines and disarm them.

Nor is there any international strategy for removing the mines. The job, which
will cost millions of dollars, may eventually fall to United Nations
peacekeeping troops, but that is undecided.

Process Could Take Years

"Armies are very good at laying down mines but they don't have the answers for
finding them again," said Rae McGrath, a retired British soldier and mine
specialist who traveled to Cambodia earlier this year on behalf of Asia Watch, a
New York-based human rights organization.

"Finding all the mines will be a process of years," he said in a telephone
interview. "It could be 15 years before some Cambodian villages are inspected.
Even if you had all the resources you needed and there was no limitation on
money, this is not a problem that Cambodia can solve in a few months."

Relief organizations report that hundreds of people in Camboida, including many
children, undergo amputations each month after stepping on mines. Mr. McGrath
and the other Asia Watch investigators reported last month that there were now
30,000 amputees in Cambodia.

The United Nations, which will be responsible for the repatriation of the
Cambodians on the Thai border under the peace plan signed in Paris last month,
is warning refugees of the dangers they face by returning home too quickly,
urging them to wait at least several more months.

"For now, people in the camps shouldn't even think about returning," said Guy
Ouellet, a Bangkok-based official of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. "It's simply not safe, and not only because of the mines. There are a
lot of bandits in Cambodia. There is also lots of malaria."

Refugees Ignore Warnings

Despite the danger, many Cambodian refugees in Thailand are expected to try to
go home soon, fearful that if they delay too long in returning, they will be
unable to claim good farming land.

"They will leave early, but they will be foolish," said Phan Phear, 20, who
waited in the offices of a French-based charity, Handicap International, to have
a wooden prosthesis attached to what is left of his right leg. A former rebel
soldier, most of his leg was blown off by a mine last year.

Mr. Phan Phear motioned with a crutch to three small Cambodian boys, perhaps 7
years old, who were playing and giggling in the distance.

"If these boys go home to Cambodia, one day they may go and play in the fields
or the jungle," he said. "And maybe there will be a land mine waiting for them.
The mines will stay there; they will wait forever."


LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phan Phear, a former Cambodian rebel who lost his right leg to a
mine last year, waiting to have an artificial limb fitted at the refugee camp in
Thailand known as Site 2. He feels that Cambodians who rush back to their
country in the wake of the recent peace agreement risk being maimed by the
thousands of mines that remain after 12 years of war. (Philip Shenon/The New
York Times)

Map of Cambodia, indicating Phnom Penh

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Says Return of Vietnamese Went Well

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 9


Hong Kong officials expressed satisfaction today with the forced return of 59
Vietnamese boat people, despite dramatic resistance offered by some of them, who
were dragged or carried onto the plane, and the distressed cries of others.

While defending the level of force used in the operation early today, the
officials made clear their intention to continue such flights until tens of
thousands of Vietnamese in camps here are sent back. Hong Kong officials, and
those of Britain, the colony's ruler, say that only a small percentage are
genuine refugees fleeing persecution, and that the rest, here largely for
economic reasons, must go back to Vietnam.

"I very much hope this will be the beginning of the end of a very long and
burdensome problem," said Lydia Dunn, a senior politician and member of the
colony's Executive Council, which advises Hong Kong's British-appointed
Governor.

John Shannon, Hong Kong's principal assistant secretary for security,
accompanied the Vietnamese to Hanoi. Upon his return here, he told reporters: "I
think the operation went extremely well. I can't think of anything I would
change."

Mr. Shannon said the next flight would come at the end of November or early
December.

Clinton Leeks, the colonial Government's refugee coordinator, said the operation
had been "handled as sensitively and carefully as possible." He maintained that
the police had used "the absolute minimum of compulsion."

Rita Fan, another member of the Executive Council, said, "This is an
exceptionally rare case by international standards. Nobody has treated illegal
immigrants as good as we have."

The Hong Kong police were unarmed in the operation and controlled the situation
through strength of numbers.

The Government later acknowledged that several Vietnamese men had been
handcuffed with "plastic wrist restrainers," but a spokesman said that once
aboard the plane, these were removed in all but one case.

In Whitehead, the largest detention center here, there were large but peaceful
demonstrations against repatriation today.

At a news conference after the takeoff of the plane carrying the 16 men, 20
women and 23 children sent back to Hanoi, Mr. Leeks addressed reports that
several women had been given anti-anxiety drugs before they were moved from
their camp to the airport.

He said that while a doctor in the camp might have given drugs to the women for
medical reasons, "no one was sedated for security reasons."

After the three-hour flight to Hanoi, the 59 Vietnamese were taken to a
reception center by United Nations officials.

Despite the emotional scenes by the Vietnamese at the camp and the airport here,
many politicians and ordinary people said they were pleased and relieved that
the ousters had begun.

A Chinese caller to a radio station said he welcomed the flight, and resented
oppopsition in the United States to the forced repatriation.

"Our security officers have to put on the track suits and act in such a nice
manner," he complained. "Why do we have to be so careful?"

Another caller, an expatriate woman, called the Vietnamese "unwanted pests."

On Friday, officials at several relief agencies said they believed that the
level of force planned to move the Vietnamese was appropriate, and that the
mandatory returns were regrettable but necessary.

"When forced returns were first tried in 1989, there was an outcry, a clamor
from the relief workers here," said an official of one agency, who declined to
be further identified. "But you don't hear that now. Very few challenge the
concept of mandatory repatriation."

A dissent was filed by Asia Watch, a New York-based human rights group, which
condemned the forced returns as "premature and irresponsible."

Sidney Jones, executive director of Asia Watch, said, "Hong Kong has not met its
duty to insure concrete measures are in place that no one returned will suffer
harassment or punishment."

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Memorial Gathering Its Own Art Exhibit

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


In awarehouse 20 minutes outside of Washington, Duery Felton and Tony Porco,
curators for the National Park Service, don white gloves to handle the estimated
25,000 items that have been left in memory of the dead at the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial since the monument was dedicated on Nov. 13, 1982.

A popsicle stick, beer cans, a single, blue woman's pump or a pair of black lace
panties seem unlikely objects for such care and cataloguing, but the curators
are preparing a selection of them for national display one year from now, on the
10th anniversary of the monument, in an exhibit at the Smithsonian Museum of
American History.

Awed by the size and scope of the collection after a visit to the warehouse
three years ago, John Wheeler, then the chairman of the National Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Fund, sought to find a way to display the items permanently.

"The exhibit will meet a felt need," said Mr. Wheeler, who was chairman of the
Fund from 1979 to 1989. "We can only terminate the grief by sharing it."

Grief radiates from the countless letters to the dead and the cases of flags,
medals and uniform pieces. From a 1940's-vintage southpaw baseball glove to a
bridal bouquet, they all provoke the imagination to fill in the stories around
them. Each object is a reaching out from the living to the dead, an attempt to
heal the wounds of the most divisive American conflict since the Civil War.

Having drawn an estimated 20 million visitors since its opening, the Vietnam
Memorial in Washington now receives more visitors each year than its neighbor,
the Lincoln Memorial, making it the most visited memorial in the United States.
The two memorials share the sentiment of healing, or, in Lincoln's words "to
bind up the nation's wounds, to care for him who shall have borne the battle and
for his widow and his orphan, to do all which may achieve a just and lasting
peace among ourselves and with all nations."

Mr. Wheeler wants to continue the process of binding up the wounds. After
directing the effort to raise the money for the building and upkeep of the Wall,
as the Vietnam Memorial is informally known, he is now helping to start a
project to raise money for the exhibit of mementos. The new project, which is
sponsored by a group called Beyond the Wall, will attempt to raise $200,000 to
sponsor the exhibit and help the Smithsonian and the National Park Service in
gathering information on the articles left there.

"To visit these items is overwhelming," Leah Miller, the director of the
project, said at a recent news conference. "You look into the country's heart
when you see them."

Edward C. Ezell, a curator of the Smithsonian's Armed Forces History Division,
said: "Most museum exhibits are the result of a single collector who has lots of
money to purchase art. This is an exhibit generated by the American people."

Mr. Wheeler said he hoped the money raised for the care of the collection would
come in small donations from many people. "I'd like to see lots of small
donations so that Americans in general can have a part in it."

Confident that the project can meet its fund-raising goals, Mr. Wheeler is most
concerned about getting out word to those who have left things at the wall so
their stories can be told.

Some stories are already known, although details need to filled in. Some who
served together have come to the monument to bring gifts to old friends. One
soldier left a pack of Kools and the playing cards of a royal flush in spades
for a friend who had notoriously bad luck at poker. Another left an inscribed
watch to a buddy who was always asking what time it was. Many of the notes left
behind are hard to read, personal notes scribbled to friends, and the curators
of the collection need the details and the permission of those who left them
before they become of part of the display.

Those who lost lovers in the war have come to the wall. Someone left a crystal
goblet, the wrapper of a Hershey's Kiss, a ring, and a note "Lovers met, and
spirits kissed."

Soldiers headed for and returning from the Persian Gulf paid their respects as
well. Cpl. Michael Kilpatrick of the Marines left the Silver Star he had earned
in the Persian Gulf conflict below the name of his father, Capt. Donald
Kilpatrick of the Air Force.

Sons and daughters have come to see the names of the fathers they never knew.
They leave notes pleading for contact with anyone who served with their fathers.
The needs expressed in these letters prompted the founding of In Touch, a
program that collects information on the whereabouts of Vietnam veterans and
helps put them in touch with their former comrades and their families.

To send donations or provide information for the exhibit, write to: Beyond the
Wall, P.O. Box 221616, Chantilly, Va., 22022.


LOAD-DATE: November 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT;
FILM

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 13; Page 34; Column 3; Holiday Times Supplement

LENGTH: 1436 words


Here is a sampling of arts and entertainment events in New York City during the
holiday season, compiled by New York Times critics, writers and contributors.
Dates and times are subject to change.

November

"CAPE FEAR." Martin Scorsese can make anything he touches his own, from the
Mafia ("Goodfellas") to the Bible ("The Last Temptation of Christ"). No doubt he
can do the same with this remake of the 1962 film noir. Robert De Niro is the
brutal ex-convict who terrorizes a lawyer (Nick Nolte) and his wife (Jessica
Lange). Opens Wednesday.

"MEETING VENUS." She can act, but can she lip-sync? Glenn Close plays a Swedish
opera diva with Kiri Te Kanawa's dubbed-in voice in this romantic comedy about a
tyrannical conductor trying to pull off a major Paris production. Directed by
the Hungarian director Istvan Szabo ("Mephisto"), with Niels Arestrup as the
conductor. An international goulash, with music. Opens Friday.

"PROSPERO'S BOOKS." Peter Greenaway's visually extravagant, eccentric version of
Shakespeare's "Tempest," with John Gielgud as Prospero guiding us through the
books he has taken to his island exile. Both praised and excoriated for "The
Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover," Mr. Greenaway returns to the lyrical
meditations about art that informed his "Draughtsman's Contract." Opens Friday.

"FOR THE BOYS." Personal traumas, historical battles and music as Bette Midler
and James Caan play long-lived U.S.O. performers from World War II through
Vietnam. A pet project of Ms. Midler's, directed by Mark Rydell, who also
directed her best film, "The Rose." Opens Nov. 20.

"THE ADDAMS FAMILY." Charles Addams's lovable ghoulish family, born as cartoons
and famous from the television series, is hilariously cast, with Anjelica Huston
as Morticia and Raul Julia as Gomez. The first film directed by the
cinematographer Barry Sonnenfeld ("Miller's Crossing"). Opens Nov. 22.

"AN AMERICAN TAIL: FIEVEL GOES WEST." In this sequel to Don Bluth's animated
mouse-tale, the Russian immigrant Fievel Mousekewitz fulfills every child's
fantasy by becoming becomes a gunslinging lawman in the Wild West. Voices by Amy
Irving, James Stewart, Dom DeLuise and John Cleese. "Presented by" Steven
Spielberg; directed by Phil Nibbelink and Simon Wells. Opens Nov. 22.

"BEAUTY AND THE BEAST." She is a beauty named Belle. He is a prince turned into
a beast. They waltz to happily-ever-after life in Disney's new animated version
of the classic fairy tale. Music by Howard Ashman and Alan Menken, the "Little
Mermaid" people. Opens Nov. 22.

"MY GIRL." The new Macaulay Culkin movie, although he only plays the heroine's
best friend. Anna Chlumsky is an 11-year-old tomboy, jealous when her father
(Dan Aykroyd), a widowed mortician, falls for his cosmetologist (Jamie Lee
Curtis). The film has already become controversial for its hard-to-take ending.
Opens Nov. 27.

December

"LET HIM HAVE IT." The first-rate English director Peter Medak ("The Ruling
Class" "The Krays") is back with this fact-based story about Derek Bentley, a
mentally handicapped teen-ager who was hanged for a 1952 robbery and murder.
Opens Dec. 6.

"HOOK." The biggest, most anticipated movie of the year is Steven Spielberg's
dream-cast update of "Peter Pan." Robin Williams is the grown-up Peter who must
rescue his children from the still-villainous Hook (Dustin Hoffman), with help
from the spritely Tinkerbell (Julia Roberts). Opens Dec. 11.

"STAR TREK VI: THE UNDISCOVERED COUNTRY." After "Star Trek V," this should be
called "Star Trek VI: How Dare They?" But it's the 25th anniversary of "Star
Trek," so the old standbys -- William Shatner, Leonard Nimoy and the rest of the
Enterprise crew -- take on the Klingons for a final adventure, or so they say.
The promising sign is that it was directed by Nicholas Meyer ("Star Trek II: The
Wrath of Khan"). Opens Dec. 13.

"THE PRINCE OF TIDES." Barbra Streisand directs and stars in this version of Pat
Conroy's best-selling novel. She is a New York psychiatrist; Nick Nolte is a
Southern man whose suicidal sister is Ms. Streisand's patient. Opens Dec. 18.

"BUGSY." Warren Beatty as the man who built Vegas and Annette Bening as the
glamour girl he loves. Barry Levinson directs. Opens Dec. 20.

"FATHER OF THE BRIDE." A sure sign of regressive times: the remake of a a
big-wedding movie. This updated version of the classic with Spencer Tracy and
Elizabeth Taylor stars Steve Martin as the dad who worries about losing his
little girl and Diane Keaton as the good mom. From Charles Shyer and Nancy
Meyers, who made "Baby Boom," the least realistic having-it-all film in recent
memory. Opens Dec. 20.

"J. F. K." Oliver Stone's already controversial film takes on the Kennedy
assassination and the possibility of a conspiracy. Kevin Costner plays Jim
Garrison, the New Orleans district attorney who tried to prove a conspiracy,
with Gary Oldman as Lee Harvey Oswald. Opens Dec. 20.

"AT PLAY IN THE FIELDS OF THE LORD." Missionaries and mercenaries threaten a
village along the Amazon River in this version of Peter Matthiessen's newly
topical, politically correct 1965 novel. Hector Babenco ("Kiss of the Spider
Woman") directs Aidan Quinn and Kathy Bates. Opens Dec. 22.

"CITY OF JOY." Patrick Swayze doesn't dance or turn up as a ghost, but he does
turn noble, playing a doctor in the poorest section of Calcutta in this film
directed by Roland Joffe ("The Killing Fields"). Opens Dec. 25.

"GRAND CANYON." Lawrence Kasdan of "Big Chill" fame turns his serio-comic
ensemble approach to Los Angeles in the 90's. Danny Glover, Kevin Kline, Steve
Martin, Alfre Woodard and Mary McDonnell, among others, discover that the city
is a killer but it's a wonderful life. Opens Dec. 25.

"THE INNER CIRCLE." Andrei Konchalovsky ("Runaway Train") shot this in Moscow --
within Kremlin walls and K.G.B. headquarters, he says. Bob Hoskins plays a
K.G.B. agent who seduces the wife of Stalin's personal projectionist. Tom Hulce
and Lolita Davidovich star, with a cast of Soviet actors. Why is this opening on
Christmas Day? Opens Dec. 25.

"MADAME BOVARY." Claude Chabrol's faithful version of Flaubert's novel, starring
Isabelle Huppert as the hopelessly romantic housewife. Visually, these bourgeois
are more hauts than petits, but the film was widely praised in France, where
they take Emma seriously. Opens Dec. 25.

"RUSH." The superb Jennifer Jason Leigh ("Last Exit to Brooklyn") plays an
addicted undercover narcotics agent in a drama of crime, cocaine and love with
Jason Patric. Based on Kim Wozencraft's autobiographical novel, this is the
first film directed by Lili Fini Zanuck, who co-produced "Driving Miss Daisy."
Opens Dec. 25.

"FRIED GREEN TOMATOES." Kathy Bates visits Jessica Tandy in a nursing home and
hears her story about female friendship in a town in the old South. In
flashbacks to the 1920's, Ms. Tandy turns into Mary Stuart Masterson. From Fanny
Flagg's affecting comic novel, "Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle-Stop Cafe."
Opens Dec. 27.

"THE LAST BOY SCOUT." A buddy-movie mystery, with Bruce Willis as a detective
whose client is murdered and Damon Wayans as the dead woman's boyfriend, an
ex-football player. They team up to solve the murder and make the world safe for
professional football. Action by the director Tony Scott ("Top Gun"). Words by
Shane Black ("Lethal Weapon"), who was paid $1.75 million for the script. Opens
in December.

"THE MAMBO KINGS." Based on Oscar Hijuelos's rich, Pulitzer Prize-winning novel.
Armand Assante and Antonio Banderas are Cuban brothers who move to New York City
in the 1950's and briefly find success with a musical group called the Mambo
Kings. They idolize Desi Arnaz, played here by Desi Arnaz Jr. Great
possibilities, but can the first-time director Arne Glimcher, an art dealer
turned film producer, pull this off? Opens in December.

"HIGH HEELS." Pedro Almodovar's women are always on the verge of some sort of
nervous breakdown. Here a daughter marries her mother's former lover. He turns
up dead, and the women share the mother-daughter experience of being murder
suspects. Opens in December.

"MAP OF THE HUMAN HEART." Anne Parillaud ("La Femme Nikita"), Patrick Bergin,
John Cusack and Jeanne Moreau star in a complicated love story spanning 30
years, two continents and you don't want to know how many coincidences. An
Eskimo loves a half-Cree woman, who falls for him and a white map-maker.
Directed by the New Zealander Vincent Ward, whose exquisite time-traveling film,
"The Navigator," suggests he can maneuver through this. Opens in late December
or early January.


LOAD-DATE: November 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule; List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Serving in Military May Cut Later Earnings, Studies Say

BYLINE: By SYLVIA NASAR

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 958 words


A study by two economists has concluded that "the earnings soldiers sacrifice
are greater than first appears," continuing a debate over the impact of military
service on income.

Joshua D. Angrist of Harvard University and Alan B. Krueger of Princeton
University have been comparing the economic fortunes of veterans and nonveterans
in a series of recently published papers.

For starters, they found that Vietnam veterans earn about 15 percent less a year
than similar men who were not drafted. "Earnings rise with experience and these
guys missed out on two years of job experience," Professor Angrist said.

The pay gap exists despite the G.I. Bill of Rights, the Government program that
has helped pay for veterans' college educations since World War II. While the
program has been extremely effective in increasing veterans' education and
earnings, its benefits were pared back for a while in the 70's. And "a lot of
people didn't use it," Professor Angrist said. "Many had families and couldn't
go back to school."

The Vietnam-era draft also contributed to the income gap, the economists
recently found, by giving young men who were at risk of being drafted an
incentive to use student deferments and stay in college longer. Since they got
more schooling than they might have without the draft threat, they ended up with
permanently higher pay, on average.

All this confirms the suspicions of many Vietnam veterans themselves. The real
surprise, Professors Angrist and Krueger show, is that those veterans are not
alone. World War II veterans, who were generally thought to have received a leg
up by serving in a popular war, also suffered financially, though only about
one-third as much as Vietnam veterans.

Among veterans of various eras, there are disparate views on how their careers
were affected by their time away from civilian life.

"I never would have gone to college if I hadn't gone into the service," said Ben
V. Luden, a 66-year-old World War II veteran who lives in Westport, Conn.

And Rosalind R. Beech, a 37-year-old veteran from Silver Spring, Md., who joined
the Army in 1974, recalled: "I came from a very low economic background. The
military was a means of escape."

But others believe their stint in the service set them back. Eugene R. Manfrey,
60, a Korean War veteran and former steelworker who lives in St. Petersburg,
Fla., said: "The guy who stayed home and went to college got the better job. I
operated a machine. He was probably up in the office."

John J. Fanning, 44, a Vietnam veteran, had a similarly dim view: "There is a
tax for all the men and women that served. That tax will be paid for the rest of
their lives."

'Were Discriminated Against'

Many other Vietnam veterans cite problems stemming from the unpopularity of the
Vietnam war. "We were discriminated against," said James B. Hubbard, a Vietnam
veteran in North Potomac, Md. "When my father came back from World War II, they
were proud to hire veterans."

Three circumstances may have magnified the perceived contrast between the impact
of serving in the Vietnam War, compared with World War II or Korea.

First is the nation's economic performance. World War II and Korean veterans
came home to an economy that was on the brink of a two-decade-long boom.
Recessions were short, unemployment stayed low and pay grew rapidly. Against
that backdrop, whatever losses may have ensued from military service did not
loom all that large in anyone's consciousness.

"I feel very good about myself," said Frederick P. Cipoletti, a 71-year-old
World War II veteran, who lives on Staten Island.

By contrast, Vietnam veterans were discharged in the early 70s, just in time for
the two worst recessions in postwar history; the combination of high
unemployment and rapidly rising prices known as stagflation, and a sharp
slowdown in real wage growth.

Unlike World War II, Vietnam was more of a poor man's war: Those who served were
disproportionately from the working class, and the post-Vietnam economy was
particularly harsh toward young blue-collar men. Vietnam veterans, as a result,
have fared even worse than other members of their age group -- a generation
whose after-tax pay has declined by roughly 20 percent since 1973.

Less Demand for the Semiskilled

Finally, the skills of Vietnam veterans might not have been as useful in the
economy of the 70's and 80's as they would have been a couple of decades
earlier. For 20 years or so after World War II, the demand for high
school-educated, semiskilled workers soared -- and so did their wages, relative
to those of more educated workers.

Vietnam vets, by contast, came into a labor market in which manufacturing jobs
were shrinking and the demand for less-educated workers within manufacturing was
declining.

Richard Flannigan, a Vietnam veteran in Washington, said, "I got out in 1971 and
was unemployed for eight months."

                             --------------------


Aid for Veterans

WASHINGTON, Nov. 10 (AP) -- The Small Business Administration and a trade group
are starting a program aimed at helping military veterans purchase their own
businesses.

More than 100 members of the International Franchise Association are offering
veterans either a reduced franchise fee or market-rate financing for up to half
the fee. The Small Business Administration will provide management and financial
counseling and offer loans to eligible Vietnam and disabled veterans.

All veterans have until Aug. 15, 1993, to apply to the program. Armed forces
members returning to civilian life between now and that date will have two years
from the date of discharge to apply. Information is available from the
administration's 110 offices around the nation.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Said to Conceal Arms for Future

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 851 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Nov. 10


The Khmer Rouge, the Communist guerrilla group that once brutally ruled Cambodia
and has now joined the new coalition government under a peace accord, is hiding
troops and a huge cache of weapons in preparation for the possible resumption of
the Cambodian civil war, diplomats and relief workers say.

The move, they say, violates disarmament provisions of the United Nations peace
treaty that the Khmer Rouge signed in Paris only last month along with
Cambodia's Vietnamese-backed Communist Government and two non-Communist
guerrilla groups. The treaty, which is seen as the best hope for ending the long
civil war in this shattered nation, requires partial demobilization by all sides
under the supervision of the United Nations.

Peacekeeping Force Due

Diplomats said that in drafting the treaty, they took into account the
possibility that the Khmer Rouge or other factions would try to hide troops and
weapons. With the first soldiers of a large United Nations peacekeeping force
arriving in Cambodia today, the diplomats expressed hope that adequate
safeguards would soon be in place to prevent any new use of force.

"As best anyone can tell, the Khmer Rouge are hiding equipment and people
wherever they can," said a Western diplomat who helped draw up the peace
agreement. "There's no way to detect a lot of it. One hope is that the Khmer
Rouge will feel sufficiently intimidated by the presence of United Nations
peacekeeping troops in Cambodia that they will not fight again."

Still, diplomats called the move by the Khmer Rouge particularly troubling
because as the most powerful of the three rebel factions, it was in a position
to determine whether the civil war would resume and when.

According to intelligence reports and accounts from Cambodian refugees entering
Thailand, the Khmer Rouge has put aside enough weapons and ammunition in the
Cardamom mountains of western Cambodia and elsewhere to allow it to fight on for
years.

Khmer Rouge soldiers are also being told to hide in remote camps to prevent
detection by United Nations inspectors who will monitor compliance with the
treaty, the Western diplomat said.

The reports from diplomats and relief workers are evidence both of the frailty
of the peace agreement, and of the threat still posed by the Khmer Rouge and its
leader, Pol Pot. During the four-year rule of the Khmer Rouge in the 1970's,
more than one million Cambodians were executed or died from starvation and
disease as it sought to remake Cambodian society.

After the Khmer Rouge was ousted by a Vietnamese invasion in 1978, its leaders
returned to the Cambodian jungle and havens in Thailand to regroup.

With sanctuary and weapons from China and Thailand -- which viewed the Khmer
Rouge as a counterforce to Vietnam, a traditional adversary -- the Khmer Rouge
emerged as the largest and best-armed force in the war against the Cambodian
Government. It formed an uneasy coalition with the two non-Communist groups, one
led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the other by former Prime Minister Son Sann.

Khmer Rouge Reform Doubted

Diplomats discount Khmer Rouge claims that the group has embraced liberal
democracy and capitalism.

"Listen, the Khmer Rouge is not made part of this peace agreement out of any
belief that Pol Pot has reformed his ways," an Asia-based Western diplomat said.
"We involved the Khmer Rouge because they were the most powerful rebel group out
there, and they could not be ignored."

In Washington, Richard Solomon, the Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs, told a Congressional panel last month that the Bush
Administration believed that the American-backed treaty was the best way of
controlling the Khmer Rouge.

"Warfare would give the Khmer Rouge their best chance at a return to power," he
said. "The settlement agreement obliges the Khmer Rouge to turn from the
battlefield, where they have particular strengths and experience, to the ballot
box, where they can be held accountable by the Cambodian people for their bloody
record."

Sihanouk Is Due Thursday

Today the first United Nations peacekeeping contingent, 37 Australian soldiers,
arrived on two planes also filled with communications equipment.

The Australians are to set up communications among the four factions and the
United Nations. They are eventually to be joined by troops from 22 other
countries.

Whatever its current ideology or leadership, diplomats say, the Khmer Rouge
retains a fierce determination to take power again in Cambodia. Still, some of
those most skeptical about the motives of the Khmer Rouge say it appears that
the organization will allow free elections to take place.

"Even during the worst of its abuses, the Khmer Rouge retained some support in
the countryside, and they will certainly win some seats in the new government,"
a West Asian diplomat in Phnom Penh said this week.

"The question is what happens if the Khmer Rouge wins only a few seats, fewer
than it wants" he said. "That's when the military option of the Khmer Rouge
becomes a problem. That will be the time to worry."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As United Nations peacekeeping forces arrived in Cambodia,
diplomats and workers there said the Khmer Rouge Communist guerrilla group had
been hiding weapons for a possible resumption of civil war. (Reuters) (pg. A7)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Aid for Homeless Focuses on Veterans

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


Four years ago, when Ken Smith made his first trip to the Vietnam memorial, he
saw something in its black granite reflection that he did not like: homeless
veterans camped in the nearby bushes.

Mr. Smith, a Vietnam veteran himself, returned to his home in Boston and last
December started the nation's largest shelter exclusively for homeless veterans.
It is a 10-story, 200-bed center where the homeless are organized in squads and
platoons and where the cook calls himself a mess sergeant.

Across the country, the small veterans groups that used to provide counseling
and job-training in storefront centers have increasingly turned their attention
to homelessness. There is no precise count of homeless veterans. But these
groups say the number is rising, and in response, they are opening shelters,
group homes and clinics for drug and alcohol abuse that are exclusively for
veterans, some with military-style discipline.

"There's the development of a national movement," said Mr. Smith. "We cannot
tolerate that our brothers are on the streets, eating from Dumpsters."

The Federal Government has estimated that 150,000 to 250,000 veterans are
homeless on any given night and that twice that number may be homeless in the
course of a year. It places the number of these veterans at about a third of the
nation's single homeless men.

Experts disagree on why. Some say the rigors of military life, particularly in
combat, induce mental and physical disorders; others argue that the military has
simply drawn its recruits disproportionately from the poor.

Members of grass-roots groups like Mr. Smith's say veterans often respond better
when treated together. And they say they hope their movement, which has not yet
been taken up by the large national veterans' groups, foreshadows the emergence
of homelessness among veterans as a national concern.

"It's a direct services movement, but it's also a 'Let's jack up the
consciousness movement,' " said Robert Van Keuren, director of Vietnam Veterans
of San Diego. The group, which is privately financed, is using a Federal grant
to convert an abandoned motel into a temporary home for veterans.

"People all over the country are saying, 'My God, how could we have so many
people who served our country out on the streets?' " he said.

The movement comes amid frequent signs of a public backlash against the homeless
that has included government sweeps of encampments. And the leaders of other
advocacy groups for the homeless are welcoming veterans as needed allies.

"If anybody can shake some resources loose from this Administration, poor
veterans can do so," said Kim Hopper of the National Coalition for the Homeless,
a Washington group that is making public a report on Monday criticizing the
Government for not doing more to help homeless veterans. "They have a different
kind of claim to what they're owed by society."

Bill Elmore, of the Vietnam Veterans Leadership Program in St. Louis, agrees.
Last year he helped organize a number of small veterans groups into a loose
confederation, the National Coalition of Homeless Veterans Service Providers,
with affiliates in 39 cities.

Just as the G.I. bill preceded other student loan programs, he said, these
programs could presage a broader national effort.

Mr. Smith says that a large number of people in his Washington shelter suffer
from problems that began in the military. "The common denominator that I find is
the effect of combat violence on the human pysche," said Mr. Smith, who served
as a combat medic in Vietnam.

But Dr. E. Fuller Torrey, a Washington psychiatrist who is an authority on
mental illness among the homeless, argues that the effects of combat stress are
often exaggerated, and that many veterans' problems preceded their military
service. "It's been a garbage-bag diagnosis," he said. "Everything gets dumped
into it."

A Group With Many Problems

While many national studies have estimated that about a third of the homeless
are drug or alcohol abusers, groups working with veterans say the figure is as
high as 50 percent or 60 percent. And while the studies have estimated that
about a third of the homeless suffer from mental illnesses, veterans groups say
as few as 10 percent or 20 percent of their clients do.

Like many homeless veterans, Theodore Aires, 45 years old, argues that his
situation arises, at least in part, from his military service. While he had
experimented with drugs before serving as a Marine in Vietnam, he said, his use
escalated there. "I can't blame the whole thing on that, but I do feel it
contributed," said Mr. Aires, who lives in a Washington shelter run by the
Community for Creative Nonviolence.

Like many others serving the homeless, Mr. Elmore, of the St. Louis group, began
working with veterans in the early 1970's, after his discharge from the Air
Force. After years of providing job-placement services for veterans, he said,
"About four or five years ago, we noticed that more and more of our folks were
homeless." Since then, a Veterans Administration hospital has provided the use
of five homes on its campus, where Mr. Elmore has started a transitional housing
program.

Among the nation's more unusual programs is one started by Mr. Van Keuren in San
Diego, called "Standdown." Once a year, he organizes an encampment at a local
high school, where more than 50 public and private agencies set up tents and
offer a variety of services. Last year, about 700 homeless veterans took part,
receiving medical care, applying for food stamps and other benefits and even
appearing before a municipal judge to dispose of outstanding misdemeanor
warrants.

In Boston, after Mr. Smith's visit to the memorial he and two partners acquired
an abandoned building through a Federal program for the homeless.  Since then,
he has served more than 2,000 people and has a waiting list of 145.

Far from clients, Mr. Smith calls the residents his "brothers" and he says
veterans heal better among other veterans. "He can address his problems in a
non-threatening way," Mr. Smith said. "I'm not the Government; I'm another vet."

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "We cannot tolerate that our brothers are on the streets, eating
from Dumpsters," said Ken Smith, director of the New England Shelter for
Homeless Veterans. He spoke to two residents in the shelter's dining room. (Rick
Friedman for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 11, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Veterans, a Prouder Time

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


Today, for the first time in years, America celebrates Veterans Day with a sense
of relief and even pride.

Last Veterans Day was an anxious time for Americans of every opinion about war,
peace and the national interest. The United States, in its immense buildup for
battle in the Middle East, awaited a showdown over whether to use that mighty
fighting force. Many people who had never come to terms with Vietnam were
concerned about loved ones, nervous about American abilities, fretful about a
bellicose national character.

The nation did, of course, wage war against Iraq, and it was not the long,
morally ambiguous undeclared war in Vietnam. Rather, it was a swift, collective
police action under United Nations authority with Congress's clear assent. It
was not flawless nor was every aspect uniformly wise; yet if any war could be
called "just," the gulf war qualified.

There was pride also in the fighting ranks, a widely shared sense of military
professionalism: smart soldiers, well trained, mostly drug- and alcohol-free,
thanks in part to the war's brevity and location. The military services made
better and more integrated use of fighting women than ever before. These forces
found themselves with a leader in Gen. Norman Schwarzkopf, who was articulate
about the mission and clear about the supremacy of civilian authority.

America has mourned her dead and wounded, thankfully few. Veterans of all wars
and fellow Americans can reclaim lost pride not merely in national power but
more fundamentally in the disciplined, limited use of power.

There's always the danger that the relatively clean Persian Gulf war will impel
Americans to forget war's horrors. But Veterans Day, 1991, is a time when
Americans can, without glorifying war, be proud of their veterans.

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bishop H. Donegan, Episcopal Leader, Dies at 91

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words


Bishop Horace W. B. Donegan, the Episcopal Bishop of New York from 1950 until
1972 and an early church advocate for the rights of blacks, women and the poor,
died yesterday at his home in Sanibel, Fla. He was 91 years old.

His longtime chaplain, the Rev. Geoffrey R. M. Skrinar, said the Bishop died of
cancer of the throat.

Bishop Donegan, in his 22 years as spiritual leader of the New York diocese,
transformed its social conciousness. A slender courtly man with cool blue eyes,
he took a diocese with some of the most patrician families in the country and
focused its attention on the needs of the growing ranks of the poor.

A landmark in that journey was his announcement in 1967 that money that had
accumulated to finish the construction of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine,
on Amsterdam Avenue at West 112th Street, would instead be given toward housing
and development projects in nearby Harlem.

'Broken and Incomplete'

The structure, seat of a diocese that embraces Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten
Island and seven counties north of the city, is the world's largest Gothic-style
cathedral. Its construction began in 1892.

"This unfinished cathedral, towering as it does over this great and suffering
metropolis, shall be the prophetic symbol that our society is still as
rough-hewn, ragged, broken and incomplete as the building itself," he said.

The halt in construction continued for a time under his successor, Bishop Paul
Moore Jr., a lanky activist with a more forceful public style who intensified
the diocese's involvement in several social causes. Work on the cathedral
resumed in 1973.

Bishop Donegan had worked to expand the role of women in his church. In 1956, he
approved their election as wardens, vestry members and delegates to the national
conventions.

Ordained Women as Deacons

In 1971, after the national church permitted it, he ordained two women, Carol
Anderson and Julia Sibley, as deacons. The Episcopal Church has since decided to
ordain women as priests and bishops.

"He bridged the gap between World War II and the tumult of the 1960's," Mr.
Skrinar said.

Bishop Donegan lived quietly in the bishop's residence on the cathedral grounds
or other church homes. He enjoyed reading biographies, listening to Gilbert and
Sullivan operettas, swimming, painting landscapes and playing an occasional game
of golf.

After his retirement as bishop, he joined the staff of St. James Church on
Madison Avenue at 71st Street, where he had once been rector. He took up the
duties of a parish pastor, though in lighter fashion, preaching occasionally and
assisting at communion.

Honored by Queen Elizabeth

The retirement included long summers in England, where he was born Horace
William Baden Donegan in Derbyshire on May 17, 1900. In 1957, Queen Elizabeth II
named him an honorary commander of the Order of the British Empire.

His family left England when he was 10. He lived in Toledo, Ohio, and did his
undergraduate work at Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y., when it was
known as St. Stephen's College, and later at Oxford. Mr. Donegan received his
divinity degree from the Episcopal Theological Seminary in Cambridge, Mass., in
1927 and became a priest in 1928.

After serving as rector of Christ Church in Baltimore from 1929 to 1933, he
became the rector of St. James, which has one of New York City's most prominent
congregations.

After 14 years at St. James and several appointments in national church posts,
in 1947 he was elected Suffragan Bishop of New York, the second highest post in
the diocese. On the retirement of Bishop Charles K. Gilbert in 1950, Bishop
Donegan was enthroned as the 12th Bishop of the diocese.

'Evil Days' for the City

Presiding at a church situated on the edge of an area of poor black and Hispanic
people, he quickly began speaking out on the need for equality of opportunity.
In 1953, he denounced conditions in schools and housing and high incidence of
crime and urged different faiths to pool resources to alleviate "the evil days"
the city had fallen on.

The church may have to "sacrifice much that is time-honored" to minister
effectively in a city whose racial and economic patterns were changing, he said
in 1954.

In 1957, he announced a $5 million program for building new churches in poorer
areas of Manhattan and the Bronx, saying New York City was "the most strategic
missionary opportunity that faces the church."

In his genteel way, he crusaded for civil rights within his church as well. He
chastised the Church Club, a prominent organization of Episcopal laymen, for
failing to admit black members, declaring that in the Episcopal Church "there is
no room for prejudice."

'Sins of Segregation'

In a pastoral letter in 1956, he asked the diocese's churches to acknowledge
"our own sins of segregation in our own community." He chose to read the letter
in one of the city's most fashionable churches, St. Bartholomew's Church on Park
Avenue at 51st Street.

His forthrightness had its costs. At a special service marking his 15th year as
Bishop, he observed that his civil rights stances had resulted in the withdrawal
of substantial gifts pledged for completion of the cathedral.

"I am faced with the fact," he said, "that one reason it is unfinished is
because I, as Bishop of New York, have taken certain positions which I had to do
as your Bishop."

Outspoken on other causes as well, Bishop Donegan condemned the "un-American
tactics" of the Congressional investigations led by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy
and deplored efforts to introduce religion into the public schools. In a
pluralistic society, he said, the public schools should not be a vehicle for
teaching "a religiously grounded ethic."

Drew Line at Draft Refusers

Shortly before Christmas 1955, the Bishop sponsored an apartment near the
cathedral for a family of four refugees from Germany, and he later helped the
husband find a job.

During John F. Kennedy's campaign for President in 1960, the Bishop told
churchgoers that Mr. Kennedy's Roman Catholic religion should not be an issue.
In the same address, he assailed the South African policy of apartheid as
"morally unsupportable, spiritually unpardonable and shamefully tragic in its
consequences."

There were, however, nuances to his liberalism. During the Vietnam War, in a
1965 address to the Patriotic Societies of New York, he said he could not
understand young men's refusal to serve their country, even as conscientious
objectors.

"Were it in my power," he said, "I would fine every person who did not vote, and
reward doubly everyone who enlisted in the service of our country, whether as an
Episcopalian in the armed forces or as Quaker in the courageous group who will
carry the wounded off the field of battle."

The Bishop is survived by two nephews and a niece.

A Liturgy of the Resurrection will be at 10 A.M. Saturday at the Cathedral of
St. John the Divine. The body will lie in the cathedral Thursday from 4 P.M. to
8 P.M. and Friday from 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.

NAME: Horace W. B. Donegan

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bishop Horace W. B. Donegan (The New York Times, 1971)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 12, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Remembering His Brethren on Veterans Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Observing his own Veterans Day tradition, Tom Evansew of
Scranton, Pa., 45 years old, paid a visit yesterday to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in lower Manhattan. Mr. Evansew, who served as a Signal Corpsman in
Vietnam in the 1960's, visits the memorial every year to lay a wreath. (Joyce
Dopkeen/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 14, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hanson Baldwin, Military Writer, Dies

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1195 words


Hanson W. Baldwin, retired military-affairs editor of The New York Times and the
author of more than a dozen books on military and naval history and policy, died
yesterday at his home in Roxbury, Conn. He was 88 years old.

Mr. Baldwin died of heart failure, his family said.

A graduate of the United States Naval Academy, Mr. Baldwin joined The Times in
1929 and won a Pulitzer Prize in 1943 for his World War II reporting from the
Pacific.

He was one of the nation's leading authorities on military and naval affairs
during the postwar transition from conventional warfare to the nuclear age. A
tall, slender, courtly man, Mr. Baldwin had a quiet manner that belied his
forceful opinions.

In addition to the European and Pacific battles of World War II, Mr. Baldwin
covered the strategy, tactics and weapons of war in Korea, Vietnam, the Middle
East and other theaters before retiring from The Times in 1968.

His articles, many marked "military analysis," were often more than reportorial,
blending his own opinions and those of the nation's military chiefs into the
news of specific military situations, so that what emerged was a broader view of
strategic considerations and their national and international political
implications.

Advocate of Nuclear Superiority

Mr. Baldwin was often aligned with Pentagon military chiefs on major strategic
issues and budgetary matters. He frequently opposed the "gradualism" of
political leaders whose restraints, he felt, stood in the way of battlefield
victories or military superiority for the United States.

He contended that the United States was engaged in a "struggle for the world"
with an aggressively expansionist Communism, and he was an outspoken advocate of
nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union.

At various times, he also advocated the intensification of the Vietnam War to
achieve a military victory, and friendship with Spain under Franco and with
white-dominated Governments in South Africa and in Rhodesia, now Zimbabwe,
because of what he regarded as their strategic positions.

Generals, admirals, Presidents and members of Congress read his articles,
sometimes with respect and sometimes with exasperation. His views occasionally
became the focus of news, as they did in 1966 when Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara called a news conference to dispute his contention that the Vietnam War
had overextended the armed forces.

Opinions Angered Moscow

The Times itself occasionally disagreed with his opinions. In 1965, for example,
he argued in an article in The New York Times Magazine for a stepped-up American
military commitment in Vietnam, including one million soldiers and saturation
bombing of North Vietnam, to stop the "Communist strategy of creeping
aggression" before it swallowed up all of Asia.

In an editorial, The Times said such a policy would be "a surer road to global
holocaust than to a 'victory' arms can never win for either side."

Mr. Baldwin's opinions sometimes drew the wrath of the Soviet Union. Pravda once
referred to him as a "cannibal in an American tunic," and Krokodil, a Soviet
satirical magazine, published a cartoon depicting him as a fat little man in an
admiral's hat seated in a puddle of ink and surveying the world through the
wrong end of a telescope.

After his retirement, Mr. Baldwin continued to write articles on military
affairs for the news columns of The Times and its Op-Ed page. He also continued
to write books and many magazine articles on strategic issues and intelligence
matters, and served as president of the Naval Academy Alumni Association.

Father an Editor

Hanson Weightman Baldwin was born in Baltimore on March 22, 1903, the son of
Oliver Perry Baldwin Jr., who for many years was managing editor of The
Baltimore Sun, and Caroline Sutton Baldwin. He attended Boys Latin School in
Baltimore and graduated from the Naval Academy in 1924.

After three years of Navy service, much of it at sea aboard a destroyer and a
battleship, Mr. Baldwin resigned his commission and began his newspaper career
in 1927 as a reporter with The Baltimore Sun. Shifting to The New York Times two
years later, he covered general assignments for eight years and became the
paper's military analyst in 1937.

That year, he spent four months in Europe, traveling in Germany, France, Britain
and Poland to report on military preparedness for what was viewed as the coming
war. When he returned, he reported extensively on the ill-prepared state of the
American military establishment.

After the outbreak of war, his dispatches from Guadalcanal and the Western
Pacific won a Pulitzer Prize in 1943. Later, he covered the Allied invasion of
North Africa and the D-day landings on the beaches of Normandy.

A Prolific Writer

In the postwar years, Mr. Baldwin reported on the sweeping changes in military
affairs, including the formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and
other international security groups, the new roles of sea and air power, the
development of atomic weapons, the age of jets and missiles, the strategic arms
race and questions ranging from mess hall complaints to global military
strategies.

In 1959 he broke the news of high-altitude atomic bomb tests by the United
States, known as Project Argus, after holding it for seven months because of
what Washington contended were national security considerations.

Besides his articles for The Times, Mr. Baldwin kept a heavy lecture schedule
and wrote regularly for magazines, scholarly quarterlies and a variety of
professional military publications. His family said his papers would be given to
the Yale Library.

His early books included "The Caissons Roll," a military survey of Europe
(Knopf, 1938); "United We Stand" (McGraw-Hill, 1941); "Strategy for Victory"
(Norton, 1942); "The Navy at War" (William Morrow, 1943); "The Price of Power"
(The Council on Foreign Relations and Harper, 1947); "Great Mistakes of the War"
(Harper, 1949); "Sea Fights and Shipwrecks" (Hanover House, Doubleday, 1955),
and "The Great Arms Race" (Praeger, 1958).

His later books included "World War I: An Outline History" (Harper & Row, 1962);
"The New Navy" (Dutton, 1964); "Battles Lost and Won: Great Campaigns of World
War II" (Harper & Row, 1966); "Strategy for Tomorrow" (Harper & Row, 1970); "The
Crucial Years, 1939-1941" (Harper & Row, 1976), and "Tiger Jack" (Old Army
Press, 1979).

"Strategy for Tomorrow" advocated an "oceanic" strategy in which United States
ground forces in Europe and Asia would be reduced and naval forces strengthened
to deploy nuclear weapons and to make intervention in world trouble spots
easier.

Besides the Pulitzer Prize, Mr. Baldwin received many awards and prizes,
including the Distinguished Service Medal from Syracuse University in 1944. He
received honorary degrees from Drake University and the Clarkson Institute of
Technology.

Mr. Baldwin is survived by his wife, the former Helen Bruce, whom he married in
1931; two daughters, Barbara Potter of Woodbury, Conn., and Elizabeth Crabtree
of Ridgewood, N.J.; seven grandchildren and three great-grandchildren. Funeral
services will be private.

NAME: Hanson W. Baldwin

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hanson W. Baldwin in a photograph taken in the 1940's.

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 15, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
Old Issue Back With a Bang

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


"GET our economy moving again," President Bush said this week, echoing the theme
of John F. Kennedy's successful campaign against Richard M. Nixon in 1960. Mr.
Nixon blamed the Eisenhower Administration's failure to take strong enough
action to wipe out the recession for his defeat.

A myth exists that Mr. Kennedy, soon after he took over the White House, swiftly
delivered on his pledge to get the country moving again by a big tax cut.
Actually, Mr. Kennedy was slow. Although the economy began to recover a month
after he took office, the unemployment rate, which had been 5.6 percent in 1960,
rose to 6.7 percent in 1961 and held at 5.6 percent in 1962 and 5.7 percent in
1963.

President Kennedy finally accepted the advice of his economic advisers, headed
by Walter W. Heller, and began to campaign for a big tax cut in 1963. He was
assassinated before Congress acted on the proposal. President Lyndon B. Johnson
pushed the $14 billion tax cut through in 1964, and the economy surged. But the
Vietnam buildup thrust it into inflation, which the tax increase of 1967 was too
late to prevent.

When Mr. Nixon gained the Presidency in 1968, defeating Hubert H. Humphrey, he
sought to stop the inflation with a policy of "gradualism," relying on the
Federal Reserve to keep the money supply -- and the economy -- growing slowly.
But recession struck in 1971, and Mr. Nixon, worried about the 1972 election,
pressed the Fed to jazz up the money supply; he also threw in tax cuts, spending
increases and a devalued dollar to drive the economy up and price and wage
controls to hold the inflation down. In 1972, Mr. Nixon was re-elected in a
landslide over George McGovern. But after the election, with price controls
lifted, inflation broke out. The political business cycle rolls on and on. With
last week's elections demonstrating voters' anger over the stagnating economy,
the old issue is back with a bang for 1992: How to stimulate economic growth
without germinating inflation or other economic ills?

Here are the main policy options now:

* Monetary policy. With chronic budget deficits having swollen the national debt
by over $2.5 trillion during the Reagan and Bush years, and fiscal policy
tightly constrained, monetary policy has looked like the only wheel in town. The
Bush Administration has been leaning on the Fed for easier money and credit.
Short-term interest rates are down a lot, long-term rates much less. The money
supply has grown sluggishly, and so has the economy.

Some economists think that thanks to the enormous hangover of public and private
debt, and business and consumer confidence impaired, monetary policy is not
working. The air is full of gloomy metaphors: monetary policy is "pushing on a
string," "driving into a 50-mile-an-hour headwind," "caught in a liquidity
trap." But most economists -- including those around Mr. Bush -- still insist
easier money will work, in time for the election.

* Fiscal policy. Supply-siders are still calling for tax cuts.
Anti-supply-siders say the big Reagan tax cut of 1981, which was turned into a
Christmas tree with the help of Democrats, is the root of the economy's ills,
undermining savings, investment and productivity growth.

President Bush has taken a hesitant line on tax cuts, because of the huge budget
deficit and the budget agreement -- to the loud annoyance of the supply-siders.
But he has urged Congress to enact "I.R.A.'s that are tailored to boost home
ownership," "enterprise zones to spawn a new generation of urban entrepreneurs"
-- and a capital gains tax cut."I believe if it could be done without getting a
lot of baggage on it coming out of the Congress," he said, it "would unleash
investment and get our economy moving again."

* Cheerleading and jawboning. Some critics of Mr. Bush say he should be
restoring business and consumer confidence -- by acting more like Mr. Reagan.
Mr. Bush has, in fact, been jawboning the banks to cut interest rates on credit
cards, urging regulators to take it easy on the banks, coaxing business and
consumers to cheer up.

* Benefits for the hard-hit. Mr. Bush has decided to work with the Democrats for
an extension of unemployment benefits without breaking the budget agreement.

* Restructuring national priorities. The end of the cold war and virtual
disappearance of the Soviet military threat open up the possibility of a bigger
"peace dividend" -- either a bigger cut in the deficit that would reduce capital
costs and spur investment or new civilian programs to improve "human capital,"
increase investment in technology, raise productivity and clean up the
environment. Cutting wasteful "entitlements" or inefficient and costly
health-care policies could make funds available to augment economic growth and
raise living standards. But such shifts in national priorities would take years
to carry out, and would be opposed by strong interest groups.

Yet a serious effort to tackle the nation's long-term social and economic
problems could have a short-run electoral payoff for the candidate who could
articulate it.

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
What Brand Of Laughter Do You Use?

BYLINE: By ROGER ROSENBLATT;  Roger Rosenblatt, the essayist for Life magazine,
opens his first one-man show, "Free Speech in America," today. It is part of the
American Humorists' Series at the American Place Theater.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


Of laughter the types range from the short-lived to the everlasting. The "thanks
for stopping by" laugh is produced by punch lines. Patient: "Doctor, I think I'm
a dog." Doctor: "How long have you thought so?" Patient: "Since I was a puppy."
It is often more lovable but less resonant than the "you know it" laugh that
rolls dry in the throat in response to a joke about politics. The corrective
laugh is more durable still -- the "yesyesyes" that sputter-chuckles in response
to satire. The "oh, no" laugh, which spills in the mouth in response to pathos,
can linger in the mind for years.

But the everlasting laugh is the "I know you" laugh. It orbits the world
propelled by some unseen gravity, and is produced not necessarily by anything
funny that was said, but by the person who said it. The "I know you" laugh is
reserved for people like Mark Twain, James Thurber and S. J. Perelman. Born
somewhere in the area of the soul, it rises through the body like a gusher,
often to explode in a mere smile, shown mainly in the eyes.

The "I know you" laugh responds only to humor, never to comedy. I am slowly
learning the difference between the two.

For that I owe thanks to Wynn Handman, the director of the American Place
Theater, and my director in my first and probably last one-person performance.
Wynn Handman has multiple gifts, but for my purpose his most valuable gift is
that he is out of things. He has never heard of La Toya Jackson; he barely
acknowledges Strom Thurmond and John Sununu; he knows Geraldo and Alan
Dershowitz not. As a result, at our early rehearsals, Wynn never so much as
tittered at my comedic references to those American icons, but instead sat like
a mummy in the empty theater, waiting for me to produce something funny from
inside my life, my experience, my dark amusement at the country, and at him.
Then Wynn would laugh.

Me: "During Vietnam, a Senator from Nebraska made an impassioned speech on the
Senate floor in which he referred throughout to 'Indigo China.' You have to be
in the mood for such a speech."

Wynn: "Fewer jokes. More dimension."

Dimension. That's what I'm learning, the difference between humor and comedy,
between the laugh that lasts forever and the one that evaporates as soon as it
hits air. Humor is giving, and comedy is taking away. Humor is companionable,
comedy cold. Humor is character, comedy personality. Humor is serious. Comedy is
as funny as humor; it's just different.

Ever notice those people who like to tell jokes all the time to assert their
social presence? I know a mean little man whose way of infiltrating clusters of
guests at a party is to tell the latest dirty story. Even when the story is
good, no one likes him better for telling it. His hope, of course, was the
opposite.

Jokes, mere jokes, are a way of putting people off at a distance, and of keeping
oneself at a distance from them. An act of aggression and of self-protection all
in one. You command everybody's attention and nobody's interest.

Whereas the person whose life has integrity, by which I mean a certain
completeness and coordination, can bring us to tears of laughter by a shrug or a
glance. Such a person does not put people off, but draws them in, at least close
enough to say, "Here I am." You know him, he knows you. The "I know you" cuts
two ways. What exactly do you know about each other?

The humorist knows that you are tired, wicked, afraid, frazzled and desperately
alone. He tells you a funny story about all that because he means to give you
power over your menaces.

For your part, you know that within his riffs and turns of phrase he is furious
at the world's crookedness, cruelty, shabbiness and cant, that he uses funny
material to save himself as well as you. Sometimes he grows so bitter as he
walks in the city, he feels he could, at any second, become one of those
self-immolating monks and produce an incandescent moment of pure, feckless right
eousness -- if he had a match. Yet he pours his rage into humor, in part because
he sees he can make you laugh. You save him.

You know him for his anger. He knows you for your pain. You gaze at each other
across the chasm of the book, the screen or the stage and laugh in lieu of . . .
what? Weeping?

The funniest people I know are often unaware of just how ticked off they are
about things until they start to kid around about them. Nature did not build
these people to sputter or preach; instead, in response to the world's
irritations, they create little plays in their minds -- parodies, cartoons,
fantasies. When they see how funny their creations are, they also understand how
really sore they were at their sources. Their anger is a revelation, one that
works backward in the minds of an audience: the audience starts out laughing and
winds up fuming.

And the reason these funniest people do not reach for anger first, I think, is
that they are basically gentle and kind. I do not personally know Richard Pryor,
Robin Williams, Whoopi Goldberg or George Carlin, but I'd bet they are gentle
and kind. Garry Trudeau and Jules Feiffer, whom I do know, are that.

Even Twain, whose life seemed to burn insistently toward a white heat at the
end, must have wished his readers well, even as he would have seen them in hell.
There is much to be said for wishing one's audience well. One wants them to be
livid sometimes, embarrassed often and instructed always, but first and last,
one wishes them well.

The wish may seem mysterious, given all the bile the humorist chews and swallows
in the manufacture of his funny business. But then, laughter is mysterious, too
-- those weird eruptions of noise we come up with, which also sustain us. Like
religion, the power of laughter depends mostly on mystery, on surrendering to
what is equally unknowable and human. This is why I believe the best humorists
are kind. They acknowledge a common helplessness to make things very much
better, even as they try wholeheartedly to make things very much better.

Under the anger and the pain lies that common helplessness, which produces the
"I know you" laugh. Because the helplessness is everlasting, so is the laugh.

My mother is one of the funniest people I know. Or she was, before enduring a
series of strokes that permanently jangled her once-hilarious mind. Yet until
recently she could still evoke the "I know you" laugh with her family. A few
years ago, my wife and I took her to lunch, and I commented that we were having
a nice time.

"Yes," said my mother. "But the next time we go out, we ought to invite Joseph
Cotten." My wife and I searched each other's eyes for an explanation.

"Why, Ma?" I asked.

"Because," said my mother, "Joseph Cotten can tell exactly what part of the
country you came from by your dialect."

"Ma," I said, after guessing whom she was thinking of. "Do you mean Rex Harrison
or Leslie Howard, when they played Professor Higgins? He could identify
everyone's dialect."

My mother rummaged through her muddle. She hated her confusion, and she could
also see how unhappy it made us.

"Oh, yes. You're right," she said, and paused a perfect Jack Benny pause. "But
since we've already invited Joseph Cotten, I don't think it would be right to
renege."

Then she laughed along with us. We laughed a very long time.

At the end of his introduction to "The Thurber Carnival," the author, writing in
the third person, noted that his book was coming out in the darkest moments of
World War II. Thurber wrote: "He presents this to his readers with his sincere
best wishes for a happy new world." Who wouldn't?

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Humor Is Character, Comedy Personality"

Humor

Mark Twain: "Golf is a good walk spoiled." (Mark Twain Memorial)

Richard Pryor: "Why get killed when you can run?"

Lily Tomlin: "If you can't be direct,
why be?" (Orion Classics)

Comedy

Jack Benny: "If it isn't a Stradivarius, I've been robbed
of $110."

Henny Youngman: "I bought my wife a mink outfit. A rifle and a trap." (CBS)

Rita Rudner: "My boyfriend and I broke up. He wanted to get married, and I
didn't want him to." (James Schnepf/HBO)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

James Caan Rises From the Ashes of His Career

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1700 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


James Caan glances around the dimly lit living room of the big rustic home in
Bel Air that he has just sold. The actor built the house years ago at the peak
of his career; it is a movie star's home, richly paneled and filled with leather
furniture and cluttered with Western-style paintings and reproductions of
Remington statues. One of the actor's former wives said something unprintable
about the masculine nature of this place. "It's the one funny thing she ever
said," Mr. Caan remarks with a laugh.

Giving up the house and its often vivid, painful memories and trying again to
accommodate his new family is, for Mr. Caan, a metaphor for renewing himself. At
51, he is at an age when most movie actors find it virtually impossible to
revive their careers. But Mr. Caan, whose personal and professional life
crumbled in the 1980's, who virtually disappeared from the screen, has suddenly
returned to the Hollywood mainstream, held in the same regard as his actor
friends Al Pacino and Dustin Hoffman and Robert Duvall.

Advance word on his co-starring performance opposite Bette Midler in the
big-budget musical saga "For the Boys" has given an extraordinary boost to a
moribund career that was jump-started last year by "Misery." The film, directed
by Mark Rydell, opens Friday, after lavish publicity and strong favorable
reaction from preview audiences. Mr. Caan is enjoying it all: he has been
mentioned as an Academy Award nominee, "friends" he hasn't heard from in years
are calling ("Typical," he says with a laugh), and new scripts are arriving.
"They're from 20th Century Fox and Universal," he says. "It used to be Podunk
Productions.

"Thank God," he adds quietly. "The No. 1 luxury of success is being able to
choose the director you want to work with." He pauses. "There was a pretty scary
period there for me. A pretty dead period. I missed a decade."

In "For the Boys," Mr. Caan portrays a song-and-dance man named Eddie Sparks, a
U.S.O. performer who teams up with a character named Dixie Leonard (Ms. Midler)
in the early days of World War II. The film covers half a century. They
entertain troops through the advent of television and the McCarthy era, through
Korea and Vietnam. The two become show business legends. The Caan character, as
written, is a faintly sleazy figure, compulsively unfaithful, forced to yield to
the Communist witchhunt and betray a friend. As performed by Mr. Caan, however,
Sparks is multidimensional, weak but compassionate.

"Somehow Jimmy's acting never shows," says Ms. Midler. "Believe me, his acting
school is so much better than mine. Mine is a school of mugging. He has a more
languid way of working. And everything he does is very small -- he's a master of
the small gesture, the flickering eyelash; everything was exquisitely right.

"He has all these deep layers of macho stuff; he's very boisterous, very
outgoing, but then you work with him and get him in a corner, and you realize
he's very smart and very sensitive."

Ms. Midler, whose company, All Girl Productions, produced the film, acknowledges
that she was reluctant to cast Mr. Caan in the movie and did so only at the
insistence of Mr. Rydell. "I had cast the role in my mind 100 times," she says.
"Mark insisted. I was skeptical. I remembered him from 'Godfather' and 'Gardens
of Stone' and 'Misery.' Real tough. Then I looked at 'Funny Lady' and 'Harry and
Walter Go to New York.' He was hilarious. Mark told me that Jimmy was the most
underrated actor in America. I said O.K."

Ms. Midler's reluctance was prompted by Mr. Caan's reputation as difficult and
temperamental and his well-known bout with what he calls "craziness" in the late
1970's and early 1980's. The bitter breakup of two marriages, poor career moves,
emotional depression, highly publicized bouts with cocaine, money problems and a
family tragedy left him devastated.

Today, the actor is married to his third wife, Ingrid Caan, a Queens-born pastry
chef with whom he has a 6-month-old son, Alexander. Another son, Scott, 15,
lives with him; he also has a daughter, Tara, 17, who lives in Phoenix.

Back then, he acknowledges, his days were spent coaching Scott's soccer and
basketball teams, and too many nights were spent dating Playboy bunnies.
Finally, he turned reclusive, until Francis Coppola, Rob Reiner and Mr. Rydell,
directors who are old friends, stepped in to help salvage his career. "My real
friends never quit on me," Mr. Caan says.

Mr. Rydell has known Mr. Caan since the 1960's, when both were actors in New
York. "He's one of the four or five best actors in America," says Mr. Rydell.
"There are very few actors who could have played this part -- a megalomaniacal,
entertaining, charming and complicated character. I needed someone to carry
their weight against as giant a talent as Bette Midler."

Mr. Rydell says it was crucial to solidify the personal relationship between Ms.
Midler and Mr. Caan before filming began. So, over Ms. Midler's strong
objections, Mr. Rydell insisted that the two spend four months, eight hours a
day, learning to tap dance. "She wanted to do it alone; she didn't want to be
embarrassed," says Mr. Rydell. "I knew this would be a perfect crucible for
their relationship. Everyone's very awkward. They're making mistakes in front of
each other. She relies on him. He relies on her. I knew a relationship of trust
would develop."

Ms. Midler says with a laugh: "It was torture. Both of us were overweight. We
both lost 20 pounds. I was ashamed of the way I looked. I was so self-conscious
in leotards. I looked horrible. Yeah, it was a binding experience."

If Mr. Caan had a reputation as a difficult actor, he is also blunt and
engaging, a man who speaks about his troubled career and life without self-pity.
"I don't want to talk about the great art I once did -- there wasn't any," he
says. "It wasn't that I did bad pictures. I just banished myself for a while."

Few actors in the 1970's emerged so quickly as a major star as Mr. Caan did
after his portrayal of Sonny Corleone, the swaggering, violent, doomed son in
Mr. Coppola's "Godfather." Before "The Godfather," he had appeared on and Off
Broadway and in television series ranging from "Wagon Train" and "Ben Casey" to
"The Untouchables" and "Alfred Hitchcock Presents."

After more than 20 years of living in California Mr. Caan still speaks in the
accents of New York: he was born in the Bronx and raised in Queens, where his
family owned a kosher meat market. To escape the family business -- "the meat
market was looming closer and closer" -- he aimed for a pro football career but
was too small to make the team when he went to Michigan State. To be closer to
home, he transferred to Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y., but left to take
acting lessons at the Neighborhood Playhouse in New York City, where he met Mr.
Rydell. "I was a class clown," he said. "The appeal that acting had for me was:
there I was, center stage."

The year 1972 was the high watermark of his career. He was nominated for an
Academy Award for "The Godfather" and won an Emmy for his television performance
as Brian Piccolo, the Chicago Bears' running back doomed by cancer in "Brian's
Song."

In the next decade, Mr. Caan was offered an array of major roles that he turned
down, including parts in such films as "Kramer vs. Kramer" ("it was such
middle-class, bourgeois baloney"), "Apocalypse Now," "Superman," "M*A*S*H" and
"One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest."

If Mr. Caan's rejections were unfortunate for his career, his choices were even
more unfortunate. Although he appeared in some films of which he is proud --
such as "Cinderella Liberty," also directed by Mr. Rydell, as well as "Thief"
and "The Gambler" -- there were numerous flops. He walked off the set of one
movie, "The Holcroft Covenant" and was replaced by Michael Caine. He says his
one directorial effort, "Hide in Plain Sight," was marred when "some jerk" at
United Artists altered the movie.

"There are pictures I made that I still haven't seen," he says. "I was depressed
when I was making them. In the middle of some of these pictures, I kept
thinking, 'What am I doing here?' It's like you're in a hallway and you can't
get out."

Beyond this, his personal life unraveled. The death of his sister, Barbara, at
38, after a prolonged battle with leukemia, left him feeling vulnerable and
despondent. "She was like my best friend, my manager," says Mr. Caan, recalling
that she lived close by, ran his production company and "was the only person I
was afraid of."

"After Barbara died, I realized passion is such an important thing to have in
life because it ends so soon, and my passion was to grow up with my son," he
says.

Those nights, in the 70's and early 80's, he partied, and his reputation for
cocaine use was well known in Hollywood. He speaks about his cocaine use
haltingly. "First you have peer pressure," he says. "You have parties. I was
single. There were girls. That was the way to get girls.

"I went through it, but not to the degree you've heard about. I wish I had done
half the things people said I did."

Facing money problems, even the possible loss of his house, Mr. Caan tried to
return to work. In 1987 he was seen in Mr. Coppola's "Gardens of Stone," in
which he plays a tough sergeant chafing under burial duty at Arlington National
Cemetery during the Vietnam War. He was then in "Alien Nation," which he shrugs
off. Last year, he finally returned with a major hit, Rob Reiner's "Misery." The
adaptation of the Stephen King work, about a bedridden novelist taken hostage by
a crazed fan (Kathy Bates), was initially intended for Warren Beatty, who
dropped out because he was working on "Dick Tracy."

Mr. Caan is now playing a starring role in a new film, "Honeymoon in Vegas," a
comedy written and directed by Andrew Bergman. His immediate priority, he says
with a laugh, is finding a house in which to start all over again with his new
family. In response to the suggestion that his life and career seem to
contradict F. Scott Fitzgerald's observation that there are no second acts in
American lives, he says:

"Yeah, it's unusual to have a second act.

"Especially in this town."

NAME: James Caan

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Caan as the song-and-dance man Eddie Sparks in "For the
Boys" (Francois Duhamel/20th Century Fox) (pg. 13); Bette Midler and James Caan
in "For the Boys"--They spent eight hours a day together for four months,
learning to tap dance. "I knew a relationship of trust would develop," the
director says. (Franois Duhamel/20th Century Fox) (pg. 22)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
'Repatriation' Is the Trend For Refugees Worldwide

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 996 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


REFUGEES have almost always been seen as innocents adrift. With the end of the
cold war, the question is being asked, can they go home again?

In the vast archipelago of the displaced, which runs from the arid camps of
Malawi and Eritrea through the rocky slopes of Pakistan to the tent cities in
the jungles of Thailand, a new word is being heard: repatriation. Depending on
who among the world's 18.3 million refugees hears it, it means going home, going
to a place that can never be home again, or being forced back to the things once
fled from.

Repatriation is the word of choice among relief organizations whose tired
workers have begun to hope that the long years of regional struggles that drove
people from their homes would come to an end as the conflict between East and
West began to fade away. But the word may not be so welcome for Vietnamese in
Hong Kong being forced on planes to Hanoi, or for Haitians in flight from the
military junta, only to be left in new holding facilities at the United States
Naval base in Guantanamo Bay.

"Ninety-nine percent of the refugees in the world want to go home," said Sylvana
Foa, a spokeswoman for Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner on
Refugees. "People don't give up their culture, home, friends and belongings
lightly." Last month, Mrs. Ogata declared her hope that 1992 will be "the year
of repatriation."

For the United States, this change in the international approach to refugees is
both welcome and discomfiting. The United States used to have an easy rule of
thumb for deciding who was a refugee. A person fleeing Communism was almost
automatically considered by the State Department to have "a well-founded fear of
persecution," the 1951 United Nations language that became the legal definition
of a refugee. But a person fleeing civil strife in El Salvador or Haiti was more
likely to be an "economic migrant" seeking access to a better standard of
living. The former could be nurtured; the latter deported. Now the old refugees
from Communism may have become the new "economic migrants" in flight from
economic disaster.

Most of the United States' refugee expenditures over those years have gone to
resettling fugitives from Communism. Between the fall of Saigon in 1975 and the
collapse of Soviet Communism in 1991, the United States admitted 1 million
Asians, almost all of them Vietnamese, Cambodian or Laotian. Most of the rest of
the 1.5 million admissions in that 16-year period consisted of 250,000 from the
Soviet Union, 100,000 from Eastern Europe and at least 20,000 from Afghanistan.

Different Priorities

Yet the number of refugees from countries like Vietnam and Cambodia -- those the
United States has been most likely to take in -- is dwarfed by the number
fleeing regional conflicts. Estimates by the United Nations and private groups
indicate that Africa has 5.4 million refugees, most from conflicts in Ethiopia,
Mozambique, Liberia and the Sudan. There are more than 9 million in the Middle
East and South Asia, including 4 to 5 million Afghans. About 135,000 Kurds are
still refugees, the last of 1.5 million who fled Saddam Hussein's troops. In
East Asia, refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos and Burma total perhaps
600,000.

Now other voices, like those of the British Government and the administration in
Hong Kong, are saying that many in the latest wave of Vietnamese boat people are
not southerners fearing persecution from old Communist enemies, but northerners
who simply want a better life. These "economic migrants," they say, should be
encouraged to go home voluntarily. If they do not, British and Hong Kong
authorities argue, they are just as eligible for deportation as are Haitians and
Salvadorans who attempt to flee to the United States.

These attitudes led to some unsettling images last week: weeping Vietnamese in
Hong Kong being dragged onto a plane back to Hanoi, small boatloads of Haitians
held on Coast Guard vessels.

American officials, who have condemned the military junta that ousted President
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, are clearly more reluctant to deport these latest
Haitian migrants than they were to send home the earlier waves of "economic
migrants" whose boats landed on Florida beaches in the 1980's.

"There are two aspects to repatriation: involuntary and voluntary," said Susan
Forbes Martin of the Refugee Policy Group in Washington. "The question of
involuntary return, in cases like Vietnam and Haiti, involves whether and how
you return people who don't meet the formal definition of a refugee. They
haven't left for political reasons but for equally troubling reasons.

"It might be a combination of pervasive repression, human rights abuses,
deep-seated poverty or ethnic abuses," she said. "If you look at Haiti and
Vietnam, you can't say it's pure economics and you can't say it's a pure refugee
situation either. People may not be able to claim they have a well-founded fear
of persecution, but they may have a well-founded fear of death."

The British argued that they had won guarantees from the Vietnamese Government
that there would be no reprisals against those returning. The Bush
Administration, with the angry voices of previous Vietnamese refugees ringing in
its ears, voiced disagreement with the policy in the diplomatic equivalent of a
whisper.

Voluntary repatriation, internationally monitored and with international support
for shattered economies, "clearly is a perferred solution," said David
Whittlesey, chief of the Division of Asia and Oceana for the International
Organization for Migration, an independent group in Geneva. But, he said,
"repatriation is going to be difficult in a situation like Cambodia," where
fields are mined and the water is malarial.

"Another problem," he said, "is repatriation to what? The infrastructures have
been severely damaged. Can repatriation precede the rebuilding of the
infrastructure? Can you rebuild the infrastructure without repatriation?"

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Origins of refugees in the U.S." shows countries leading in
refugee admissions in the U.S. for 1987 and 1991. (Source: Bureau for Refugee
Programs, State Department)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting the John Wayne Syndrome

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 12; Column 4; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


IT has variously been called battle fatigue, shell shock and the Vietnam
syndrome. But more recently psychologists are using the term post-traumatic
stress to describe the disorder.

Whatever the term, the symptoms are often the same: flashbacks, nightmares,
intrusive memories of a painful event, inability to concentrate, irritability
and problems with relationships.

Its victims, suffering from what some have termed the John Wayne syndrome, often
keep their feelings to themselves and attempt to deal with their problems alone,
experts in the field say. Among the most likely to suffer from the disorder are
armed forces personnel, emergency medical technicians, police officers and
firefighters.

"We're talking about the people who very regularly face life-threatening
situations, who experience things out of the range of normal human experience,"
said W. James Cosse, a Hartsdale psychologist.

A New Group Is Trained

County firefighters, realizing the need to deal with the stresses of their jobs
and the importance of heading off serious emotional problems among their ranks,
recently formed the Westchester County Paid Firefighters' Critical Incident
Debriefing Team.

Twenty-three men -- representing firefighters from Mount Vernon, New Rochelle,
White Plains and Yonkers -- have been trained by Dr. Cosse to recognize the
symptoms of stress disorder and to help fellow firefighters who have been
traumatized in the line of duty.

"We attempt to get behind the big tough-guy facades that often mask the real
feelings inside," said Dr. Cosse, who also does critical-incident counseling
with the Scarsdale Police Department.

During four training sessions, each lasting three hours, Dr. Cosse taught
peer-counseling skills to members of the debriefing team so they could help
colleagues deal with the difficult range of emotions that often follows intense
rescue efforts.

'We're the Heroes'

"Historically, we're the heroes who aren't supposed to hurt or feel pain or be
affected by the things we see, when in reality many of us are being torn apart
inside," said Lieut. Roy Miserindino, coordinator of the debriefing unit and a
member of the Mount Vernon Fire Department.

Lieutenant Miserindino recalled an incident 10 years ago in Yonkers when
firefighters knew there were children trapped inside a building but were
uncertain about how to reach them.

"They had to decide which room to go to, and they ended up going to the wrong
room," Lieutenant Miserindino said. "The bottom line was that the children were
in a room that no one could get to. But that's not what the guys remembered
afterward. They only could think that somehow they made a mistake, that somehow
they failed."

The symptoms of post-traumatic stress often follow the death of a co-worker in
the line of duty, the death of a civilian -- especially a child -- or the death
of a victim despite heroic lifesaving efforts. But firefighters, instead of
talking out their feelings, traditionally keep their emotions to themselves,
said Lieutenant Miserindino, who holds a master's degree in psychology and is a
licensed alcohol counselor.

Drinking Instead of Talking

He said firefighters often think it is a sign of weakness to talk about their
disappointments or share feelings of sadness.

"Instead, a common thing after a rough night is to go out and have a few
drinks," Lieutenant Miserindino said. "We're talking about an inherently
high-stress job and lots of high blood pressure, heart attacks and not always
the most constructive ways of working out feelings."

Lieut. Peter Mitchell, a member of the Yonkers Fire Department who began efforts
to form the countywide debriefing team, said firefighters were "finally
realizing that it's time for the John Wayne syndrome to go out the back door."

"I've been on the job 32 years," he said, "and I've seen too many burning
bodies. We're learning that you can't just stuff memories and feelings in the
back of your mind and hope they will go away."

"We want to help the newer people," Lieutenant Mitchell said. "We want to give
them a leg up and teach them aspects of this job that aren't taught in the
regular training classes."

Sharing in the Feelings

Mr. Cosse, hired to teach the firefighters peer-counseling techniques, was paid
$2,000 from the fire departments and local firefighters' unions. He taught
members of the debriefing team the technique of empathetic mirroring, in which
the peer counselor, he said, "shares in a nonjudgmental way the feelings a
traumatized firefighter is experiencing."

Peer counselors are taught to help fellow firefighters express feelings of
guilt, personal failure and fright. And generally, once the feelings are
expressed and understood by colleagues, "the cycle of loneliness" is broken,
said Mr. Cosse, who has written a manual on recognizing and helping victims of
post-traumatic stress disorder.

The debriefing team is also taught to recognize when peer counseling is not
working and professional psychological help is needed, Mr. Cosse added.

The Verdict Is Not In

"The verdict's not in on whether this concept is going to work in the long run,"
said Duncan T. MacRae, president of Local 274 of the International Association
of Firefighters and executive vice president of the New York State Professional
Firefighters Association.

"But the concept of stress debriefing is growing across the country," he said.
"It's peers dealing with peers, and because of that the menfeel they can relate,
share their feelings and not hold everything inside in the old stereotypical
way."

In the past, the Yonkers Fire Department has called in debriefing teams from
other areas to assist after traumatic incidents.

Three years ago, when two local firefighters fell through a stairwell and were
severely burned, the department called in a debriefing team from Fort Lee, N.J.,
the team that was used to help firefighters deal with the aftermath of a deadly
car dealership fire in Hackensack. Two years ago, a team from the New York City
Fire Department visited Yonkers after firefighters, many of them new to the
force, saw many people die in a tenement fire.

The Time Had Come

"We decided the time had come to form our own unit," Lieutenant Mitchell said.
"We had seen peer counseling work elsewhere, and we thought we could do it for
ourselves."

The Westchester debriefing team, in place since July, is composed of four units
that rotate weekly shifts of being on call. The team is available to help any of
the county's 1,200 or so paid firefighters, said Richard J. Nestro, Fifth
District vice president of the New York State Professional Firefighters of the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. There is one paid female firefighter in the union, he said. The
program could be made available to volunteer firefighters for special
emergencies, Dr. Cosse said.

"This isn't a new concept," the lieutenant said. "But it's new for us. No one is
ever trained for the kinds of things we see in our work. And if we can help
another firefighter cope with some of the feelings that go along with this kind
of job, then it will be worth it."

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Collapse of Clifford & Warnke

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17


The law office of Clifford & Warnke, with its stunning views overlooking the
White House, has for more than 20 years been a place where America's corporate
leaders, baffled by the workings of Washington, have come for high-priced
guidance.

The firm's main draw, without a doubt, has been the reputation of Clark M.
Clifford, a former Defense Secretary and informal adviser to Democratic
Presidents, a man whose studied courtliness well matched the wood-paneled,
faintly English ambience of the place.

But Mr. Clifford's late-in-life association with the Bank of Credit and Commerce
International, a largely unregulated international bank accused of money
laundering and other crimes, has not only damaged his own reputation for
integrity but has resulted in the destruction of his once-prosperous law firm.

Stock Deal Said to Be the Downfall

The disclosure in May of a stock deal in which Mr. Clifford and his junior
partner, Robert A. Altman, made a profit of nearly $10 million in less than two
years -- with B.C.C.I.'s help -- was the trigger that resulted in Clifford &
Warnke's collapse this month, several lawyers in and out of the firm said.

The details of that stock deal shook many of the firm's lawyers' confidence in
Mr. Clifford. And while the firm's other well-known partner, Paul C. Warnke,
never wavered in his faith in Mr. Clifford's integrity, he told his colleagues
this spring that the deal meant the scandal that had enveloped Mr. Clifford and
Mr. Altman was not going to go away. It was time, he said, for all of them to
look elsewhere for their futures.

Now Clifford & Warnke's offices are available for leasing ("Available within 30
days!" trumpets a real estate flier), the firm's partners and associates are
scattering and the capital's legal community is shaken by the spectacle of the
shattered institution.

Clifford & Warnke was formed 22 years ago by Mr. Clifford and his former
assistant at the Defense Department, Mr. Warnke, a pioneer of the modern science
of arms control. Mr. Warnke had forged a close friendship with Mr. Clifford when
they were among the senior policy advisers fighting to convince President Lyndon
B. Johnson that he should end the Vietnam War.

But in recent years, Mr. Clifford, who will soon turn 85, grew closer to his
protege, Robert A. Altman. The firm, many lawyers said, began to be identified
less as Clifford and Warnke than as Clifford and Altman.

The unraveling of Clifford & Warnke had in fact begun in January when the
Federal Reserve said it had discovered that B.C.C.I. held a secret controlling
interest in Washington's largest bank holding company, First American
Bankshares.

In 1981, Federal regulators had approved the sale of First American to 14 Middle
Eastern shareholders, largely on the ironclad assurances of the shareholders'
lawyer, Mr. Clifford, that neither B.C.C.I. nor anyone else would have any
hidden interest in the bank. It was an assurance Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman
would repeat over the years.

Mr. Clifford, who in his career has turned down offers of nomination to the
Supreme Court and to become Secretary of State, was exuberant at being named
chairman of First American, friends said. Mr. Altman became the bank's
president. Clifford & Warnke continued to prosper, representing both First
American and B.C.C.I., accounts that brought in millions of dollars that were
divided among the firm's 17 lawyers.

But in the months after the disclosure in January that First American was
secretly controlled by B.C.C.I., the mood became anxious at Clifford & Warnke.
There were pained discussions with Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman about just what
their relationship was with the Middle Eastern money men who controlled B.C.C.I.

None of the lawyers interviewed would allow themselves to be quoted, but all
agreed that the May disclosure of the highly lucrative stock deal financed by
B.C.C.I. was an epiphany of sorts, hastening the determination of many lawyers
to leave the firm.

In the months before that disclosure, the lawyers generally spoke politely of
the banking affair in a way that accepted Mr. Clifford's and Mr. Altman's
explanation that they were ignorant of B.C.C.I.'s secret interest in First
American. In that version, Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman were duped by the
Pakistani founder of B.C.C.I., Aga Hassan Abedi, who has been indicted by the
United States Justice Department and a New York grand jury on fraud and other
charges.

But even that explanation was discomfiting, said one lawyer at the firm. Clark
Clifford's reputation -- and thus his value to the firm -- was grounded in a
belief that no one could grasp a situation as well as he.

Mr. Clifford was a towering figure on the Washington scene for nearly half a
century. He had masterminded Harry S. Truman's come-from-behind victory in the
1948 election and had gone on special diplomatic missions for other Presidents.
Mr. Altman, in contrast, had done little in his adult life but practice law
under Mr. Clifford.

Over the years, Mr. Altman picked up some of Mr. Clifford's trademark habits,
like putting his hands together at the fingertips during conversation, a gesture
so identified with his mentor that it is known as "the Clifford steeple."

Many attitudes at the firm changed with the May disclosure of the stock deal. As
further details emerged, there was a rapid and stunning loss of faith among some
colleagues. "Many of us felt let down," one lawyer said.

A Report of B.C.C.I. Manipulation

The Fed reported that the entire transaction, from start to finish, was
manipulated by B.C.C.I. Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman bought the stock with a loan
from B.C.C.I. on highly favorable terms.

The shares became available in July 1988, Federal investigators reported, after
B.C.C.I. arranged for a First American shareholder to waive his right to buy
them at a special insider's price. And 19 months later, B.C.C.I. found a buyer
willing to pay nearly three times as much for the Clifford and Altman stock.

The buyer was a small-time moneylender in Beirut, whose purchase was bankrolled
by a shadowy B.C.C.I. affiliate, investigators said.

At the same time that Clifford & Warnke was not getting much new business, it
lost its lucrative account with First American. And the bank's board forced the
resignations of Mr. Clifford and Mr. Altman from their executive posts.

Some of the lawyers at Clifford & Warnke stepped up their negotiations to join
other law firms. Ralph J. Savarese, the managing partner at Howrey & Simon, was
quick to open discussions with Harold Murry, the managing partner at Clifford &
Warnke.

Mr. Savarese was also openly covetous of Clifford & Warnke's clients, which
include Eastman Kodak, Knight-Ridder, Phillips Petroleum and other blue-chip
corporations. "They are the quality type of clients we want," he said in a
statement.

The negotiations expected to conclude this month will probably bring about 10
lawyers from Mr. Clifford's firm to Howrey & Simon. Most of the other lawyers
will probably end up at other firms.

Mr. Clifford, in a statement through a lawyer representing him in Federal and
New York state criminal investigations, said he would carry on as an attorney.

But what will remain of the law practice may be only himself and his protege,
finally making the firm truly Clifford & Altman.

NAME: Clark M. Clifford

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Clark M. Clifford's association with B.C.C.I. has not only
damaged his own reputation for integrity but has resulted in the destruction of
his once-prosperous law firm. He posed in his office in April. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 18, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Teetering on the Brink of Stardom

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 17


Larry Fishburne spends most of his time working in Los Angeles, but he lives
with his wife and small children in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.

"I grew up in Park Slope but can't afford to live there now," he says with a
gentle laugh.

But isn't he a movie actor on the edge of stardom? "I'm not a movie star," the
30-year-old actor says, his laugh deepening. "At least not yet!"

For Mr. Fishburne, the role of Furious Styles, the proud, struggling father of a
teen-ager in "Boyz N the Hood" last summer, was a major career breakthrough that
has since then placed him in the front ranks of black actors.

Roles on Stage and Screen

Mr. Fishburne has just finished his first starring role, in "Deep Cover,"
produced by New Line Cinema. The recently completed film is about an undercover
policeman who becomes entwined with the drug dealers he is pursuing. The film is
to be released in the spring. He is also set to start rehearsals in Los Angeles
next month for a lead role in August Wilson's new play, "Two Trains Running,"
which is to open at the Walter Kerr Theater in New York on April 13, after a
long run at the Doolittle Theater here.

"What's happened is all of a sudden my name is on a lot of people's lips," Mr.
Fishburne says. "It's nice. It's weird. When I first read 'Boyz' I cried. It
could have been about some kids in Warsaw, Poland. I knew it was good, but I had
no idea what it would do to me. Of course, I've been doing this for a long, long
time."

Mr. Fishburne grew up working in films and television and, unlike most actors,
black or white, he acknowledges that he has never really struggled for jobs. In
Park Slope, his mother, Hattie, now a retired junior high school teacher, pushed
him into professional acting at the age of 10, while his father, Laurence, who
is still a New York City correction officer, took him to movies.

"Everybody else had a big family and couldn't afford to go to movies," he said.
"I was an only child, so I went."

Worked on 'Pee-wee's Playhouse'

He appeared in productions at the New Federal Theater and the Negro Ensemble
Theater in Manhattan, and he worked for four years on the television soap opera
"One Life to Live" and for several years on "Pee-wee's Playhouse," with Pee-wee
Herman. But the formative professional experience of his youth, he said, was
being cast at the age of 14 as a young soldier in Francis Ford Coppola's Vietnam
War epic "Apocalypse Now." The film was largely made in the Philippines over a
turbulent two-year period.

"You can imagine: I was 14 years old; I was impressionable; I was innocent," Mr.
Fishburne said. "When I came back two years later, that was gone. It was my
adolescence. It was like, in my head, I was a Vietnam veteran. People kind of
went insane there. It had a profound effect."

His mother accompanied him on location for the shooting and sought to keep up
her son's education. But Mr. Fishburne said, shaking his head, "It affected me
deeply, deeply." Professionally, Mr. Fishburne said, he learned how to act. "The
people on that movie were my teachers: Coppola, Brando, Robert Duvall, Martin
Sheen, the cinematographer Vittorio Storaro."

Getting Parts on His Own

Upon his return, the young actor attended Lincoln Square Academy in New York
City and almost immediately began working on television and in movies. His film
credits include "Red Heat," "The Color Purple," "School Daze," "The Cotton
Club," "Rumble Fish" and "Gardens of Stone." Two films that he takes special
pride in are "King of New York" and "Class Action." In each movie he plays a
colleague to the star, Christopher Walken in the first and Gene Hackman in the
other, in roles that were not initially written for a black actor. After
auditioning for the parts, Mr. Fishburne was given the roles.

Mr. Fishburne says that in the last decade roles for black actors have opened
up. He adds: "More things are being written for black actors, more films are
being made, there are more black directors. The market has opened up to black
faces in a way that it hasn't for a long time. I'm not one to question why. I'm
grateful."

He says he believes older black actors, who have struggled all their lives, are
ambivalent about the success of their younger counterparts like Denzel
Washington, Mario Van Peebles and himself, who are in their 20's and 30's.

"It's only natural for some actors to be angry and envious and proud," he said.
"They must also get some satisfaction, too. People like Denzel or Mario or me or
other people having a chance to step up to the plate like they never did. I know
it hurts these people. It's got to hurt. You can feel it when you meet them.
There were some wonderful actors in the 50's and 60's, incredible black actors
who were ahead of their time. These cats want you to know. It hurts."

Following the Work

Mr. Fishburne says he is reluctantly considering moving to Los Angeles with his
wife, Hajna, and their 4-year-old son and infant daughter because "this is where
the work is." He speaks of his mother, who started his career, with fondness and
a hint of humor.

"She wants me to be a big star, a really big star," he said. "She wanted me to
make records, to sing. I said no. I didn't want to be a big star. I wanted to be
a really good actor. My mother is quite a woman. She would push me and when I
got tired of her pushing, I'd say: 'Leave me alone. Don't push so much.' "

"She's very proud of me, but she's mad she doesn't get all the credit," Mr.
Fishburne said, laughing. "I can't give her all the credit, but I give her a
lot. I didn't have much of a childhood, but that's O.K. I have a livelihood."

NAME: Larry Fishburne

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larry Fishburne (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Coffee Shortage

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 16; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 74 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Nov. 18


Because of a severe shortage of hard currency, the Soviet Union plans no coffee
imports for 1992. The Tass press agency said today that the Soviet Union had
signed no contracts for coffee imports for 1992 and Soviet coffee-processing
plants might shut down because of a lack of deliveries for the rest of 1991. It
said the Soviet Union had received only 50,000 metric tons of the 80,000 tons
contracted from India, Vietnam and Laos this year.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
New Mastercard Post To Experienced Banker

BYLINE: By JONATHAN P. HICKS

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 383 words


Mastercard International Inc. said yesterday that it had named William T.
Sandalls, vice chairman and chief financial officer of Bay Banks Inc., Boston,
to the new position of chief operating officer.

The company, which said that Mr. Sandalls would join Mastercard in December,
added that he would have responsibility for the company's global payment system
and would report directly to Alex W. Hart, the company's president and chief
executive.

At Bay Banks, Mr. Sandalls, who is 47, has worked in a variety of management
assignments, including posts in data processing, operations and employee
benefits. He also directed the development of the company's business strategies
in electronic banking, interstate banking and mergers and acquisitions. Mr.
Sandalls, who is also a certified public accountant, went to Bay Banks in 1974
after working with Arthur Andersen & Company. He has been a member of the board
of Mastercard since 1988.

In an interview yesterday, Mr. Sandalls expressed concern that the measure
approved by the Senate to limit credit card interest rates to 14 percent would
bring a sharp reduction in the availability of credit cards, which could disrupt
the economy.

"From my experience as a banker, I think that having freely competitive markets
is important, and to put arbitrary constraints on markets -- however politically
appealing that might be -- in the long run does a great disservice to
consumers," he said. "I think there is a problem with this kind of last-minute
legislative effort to score political points."

On his new duties at Mastercard, Mr. Sandalls said he planned to work on the
company's plans to develop a debit card and to help Mastercard, which is second
behind Visa in the number of card holders. "I want to work to make Mastercard
the preferred method of payment," he added. "Mastercard is doing well and
growing very vigorously, particularly internationally. I want to work to
continue that."

Mr. Sandalls is a graduate of Yale University and received an M.B.A. from the
Harvard Business School. He served as a naval officer from 1966 to 1970 with
assignments in Vietnam and Washington. Mr. Sandalls is also chairman of Cirrus
Syetem Inc., the international electronic banking network. He is married and has
a son and a daughter.

NAME: William T. Sandalls

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William T. Sandalls Jr., Mastercard International (Mastercard
International)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S.-Hanoi Talks Set On Normal Relations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 18


Top officials from the United States and Vietnam on Thursday will hold the first
of a series of talks on establishing normal relations, the State Department said
today.

Assistant Secretary of State Richard Solomon will head the American delegation
at the talks in New York; the Vietnamese will be led by Deputy Foreign Minister
Le Mai.

Last month, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said that the mood of
reconciliation in Cambodia opened the way for talks with Vietnam on normal
relations. Also cited was a more cooperative attitude by Hanoi on providing an
accounting for Americans missing in action since the Indochina war.

Today, the department's deputy spokesman, Richard Boucher, reaffirmed that "the
pace and scope of normalization will be directly influenced by Vietnam's
cooperation on the POW-MIA and other humanitarian issues."

Mr. Boucher said the meeting would be the first in a series of talks with
Vietnam on general and technical issues related to normalization.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Court Halts Expulsion of Haitians As Hundreds More Leave for U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


A Federal judge in Miami ordered a five-day stay today in the forced return of
Haitians trying to flee to the United States by boat, as hundreds more Haitians
put to sea. The ruling came only hours after a second group of Haitians
numbering over 300 were returned to the island.

The United States resumed a decade-old policy of returning Haitians on Monday,
after a period of relaxation following a military coup on Sept. 30 that ousted
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide. The State Department says that 538 Haitians
have been returned in the last two days. Only 53 in the present exodus have been
given asylum.

Despite the forced repatriations, the flight from Haiti increased suddenly in
the last 24 hours. The Coast Guard said that 650 more Haitians were picked up
today, the largest number to date, and that the total number of refugees in
American custody had passed the 3,000 mark. Coast Guard officials said they
feared that news of the stay order would encourage many others to flee, and that
many would drown.

'It Was Sinking'

Thirteen Coast Guard cutters were circling choppy Caribbean waters in six-foot
waves today. The ships are laden with Haitians plucked from the sea, including
more than a hundred people saved today in a dramatic rescue by the cutter
Northland.

"It was a small sailing vessel with over 100 people on board," said Lieut. James
Howe, a Coast Guard spokesman in Miami. "It was sinking right before the Coast
Guard vessel's eyes."

The Federal district court issued its temporary restraining order in a
class-action filed on behalf of 1,600 Haitian emigres by the private Haitian
Refugee Center in Miami, which asserts that most if not all of the refugees
might be eligible for political asylum. The center's director, Rolande Dorancy,
said in an interview that the judge, Donald Graham, had also called for a full
hearing at the end of the stay. United States Government lawyers were reported
considering an appeal.

Legal questions about the jurisdiction of the district court in this case along
with other issues raised by American actions taken on the high seas are
reportedly being considered tonight by lawyers in several Government departments
and on Congressional staffs.

Today a State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, defended the
Administration policy, saying, "We have seen no history of any persecution of
boat people returned to Haiti."

Mr. Boucher brushed aside a comparison of Washington's treatment of Haitian and
its criticism of Britain's policy of forced repatriation of Vietnamese boat
people in Hong Kong. Several members of Congress have described the decade-old
Haitian repatriation policy as racially or politically motivated.

"The legal status is different, the country conditions are different and the
political and social conditions in the countries -- those which have a bearing
on asylum -- are different," Mr. Boucher said of Haiti and Vietnam.

The Bush Administration's decision to send back families who are fleeing an
extremely volatile political situation in Haiti after the coup is provoking an
outcry in Congress. A hearing by the House Judiciary Subcommittee on
International Law, Immigration and Refugees will be held Wednesday morning.
Administration officials, the Coast Guard, Haitian organizations, human-rights
groups and a panel of concerned members of Congress will testify.

The United States has rejected two personal pleas from the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Sadako Ogata, according to Arthur C. Helton of the
Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.

"The decision to return boat people can only seriously undermine any prospects
of a viable regional approach," Mr. Helton said, referring to tentative steps
taken by Caribbean countries to welcome the refugees. "More than that, this sets
terrible precedent for refugee protection, not only here but anywhere else in
the world."

He called the differing policies on Vietnam and Haiti "a world-class exercise in
hypocrisy."

There were reports today that the United States was discouraging neighboring
countries from accepting Haitian refugees so that more would not be tempted to
go to sea in unseaworthy boats. A State Department spokesman denied that, saying
that plans were moving ahead to begin sending several hundred Haitians by air to
camps in Honduras and Venezuela on Wednesday. The refugees will be drawn from
the 480 now being held at the United States naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba.

American officials say Honduras has offered to take 250 Haitians, Belize about
100, Venezuela another 100 and Trinidad and Tobago 100.

U.S. Cutters Diverted

At the Haitian Refugee Center in Miami, Ms. Dorancy said her group opposed the
plan because under international law governing refugees, a country of first
asylum cannot turn refugees over to a third country. Since most of the Haitians
are on the high seas, there is some question as to whether the refugees can
consider themselves in the United States by virtue of being on American ships. A
counsel for the House Judiciary Subcommittee on International Law, Immigration
and Refugees said legal research was being done on that issue today.

Lieutenant Howe of the Coast Guard said all available Coast Guard cutters had
been ordered to the seas between Haiti and the United States.

The deteriorating weather at the scene was making matters worse, he said.

The Coast Guard's ships are overwhelmed with the job of feeding and caring for
people already on board, according to officers near the scene.  But the United
States is reluctant to bring them ashore or transfer them to better
accommodations like a large Navy ship out of fear that their rescue operation
will become a magnet attracting more Haitians to take to the water.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Haitian refugees lay on the deck of the Coast Guard cutter
Confidence after they were picked up earlier this month. (Petty Officer Roger
Wetherell/U.S. Coast Guard)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 20, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Making the Mosaic

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


There is some disagreement over which wordsmith first substituted "mosaic" for
"melting pot" as a way of describing America, but there is no doubt that it is a
more apt description. And there is no doubt that it applies in Ms. Miller's
third-grade class and elsewhere within the walls of Public School 20 in New York
City.

The neighborhood the school occupies is to the immigrant experience what
Broadway is to actors. Past Blevitzky Bros. Monuments ("at this place since
1914"), past Katz's Delicatessen with its fan mail hung in the window ("Thank
you for remembering me with the salami," Ronald Reagan wrote), past the tenement
buildings where fire escapes climb graceful as cat burglars, P.S. 20 holds the
corner of Essex and Houston. Its alumni include the Gershwins and Jacob Javits.

Its current student body comes from the Dominican Republic, Cambodia,
Bangladesh, Puerto Rico, Colombia, mainland China, Vietnam and El Salvador. In
Ms. Miller's third-grade class these various faces somehow look the same,
upturned and open, as though they were cups waiting for the water to be poured.
There's a spirit abroad in opposition to these children. It is not interested in
your tired, your poor, your huddled masses. In recent days it has been best
personified by David Duke and the suggestion in his campaign that there is a
kind of authentic American.  That authentic American is white and Christian (but
not Catholic), his ethnic origins lost in the mists of some amorphous past, not
discernible in accent, appearance or allegiance.

This is not a new idea, this resilient form of xenophobia. "It is but too common
a remark of late, that the American character has within a short time been sadly
degraded by numerous instances of riot and lawless violence," Samuel F. B. Morse
wrote in an 1835 treatise called "Imminent Dangers to the Free Institutions of
the United States through Foreign Immigration," decrying such riffraff as the
Jesuits. Morse also suggests that pushy foreigners expect to be treated better
than "native Americans," by which he does not mean the Sioux. There is indeed
nothing new under the sun.

Times are bad, and we blame the newcomers, whether it's 1835 or 1991. Had Morse
had his way, half of me would still be in Italy; if some conservatives had their
way today, most of the children at P.S. 20 would be, in that ubiquitous ugly
American phrase, back where they came from. So much for lifting a lamp beside
the golden door.

They don't want to learn the language, we complain, as though the old
neighborhoods were not full of Poles and Italians who kept to their mother
tongue. They don't want to become American, we say, as though there are not
plenty of us who believe we lost something when we renounced ethnicity. "Dagos,"
my mother said the American kids called them, American being those not Italian.
"Wops." How quickly we forget as we use pejoratives for the newest newcomers.

Our greatest monument to immigration, the restored Ellis Island, seems to
suggest by its display cases that coming to America is a thing nostalgic,
something grandparents did. On the Lower East Side it has never been past tense,
struggling with English and poverty, sharing apartments with the bathroom in the
hall and the bathtub in the kitchen.

They send their children to school with hopes for a miracle, or a job, which is
almost the same thing. This past week the School Volunteer Program, which fields
almost 6,000 volunteer tutors, sponsored the first citywide Read Aloud: 400
grown-ups reading to thousands of kids in 90 schools. In P.S. 20, they clutched
their books, as so many have done before, as though they were visas.

Coming to America has always been hard. Thriving in America is harder than ever.
But so many things remain the same. And one of them is that the people who,
generation to generation, believe America is a finished product are habitually
revealed as people whose ideas would have impoverished this country beyond
measure. It is foolish to forget where you come from, and that, in the case of
the United States, is almost always somewhere else. The true authentic American
is a pilgrim with a small "p," armed with little more than the phrase "I wish. .
. ." New ones are being minted in Ms. Miller's class, bits of a mosaic far from
complete.

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 21, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Shift, Sihanouk Is Named Cambodian President

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 20


Prince Norodom Sihanouk was declared Cambodia's President today in a move that
was clearly intended to foil the Khmer Rouge in its hopes of returning to power.

The unexpected announcement by the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government
came less than a week after Prince Sihanouk, the former head of state and rebel
leader, returned home after spending most of the last 20 years in exile.

The announcement, made here in the Cambodian capital, said Prince Sihanouk would
serve until "free, fair and equitable presidential elections" were held in 1993
under the terms of a United Nations peace treaty. It also called on Cambodians
"to support and later to vote for" Prince Sihanouk as the nation's President in
the election. The Prince, still revered by many Cambodians, is widely seen in
Cambodia as its best hope for restoring peace after more than 12 years of civil
war and, before that, four years of Khmer Rouge terror. From 1975 to 1979, the
Khmer Rouge carried out a Maoist agrarian revolution that left more than one
million Cambodians dead from execution, starvation or disease.

While Prince Sihanouk's exact duties as President were not detailed, the
announcement today suggested that the Prince had joined in a power-sharing
arrangement that would give him immediate broad authority in the running the
country. Its current head of state, Heng Samrin, is thought to have little real
power.

Under the United Nations accords signed in Paris last month, Prince Sihanouk was
expected to be the neutral leader of a coalition group, the Supreme National
Council, that will take part in running the country until internationally
supervised free elections.

But over the last week, the 69-year-old Prince and his followers have thrown in
their lot with the current Cambodian Government at the expense of their former
rebel allies in the Khmer Rouge. For years, Prince Sihanouk, the Khmer Rouge and
a third, much smaller rebel group, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front,
were allied in the civil war against the Vietnamese-backed Government led by
Prime Minister Hun Sen. Vietnam installed the Government after it overthrew the
Khmer Rouge in an invasion that began in December 1978.

The rebel alliance is now dead, however, and since his return from exile, Prince
Sihanouk has taken to bitter denunciations of the Khmer Rouge while praising the
accomplishments of Mr. Hun Sen's Government.

Foreign Minister Hor Nam Hong said the appointment of Prince Sihanouk as
President had been made without consulting the Khmer Rouge or the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, which is led by former Prime Minister Son Sann.

                             --------------------


Last Guerrilla Leader Arrives

PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Thursday, Nov. 21 -- Mr. Son Sann, leader of the guerrilla
faction supported by the United States during the Cambodian civil war, arrived
here today. His faction, thew Khmer People's National Liberation Front, is the
last of the four to be represented in the city.


LOAD-DATE: November 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Vietnam Start Talks On Establishing Normal Ties

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 21


Senior officials of the United States and Vietnam met today for the first in a
series of talks aimed at establishing normal relations.

Assistant Secretary of State Richard H. Solomon and the Vietnamese Deputy
Foreign Minister, Le Mai, talked about the implementation of the United Nations
plan for a political settlement in Cambodia and accounting for Americans who are
missing in action or were prisoners of war in Vietnam, American and Vietnamese
officials said.

A date for future talks was not set.

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 22, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Bette Midler as a Woman a Lot Like Bette Midler

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words


The hardest thing Bette Midler has to do in "For the Boys," the big, sweeping
multi-hanky musical in which she plays a U.S.O. entertainer named Dixie Leonard,
is to pretend to be shy. When in 1942 Dixie is first approached to tour with an
established star named Eddie Sparks (James Caan), she is all butterflies. Can
she perform before a large crowd? Will she get over her jitters? The film may
dwell on these questions, but its audience knows full well that Dixie Leonard,
being a lot like Ms. Midler, can bring down the house even if she's playing an
open-air arena in a war zone.

That's the point, of course. "For the Boys," which is opening today at the
Ziegfeld, is a custom-tailored showcase for Ms. Midler's talents, and it offers
her a role in which screen character and offstage persona are powerfully
intertwined. In the 1940's, a period toward which Ms. Midler has always shown an
affinity, an actress with a personality this strong would always have fused her
own larger-than-life image with that of whomever she was playing. Today that
happens less often, but Ms. Midler has wisely taken the bull by the horns.
Acting as one of her own producers, she has seen to it that "For the Boys"
offers her an appealing, frank, always pivotal leading role, one that no one
else could have played.

"For the Boys," directed by Mark Rydell, is at its best when concentrating on
Dixie, which it does most of the time. First seen in elaborate makeup as a
tough-talking, embittered old broad, she feigns infirmity but still manages to
convey great reserves of grandmotherly zip. This makes a strong contrast with
the film's next sequence, in which the elderly Dixie remembers her first
encounter with Eddie Sparks. Looking rosy, young and vital, Ms. Midler is an
instant crowd-pleaser. And when she takes the stage with Eddie and walks off
with the show, she takes command of the movie as well.

"For the Boys" follows Eddie and Dixie through 50 years of what is essentially a
rocky friendship and stormy business relationship, but not much more. This is
surprising in view of the film's extravagantly romantic style and its portentous
sense that some crucial development between Dixie and Eddie may be in the
offing.  In fact, the real emphasis is on Dixie as the mother of Danny, who is a
small boy in the 1940's scenes and a soldier by the time the film gets to
Vietnam. In a way, "For the Boys" makes a clever choice in presenting Ms. Midler
more as a noble, long-suffering mother figure with a flair for wisecracks than
as a garden-variety romantic heroine.

But even allowing for its lack of romantic chemistry (despite a fleeting
one-night encounter that has Dixie back to her same old scathing remarks in the
morning), the film has trouble with its central relationship, in part because
James Caan never makes Eddie the magnetic figure he is supposed to be. Never
credible as a famous song-and-dance man (although he displays more than enough
temper and vanity for a star's role) and looking more like a world-weary
carnival barker, Mr. Caan's Eddie is too easily upstaged by his partner and not
enough of a foil. The screenplay, by Marshall Brickman, Neal Jimenez and Lindy
Laub, never seems entirely certain of what it wants to see happening between
them.

Dixie works better in big, sometimes shamelessly sentimental tableaux than she
does in intimate settings anyhow. This film's most touching moments generally
occur either on Christmas or when Dixie and Eddie bring their act to war-torn
places, first to North Africa, where Dixie is tearfully reunited with her
husband and serenades him with "Come Rain or Come Shine" before a large,
appreciative military crowd.

Manipulative as this is, it presents Ms. Midler with some remarkable
opportunities for heartstring-pulling, which she does especially well during the
film's wrenching Vietnam chapter. Many other films have covered this territory,
and done it better. But when Ms. Midler performs an eerily delicate, anthemlike
rendition of "In My Life" to a group of soldiers who have come face-to-face with
their own mortality, she adds something new. It's a moment that lingers long
after the film is over.

Ms. Midler's performance, even in a role as patently flattering and theatrical
as this one, has an edge of candor that keeps her seeming very real. "For the
Boys" is also deft in recapitulating various cultural landmarks of its time
frame, from the ways in which pinups have changed through different wars to the
progress of network television and its conventions. The film's brief, sardonic
looks at television are often clever, and it even attempts a scene in which
Dixie champions a blacklisted associate (who has been fired while wearing a
Santa Claus suit at Christmas). "Me! Who always thought Karl was the sixth Marx
brother, after Zeppo!" she complains after being punished by her network for
this outburst.

Also in "For the Boys" are George Segal as the uncle who helps give Dixie her
start, Arye Gross as the nice young man who coaxes her onto television one last
time, Dori Brenner as an early colleague and Christopher Rydell as the grown-up
Danny and such ringers as Melissa Manchester and Bud Yorkin in small roles. The
cast is big and helpful, but the star is always at center stage.

"For the Boys" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes sexual innuendoes and off-color language.

For the Boys

Directed by Mark Rydell; screenplay by Marshall Brickman, Neal Jimenez and Lindy
Laub, story by Mr. Jimenez and Ms. Laub; director of photography, Stephen
Goldblatt; edited by Jerry Greenberg and Jere Huggins; music by Dave Grusin;
production designer, Assheton Gorton; produced by Bette Midler, Bonnie
Bruckheimer and Margaret South; released by 20th Century Fox Film Corporation.
At the Ziegfeld, 141 West 54th Street, Manhattan. Running time: 148 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Dixie Leonard . . . Bette Midler
Eddie Sparks . . . James Caan
Art Silver . . . George Segal
Shephard . . . Patrick O'Neal
Danny . . . Christopher Rydell
Jeff Brooks . . . Arye Gross
Loretta . . . Dori Brenner

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bette Midler (20th Century Fox/Francois Duhamel)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Seeking Ms. Right in Throngs of Ms. Wrongs

BYLINE: By RICHARD SANDOMIR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2189 words


On a steamy Summer day in his West 54th Street office, the casting director
Louis DiGiaimo is auditioning actresses for the role of Vida, the saucy,
ebullient arsonist in "Wilder Napalm." In the movie, Vida is married to Wilder,
a Fotokwik clerk and volunteer fireman who loves calling bingo games and is
blessed with the ability to set fires with his mind. Wilder's brother, Wallace,
to be played by Dennis Quaid, is a carnival clown (also pyrokinetic) whose
ambition is to lead his co-workers in an appearance on the "Tonight" show.

Though "Wilder Napalm" is not to begin filming until early November, the summer
finds Mr. DiGiaimo deeply involved in the casting process. The job requires him
to fly between New York and Los Angeles to audition actors for not only Vida and
Wilder but such characters as the Snake Lady; Rex, the chief carny, and a
company of volunteer firemen.

In Los Angeles, Daryl Hannah, Mimi Rogers, Molly Ringwald and Linda Hamilton
have already read for the role -- and some have been called back to meet the
movie's director, Glenn Gordon Caron -- but no one has been offered the part.
"Vida is a great role," says the balding, bearded Mr. DiGiaimo (pronounced
de-JEYE-mo), who most recently cast "Thelma and Louise." "She has so much
heart."

A camcorder is beside Mr. DiGiaimo, who is sitting in a director's chair.
Opposite Mr. DiGiaimo is a leather sofa. Sharing wall space with shelves full of
books, scripts and videotapes are posters from some of the films he has cast,
including "Good Morning, Vietnam," "The Godfather" and "Rain Man." (Mr.
DiGiaimo, who is 48 years old, has cast about 100 films, television shows and
miniseries.) The office is an amiable mess.

Each actress reads two scenes, one as a warm-up, the other for the video camera.
The latter scene shows Vida apologizing to her husband for romancing his
brother. It seems that while the toupeed Wilder was out calling bingo numbers,
Vida and Wallace were striking up a dalliance that ignites a literal
conflagration between the two men.

To each actress, Mr. DiGiaimo gives similar advice: "Remember, she loves Wilder;
and just because she lives in a trailer park doesn't mean she's white trash.
She's been under house arrest for a year," on an arson charge, "and when she's
finally free, Wilder goes to call bingo. Don't forget, you've been up for 36
hours."

Jill Hennessy, a Canadian-born actress wearing a sleeveless blue T-shirt, faded
jeans and black boots, adopts a Southern accent.

"Yesterday was my first night of freedom, but you had to spend it calling
bingo," she says, building slowly toward hysterical anger. "Don't get me wrong.
Normally, I'd say bingo is where it's at. But I guess I went a little crazy last
night. Got a little selfish. Figured I'd steal you away from squinting at a
bunch of Ping-Pong balls. Figured I'd get you out on the town for one real night
of life -- one night of freedom from that country-western version of a Soviet
gulag."

Her audition ends perfunctorily. Mr. DiGiaimo is friendly but noncommittal. More
actresses read, including Mary-Louise Parker, who starred in the Broadway
production of "Prelude to a Kiss."

Most of the actresses are too young or wrong for the part -- and none can
pronounce the word "gulag" -- but Mr. DiGiaimo shows no frustration. It is his
job to see scores of performers while balancing a producer's desire for stars
with the movie's budget. And of course the director always has final say. Mr.
DiGiaimo is certain he will find the right Vida to satisfy both him and Mr.
Caron.

"It isn't really who's good or bad," Mr. DiGiaimo says, "but who can play a
particular role. Auditions establish who's wrong immediately."

But often auditions turn into moot exercises. A few weeks later, it is announced
that Debra Winger will play Vida (she was an early front-runner) and that Arliss
Howard (who had appeared in last year's film "Men Don't Leave") will play Vida's
husband.

Mr. DiGiaimo, who has been in the business for 20 years, has actors' names and
faces burned in his brain. The images come from actors he has worked with, from
watching films and plays and from studying glossies. He reads a script a
half-dozen times to envision the type of actors he wants to audition. Lists are
made. Names are discarded. Combinations of actors are contemplated. Agents
suggest and demand. Actors are auditioned. Recommendations are made to directors
and producers. And parts are offered.

The process is too instinctive for Mr. DiGiaimo to explain. "You're asking about
the gut feeling that you can't fully describe," he says. "All I can say is it's
not just knowing actors but sensing what they can do."

William Friedkin, who has directed such films as "The French Connection" and
"The Exorcist," has hired Mr. DiGiaimo for each of his films since the early
1970's. "A casting director's work is completely unsung," Mr. Friedkin says. "If
it works out great, and the actor puts in a skilled performance, you don't think
of who casts them."

Mr. DiGiaimo's particular talent is for finding actors with the look and sound
of New York streets. He prefers actors with New York training, borrowing Al
Pacino's judgment that California "fries your brain." A subspecialty is finding
"realies," non-actors like laborers, cops and people with exotic ethnic
backgrounds, to fill small roles.

In "29th Street," a new film about the first winner of the New York State
Lottery, the writer-director George Gallo seems to have hired every Italian
blue-collar character Mr. DiGiaimo could find. Mr. Gallo needed some especially
tough-looking fellows.

"I was on the set one day with these two guys," says Mr. Gallo, "and I asked one
of them if he'd ever worked with the other before. He says, 'Yeah, it wasn't a
movie, but a bank job we pulled years ago.' We also needed a chronic overeater,
about 20 years old." Because they were filming in North Carolina, Mr. Gallo
explains, "Lou says, 'Let's go over to the Rice Clinic where everybody's losing
weight and there are a lot of New Yorkers.' He found him."

In "The Exorcist," Mr. Friedkin needed a drunk to utter one line to a priest at
the Grand Central Terminal subway station.

"Lou went to a bar on 14th Street and found a lifelong drunk," Mr. Friedkin
says. "He was perfect. But this was six months before the shooting, so Lou had
to baby-sit the guy. Months later, we sit him down at Grand Central in simulated
urine. He did his one line 15 or 20 times. At 2 A.M. we get it. Seven months go
by, and I decided we have to loop the guy's dialogue because the sound quality
wasn't any good. Lou finds him at the same bar and takes him to a sound
recording studio on the East Side, and I give the guy a lesson in saying the
same words in sync with the way he said them on film. At the end, he said, 'I
ain't going to work with that director no more.' "

Mr. DiGiaimo grew up in Paterson, N.J., where he insists he caught the casting
bug early -- an odd vocational choice for a teen-ager. "I used to sit in a movie
theater and wonder, 'Where'd they find those girls?' " he says. After studying
to be an accountant at the Teaneck, N.J., campus of Fairleigh Dickinson
University, he worked for an accounting firm and then sold insurance before
becoming a casting agent for commercials.

When New York City opened a special office to facilitate making movies and
television programs in the city in the late 60's, Mr. DiGiaimo thought it could
be his entree into casting extras. Armed with a list of producers and directors
who would be filming in New York, he went to Hollywood and met the director
Martin Ritt, who was in preproduction for the 1968 movie "The Brotherhood." They
talked about the Brooklyn faces Mr. Ritt needed. Mr. DiGiaimo went back to New
York to pick up glossies; he took additional photographs, then he returned to
Hollywood and Mr. Ritt hired him.

"I had to find a 70-year-old Italian guy to sit in a casket, and I found him in
Ferrara's in Little Italy," Mr. DiGiaimo says. "I talked to him, and he thought
I was crazy. While he's in the casket, he gets spit on. Then while we're
filming, he fell asleep in the casket."

He cast extras for "Goodbye, Columbus" (1969) and for Mr. Friedkin's "Boys in
the Band" (1970). The producer Stanley Jaffe hired him to cast the young
students in "A Separate Peace" (1972) and, that same year, to do the New York
casting for "The Godfather." The producer gave parts to Al Pacino, Robert
Duvall, Diane Keaton, Richard Castellano and Abe Vigoda, many of whom were
unknown at the time, or known only in the New York theater world.

"Al Pacino was known, and Robert Duvall had worked with Francis Coppola," says
Mr. DiGiaimo. "But Francis didn't know Diane Keaton. I brought in Richard
Castellano and Abe Vigoda, who wasn't known. As soon as Francis saw Vigoda, he
hired him." Mr. DiGiaimo also cast Robert De Niro in a small part in the movie
-- he was "hanging around with us," the casting director says -- but Mr. De Niro
decided to take another role instead, in the critically excoriated "The Gang
That Couldn't Shoot Straight."

Mr. DiGiaimo's career took off from there, as his name was passed from Mr.
Coppola to Mr. Friedkin and others. Mr. Friedkin used him for many films,
including "The French Connection." Barry Levinson used him on "Good Morning,
Vietnam" and "Tin Men" (both 1987), the next year's "Rain Man" and last year's
"Avalon" (though Mr. DiGiaimo only cast a few parts); "Wilder Napalm" is
produced by Mr. Levinson. Mr. DiGiaimo also casts American actors in
Italian-made movies that will never be seen in the United States.

It was Mr. DiGiaimo's work on Mr. Levinson's films that intrigued the British
director Ridley Scott, who hired Mr. DiGiaimo to cast "Thelma and Louise," a
road film with similarities to "Rain Man."

"Lou's casting in Barry's films put people in parts that were interesting,
rather than normal, choices," says Mr. Scott. "There were new faces. I knew
whoever was casting his movies had to be good."

Mr. Scott was especially intrigued by the casting of Barbara Hershey as the wife
of the aluminum siding salesman played by Danny DeVito in "Tin Men."

"We needed someone who was attractive and believable to bring Danny out," says
Mr. DiGiaimo. "She had to be pretty enough so that it was believable for her to
leave him for Richard Dreyfuss. We could dress Barbara up or down so she'd be a
girl who went well with both guys."

When casting began on this year's "Thelma and Louise," neither Geena Davis
(Thelma) nor Susan Sarandon (Louise) had been hired for the female buddy film
about two discontented women who take off on a vacation from their men.

Alan Ladd Jr., at that time head of Pathe, which financed the film, "wanted a
star-driven vehicle, but Ridley never felt that way," says Mr. DiGiaimo. "He
said, 'Get the best.' Meryl Streep was interested, but she needed three months
off. Every major actress wanted it. I can't say Geena and Susan were at the top
of the list. We knocked around a lot of names -- Michelle Pfeiffer, Kim
Basinger, Debra Winger. But when it came down to it, Geena and Susan were the
only ones offered the roles."

Ms. Sarandon was considered right for the waitress Louise, but Ms. Davis would
have to transform herself from the innocent quirkiness seen in "The Accidental
Tourist" to the gun-toting toughie that Thelma becomes.

"The initial half of the movie is the Geena Davis we know," says Mr. DiGiaimo.
"Then we get the switch. But there was no doubt she could do it. If you spent
any time with her, you knew she could."

Among other chores, casting directors must deal with emergencies: actors
storming off pictures or getting sick; actors landing other jobs or being wrong
for the part. Billy Baldwin left "Thelma and Louise" three weeks before shooting
began to co-star in Ron Howard's firefighter drama, "Backdraft." That left Mr.
Scott without the pivotal role of J. D., the cowboy drifter who teaches Thelma
about sexual pleasure, then steals money from her.

"Lou had to haul in people I'd never seen before," says Mr. Scott, "and we made
a short list." One of those names was the little-known Brad Pitt, who had
appeared on television in "Dallas" and "Another World."

Says Mr. DiGiaimo: "I saw a hundred guys. When Brad's agent sent us his picture,
I said, 'This guy is familiar.' I'd seen him on the tube. Ridley thought he was
too young, but we read him with Geena. He had what we needed. Here was this kid
who'd set her sparks off."

Mr. DiGiaimo is now wrapping up work on the task of finding actors for Mr.
Scott's epic about Christopher Columbus, which will begin filming early next
month and will cover 23 years in the discoverer's life. Mr. DiGiaimo had to find
actors in the United States, France, Spain and the West Indies to portray
Spanish aristocracy, family and crew members.

"Lou is absolutely unshakable," Mr. Scott said early in the casting of the film.
"If I said, 'Let's turn around 180 degrees tomorrow,' he would do it. He's got a
great nose for actors. My bottom line with him is, 'Surprise me. Bring me people
I haven't seen before.' "

NAME: Louis DiGiaimo

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Louis DiGiaimo -- He has actors' names and faces burned in his
brain. (Laura Levine/Visages for The New York Times)(pg. 13); Geena Davis with
Brad Pitt in "Thelma and Louise"--"Get the best," the director said. (M-G-M);
Diane Keaton in "The Godfather"--She was cast with other unknowns in the epic
film. (Paramount Pictures); Barbara Hershey in "Tin Men"--The actress looked
right with both male leads. (Touchstone Pictures)(pg. 20)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PEARL HARBOR IN THE MIND OF JAPAN

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 112 words


It seems that Japan has launched an attack upon the truth in its
rationalizations about Pearl Harbor: 1) The United States was informed in
advance; 2) The Japanese didn't know much about the war at the time, and still
don't; 3) Hirohito couldn't have stopped the attack if he had wanted to; 4)Japan
was the victim, not the victimizer; 5) It was a long time ago, let's forget it;
6) Japan is peaceful now.

Contrast this with the soul-searching that the United States has gone through
over its mistakes -- the mistreatment of American Indians and blacks, the
relocation of Japanese-Americans during World War II, the Vietnam War.

GERALD W. GRUMET, M.D.
Rochester

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Again, Sihanouk Seeks A Delicate Balance

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 918 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


PRINCE NORODOM SIHANOUK Cambodia's master political showman and greatest
survivor, its charming, confounding peacemaker and one-time god-king -- has
brought his remarkable half-century-long career full circle.

He has not only returned to Cambodia in triumph under a United Nations peace
plan; he has also managed to win back the title of head of state, 21 years after
it was taken from him in an American-backed military coup, and to begin to exact
revenge on his erstwhile allies in rebellion, the Khmer Rouge.

Diplomats and many Cambodians have welcomed this extraordinary turnabout, but
they are also watching with a sense of dread; what happens, many ask, if the
recent good fortune of the 69-year-old Prince runs out? The peace plan was
forged largely through the force of his irrepressible personality and it appears
dependent on his energy and popularity. Could it last without him?

"We wish the Prince much good health and a long, long, long life," a Western
diplomat said recently in Phnom Penh, Cambodia's capital. "You will find few
peace accords in modern history that are so dependent on one man and the good
will he inspires among his people." For now, the good will of Cambodia's people
seems little in doubt. Even if many Cambodians had never cast eyes on the Prince
-- he has been in exile for most of the last 20 years -- there was still a sense
of relief on the rubble-strewn streets of Phnom Penh that he had returned to
take residence in his storybook gold-and-green palace along the Tonle Sap River.

The last peace many Cambodians remember was under the Prince, whose ouster in
1970 was followed by five years of civil war punctuated by American bombing and
infantry sweeps from South Vietnam; then came four years of Khmer Rouge terror
in which more than a million Cambodians died, followed by a Vietnamese invasion
to oust the Khmer Rouge, followed by another 12 years of civil war.

The most recent civil war was fought between the Vietnamese-installed Government
in Phnom Penh and a fractious coalition of three Cambodian rebel groups: the
Khmer Rouge, the followers of Prince Sihanouk and the followers of Son Sann, a
Sihanouk-era Prime Minister.

The most perversely fascinating spectacle in Cambodia in the coming months may
well be that of the Prince trying to negotiate with the secretive, unrepentant
leaders of the Khmer Rouge over the direction of the new government.

In his first mass rally after returning to Phnom Penh, the Prince left some of
his audience in tears as he listed by name five of his children who, along with
14 grandchildren and other relatives, were murdered by the Khmer Rouge in the
madness of their campaign to impose a Maoist, purely agrarian society on
Cambodia in the 1970's. "Their deaths were not easy ones," the Prince said. "In
a war, a person is shot at and killed instantly. In my family's case, they were
tortured and clubbed to death."

Because it was the best-armed rebel group in the civil war, the Khmer Rouge has,
despite its barbarous past, been granted membership in the coalition body led by
Prince Sihanouk that will take part in running the country until free elections
can be held under United Nations supervision.

For now, the Prince's strategy is to make clear his disdain for the Khmer Rouge
(even though he led the rebel alliance that included the Khmer Rouge) while
building a political alliance with the current regime (even though it is the one
he and the Khmer Rouge sought to overthrow). The hope is to shut out the Khmer
Rouge in the elections, now scheduled for 1993.

A New Partnership

Last week the Phnom Penh regime declared Prince Sihanouk to be the new head of
state and President of Cambodia, and yesterday Prince Sihanouk announced that
within several days his son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, would form a coalition
government with Prime Minister Hun Sen. Diplomats said it appeared that the
Khmer Rouge had not been consulted, and they warned that the Khmer Rouge might
respond angrily.

Still, even as he tries to deny the Khmer Rouge power in the new government, the
Prince seems to understand the danger of so alienating Khmer Rouge leaders that
they bolt from the coalition and take up arms again in a guerrilla force. Said
the Prince: "We must think seriously whether or not we want the Khmer Rouge ever
to be rebels again."

For Prince Sihanouk and his compatriots, the best insurance against a return to
power by the Khmer Rouge is likely to be provided by Cambodia's powerful
neighbors, China and Vietnam. China, the diplomatic patron and arms supplier of
the Khmer Rouge, and Vietnam, which installed the current Cambodian regime,
restored full diplomatic ties this fall, and they seem far more interested in
dealing with their own internal troubles than in underwriting another long proxy
war in Cambodia. The peace agreement would not have been possible without the
leadership of the Prince, and without the enthusiastic support of both Beijing
and Hanoi.

"The Khmer Rouge were useful to the Chinese because they made lots of trouble
for Vietnam, China's traditional adversary," said an Asian diplomat. "But if
China and Vietnam have ended their hostility, the Khmer Rouge doesn't serve
China's purpose any longer. For China and Vietnam, Sihanouk is a quite
acceptable compromise." To many of his eight million compatriots, the Prince is
much more than that, of course. To many Cambodians, Prince Sihanouk is all that
stands between them and another generation of disaster.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, named Cambodia's President last week,
greeting monks after his return to Phnom Penh earlier this month. (Jacques
Langevin/Sygma)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Hopeful on Ties After Talks in the U.S.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 23


The leader of a Vietnamese delegation that has been meeting American officials
says Vietnam hopes that it will be able to establish normal diplomatic relations
with the United States in the next six months.

The Vietnamese official, Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai, said in an interview on
Friday that his discussions at the United States mission to the United Nations
on Thursday with Richard H. Solomon, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian
and Pacific Affairs, were "quite productive and constructive." He added that he
had invited Mr. Solomon to come to Hanoi for the next round "at any time
convenient to him."

He also said several teams of American experts were expected in Hanoi in
December and January to work on remaining issues of contention -- in particular
the resolution of the cases of 2,273 Americans still unaccounted for in
Indochina since the Vietnam War. This issue, a sensitive political topic in
Washington for years, has derailed talks many times in the past.

No Rights Discussion

Mr. Mai said the talks in New York did not include human rights questions.

"We say these are purely questions to be decided by Vietnamese," Mr. Mai said of
human rights issues. "However, I do understand the concerns of the Americans."

A State Department summary of the talks with the Vietnamese issued on Thursday
said that in six hours of discussion, the two sides had focused on the United
Nations peace plan now being put into effect in Cambodia and "the fullest
possible accounting of our P.O.W./M.I.A.'s."

The United States wants to see free elections held as planned in Cambodia in
1993 before a full diplomatic relationship is established with Vietnam.

The statement added that Washington hoped that Vietnam would address
"humanitarian issues of importance to the United States," but it did not give
details. It also said progress had been achieved since April, when Washington
produced a "road map" to normalization.

Politically, Vietnam remains a rigidly authoritarian state, although it has made
efforts to open its economy to outside investment. Hanoi's leaders have also
recently made some overtures to cultural figures, suggesting that they are
willing to relax restraints on expression. It was reported in Bangkok this week
that a well-known writer, Duong Thu Huong, had been released after seven months
in detention for possessing "anti-socialist literature."

But the Vietnamese authorities have announced no change in their plans to try
Nguyen Dan Que, a physician in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon, who has been
imprisoned twice for trying to form a human rights organization. His trial on
treason charges is scheduled to begin on Nov. 29.

Mr. Mai would not comment on these cases.

The Vietnamese delegation asked the United States to consider lifting its
embargo on Hanoi's participation in the International Monetary Fund and World
Bank "in stages," Mr. Mai said. He said Washington continued to tell foreign
governments prepared to support such moves that "the time was not right."

The Vietnamese and American delegations agreed to set up a permanent working
group to meet from time to time on specific issues.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Le Mai, the Vietnamese Deputy Foreign Minister, said meetings
with American officials to try to restore normal diplomatic relations have been
"quite productive and constructive." (Cori Wells Braun for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE LEFT OUTSIDE COALITION

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 23; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 23


Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia announced today that his royalist party
would form a coalition government with the current Vietnamese-backed Cambodian
regime, a move that would solidify the former monarch's authority at the expense
of the dreaded Khmer Rouge.

The Prince, who in recent days has been restored as Cambodia's head of state,
said at a news conference in Phnom Penh that his son -- Prince Norodom
Ranariddh, head of the royalist party -- and the current regime would "form a
bipartite government within a week."

Prince Sihanouk announced last week that his son and the Vietnamese-installed
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen had joined in a political alliance, so
today's announcement was not a complete surprise. But it did heighten concern
that a month-old United Nations peace treaty for Cambodia could be in danger of
unraveling.

Under the peace accord, the Khmer Rouge, the largest and best-armed rebel group
in Cambodia's 12-year civil war, was expected to be granted some say in the
running of Cambodia until free elections are held in 1993.

Khmer Rouge's Reaction

But after today's announcement, it appears that virtually all of the power in
Cambodia will be in the hands of Prince Sihanouk, his son and Mr. Hun Sen and
his allies. In recent days, Prince Sihanouk, who once called Mr. Hun Sen a
"one-eyed lackey" of Vietnam, has instead taken to describing the Cambodian
Prime Minister as his adopted son.

"No one knows how the Khmer Rouge will react to what the Prince is doing now,"
said an Asian diplomat in Bangkok, who describes himself as a longtime "Cambodia
watcher." "This all must be humiliating for the Khmer Rouge."

Although an ally of the Khmer Rouge during the guerrilla war against the Vietnam
-backed regime in Phnom Penh, Prince Sihanouk has turned on the Khmer Rouge
since he returned home to Cambodia earlier this month after 13 years in exile.

When the Khmer Rouge controlled the country from 1975 to 1979, its radical
Maoist leaders presided over the deaths of more than one million Cambodians from
execution, starvation and disease. The Khmer Rouge was ousted in a Vietnamese
invasion that began in December 1978.

Anti-Khmer Maneuvering

As the head of the Cambodian Supreme National Council, the coalition group that
includes the Khmer Rouge and that is supposed to take part in the running of the
Government under the United Nations peace treaty, Prince Sihanouk insists that
he is neutral in Cambodian politics.

But the mercurial 69-year-old Prince has watched with obvious glee as his "two
sons" -- Prince Ranariddh and Mr. Hun Sen -- have maneuvered to deprive the
Khmer Rouge of any power in the new Government.

On Wednesday, without consulting the Khmer Rouge, the Phnom Penh regime declared
that Prince Sihanouk had been restored as Cambodia's head of state, a title that
he lost in 1970 in an American-backed coup. The 69-year-old Prince eagerly
accepted the honor, describing it as "simple justice."

Only hours before Prince Sihanouk announced the creation of a coalition
Government without the Khmer Rouge, the Khmer Rouge said in a radio address
monitored in Bangkok today that it, too, had accepted the Prince as Cambodia's
head of state.

A Return to Power

According to Reuters, the Khmer Rouge said in the broadcast that it "would like
to solemnly and officially state" that Prince Sihanouk "remains Cambodia's
legitimate and rightful head of state."

The broadcast said the Prince would remain head of state "until there is a new
president resulting from free and democratic elections."

Diplomats are divided on the intentions of the Khmer Rouge, although many firmly
believe that it is plotting a return to power in Cambodia.

It is widely assumed that the Khmer Rouge will allow internationally supervised
elections to take place in 1993 in the belief that Khmer Rouge candidates will
do well in the Cambodian countryside, where they retain a following despite the
atrocities of the 1970's.

If they do not win a large number of seats in the new Cambodian legislature --
and the Prince seems determined to deprive the Khmer Rouge of any real power in
the Cambodian Government -- then the Khmer Rouge is expected to reconsider its
options on the battlefield.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BACKTALK;
Sports Are More Than Games in the Groves of Academe

BYLINE: BY ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8; Page 10; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


THE Footnote League has opened its season and the air is filled with flying
hypotheses and the heady crunch of fresh ideas.

It is the time of academic conferences, and these days there are few meetings of
historians or political scientists or sociologists without at least one session
on the intricate relationship between sports and society.

In Chicago last week, for example, the 90th meeting of the American
Anthropological Association included a morning devoted to the identity crises of
women who pump iron and ride motorcycles. Among the papers delivered was Barbara
Joans's "Dykes on Bikes Meets Ladies of Harley."

"It's part of what's happened in academia generally," said Peter Levine, a
historian at Michigan State. "Those of us who came of age during Vietnam began
to study history from the bottom up -- working people, blacks, women -- and
sports is certainly something that affected millions of everyday lives."

Professor Levine is a Jacksonian, an expert in 19th century American political
and social history, but he is best known for "A. G. Spalding and the Rise of
Baseball" (Oxford, 1985), a lively tale of the original George Steinbrenner and
the not coincidental emergence of the national pastime and the middle class.

"A very important book," said Professor Charles P. Korr, a historian at the
University of Missouri-St. Louis. "I've ripped it off in half-a-dozen
conferences, here, Hungary, Australia. It's part of the current movement to
apply what we learn from studying sports to the real social problems of the
larger culture."

Professor Korr's original area of expertise is 17th century Cromwellian foreign
policy. He is currently writing a book on "the union that revolutionized
sports," the Major League Baseball Players' Association. With his new expertise,
Korr is on his way to a conference in Florence, Italy, sponsored by the members
of the Common Market. They are facing the problem next year of not only
unrestricted trade but of the unrestricted flow of foreign workers. How will
this affect all the soccer clubs? And the national teams?

Twenty years ago, the relationship between sports and academia was far less
intellectually rigorous and more likely to be either confrontational (such
activists with doctorates as Richard Lapchick, Harry Edwards, Jack Scott and
Mark Naison gave the profession some credible muscle) or sycophantic (thousands
of men with leather elbow patches who sat at the 50-yard line to watch the
players they were passing, but never teaching).

While interesting, pioneering work was being done, primarily in college physical
education and sociology departments, in kinetics, behavior and the role of the
emerging female athlete, the output was erratic. Too many papers had the words
"anomie" or "agon" in the title, and there was a bit too much on the flip side:
i.e., the Oedipal aspects of baseball in which the son (batter), waving a
you-know-what, tries to interrupt the relationship between the father (pitcher)
and the mother (catcher).

Traditionally, most academic departments looked down on sports studies. But in
the 70's, when enrollments in many of the liberal arts slipped, professors began
to scramble for sexy ways to repackage history and sociology and even literature
courses. "The Rise of Baseball" was as good a way as any to study 20th century
America and had a better chance of packing the hall. Not only did students flock
to such courses, but many went on to take other, more orthodox, courses in the
field.

And there has been research progress as well. In one recent thought-provoking
study, two economists, Sumner LaCroix of the University of Hawaii and Torben
Andersen of Red Deer College in Alberta, Canada, compared black and white
baseball superstars who had similar performance statistics. While their salaries
were comparable (the economists suggested that arbitration was color blind), the
value of their trading cards were not. Collectors, mainly youngsters, paid
higher prices for the cards of white players.

In recent years, the literature of sports has been enriched more by
Ph.D.'s than by sportswriters. Worth serious study are Bruce Kuklick's "To Every
Thing a Season: Shibe Park and Urban Philadelphia" (Princeton, 1991); Elliot J.
Gorn's "The Manly Art: Bare-Knuckle Prize-fighting in America" (Cornell, 1986),
and William J. Baker's "Jesse Owens: An American Life" (Free Press, 1986).

The works of John J. MacAloon of the University of Chicago, Jules Tygiel of San
Francisco State, Michael V. Oriard of Oregon State and Bruce Kidd of the
University of Toronto have been outstanding over the years.

Professor Levine, at work on his study of Jews in sport, "From Ellis Island to
Ebbets Field," sees even better seasons ahead.

"We tended to wait until we were tenured and secure before we studied sports,"
he said. "But there's a new generation of scholars who have come right into
sports through black studies and gender studies and they will have a lot to say
that's worth hearing."

Meanwhile, at Springfield College in Massachusetts, members of the Sports
Literature Association are still talking about George Grella's recent paper on
"Karl Marx: Tennis Anyone?" And out at Creighton University in Nebraska they are
waiting for papers to fill their proposed volume, "The Psyche At Play," a volume
on Jungian and Archetypal Approaches to Sports and Athletics.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

D. B. Cooper, Still Among Us

BYLINE: By Karen Karbo;  Karen Karbo, a novelist, is author of "The Diamond
Lane."

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore.


Twenty years ago today, D. B. Cooper skyjacked a Northwest Airlines Boeing 727
and bailed out over a densely wooded area of Washington State. He was ahead of
his time. Back in 1971, every skyjacker was going to Cuba. Skyjacking was a
political statement. Cooper, the only American skyjacker who has never been
caught, was a harbinger of the go-go 1980's: he did it for the money.

He also did it in a business suit and loafers. Very un-1971. He said he had a
bomb. During the flight, a milk run from Portland to Seattle, he demanded
$200,000 and two sets of parachutes. After landing in Seattle, where the 36
passengers were released and Cooper's demands were met, the plane took off for
Reno. Somewhere over Washington he climbed down the aft stairway, the $200,000
(10,000 $20 bills in a bank bag weighing 21 pounds) strapped to his belly. At
10,000 feet, in a storm, the wind was gusting at 200 miles an hour. Visibility
was zero.

He jumped. Straight into aviation history and the popular imagination.

There are theories why no trace of D. B. Cooper has ever been found. But unlike
the man, who was a visionary, they are hopelessly mired in the innocence of the
pre-Watergate era.

Some say Cooper fell into one of the region's many lakes and drowned. Some say
he was separated from his bank bag during his jump and landed on the slopes of
Mount St. Helens, where he lived until his death in 1980 when the volcano blew.
The F.B.I. thought he was an ex-convict or perhaps a World War II paratrooper.
He was an average man, they thought.

But that was back in 1971. Today, post-Watergate, post-Abscam, post-Iran-contra,
post-October surprise, post-B.C.C.I., we realize how naive these assumptions
are. We realize that no one is as he seems.

There are a number of prominent Northwesterners who could qualify as likely
suspects. Evel Knievel, for example, a Montana native. When Cooper demanded his
parachutes, he insisted they be civilian models. Military parachutes open
automatically at 200 feet. Civilian chutes open at the jumper's discretion. Who
but a thrillseeker like Mr. Knievel would relish jumping out of a plane in a
storm with a parachute not guaranteed to open?

D. B. Cooper might also be a big shot at Nike, which is based in Oregon. After
the skyjacking, the F.B.I. investigated anyone in the region who had suddenly
started a business that needed a lot of seed money. The fledgling company,
founded in 1964, would luckily have escaped scrutiny. It's interesting to note
that Nike recently introduced a line of outdoor gear for walking long distances
in densely wooded areas in bad weather.

Everyone knows how hard it is to get a movie off the ground. No one knew that
better than David Lynch, who was raised in Spokane. What if, in 1971, when he
was 25, Mr. Lynch raised $200,000 to finance his first feature, "Eraserhead"?
And wasn't the lead character in Mr. Lynch's "Twin Peaks" an F.B.I. agent named
Cooper?

The most likely suspect, however, is a man against whom, until this moment, not
a single charge has been brought, probably because he's not a native
Northwesterner. But have we learned nothing from the last 20 years of conspiracy
and scandal?

In 1971, no civilian knew that a 727 could be flown with the aft stairway
extended. But 727's had been used in Vietnam for years to drop agents behind
enemy lines. Only the C.I.A. knew this. And what important personage was, even
then, being groomed to head the Agency? And was also a World War II pilot shot
down in battle, which gave him the necessary knowledge of parachutes and
survival skills? Add the choice of suit and loafers, doubtless influenced by
years at Andover and Yale, and it's clear that, once again, all roads lead to
the White House.

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Political Memo;
An Early Report Card On the Democrats' Trail

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: DES MOINES, Nov. 24


Democrats are now enjoying the unusual experience of watching Republicans in
disarray, but sooner or later the Democratic Party will have to pre sent an
alternative -- not a simple Bush basher, but a full-blown Presidential nominee.

This weekend, the six major contenders for the job engaged in a kind of rolling
cattle show that began in Chicago, where the state Democratic leaders were
meeting, continued in Des Moines before the Iowa Democratic Party's
Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner, and ended up at the South Dakota Democratic Party
steak fry in Sioux Falls.

When the jockeying was over, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas seemed the candidate
most ready for prime time, judging by the response of the party professionals in
Chicago. Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa remains the cruising-for-a-fight liberal,
who can hit nearly every button imaginable in an audience of active Democrats.
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who seemed to start the race with the most
natural star quality, is still struggling for a message that uses it.

All six have their strengths and weaknesses, three weeks before a series of
national television debates introduces them to the nation. Herewith, a preview:

Edmund G. Brown Jr.
Former Governor of California

Message: This is the candidate of rage, railing against the corrupting influence
of special interest money, warning of continued national decline under a
Government stacked against the people, urging term limits and a host of other
measures to shake up the system. He gets increasingly apocalyptic as he goes
along, warning of the consequences of business as usual. "This is not going to
go gentle into that good night," he roared at Democrats in Chicago. "This is
going to be an explosive ripping apart of the social fabric."

Problems: Mr. Brown's lifelong background in politics, including his stint as
chairman of the California Democratic Party, tends to cut against his outsider
message. He tries to present himself as a reformed sinner who truly knows how
awful things are. "I'm not some academic," he told Iowa Democrats. "Even though
you might not believe it, I didn't come in here off the moon."

Bill Clinton
Governor of Arkansas

Message: Mr. Clinton presents himself as the champion of the middle class,
promising to reclaim the American Dream and restore the economy with a set of
domestic policy prescriptions. What Mr. Clinton has acquired in his months of
traveling -- which some think the New York-bound Gov. Mario M. Cuomo needs -- is
a message that at least tries to reach out to the various parts of the
Democratic coalition, North and South, left and right.

"I am a Democrat by heritage, instinct and conviction," he said in Iowa, where
some look askance at his background as past chairman of the Democratic
Leadership Council, a group that often feuds with liberals. Mr. Clinton now
argues that the party needs to be pushed neither right or left, but "into the
future."

Problems: There is a fine line between coalition-building and muddying one's
message. When Mr. Clinton misses the mark, as he has on other occasions, he can
sound mushy.

Also, communism may have collapsed and Americans may be ready for a President
who spends more time at home, but doesn't the nation still need a foreign
policy? Mr. Clinton's speeches covered a lot this weekend, but not that.

Tom Harkin
Senator from Iowa

Message: No chance of a muddied message here. Mr. Harkin wants to cut military
spending sharply and embark on a major new public works program, rebuilding
roads and the like. He says he does not mind being be labeled a protectionist.
("Well, la-di-da," he says.) He says he laughs at those who accuse him of
preaching class warfare. "What the hell do they think we've had over the past 10
years?" he asked in Iowa. "We had class warfare -- and we lost."

This is unrepentant liberalism.  "It's time for us to quit apologizing for being
Democrats," he said, and the party faithful keep cheering him on. "I haven't
lost my heart and I haven't lost my soul, and the Democratic Party hasn't
either."

Problems: Hearts and souls aside, some Democrats wonder whether traditional
liberals make the best nominees. Mr. Harkin scoffs at the notion that the party
must fundamentally refashion its image to regain the White House, but there are
many Democrats who disagree.

Bob Kerrey
Senator from Nebraska

Message: Mr. Kerrey has been trying to present himself as the candidate of
change; he uses his plan for universal health care as an example of the change
he seeks. "It's not just a moral imperative, it's an economic imperative," he
said in Iowa.

But Mr. Kerrey got his best response this weekend when he was taking questions
from the audience and when he was talking about his values and his life. "Were
it not for the values of the Great Society when I returned in 1969, I would not
be standing here today," said Mr. Kerrey, who won the Congressional Medal of
Honor in Vietnam for a battle in which he lost a leg. "Today, we're led by the
values of a grim society."

Problems: Mr. Kerrey's life story and personal style were two of the major
strengths many Democrats thought he brought to the campaign; yet those qualities
seemed buried under a mountain of health care information this weekend. "Kerrey
was best when he went to Q and A," said Bob Slagle, the chairman of the Texas
Democratic Party. "He sounded a little bit bored with his speech."

Paul E. Tsongas
Former Senator from Massachusetts

Message: This is the pro-business liberal, who says he wants Democrats to
forswear corporate-bashing and adopt some serious measures, like a specific cuts
in the tax on capital gains, to get the economy growing again.

He is professorial and earnest, urging his audience to read his white papers on
health care and economic policy. He also urges his party to retain its
traditional values on civil rights and women's rights even as it remakes its
economics.

Mr. Tsongas is one of the wittiest of the candidates: On Saturday in Iowa, while
arguing that the party must regain its credibility on economics to regain the
White House, Mr. Tsongas said: "Let's try winning and see what it feels like. If
we don't like it, we can go back to our traditions."

Problems: Bruce Babbitt, the former Arizona Governor who ran for the Democratic
nomination in 1988, was also a witty, somewhat professorial man who urged the
party to change; his candidacy did not last. Mr. Tsongas still has to convince
many in the party that his candidacy is more than a very long shot.

L. Douglas Wilder
Governor of Virginia

Message: The Governor casts himself as the outsider who can reassert some fiscal
discipline in Washington. He says it is time to "put America first," and
proposes the Government give $35 billion in tax cuts to the middle class, with
another $15 billion sent to cities for problems like crime.

Mr. Wilder, the first black American ever elected governor, has increased
appeals for black support in recent weeks. And the very idea of his election
continues to strike a powerful chord among many white voters.  One of the
strongest responses he got this weekend came when he was talking of the Framers
and the inspiration he drew from their writings -- "those great Virginians who
may not have envisioned me when they wrote them," he said with a slight laugh,
adding, "Of course they didn't."

Problem: Mr. Wilder says his $50 billion "Put America First" program would be
financed by eliminating waste in the Federal budget, but has yet to detail any
cuts.

"I am telling you, based on my experience as Governor, I can find waste," he
finally told reporters.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination at a
dinner in Des Moines on Saturday were, from left, Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob
Kerrey of Nebraska, and Paul E.Tsongas, of Massachusettes. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sketches of Atlantis's Crew Members

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 738 words



Col. Frederick D. Gregory
Mission Commander

Colonel Gregory, a 50-year-old Air Force pilot and veteran of two shuttle
flights, made his first trip into space seven years ago. He commanded the
shuttle mission, the Discovery, in 1989.

Colonel Gregory, who received pilot's wings in 1965, completed more than 550
combat missions in Vietnam and was awarded two Air Force Distinguished Flying
Crosses. He then served as a research test pilot, flying fighters and
helicopters, before being selected as an astronaut in 1978. He has logged more
than 288 hours in space.

Colonel Gregory received a bachelor's degree in science from the Air Force
Academy and a master's degree in information systems from George Washington
University. He and his wife, Barbara, have a son and a daughter. His hometown is
Washington D.C.

Lieut. Col. Terence T. Henricks
Pilot

Colonel Henricks, an Air Force pilot, is making his first trip into space. NASA
named him as an astronaut in 1985 and since then he has been evaluating shuttle
landing sites worldwide.

Before becoming an astronaut, Colonel Henricks, 39, flew F-4 fighters in England
and Iceland. He has logged more than 3,200 hours in flight and has flown 30
different types of aircraft.

He received a bachelor's degree in civil engineering from the Air Force Academy
and a master's degree in public administration from Golden Gate University. He
is separated and has two daughters and a son. His hometown is Woodville, Ohio.

Lieut. Col. James S. Voss
Mission Specialist

This will be the first shuttle mission for Colonel Voss of the Army, who became
an astronaut in 1987.

After serving as a platoon leader and company commander in Germany, he taught at
the United States Military Academy for three years. He became a test pilot and
has been working as an engineer since 1984 at the Johnson Space Center, where he
helped investigate the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger and has worked
as a specialist in shuttle safety.

Colonel Voss, 42, received a bachelor's degree in aerospace engineering from
Auburn University and a master's degree in aerospace engineering from the
University of Colorado. He and his wife, Suzan, have a daughter. His hometown is
Opelika, Ala.

F. Story Musgrave
Mission Specialist

Dr. Musgrave has logged 413 hours in space and is a veteran of three space
missions: the maiden voyage of the shuttle Challenger in April 1983, the
launching of Spacelab 2 in July 1985 and the voyage of the shuttle Discovery in
November 1989.

Dr. Musgrave, 54, is a veteran of the Marine Corps and a graduate of the Naval
Airman Preparatory School.

He earned bachelor's degrees in mathematics and statistics from Syracuse
University and in chemistry from Marietta College; master's degrees in computer
programming from the University of California Los Angeles, in physiology and
biophysics from the University of Kentucky and in literature from the University
of Houston; and a doctorate in medicine from Columbia University.

He was employed as a mathematician by the Eastman Kodak Company, and served a
surgical internship at the University of Kentucky Medical Center.

Dr. Musgrave and his wife, Carol, have two daughters and three sons. His
hometown is Lexington, Ky.

Lieut. Comdr. Mario Runco Jr.
Mission Specialist

Commander Runco, 39, of the Navy is making his first space flight.

Before becoming an astronaut in 1987, Commander Runco worked as a research
hydrologist for the United States Geological Survey and as a New Jersey State
Trooper. He joined the Navy and worked as a research meteorologist, conducting
oceanographic surveys of the Java Sea and Indian Ocean.

Commander Runco received a bachelor's degree in meteorology and physical
oceanography from the City College of New York and a master's degree in
meteorology from Rutgers University. He and his wife, Susan, have a daughter and
a son. His hometown is Yonkers.

Chief Warrant Officer Thomas J. Hennen
Payload Specialist

This will be the first space flight for Chief Warrant Officer Hennen, 39.

He has served more than 18 years in the Army, working primarily in military
intelligence and training. He was awarded three United States Army Meritorious
Service Medals.

Mr. Hennen attended Urbana College and completed a number of military courses of
instruction.

He is divorced and has two sons and a daughter. His hometown is Columbus, Ohio.

NAME: Frederick D. Gregory; Terence T. Henricks; Story Musgrave; James S. Voss;
Mario Runco Jr.; Thomas J. Hennen

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Nixon in the Aftermath of Watergate

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1089 words


Nixon
Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990
By Stephen E. Ambrose
Illustrated. 667 pages. Simon & Schuster. $27.50.

In this third volume of his biography of Richard M. Nixon, Stephen E. Ambrose
continues the monumental exercise in ambivalence that he began in "Nixon: The
Education of a Politician, 1913-1962" (1987) and continued in "Nixon: The
Triumph of a Politician, 1962-1972" (1989). Both his admiration and his disdain
grow more pronounced in "Nixon: Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990." Yet they remain
in balance. The question is, with all that has been written on the last phases
of Mr. Nixon's career, including many books by the former President himself, is
it worth plowing through 600 more pages to experience this peculiar balance?

Throughout his more than 2,000-page study, Mr. Ambrose -- a professor of history
at the University of New Orleans who has also written five volumes on the life
of Dwight D. Eisenhower -- has shown us Mr. Nixon through the wrong end of a
telescope. By this I mean that he has compacted the events of the former
President's life instead of magnifying and looking deeper into them, as, say,
Roger Morris did in the impressive first volume of his study, "Richard Milhous
Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician" (1989).

In his first two volumes, Mr. Ambrose's approach had the advantage of placing
events in clearer perspective and the drawback of perpetuating what Mr. Morris,
from his persuasive point of view, regards as myth, for instance the notion that
Mr. Nixon was lifted in his early career by a grass-roots movement of small
businessmen and civic leaders chafing at the New Deal, instead of by
special-interest groups composed of the rich and powerful.

In this new volume, the advantages of shrinking events grow stronger.  Most of
the story is about Watergate, of course, and Mr. Ambrose draws overwhelmingly on
the published record of the last 20 years for his material (with the curious
exception of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's "All the President's Men," which,
although he emphasizes The Washington Post's contribution to investigating
Watergate, he almost completely ignores, perhaps because he takes a dim view of
the two reporters' later book, "The Final Days").

By putting it all together, Mr. Ambrose gives the events of Watergate a fresh
coherence. He makes us see how the participants kept reinventing themselves and
revising history on those endless, incoherent White House tapes. And he makes it
finally crystal clear just why the recording of June 23, 1972, in which the
President seems to approve a plan by John Dean, the White House counsel, "to
tell the C.I.A. to tell the F.B.I. to back off its investigation" of the
Watergate break-in, and that of March 21, 1973, in which the President appears
to condone the payment of money to E. Howard Hunt to keep quiet about his role
in the break-in, were so instrumental in bringing Mr., Nixon down. In short, he
illuminates as never before just what happened in Watergate, which may have been
trivial in its substance but was horrendous in the shadows it cast.

Similarly, Mr. Ambrose puts in perspective how close the Nixon Presidency came
to achieving peace in the Middle East, to reaching an honorable solution to
Vietnam and to working out a compromise between rivalry and accommodation with
the Soviet Union, and yet how far short it fell, precisely because it was
hamstrung by Watergate.


For a young reader who comes fresh to the scene, "Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990"
is as good an introduction as any I know of to Watergate and its aftermath. But
to someone who lived through the scandal and has read most of the literature on
it, Mr. Ambrose tells a wearying, distressing story that is painful to read
again.

In fact, I was about to toss it aside when I was struck yet again by the
incomprehensible sadness of Mr. Nixon's downfall and suffering, the mystery of
which must lie in whatever inexplicable quality makes the man ultimately
attractive to Mr. Ambrose. And then suddenly one feels outrage that the author
calls the aftermath of that downfall -- the period from 1974, when Mr. Nixon
resigned, to 1990, when he had apparently risen to the status of elder statesman
-- a "recovery."

Is it really a "recovery" when, as Mr. Ambrose points out, the mainly
anti-Communist ideological message of the books that Mr. Nixon has earned so
much by writing contradicts what he worked for as President in opening up China
and seeking detente with the Soviet Union? Is it a "recovery" when the draw of
his several lucrative television appearances has been based largely on the vain
hope that he will some day admit to having committed wrong in the events of
Watergate and then apologize for doing so?

Is it a "recovery" when, in what the author calls Mr. Nixon's "last laugh," he
presides over the glorious opening on July 19, 1990, of a library in his name
that contains little more in the way of documents than the books he and his
family have written? Has Richard Nixon really wiped away the stain of Watergate
and assumed a place in future history as a great President?

No, he has not, Mr. Ambrose concludes in the final frenzy of ambivalence that
constitutes his Epilogue: Despite the many admirable character traits that have
enabled Mr. Nixon to keep coming back (if he ever had a heart attack, Mr.
Ambrose reports Bryce Harlow as saying, he would breathe into his own mouth and
resuscitate himself), he doesn't even rate as a good President because of his
irredeemable character flaws. And in the name of preserving the greatness of the
office, he held onto it so long that he ended up weakening it.

And yet. And yet. The final sentence of this volume reads: "When Nixon resigned,
we lost more than we gained." And in his acknowledgments, Mr. Ambrose confesses
that in writing Volume 3, "I found, to my astonishment, that I had developed a
liking for him." He concludes: "I have lived with him for up to ten hours per
day, almost every day, for seven years, and never once got bored."

Mr. Ambrose never arrives at the succinct conclusion that "Ruin and Recovery"
suggests, which is that if Watergate was more shadow than substance, shadow was
precisely what Richard Nixon was such a master at casting in his quest for the
substance of power. So it was not entirely inappropriate that Watergate brought
him down.

But the author's concluding zigzags do suggest another fitting final judgment of
both his biography and its subject: They may drive you crazy, but they never
make you bored.

NAME: Richard M. Nixon

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Television;
Hawkeye and Company In a 'M*A*S*H' Salute

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 719 words


"The nervousness of the network," says Alan Alda, "was kind of a clue that we
were on the right track."

The actor, taped in London during a stage engagement in "Our Town," is of course
talking about one of CBS's most successful and distinguished series, the one
being saluted this evening at 9:30 with a retrospective special called "Memories
of 'M*A*S*H.' " The show was, as someone notes in passing, television's first
dramedy.

Again Mr. Alda: " 'M*A*S*H' had "the ability to take us from comedy to drama and
sometimes back again in seconds." The humor could be either wackily broad or
subtly irreverent. Supposedly about the Korean War of the early 1950's, much of
the series was broadcast during the Vietnam War in the 1970's, and its distaste
for war in general was unmistakable. Certainly in terms of liberal political
correctness, the series -- which turned out 251 episodes from 1972 to 1983 --
was at least a decade ahead of its time. Mr. Alda's Hawkeye, whom the macho
1980's tended to dismiss as wimpish, now looks like the perfect kind of
sensitive 1990's fellow who knows and respects the boundaries of, say, sexual
harassment.

"M*A*S*H" actually started as a book by "Richard Hooker," who was really Dr.
Richard Hornberger recalling, 12 years after the fact, the 18 months he had
spent in Korea as a surgeon. The book then became a 20th Century Fox movie,
adapted by Ring Lardner Jr., and directed by Robert Altman. Starring Elliot
Gould, Donald Sutherland and Sally Kellerman, "M*A*S*H" the movie was hailed for
its hilariously dark humor. Fox decided to try a television series. The producer
and director Gene Reynolds, the writer Larry Gelbart and the casting director
Burt Metcalfe became the key off-camera creative forces.

The series got off to a less than promising start. Rolling off the bitingly
satirical movie, the television version seemed tame and rather flat. But here,
certainly, was a series that would make the most of the development time it
needed, time it would not get in today's anxiety-ridden marketplace. By the
start of the second year, the series had developed one of the most closely knit
repertory companies in the business. Over the years, stars like Wayne Rogers and
McLean Stevenson would depart, but they would be brilliantly replaced, not
impersonated, by Mike Farrell and Harry Morgan.

Even more to the point, the writers gradually became more confident and
adventurous. They began battling not just all the standard production odds, but
also the executive jitters at the network and studios. New writers were
encouraged to do their best. One was Linda Bloodworth-Thompson, hired when
female writers were still something of a rarity on weekly television. With Mary
Kay Place, she wrote the second season's "Hot Lips and Empty Arms" episode,
which enabled Loretta Swit's character, Margaret, to become far more complex.
Today, of course, Ms. Bloodworth-Thompson is better known as the creator of the
CBS series "Designing Women" and "Evening Shade." Mr. Gelbart, who stayed with
the series for four years, was clearly its creative guru.

"M*A*S*H" had, and still retains in reruns, an uncanny ability to veer off in
unexpected directions. Even the supposedly minor characters could be surprising.
The naive and innocent Radar (Gary Burghoff) meets a wounded soldier claiming to
be Jesus Christ and, without missing a beat, asks him to bless his Teddy bear.
Klinger (Jamie Farr) gets news of death, and his reaction is terribly moving
despite the fact that he's dressed up like Carmen Miranda. The new colonel (Mr.
Morgan) turns out to be nuttier than the troops.

Oddly enough, one of the best episodes was largely unscripted. "The Interview"
had the company responding, on black-and-white tape, to the questions of a
television reporter. The actors simply spoke as they thought their characters
might in a similar situation. Mr. Gelbart speaks about the final effect being
"artful in its very artlessness." Stopping to address the camera seriously, for
instance, Hawkeye says, "Now that I'm here, I can't understand why anybody would
willingly go into a war."

Hawkeye, and Mr. Alda's performance, reflected what "M*A*S*H" was at its core:
earnest, decent, enlightened, hilarious, moving and, more often than anyone had
a right to expect, memorable.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "M*A*S*H" is being saluted tonight on CBS. Wayne Rogers, left,
played Trapper John McIntyre, and Alan Alda was Hawkeye Pierce.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 25, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Yugoslavia Sanctions Can Only Do Harm

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 355 words


To the Editor:

Re "Serbia's Spiteful War" (editorial, Nov. 6): I would like to offer my opinion
as a writer who is American and Yugoslav, and has just returned from months in
Yugoslavia. My interest is not to discuss who is right or wrong in this sad,
murky civil war.

I am against economic sanctions of Serbia (or Croatia) because they hurt people
who most need it -- the poor, the old, the very young. The population of Serbia
is only about 65 percent Serbian, so you would also punish Albanians, Croats,
Germans, Hungarians, gypsies. Sanctions would stop the healthy process of
establishing a multiparty system and freedom of the press, despite the war. In
Belgrade, newspapers attack each other and argue as much as the people do on the
street and at home.

The sanctions would stop the growing middle class and businesses just starting.
They would add to the feelings of rage and injustice many have: Serbia lost a
million people in World War I and was bombed again in World War II. The bulk of
the anti-Fascist partisan army was Serb, only a small fraction of it Communist.

This is a family feud in which much patience and forgiveness will be needed on
both sides. There are three million children of mixed marriages, and the United
States should not increase rage and separations. Help everyone equally, or 20
years from now, you'll have a new generation raging with memories of injustice.

If you want to help, stop the arms deliveries on both sides. Yugoslavia has
become a dump for outmoded West European machinery you can't get parts for.
Serbs and Croats are killing one another with dumdum bullets, which were
outlawed after the Vietnam War. Doctors in Belgrade told me they had never seen
such wounds: the bullet explodes inside the flesh, tearing it apart.

Weapons are not in short supply in Yugoslavia, and somebody out there must be
making a profit. So why economic sanctions on Serbia? Why not sell Serbians, at
very low prices, what they'll need: food, medicine, a way to rebuild?

NADJA TESICH
New York, Nov. 7, 1991

The writer is author of "Shadow Partisan," a novel about the Balkans.

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-13

U.S. MOVES TO RECOGNIZE UKRAINE

President Bush has decided to recognize an independent Ukraine "expeditiously"
if the second-largest Soviet republic breaks with Moscow in a referendum on
Sunday. The decision represents a major shift in American policy away from the
central Soviet Government.  Page A1

KHMER ROUGE CHIEF ASSAULTED

Screaming "murderer" and vowing to "kill the monster," a mob of revenge-seeking
Cambodians beat and bloodied Khieu Samphan, a senior Khmer Rouge leader, and
forced him to flee to Thailand only hours after he returned to the Cambodian
capital under the auspices of a United Nations peace treaty.  A1

U.N. BACKS YUGOSLAV PEACE FORCE

The Security Council pledged to send a peacekeeping force of up to 10,000
soldiers to reinforce the fragile cease-fire in Yugoslavia if the warring Serbs
and Croats show they really want peace. The council had to overcome the
reservations of many countries worried about creating a precedent by intervening
in what is essentially a civil war.  A1

ISRAEL REBUFFS U.S. ON TALKS

In a blunt challenge to the United States, Israel rejected an American call for
a new round of peace negotiations in Washington next week. It proposed instead
that the talks be delayed for five days and then moved quickly to a new site in
or near the Middle East.  A1

U.S. officials admit Middle East peace efforts are in trouble.  A10

U.S. AND IRAN REACH SETTLEMENT

The United States has agreed to pay Iran $278 million to compensate it for
undelivered American-made military equipment bought by Teheran before Iran's
1979 revolution. American officials denied that the deal reached in The Hague
was linked to the fate of three remaining American hostages.  A3

DEMAND FOR LIBYANS' EXTRADITION

The United States and Britain increased pressure on Libya, demanding that it
surrender the two intelligence agents who have been charged with the bombing of
Pan Am Flight 103. No deadline was set for compliance and there was no mention
of possible retaliatory steps.  A3

Moscow Journal: Cold-turkey capitalist vs. timid reformers.  A4

Bishops meeting in Rome on rebuilding church in Eastern Europe.  A13

Haitians are in limbo at a new American tent camp in Cuba. A6

The A.N.C. is accused of a secret transition deal with Pretoria. A12

NATIONAL A16-21, B14-18, D20-22

BILLIONS MORE IN BAILOUTS

Hurrying to wrap up legislation before adjourning until January, Congress
approved two bailout measures totaling more than $100 billion: one for the
nation's banking industry, the other to continue the Government's rescue of
hundreds of savings and loan associations.  A1

FORETASTE OF A COMING BATTLE

Preparing the ground for a showdown with President Bush next year, Congressional
Democrats announced a series of public hearings in December on tax policy and
the state of the economy.  D20

News analysis: How the tax-cut issue emerged.  D20

The crime bill was passed by the House but died in the Senate.  D22

Congress approved new rules on Medicaid financing.  D20

Reporter's Notebook: At Capitol, the hours were few, but very long.  D21

HE WAS SURE YOU'D ASK

White House Memo: As an episode this week made clear, the President has many of
his exchanges with ordinary citizens scripted by aides, so that questions are
known in advance and the answers are readily at hand.  A16

A SOLDIER'S STORY

In Vietnam one day 23 years ago, a surgeon tried to save the life of a young
soldier with both legs nearly blown off, damaged eye tissue and extensive head
injuries. The surgeon succeeded, but for years he wondered to what end. Now he
has some answers, as does the soldier.  A16

DOROTHY, THE WIZARD AND GOD

At the annual convention of the American Academy of Religion, scholars rushed to
sessions on topics like reincarnation in Hinduism, Ugaritic ritual texts -- and
the religious significance of "The Wizard of Oz." A16

WHERE DID AIDS COME FROM?

In a provocative hypothesis that has startled experts, an Oxford University
researcher has proposed that AIDS may have entered the human population in a
bizarre series of malaria experiments.  B14

A PROFESSOR'S PAST

Events of half a century ago have become a center of controversy at the
University of Chicago, where a visiting professor has been accused of writing
anti-Semitic views as a young woman in Nazi Germany.  B16

The text of the President's Thanksgiving Day proclamation.  B18

Maryland proposed linking welfare to "greater personal responsibility." B17

A plot against Puerto Rican independence advocates was uncovered.  A21

The Atlantis astronauts passed a tricky test.  A16

METROPOLITAN Digest, B1

LEARNING ENGLISH AND MORE

On Thanksgiving, Americans usually go home. But the students enrolled in the
English as a Second Language class in Brooklyn have left their homes far behind.
The class gives the students English, and brings them closer to making America
their home.  A1

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

The Home Section
Sailing through a skyful of Thanksgiving reveries.  C1
Explaining thankfulness to the young.  C1
Sitting down in style.  C1
Parent & Child.  C2
Making an understatement.  C8

Arts/Entertainment
Court eases curb on biographers' use of unpublished material.  C13
Music: Music Notes.  C13
Juan Luis Guerra y 440.  C13
Dance: Three by Balanchine.  C13
Word and Image: "Deadline," a memoir by James Reston.  C18
Home Video.  C19

Obituaries D23
Norman B. Norman, former ad and marketing adviser

Sports B20-28
Baseball: Mets land Murray.  B21
Reds send Davis to Dodgers.  B21
Boxing: Dismissal of charges in Tyson case denied.  B26
Column: Anderson on good guys in sports.  B21
Football: Handley seeks light touch amid troubles.  B21
Soccer: U.S. women blaze way to final.  B21

Editorials/Op-Ed
Editorials A26
Israel's coffee spoons.
Talking turkey about the bird.
End to the slaughter at sea.
David Anderson: Homeless.
Letters A26
Tom Wicker: Bypassing Congress.  A27
William Safire: Langley greets Lubyanka.  A27
David Hackett Fischer: Multicultural fowl.  A27

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A tent city for Haitian refugees at Guantanamo naval base.  A6
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Years After War's Trauma, Lives of 2 Men Reconverge

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ga., Nov. 26


Ever since he was wounded in Vietnam in the fall of 1968, the autumn months have
been troubling for Kenneth J. McGarity.

Without warning, the battle scenes and sounds heard by a 19-year-old soldier
come raging back, bringing tension and anxiety and a painstaking effort by Mr.
McGarity's wife, Theresa, to avoid the countless arguments they have caused over
the years.

Part of the problem was the "blank spaces," the 43-year-old Mr. McGarity said
Tuesday as he sat in his home here and strained to explain the feelings of
surviving a trauma so violent that the surgeon who first treated his wounds is
convinced that the patient and God played the biggest parts.

There always was a frustrating quest for details, colors, images of the moments
from the time a rocket exploded at Mr. McGarity's helicopter gunner position to
the time he regained consciousness.

Triage -- treating first the wounded who were most likely to survive -- was
routine 23 years ago at the 71st Evacuation Hospital outside Pleiku, Vietnam.
But Dr. Kenneth G. Swan, a 33-year-old-trauma surgeon had been there only a
month when he instinctively decided to try to save the life of the young soldier
with both legs nearly blown off, damaged eye tissue and severe head injuries.

Dr. Swan succeeded, but for years, he wondered to what end. Most of the time he
suppressed the memory of the young man. Occasionally he imagined him leading a
life with no purpose, tucked away in a chronic-care center, or perhaps long
since dead by his own hand, a victim of the oppressive weight of his injuries.

This fall both men found answers to some of their questions and relief from
their very different agonies. Dr. Swan and Mr. McGarity met for the second time
in September, a reunion that was the subject of an article on Monday in the
American Medical Association's American Medical News.

As a result, Mr. McGarity said his Thanksgiving and holiday season would be that
much more "soft and warm and festive." Dr. Swan said the meeting was a reminder
of "how grateful and humble" he should be.

Medicine in Perspective

What the 56-year-old doctor found at the reunion was a blind, double amputee who
had fathered two children, managed to attend college for two years, teach
himself to play the piano and trumpet and learn to sail and scuba dive. More
important, Dr. Swan said, he found in Mr. McGarity a determination that put in
perspective the skills of doctors.

"I realized that we as doctors contribute a relatively small amount to patient
outcome," said the doctor, a trauma surgeon at the University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark. "We are 5 percent. God and the patient are
the rest."

Mr. McGarity, a garrulous man who wheels himself about his house narrowly
avoiding walls and furniture in a practiced way, said that at first the prospect
of meeting the surgeon and the memories that it would excite troubled him. But
he was more troubled by the haziness that was the fall of 1968, a time when he
was passing in and out of consciousness, not knowing who was ministering to him
or what they were doing, and then slowing coming to the realization that he was
blind and without legs.

"Having it all portrayed to me, giving colors to the pictures in my mind was
important," he said. He compared what some would consider the morbid details of
his injuries to the childhood memories that others savor and sift for their
meanings.

"It might seem morbid to want to know if my legs were still attached somehow or
not when they bought me in," Mr. McGarity said, "but the more color I can add,
the more complete my life is. The old McGarity was dead then and that's when I
started rebuilding myself."

Three years after he returned from Vietnam, Mr. McGarity married. He receives
veterans' benefits and is not employed, but his wife works at a day-care center.

Mrs. McGarity said the reunion seemed to change some things for her husband.
There are still nightmares and frequent talk about the war and even some
arguments. "But he has put more of the pieces together now, and Dr. Swan coming
here sort of made everything more rounded and smooth," she said.

Dr. Swan said the decision to seek out Mr. McGarity began to take shape two
years ago when he lectured at a symposium on trauma. For the first time, he
said, he spoke publicly about the incident. In such situations, Dr. Swan said,
the wounded most likely to survive with the likelihood of "a meaningful life"
were given priority.

Although many colleagues disagreed with Dr. Swan's efforts to save the severely
wounded Mr. McGarity, he devoted nine hours and focused the skills of five
specialists on the young soldier. "I was criticized for what I did and I took
the criticism seriously and felt that I had probably made a mistake," the doctor
said. "They moved him four days later, and I remember a chaplain's assistant who
knew him telling me that he had made it back to the U.S. I remember thinking
that was good, but maybe it wasn't because what kind of life could he lead?"

When he started his search, Dr. Swan's only clue to the soldier's identity was a
recollection that they shared the same first name. But with the help of Peter
MacPherson, a freelance writer and friend who was interested in the case, the
search led to Mr. McGarity's home. Dr. Swan, too, approached a possible meeting
with trepidation and at first inquired through third parties about Mr.
McGarity's condition and his life before deciding to try a meeting.

"I found this remarkably resilient individual who had a will to overcome what
for many would be insurmountable and who had a meaningful life," Dr. Swan said.

Surrounded by his wife and two daughters, Alicia, 18, and Elizabeth 12, Mr.
McGarity does not romanticize about his condition and his life. He admits he was
addicted to pain medications early in his recovery, though he said he overcame
them with the help of the medical staff at the Veterans' Hospital at Hinds, Ill.

And he still experiences the effects of post traumatic shock syndrome, when deep
despair nearly overcomes him.  When these feelings overtake him, he does not
exhibit what his friends and family say is his normal, almost compulsive need to
prove wrong those who say he cannot do certain things.

Marion Early was a nurse at the Veterans' Hospital at Hinds, where Mr. McGarity
was a patient for more than a year. They have become friends and keep in touch.
She recalled him as someone who initially required "pushing" but who eventually
grew to enjoy surprising other people and even himself with what he could
accomplish.

"Once he got through it he did all right," Ms. Early said with pride and
affection.

In the end, Mr. McGarity said, it was a simple decision for him.

"What are my choices?" he said. "I could either vegetate or live my life. I had
to prove myself to others or they would just put me in a room and leave me."

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kenneth J. McGarity, who lost his sight and the lower portion of
his body when he was wounded in Vietnam in 1968, recently met the doctor who
made the decision to save his life. With Mr. McGarity outside his home in
Columbus, Ga., was his wife, Theresa, and their daughter Elizabeth. (Alan S.
Weiner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words


800 Number for 'Nature'

During broadcasts of "Land of the Eagle," the "Nature" series special on PBS
this week (all eight parts are on Channel 13 today from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.),
viewers have been invited to dial an 800 number and order the video. A line on
the television screen with the number reads, "Offer made by Thirteen/WNET" and
it is explained that some of the proceeds will help support similar specials in
the future. No other details of the offer are given.

Viewers' calls are answered by a telemarketing service that takes orders but
does not identify the supplier: Time-Life Video of Alexandria, Va., a part of
Time Warner, which sells videos by mail order. Through an agreement with WNET,
which co-produced "Land of the Eagle" with the BBC, Time-Life has exclusive home
video rights to "Land of the Eagle" (another company, PBS Video, sells to
schools and libraries). The program is not yet available in video stores.
Callers may order the entire series for $149.94 or receive it cassette by
cassette via subscription. A spokesman for Time-Life wouldn't say how much of
the proceeds will go to WNET.

The spokesman did say that callers for "Land of the Eagle" might be approached
to buy other Time-Life titles like Bill Moyers's "Power of Myth" or Ken Burns's
"Civil War," which was broadcast on PBS last year with a similar video offer
from Time-Life. The company, which has access to Time-Warner's mailing list of
about 45 million names, likes big, well-financed documentaries. "Things that get
made for broadcasting are the source for us," said Candice Carpenter, Time-Life
Video's president. "They have the budgets to make what we need for the video
market."

The company, she added, also favors broad subjects rather than narrow ones
presented from a single point of view. She said this was not because Time-Life
wanted to avoid controversy so much as that it wanted to appeal to the collector
who might like to watch an opinionated documentary once but not necessarily over
and over. One future project being contemplated, she said, is a series about the
Bible with Charlton Heston.

The Addamses of TV

In one episode Pugsley turns in his pet octopus; in another Morticia welcomes an
escaped gorilla into the household. The lines are around the block at theaters
for "The Addams Family" of the movies, but there's also a crowd at video stores
for "The Addams Family" of television, the series from the mid-60's. Twelve
episodes on six tapes, the first ever released of the show, which stars Carolyn
Jones as Morticia, John Astin as Gomez and Jackie Coogan as Uncle Fester, are
$9.95 a tape. To date there are 150,000 copies in the stores, according to Gary
Delfiner, a vice president of Worldvision, which distributes the title.

New Video Releases

City Slickers 1991. New Line. $99.95. Laser disk, $34.98. 1 hour, 54 minutes.
Closed captioned. PG-13.

When midlife troubles get the better of them, three Eastern dudes (Billy
Crystal, Daniel Stern and Bruno Kirby) head out to a New Mexico ranch, where
they hope a couple of weeks of fresh air and an Outward Bound-style cattle drive
will restore their spirits. "Go and find your smile," says the wife of one.
There to help, if he doesn't kill them in the process, is a flinty trail boss
named Curly (Jack Palance), and when day is done the boys hunker around the
campfire and sort out their problems in a "comedy that's cheery, earnest,
harmless and almost totally lacking in bite" (Janet Maslin).

Soapdish
1991. Paramount. $91.95. LD, $34.95. 1:37. CC. PG-13.

For Celeste Talbert (Sally Field), the exquisitely insecure star of the soap
opera "The Sun Also Sets," real life, or as real as it gets for Celeste, is
every bit the half-crazed melodrama it is on the set. Enter Jeffery Anderson
(Kevin Kline), suave if bruised veteran of supper club theater who might have
gone on to soap stardom himself had he not been done in by Celeste, a former
lover, 20 years earlier. Will the couple reunite? Will Celeste, collecting
statuettes at soap award ceremonies and battling a treacherous producer (Robert
Downey Jr.), survive the plot to dump her from the show? Michael Hoffman's film
is "an uneven but often sidesplitting look at the soap opera cast and its
conspiratorial backstage antics" (Maslin).

Toy Soldiers
1991. Columbia/Tri-Star. $92.86. LD, $34.95. 1:44. CC. R.

Prep school isn't all tea and sympathy, as terrorists discover when they take
over the Regis School and grab as hostages a student body of born resistance
fighters. From secret ducts and passageways only adolescents know about, the
youngsters (Sean Astin, Will Wheaton and Keith Coogan, among others), aided by
the dean (Louis Gossett Jr.), wage guerrilla war and overcome their fears in a
"crisp, suspenseful thriller well tailored to the tastes of teen-age audiences"
(Maslin).

Out for Justice
1991. Warner. $94.99. LD, $24.98. 1:31. CC. R.

Out for law and order no matter how many people he has to throw through
windshields, Gino Felino (Steven Seagal) earns a little respect from Brooklyn
lowlife. Mr. Seagal mixes street smarts, swagger and the air of a Hollywood
star, "maintaining that scowl and pretending not to enoy it" (Maslin).

Shadow of China
1991. New Line. $89.95. 1:40. PG-13.

A Hong Kong banker with a shady past, Henry (John Lone) is a sort of Asian Jay
Gatsby who strives to take over a newspaper. Set against the city's political
uncertainties, Mitsuo Yanagimachi's film fails to live up to its thematic
richness, but does convey "an uneasy sense of the world shifting under people's
feet" (Stephen Holden).

High Tide

A star of the current hit "Cape Fear" as well as the forthcoming "Prince of
Tides," Nick Nolte has come far from the days when one film writer described him
simply as "a blond leading man of Hollywood." Here are some Nolte films
available on tape.

WHO'LL STOP THE RAIN. Mr. Nolte is a Vietnam veteran who agrees to smuggle
heroin back to California. Karel Reisz's film is based on Robert Stone's book
"Dog Soldiers." 1978. MGM/UA. $29.99. 2:06. R.

NORTH DALLAS FORTY. A banged-up, hard-partying wide receiver (Mr. Nolte) tackles
the Dallas pro football establishment. 1979. Paramount. $14.99. 1:58. R.

CANNERY ROW. From two John Steinbeck novels comes the story of a biologist and
retired baseball player (Mr. Nolte) who gets involved with a prostitute (Debra
Winger). 1982. MGM/UA. $19.98. 2:00. PG.

GRACE QUIGLEY. In not everybody's idea of a comedy, an elderly woman (Katharine
Hepburn) blackmails a hitman (Mr. Nolte) into killing other elderly people who
would like to die but can't bring themselves to commit suicide. 1985. MGM/UA.
$79.98. 1:27.

DOWN AND OUT IN BEVERLY HILLS. Mr. Nolte is a drifter who connives his way into
the affections of a coat-hanger manufacturer (Richard Dreyfuss). 1986. Buena
Vista. $19.95. 1:37. R.

FAREWELL TO THE KING. As a World War II deserter, Mr. Nolte becomes the leader
of a tribe in Borneo. 1988. Orion. $19.98. 1:57. PG-13.

NEW YORK STORIES. Directed by Martin Scorcese (his director in "Cape Fear"), Mr.
Nolte is a burned-out painter obsessed with his assistant (Rosanna Arquette).
Buena Vista. $19.95.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Astin and Carolyn Jones in a 1964 episode of "The Addams
Family." Twelve episodes of the show are on videocassette. (ABC); Kevin Kline
and Sally Field in a scene from "Soapdish." (Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 28, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Journalist Looks Back on His Life and World

BYLINE: By RONALD STEEL;  Ronald Steel is the author of "Walter Lippmann and the
American Century."

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1279 words


Deadline
A Memoir
By James Reston
Illustrated. 525 pages. Random House. $25.

In his 50 years as a reporter and columnist at The New York Times, James Reston
broke more big scoops, interviewed more big shots and won more kudos from his
fellows than just about anybody else in the business. He was the quintessential
Washington insider. Officials used him to test out new ideas on the public or to
drop leaks for which they did not want to be held accountable. Because of his
high position at The Times -- Washington bureau chief from 1953 to 1964, and
columnist from 1954 on -- and his personal integrity, he was trusted both by
those who provided the news and by those who read it.

But what he did so well and so usefully for so long could not be done today.
Journalism and the political world have changed too much. We do not live in Mr.
Reston's world anymore, and Mr. Reston himself has survived it. This, rather
than the lengthy span it covers, is what gives his amiable memoir such a
nostalgic quality.

"Deadline" is the cheerfully optimistic chronicle of a boy born in a Glasgow
slum in 1909 who moved to Ohio with his parents at the age of 10, played soccer
at the University of Illinois, and worked as a sportswriter in the Midwest, in
New York and in London until 1939, when -- because he always seemed to be in the
right place and meet the right person at the right time -- he was hired by The
Times.

His career soared like that of a hero in a Frank Capra movie. In 1944 he was
assigned to the Washington bureau to work under the imperious curmudgeon Arthur
Krock; in 1953 he took over the bureau; in 1954 he began writing the column that
he continued until a couple of years ago. For a few years beginning in 1968, he
was executive editor of the paper in New York, but he decided that he was
happier writing in Washington. During his half-century at The Times, he picked
up two Pulitzer Prizes, trained a host of younger journalists who are now
eminent figures themselves, and became the very model of the Washington
establishmentarian journalist.

There are several potential stories here. One is the autobiography of a man who
began as an immigrant outsider and came to be seen, though not necessarily by
himself, as the ultimate insider. Another is America's rise to global dominance
during a half-century that began with the outbreak of World War II in Europe on
the very day Mr. Reston went to work for The Times. A third is the great human
and organizational story of The Times itself, from the perspective of one who
enjoyed close relations with the family owners and who operated at the highest
levels of institutional power. A fourth is the impact that the media have had on
politics, on the framing of issues and on the way the country is governed.

Unfortunately, Mr. Reston has chosen instead to reminisce -- engagingly and
often sentimentally -- mostly on the surface of events. "Deadline" is a charming
story told on the front porch of Mr. Reston's rustic country cabin at dusk at
the end of a long summer day. Growing up poor in Scotland, being a schoolboy in
America with a troublesome accent, covering the daily agonies and triumphs of
athletic teams, marrying the most wonderful girl in the world, being where it
counted when it mattered, knowing all the movers and shakers of cold-war
Washington, watching the world transform itself at a dizzying pace, finding
oneself suddenly old: these are the themes of this memoir.

They are handled skillfully, if sketchily, for Mr. Reston is a fine writer, but
without an animating passion or sharp insight. One yearns for him to break out
in angry denunciation or lyrical embrace, to condemn, to exult or even to
instruct. But he is a moderate, forgiving man and, even when writing on the
scoundrels he has known, cannot resist the parting tip of the hat.

Although he criticizes President Reagan for "what he did to the mind of the
country, to its sense of fairness, its priorities, its better instincts," he
concludes by noting that "it was fun covering Ronald Reagan, sort of like going
to the movies." He writes of Richard M. Nixon's Presidency as "a tale of petty
betrayals and massive deceit" yet says that the man himself "covered up his good
qualities."

While observing that "many of our postwar follies resulted from impulsive
Presidential actions," he writes that the achievements of the cold-war
Presidents "will be remembered long after Vietnam, Watergate, Iraq, the budget
deficits and the political corruption and financial scandals are forgotten."
Sometimes one waits for an editorial comment that never comes. In writing about
Henry A. Kissinger, whom he admires, he reports with a straight face Mr.
Kissinger's belief that "we should never have gotten so involved in Vietnam in
the first place, and that he was a casualty of that war."

In a sense Mr. Reston never stopped being a sportswriter. In sports, when the
game is done, there are no good guys or bad guys, but just guys who tried to do
their best. "When you cover foreign policy, everything is hidden and you have to
wait a lifetime to know how it all comes out," he writes. "But sports are quite
different. They are out in the open. You know the players and feel their pain
and happiness." In his capsule portraits of some of the big players he has known
-- Dean Acheson, Arthur Vandenberg, John Foster Dulles, John F. Kennedy, Lyndon
B. Johnson -- one feels the locker room after the big game: the smell of sweat,
the satisfying exhaustion, the camaraderie of being in the fight together.

Mr. Reston holds no grudges, but he is deeply offended by those who betray the
rules, among them Senator Joseph McCarthy, who is perhaps the one unalloyed
villain of his career. McCarthy, of course, beat the press at its own game,
taking advantage of a journalistic tradition that barred reporters from
commenting on the news they relayed, no matter how phony the charges might be.
McCarthy, Mr. Reston writes, "knew how to take advantage of this 'cult of
objectivity,' " and the press did not know how to untie its own hands. "Putting
quotation marks around McCarthy's false charges did not relieve us of complicity
in McCarthy's campaign," he acknowledges. The same is true, one might add, in
David Duke's campaign today, for the problem has not been solved by the addition
of "news analysis" columns. By their attraction to sensationalism, the media,
particularly television, helps create the monsters that responsible journalists
like Mr. Reston deplore.

Mr. Reston was among the last of the gentleman columnists, passing on
information, gently admonishing, warmly inspiring. He rarely showed strong
political convictions, other than a decent, moderate liberalism, and was not
animated by fervently held ideas. He thrived in an era of consensus, and for
that reason he was at the peak of his influence in those years when
establishmentarian norms governed the political debate. The passion of the late
1960's, the sleaze of Nixon, the soporific banalities of Reagan left him without
an effective vocabulary and diminished his influence. He was a consensus-seeker
rather than a dragon-slayer. The bold resourcefulness he showed as a reporter
became muted in a column that suffered from a reach toward the philosophical.
Interestingly, in occasional columns since his retirement, he has allowed
himself to be tougher and more passionate.

Instead of offering a great reporter's insights or conclusions into the events
he wrote about, "Deadline" recounts them in tranquillity. A charming memoir,
though neither a challenging nor an illuminating one, it is a valentine to his
paper, his wife, his adopted country.

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Planning to Stick to Peace Plan

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 28


The Khmer Rouge, the rebel group responsible for the deaths of more than one
million Cambodians when it ruled Cambodia in the 1970's, have announced that
they will abide by a United Nations peace plan despite a brutal attack on its
nominal leader by a revenge-seeking mob in Cambodia.

In a broadcast late Wednesday by the Khmer Rouge radio, the group said it would
"not fall into the trap or maneuvers of the destroyers of the peace agreement."

On Wednesday, Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge theoretician whose economic
planning brought Cambodia to financial ruin in the 1970's and whose membership
in the Khmer Rouge inner circle has implicated him in the mass killings of his
compatriots, was nearly lynched by an angry crowd in Phnom Penh, only hours
after he returned to the Cambodian capital under auspices of the peace
settlement.

In the radio broadcast, the Khmer Rouge said: "We are of the opinion that
Cambodians of all bents should not quarrel and fight against each other.  All
Cambodians should unite and look to the future."

Pact's Benefits Cited

Diplomats said the radio broadcast suggested that the Khmer Rouge still saw too
many benefits in the United Nations-brokered peace settlement -- specifically,
the degree of international legitimacy it offers the organization -- to permit
it to collapse, at least for now.

"I'm sure the Khmer Rouge thinks that the Hun Sen Government was responsible for
the attack, or was at least responsible for not stopping it," an Asian diplomat
said. "For now, though, they have decided to hold their tongues."

After it was ousted from Phnom Penh in 1979 by a Vietnamese invasion, the Khmer
Rouge emerged as the largest and best-armed rebel force seeking the overthrow of
the Government that was installed by Hanoi and is now led by Prime Minister Hun
Sen. The rebel war lasted 12 years and was ended, at least formally, by the
United Nations accord signed last month in Paris.

Meeting Expected in Bangkok

Although Mr. Khieu Samphan is officially described as the leader of the Khmer
Rouge, their real leader is still believed to be Saloth Sar, better known by the
nom de guerre Pol Pot, whose brutal campaign to impose a Maoist agrarian
revolution on Cambodia in the 1970's lead to the mass killings and deaths. Pol
Pot is reported to be in hiding on the Thai-Cambodian border.

Diplomats said today that in response to the attack on Mr. Khieu Samphan, Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, the nation's newly restored head of state, had requested an
emergency meeting of the Supreme National Council, the coalition body created to
take part in running Cambodia until free elections can be held in 1993.

The meeting, the diplomats said, will apparently be held in Bangkok, with the
Thai Government acting as host. The Supreme National Council is made up of
representatives of the Hun Sen Government and the three guerrilla groups that
once sought to oust it: the Khmer Rouge, the followers of Prince Sihanouk and
those of former Prime Minister Son Sann.

The council had been scheduled to meet in Phnom Penh this Sunday, but the
meeting was canceled as a result of the attack on Mr. Khieu Samphan.

China, the chief diplomatic patron of the Khmer Rouge and its chief arms
supplier, said today that it was "deeply concerned" by the mob attack on Mr.
Khieu Samphan and other Khmer Rouge officials, and that the attack had set back
peace efforts.

"We were shocked to learn of the violent incident and are deeply concerned," the
Foreign Ministry said in a statement released in Beijing. The attack, it added,
"has impeded the implementation of peace agreements."

Thousands Surround Villa

Mr. Khieu Samphan arrived in Phnom Penh on Wednesday morning to take part in the
Supreme National Council meeting on Sunday.

Shortly after he arrived at a two-story villa in the center of Phnom Penh that
was to be his residence in the capital, it was surrounded by thousands of angry
Cambodians, many saying they were there to avenge family members slain by the
Khmer Rouge in the 1970's.

Several dozen burst past police officers and stormed into the villa, trapping
Mr. Khieu Samphan and other Khmer Rouge officials in an upstairs room, and
pummeling them with rocks and fists.

Mr. Khieu Samphan suffered a gash to the forehead, and blood streamed down his
head when he was rescued by Cambodian security forces and rushed to Phnom Penh's
international airport for evacuation to Bangkok. Diplomats said today that the
Khmer Rouge leader was not believed to have been seriously injured.

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Cambodian surveying the Phnom Penh villa where Khieu Samphan,
a senior Khmer Rouge leader, was attacked on Wednesday on his return from exile.
The house was to be Mr. Khieu Samphan's new residence. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 29, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Bar

BYLINE: By David Margolick

SECTION: Section D; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 796 words


No one in America has known more legal movers and shakers than Erwin N.
Griswold. As a student, professor and longtime dean at Harvard Law School, Mr.
Griswold watched generations of young men (and, eventually, a few young women)
evolve from hobbledehoys to honchos.

Consider, for instance, Mr. Griswold's unique perspective on the "Saturday Night
Massacre" of 1973. Archibald Cox, the Watergate special prosecutor cashiered by
President Richard M. Nixon, was a former student. So was Elliot L. Richardson,
the Attorney General, who resigned in protest over the dismissal, and William D.
Ruckelshaus, Mr. Richardson's deputy, who also quit.

Harvard ruled the elite legal community and, from the Fair Deal through the
Great Society, the crusty, curmudgeonly Mr. Griswold ruled Harvard.

Mr. Griswold, now 87 years old and still practicing law, has just published his
autobiography, "Ould Fields, New Corne: The Personal Memoirs of a Twentieth
Century Lawyer" (West Publishing Company). One would not expect anything
sidesplitting or titillating from Mr. Griswold, a stern, teetotaling type whose
greatest passions are the Federal tax code, postage stamps and state boundary
markers. A book dedicated to the legal profession ("With all its faults," it
"stands up well against other varieties of mankind") can hardly be an indictment
of it.

But while Mr. Griswold is no Geraldo Rivera, nor is he a Winston Churchill. His
book, unfortunately, is heavier on childhood memories, case synopses and foreign
itineraries than on anything particularly insightful about his own undeniably
distinguished career.

This is not due to either inattention to detail or a faulty memory. We do learn
about four centuries of Griswolds. We hear about his elementary school teachers,
Miss Sapp and Miss Leach. We follow him from Cleveland to Camp Pemigewassett to
Oberlin and Harvard, and his cars from a Model A Ford (1930) to a second-hand
Chevrolet (1934) to a Buick (1940). At last it can be told that during lunches
in Hoover-era Washington he had pie for dessert -- he does not specify which
flavor -- and that his law school roommate, later a prominent Connecticut judge,
"snored vigorously and violently."

There are a few revealing anecdotes: Mr. Griswold's Marshall Plan to humanize
Harvard Law School, for example, consisted of dismissing a crochety
receptionist, planting a few shrubs around Langdell Hall, starting a glee club
and hanging Christmas decorations each December. Otherwise, he sheds little
light on his years at Harvard's helm, a bygone time when deans could still be
despots.

He does examine Harvard's belated decision to admit women, beginning in 1950, a
move opposed by one professor (the model for Professor Kingsfield of the movie
and television series "The Paper Chase") because he would have to change all his
notes. But Mr. Griswold glosses over his own disputed role in Harvard's brush
with McCarthyism, when the Lubell brothers, Jonathan and David, were kept off
student organizations for refusing to testify before the Senate Internal
Security Subcommittee. He offers even fewer insights about Vietnam-era Harvard
or into his philosophy of legal education, except to gripe that law professors
write too little and that too much of what they do write is inside baseball.

Character analysis is not Mr. Griswold's strong suit. Longtime acquaintances
from Alger Hiss to J. Edgar Hoover go largely unexamined. Innumerable others are
described as "able." Moreover, though both as dean and Solicitor General of the
United States from 1967 to 1972 he argued dozens of cases before the United
States Supreme Court, he sheds light on none of the Justices he met along the
way.

William O. Douglas, John Marshall Harlan, Hugo Black, Earl Warren, William J.
Brennan Jr., all are either mentioned only in passing or ignored altogether. Of
Benjamin Cardozo, he says only that he was "a remarkably interesting man." As
for his one-time faculty colleague, Felix Frankfurter, whose chambers were a
virtual annex to the law school's alumni and placement offices during his High
Court years, we are told only that he had a "somewhat mercurial disposition."

If Mr. Griswold has no more to say about Washington than Cambridge, in this
instance he can at least plead ignorance. He concedes that he was "not aware of
the extent to which the Vietnam involvement affected President Johnson's
political situation," that he had known nothing in advance about Justice Abe
Fortas's resignation from the Supreme Court and that he had been entirely taken
aback by Watergate.

"Though I recognized that the higher levels of government were necessarily and
appropriately 'political,' " he writes, "I assumed in my naive way that they
were rational and essentially honest."

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Be Calm and Preserve Peace, Premier Urges Cambodians

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Nov. 29


Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia appealed to the public for calm today and
warned that an assault on a senior Khmer Rouge leader earlier this week had
threatened a United Nations-sponsored peace agreement.

His appeal in a radio address came as Thailand announced that leaders of the
four Cambodian factions involved in the peace agreement would meet in an
emergency session next week at a Thai resort town, Pattaya.

The assault Wednesday on Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmer Rouge
and one of the chief architects of policies that led to the deaths of more than
a million Cambodians in the 1970's, "seriously affected the process of
implementing the peace agreement," Mr. Hun Sen said.

"The attacks on, or murders of, a few Khmer Rouge leaders cannot solve the
problems of the entire nation," said Mr. Hun Sen, who leads the Cambodian
Government installed by Vietnam after its army invaded Cambodia in 1978 and
ousted the Khmer Rouge. "Hatred can only beget hatred," he said.

Seeking Reprisal for Atrocities

Mr. Khieu Samphan was nearly lynched by Cambodians seeking revenge for the
killings of their relatives. He suffered a head wound in the attack and was
flown out to Thailand hours after returning to Phnom Penh, the capital, from
more than a decade in exile.

The Khmer Rouge, which resumed the role of a guerrilla force after being
overthrown by the Vietnamese, is the militarily strongest of three rebel
factions that fought the Vietnamese-backed Phnom Penh Government from 1979
through the early part of this year.

Mr. Hun Sen today described Wednesday's attack, in which dozens of Cambodians
ransacked a Phnom Penh villa being used by the Khmer Rouge, as unplanned. He
noted that members of the Government forces were hurt as they tried to protect
Mr. Khieu Samphan from the furious crowd.

"It was most regrettable that an unplanned violent demonstration took place," he
said, adding pointedly, however, that his comments were not meant as any sign of
support for Mr. Khieu Samphan or his colleagues.

"My intervention in ordering the police and military forces to protect and save
the lives of Mr. Khieu Samphan and his colleagues from death does not mean that
I am defending the Khmer Rouge," said Mr. Hun Sen, a former Khmer Rouge soldier
who defected from the organization in the late 1970's.

Police Commitment Questioned

Witnesses who saw the attack Wednesday are divided on whether Cambodian police
officers made a serious attempt to control the rampage and prevent demonstrators
from entering the Khmer Rouge villa.

"Whatever they did, they didn't do enough," an Asian diplomat said. "The
Government should have planned for something like this. Because of the
Government's inattention to the security of the Khmer Rouge -- perhaps willful
inattention -- the whole peace accord is jeopardized."

Australia's Foreign Minister, Gareth Evans, a principal author of the Cambodian
peace agreement signed last month in Paris, said today that he did not believe
the assault on Mr. Khieu Samphan would seriously disrupt the peace process.

The Associated Press quoted Mr. Evans as saying in New Zealand that "there is
too much commitment by too many people for it to be thrown off the track by an
event of this kind." He also reportedly said that China, the chief arms supplier
to the Khmer Rouge, would not support any decision by the group to withdraw from
the peace process.

Other diplomats are not so sanguine, saying the attack could lead to, or hasten,
a Khmer Rouge decision to withdraw and resume the civil war.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, a former Cambodian head of state and rebel-faction
leader, who was recently chosen as chairman of the Supreme National Council, a
transitional committee to free elections, requested that the council meet. That
session in Thailand is to be held on Tuesday.

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Notable Books of the Year 1991

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 16354 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas Books issue
of December 1990. It suggests only high points in the main fields of reader
interest, and it does not include the titles chosen by the editors of The Book
Review as the Best Books of 1991. Books are arranged alphabetically under
subject headings.

Autobiography and Biography

ADAM CLAYTON POWELL, JR.: The Political Biography of an American Dilemma. By
Charles V. Hamilton. (Atheneum, $24.95.) Mr. Hamilton's diligent scholarship
captures the full life of an exciting man, at once a civil rights pioneer and a
buccaneer.

ANNE SEXTON: A Biography. By Diane Wood Middlebrook. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $24.95.) Ms. Middlebrook, a professor of English at Stanford, gives a
balanced, insightful, intelligent account of how a poorly educated, mentally ill
woman became a poet of distinctive and original gifts.

BERNARD SHAW. Volume Three: 1918-1950. The Lure of Fantasy. By Michael Holroyd.
(Random House, $30.) Mr. Holroyd's commanding life of Shaw concludes with the
years 1918-50 -- a long, strong period in which what amounted (for him) to
decline would have been more than strenuous for anyone else.

BEST NIGHTMARE ON EARTH: A Life in Haiti. By Herbert Gold. (Prentice Hall,
$19.95.) More a memoir than a travel book, the novelist's account of his
sojourns in Haiti since the 1950's amply justifies his membership in the
"fraternity of Haiti fanatics."

BLACK ICE. By Lorene Cary. (Knopf, $20.) Ms. Cary recounts her two years as a
black student at a New England boarding school, analyzing both her new
environment and her developing life in it.

BLOOD MEMORY. By Martha Graham. (Doubleday, $25.) Dictated in the final months
of her life, this intense autobiographical memoir by the great choreographer who
died in April at 96 goes far to explain how she got to be such a passionate
creature; with about 100 photographs from her own collection.

THE BOOKMAKER'S DAUGHTER: A Memory Unbound. By Shirley Abbott. (Ticknor &
Fields, $19.95.) A moving personal memoir that explores the histories of two
clever people -- the author herself and the father to whom age, experience and
disappointment brought not wisdom but bitterness.

BREAKING BARRIERS: A Memoir. By Carl Rowan. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) An
anecdotally rich memoir of the pioneering African-American journalist.

BROKEN VESSELS. By Andre Dubus. (Godine, $19.95.) This first book of
autobiographical (and often painful) essays by an outstanding fiction writer who
lost the use of his legs in 1986 seeks to capture the contradictory demands of
being an American man.

BY HER OWN HAND: Memoirs of a Suicide's Daughter. By Signe Hammer. (Soho Press,
$18.95.) A fascinating and disturbing family memoir that carefully follows to
their beginnings the threads of family history that ultimately converged in
disaster.

CELIA: A Slave. By Melton A. McLaurin. (University of Georgia, $19.95.) Through
ingenious use of local histories, newspapers, court records and census data,
Melton McLaurin pieces together the horrifying and shocking life story of a
woman who was purchased as a slave at age 14, raped repeatedly by the man who
bought her, and eventually hanged for killing him while warding off his
advances.

COLD WARRIOR. James Jesus Angleton: The CIA's Master Spy Hunter. By Tom Mangold.
(Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) An account of the C.I.A.'s 20-year chief of
counterintelligence and his futile, obsessive, destructive hunt for a Soviet
mole in the agency.

COMING INTO THE END ZONE: A Memoir. By Doris Grumbach. (Norton, $19.95.) This
curmudgeonly journal, begun at age 70, includes a list of "things I now actively
dislike."

COUNSEL TO THE PRESIDENT: A Memoir. By Clark Clifford with Richard Holbrooke.
(Random House, $25.) A life and a career of extraordinary scope, recalled by the
polished lawyer from St. Louis whose 45-year career as public and private
adviser to generations of Democrats discreetly made him one of the century's
most influential men.

A DAMNED SERIOUS BUSINESS. By Rex Harrison. (Bantam, $21.95.) A last observation
on a life in comedy, written shortly before his death. Though sometimes vulgar
and arrogant, Rex Harrison always worked at what he did best: presenting a
superior facade over calculated insecurity. This book is another demonstration
of his art.

DEADLINE: A Memoir. By James Reston. (Random House, $25.) The memoirs of a
reporter, editor and columnist of The New York Times who was effective, fair and
much admired in each position.

DICKENS. By Peter Ackroyd. (HarperCollins, $35.) A conventional, in some
respects old-fashioned biography, full of well-told anecdotes, that remains open
to the peculiarity of its subject.

THE DIVINE SARAH: A Life of Sarah Bernhardt. By Arthur Gold and Robert Fizdale.
(Knopf, $30.) An encyclopedic knowledge of things French underlies this splendid
evocation of the actress who ruled Western theater from the 1870's to well into
our century.

THE DREAM AT THE END OF THE WORLD: Paul Bowles and the Literary Renegades in
Tangier. By Michelle Green. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) A carefully researched life
and times of Tangier's most famous resident and the circles that moved around
him: outlaws, socialites, highly advanced fun seekers.

ENTRANCES & EXITS: A Life in and Out of the Theatre. By Norris Houghton.
(Limelight, $29.95.) A consistently amusing, pertinent and touching book of
memoirs at 81 by the illustrious producer, director, artistic director and
conscience of Off Broadway.

FORD MADOX FORD. By Alan Judd. (Harvard University, $27.50.) A friendly,
vivifying biography of the great editor, meticulous novelist, unwise lover and
disorganized Englishman (1873-1939).

FORTUNATE SON. By Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) The dark and
bitter, but ultimately redemptive, autobiography of a Vietnam veteran, the son
of a renowned Marine general, who was horribly mutilated in combat.

FREDERICK DOUGLASS. By William S. McFeely. (Norton, $24.95.) A detailed and
finely written portrait of the former slave who became a great orator, civil
rights crusader and editor.

FROM THE OLD MARKETPLACE. By Joseph Buloff. (Harvard University, $19.95.)
Posthumously published, this charming memoir by a veteran of the Yiddish and
Broadway theaters is cast as a tale of coming of age in prerevolutionary
Lithuania.

GOD, COUNTRY, NOTRE DAME. By Theodore M. Hesburgh with Jerry Reedy. (Doubleday,
$21.95.) The life of the priest best known as the president of the University of
Notre Dame reads like oral history -- easily, at times breezily, as if the
author were just chatting about himself.

GOETHE: THE POET AND THE AGE. Volume One: The Poetry of Desire (1749-1790). By
Nicholas Boyle. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $37.50.) This insightful study,
unsurpassed in thoroughness, of the greatest German poet takes its subject up to
the return to Weimar from his second trip to Italy.

HENRY CLAY: Statesman for the Union, by Robert V. Remini. (Norton, $35.) A
historian's biography of the Kentuckian whose compromises could not avert the
Civil War but whose program of commercial development assured the North would
win it.

THE HOUSE OF BARRYMORE. By Margot Peters. (Knopf, $29.95.) A candid chronicle of
America's great theatrical trio -- reclusive Lionel, difficult Ethel, absolutely
impossible John.

IN THE EYE OF THE STORM: The Life of General H. Norman Schwarzkopf. By Roger
Cohen and Claudio Gatti. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) Solid, readable
reporting by a Times reporter and an Italian journalist who provide numerous
insights into the general's origins, character and psychology.

I REMEMBER BALANCHINE: Recollections of the Ballet Master by Those Who Knew Him.
By Francis Mason. (Doubleday, $25.) Eighty-four people -- some famous, many not
-- relate what Balanchine was to them, giving a real sense of his achievement.

I REMEMBER NOTHING MORE: The Warsaw Children's Hospital and the Jewish
Resistance. By Adina Blady Szwajger. (Pantheon, $20.) An unsentimental memoir,
at once damning and uplifting, by a doctor who did her duty until it could no
longer be done.

THE JAMESES: A Family Narrative. By R. W. B. Lewis. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$35.) Mr. Lewis handsomely presents Henry, William and all the others
interacting with one another in a family that was virtually a brilliant American
nation of its own.

J. EDGAR HOOVER: The Man and the Secrets. By Curt Gentry. (Norton, $29.95.) A
journalist who is a master of detail and description tells us at length what
Hoover said and did in his remarkable career, leaving judgment mainly to us.

KING EDWARD VIII: A Biography. By Philip Ziegler. (Knopf, $24.95.) The
well-known story of how the Fairy Prince became a mortal takes on new freshness
and excitement in this frank and generous portrait that draws on hitherto
unavailable sources.

KOOP: The Memoirs of America's Family Doctor. By C. Everett Koop. (Random House,
$22.50.) A revealing and provocative autobiography by the former Surgeon General
who got his job by being opposed to abortion, then astonished everyone --
especially his sponsors -- by talking and acting like a physician.

A LIFE OF HER OWN: A Countrywoman in Twentieth-Century France. By Emilie Carles,
as told to Robert Destanque. (Rutgers University, $19.95.) Rural canniness is
conveyed in the voice of a peasant in this memoir, immensely popular in France,
of a sharp-tongued country teacher who fought to keep the Alps unspoiled.

LONE STAR RISING: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960. By Robert Dallek.
(Oxford University, $30.) Mr. Dallek's Johnson is a champion of the New Deal
whose "sense of unrelenting deprivation" made him do anything to win the
glittering prizes.

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN: The Duty of Genius. By Ray Monk. (Free Press, $29.95.) A
vivid, credible, substantial biography of the philosopher, one of the world's
smartest and oddest men.

LITTLE MAN: Meyer Lansky and the Gangster Life. By Robert Lacey. (Little, Brown,
$24.95.) An entertaining, credible, detailed biography of the last of America's
great Jewish gangsters.

MADAM VALENTINO: The Many Lives of Natacha Rambova. By Michael Morris.
(Abbeville, $35.) Michael Morris, a Dominican friar, gives us the familiar story
of Natacha Rambova (nee Winifred Shaughnessy), the hated woman who married a
sultry Rudolph Valentino and made him over as a dandy, but this time it's from
her point of view.

MARTHA: The Life and Work of Martha Graham. By Agnes de Mille. (Random House,
$30.) Long a friend and critic of Martha Graham, never a collaborator, Agnes de
Mille offers a biography with many important characters Graham neglected to
mention.

ME: Stories of My Life. By Katharine Hepburn. (Knopf, $25.) An unsaintly,
selfish, narcissistic and often ruthless Katharine Hepburn emerges in this
rambling, stream-of-consciousness memoir.

MEMOIRS. By Kingsley Amis. (Summit, $25.) Low opinions of nearly everybody and
everything that has crossed Sir Kingsley's path, rendered in his everyday
dazzlingly addictive prose.

MOTHERS OF PSYCHOANALYSIS: Helene Deutsch, Karen Horney, Anna Freud, Melanie
Klein. By Janet Sayers. (Norton, $24.95.) This valuable biography of four of the
pioneering women of psychoanalysis shows how their lives shaped their theories.

NIXON. Volume Three: Ruin and Recovery, 1973-1990. By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon
& Schuster, $27.50.) The concluding volume of a massive three-part biography of
Richard Nixon lays out the facts chronologically -- from his landslide
re-election, to Watergate and beyond -- in an accretion of detail that has a
repellent illuminating effect.

THE NOBLE SAVAGE: Jean-Jacques Rousseau, 1754-1762. By Maurice Cranston.
(University of Chicago, $32.50.) This second volume of Mr. Cranston's handsome
and elegant biography finds Rousseau, the uneasy misanthrope who was arguably
the strangest of the French Enlightenment thinkers, as he was writing "The
Social Contract" and "Emile" but before he began the "Confessions."

ORWELL: The Authorized Biography. By Michael Shelden. (HarperCollins, $25.) This
life of Orwell furnishes new details of the career of a writer the influence of
whose honesty and decency has been far greater than his literary
accomplishments.

THE PATRIARCH: The Rise and Fall of the Bingham Dynasty. By Susan E. Tifft and
Alex S. Jones. (Summit, $24.95.) This prodigy of research and interviewing is
both a history of the family that built a distinguished newspaper empire in
Louisville, Ky., and a psychodrama of the squabbling siblings who destroyed it.

PATRIMONY: A True Story. By Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Mr. Roth
brings his gift for attention and prodigious storytelling powers to his father's
struggle with a fatal brain tumor in this agonized, often comic, infallibly
realistic account.

PHIL STONE OF OXFORD: A Vicarious Life. By Susan Snell. (University of Georgia,
$45.) A genial biography of the man who taught and nurtured William Faulkner,
then vanished into his fiction.

PAUL SCOTT: A Life of the Author of "The Raj Quartet." By Hilary Spurling.
(Norton, $24.95.) A thorough, thoughtful treatment of the conflicted man whose
success waited for the end of his career.

PRIDE OF FAMILY: Four Generations of American Women of Color. By Carole Ione.
(Summit, $19.95.) The captivating story of a black aristocratic clan and the
mother-daughter conflicts within it, fought out with spunk, energy and
resourcefulness.

RIGHTEOUS PILGRIM: The Life and Times of Harold L. Ickes, 1874-1952. By T. H.
Watkins. (Holt, $35.) A huge yet charming biography of the articulate reform
politician, F.D.R.'s Secretary of the Interior, who did so much to define
liberalism in his time.

RIVETHEAD: Tales From the Assembly Line. By Ben Hamper. (Warner, $19.95.) A
roughshod, vehement autobiographical essay that conveys the atmosphere and the
malaise of a generation that cannot find satisfaction or self-esteem in factory
work.

SERIOUS PLEASURES: The Life of Stephen Tennant. By Philip Hoare. (Hamish
Hamilton/Viking, $29.95.) A biography both scholarly and hilarious of a truly
amazing creature, a man who aspired only to be decorative and succeeded
tremendously.

SQUANDERED FORTUNE: The Life and Times of Huntington Hartford. By Lisa Rebecca
Gubernick. (Putnam, $24.95.) The riches-to-rags saga of a remarkably privileged
American who never quite found his calling while losing nearly all his money.

SOMEDAY. By Andrew H. Malcolm. (Knopf, $22.) A Times reporter's delicate,
engrossing account of his own involvement with issues of death and dying as a
journalist and as a son.

STALIN: Breaker of Nations. By Robert Conquest. (Viking, $25.) A superb portrait
for the general reader of the mean-spirited little man who terrorized the Soviet
Union for 30 years.

THE STARCHED BLUE SKY OF SPAIN: And Other Memoirs. By Josephine Herbst.
(HarperCollins, $19.95.) Autobiographical fragments from the Spanish Civil War
and other scenes.

A TERRIBLE LIAR: A Memoir. By Hume Cronyn. (Morrow, $23.) Not quite an
autobiography by the distinguished actor; a self-investigation into what makes
him go and how seriousness and industry transformed him from a Canadian
patrician into a star.

TRAPS, THE DRUM WONDER: The Life of Buddy Rich. By Mel Torme. (Oxford
University, $21.95.) A loose, anecdotal hybrid biography and memoir of the
boyish and prickly drummer known for his self-immolatory solos, written by his
friend.

TURNING JAPANESE: Memoirs of a Sansei. By David Mura. (Atlantic Monthly,
$22.95.) A journey of discovery by a poet and third-generation Japanese-American
who explores the sense of difference that haunts him both at home and in Japan.

U AND I: A True Story. By Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $18.) Intermittently
obsessed with John Updike, Mr. Baker embarked on this peculiar book-length
personal essay, a remarkable journey of literary analysis and self-discovery.
Strange, delightful.

WANDERING GHOST: The Odyssey of Lafcadio Hearn. By Jonathan Cott. (Knopf,
$24.95.) An "informal biographical reader," in the author's phrase, about the
eccentric American journalist who ended his days in 1904 as a substantial
Japanese citizen and talented interpreter of its culture to the West.

WOODY ALLEN: A Biography. By Eric Lax. (Knopf, $24.) A journalist's fond
chronicle of the film maker's life captures his essential, Bob
Hope-versus-Ingmar Bergman tension.

VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The American Years. By Brian Boyd. (Princeton University,
$29.95; $35 after Dec. 31.) The second volume of Mr. Boyd's definitive biography
fully redeems its length (783 pages) and immense detail by its unraveling of
Nabokov's endless verbal puzzles and its relation of them to his life.

Children

AMAZING GRACE. By Mary Hoffman. Illustrated by Caroline Binch. (Dial, $13.95.)
Grace, the spunky heroine, wants to be Peter Pan in the class production and,
because example rather than psychobabble proves to be the best method of
instruction, she eventually succeeds. (Ages 5 to 8)

AT THE CROSSROADS. Written and illustrated by Rachel Isadora. (Greenwillow,
$13.95.) The children in a South African shantytown are waiting for their
fathers to return from their work in the mines. They wait and wait, and come the
morning, come the fathers, who carry their rejoicing children from the road back
to the shacks. (Ages 4 and up)

A BOY WANTS A DINOSAUR. By Hiawyn Oram. Illustrated by Satoshi Kitamura.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.) Buying a pet for Alex at the Dino-Store is
simple, but dinosaur care and maintenance prove to be a tall order. Fred (for
that is her name) pines for the swamp. The setting is a wittily detailed, wildly
animated London cityscape. (Ages 5 to 9)

EIGHT HANDS ROUND: A Patchwork Alphabet. By Ann Whitford Paul. Illustrated by
Jeanette Winter. (HarperCollins, $14.95.) Only incidentally an alphabet book,
this sampler uses 26 quilt patterns to piece together a charming history of
quilts and the early American life that inspired them. The illustrations, boldly
colored and gently washed out, are just right. (Ages 8 and up)

FOLLOW THE DREAM. Written and illustrated by Peter Sis. (Knopf, $15.) This
wonderful large-format storybook, as it describes Christopher Columbus and his
journeys, manages to show us how vision can penetrate stone, how, where there
seems to be nothing but drabness and defeat, the mind finds possibility. (Ages 5
to 10)

THE FROG PRINCE, CONTINUED. By Jon Scieszka. Illustrated by Steve Johnson.
(Viking, $14.95.) Now a nice yuppie-looking man in a suit and tie, the unhappily
married Frog Prince packs his bag and leaves, but the witches he meets are
apparently heavily influenced by Stephen Sondheim. The illustrations are witty
and spooky at the same time. (Ages 5 and up)

THE LAMPFISH OF TWILL. By Janet Taylor Lisle. Illustrated by Wendy Anderson
Halperin. (Orchard, $15.95.) On the fictional coast of Twill the hazards of rock
and riptide are thought too great, it seems, for any but the most foolish and
arrogant to hunt the lampfish, yet those who do finally get one are
fantastically celebrated. Here is a fresh and fascinating intellectual thriller.
(Ages 10 and up)

LYDDIE. By Katherine Paterson. (Lodestar, $14.95.) The battleground is the
Industrial Revolution in America, specifically the mills of Lowell, Mass., in
the mid-1840's; and the heroine, Lydia Worthen, is in many ways larger than life
in order to endure what she endures. The novel is full of life, full of lives,
full of reality. (Ages 10 and up)

OOH-LA-LA: (Max in Love). Written and illustrated by Maira Kalman. (Viking,
$14.95.) The Parisian adventures and amour of Max Stravinsky, the dog poet, are
described in rapid-fire English that has the flavor of fractured French, and the
clever illustrations include parodies of famous French paintings. Witty
throughout. (All ages.)

TAR BEACH. Written and illustrated by Faith Ringgold. (Crown, $15.) Cassie
Louise Lightfoot literally flies over the frustrations of her life as she gets
to float up over the New York City of the 1930's, and wear the George Washington
Bridge "like a giant diamond necklace." The book and its illustrations carry an
air of triumph. (All ages)

Crime

THE CAVALIER CASE. By Antonia Fraser. (Bantam, $17.95.) This seventh book in the
Jemima Shore mystery series involves the ghost of a 17th-century poet, an
upscale tennis club and modern London society. Ms. Fraser writes with zest and
verve, and her primary interest is people.

THE CITY WHEN IT RAINS. By Thomas H. Cook. (Putnam, $19.95.) A brooding,
haunting work about a bizarre suicide and a freelance photographer who covers
Manhattan after dark, when its guard is down.

DOUBLE DOWN. By Tom Kakonis. (Dutton, $19.95.) Mr. Kakonis's second novel about
an ace gambler, a contemplative, overeducated poker pro. The author is a flashy
stylist who knows his game.

DOWNTOWN. By Ed McBain. (Morrow, $20.) All the twists, turns and surprises one
expects from the author, merged in a wildly comic plot and situations -- and all
without the 87th Precinct.

GOOD NIGHT, MR. HOLMES. By Carole Nelson Douglas. (Tom Doherty/Tor, $18.95.) The
author, who has a saucy style and a delicious sense of humor, purports to tell
how Irene Adler outfoxed Sherlock Holmes in "A Scandal in Bohemia."

"H" IS FOR HOMICIDE. By Sue Grafton. (Holt, $17.95.) In this engaging,
fast-paced story of urban gang violence, white-collar crime and friendship
between women, the detective Kinsey Millhone takes on the identity of a reckless
vamp .

THE KILLING OF THE SAINTS. By Alex Abella. (Crown, $19.) A strange and powerful
first novel, narrated by a court investigator and written in an ornate style,
about the Cuban-American subculture in Los Angeles.

MAXIMUM BOB. By Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $20.) Mr. Leonard outdoes himself in
his 29th novel, in which Maximum Bob, a crackpot judge in Palm Beach County,
Florida, tries to get rid of his wife with two personalities by bringing an
alligator home.

PASTIME. By Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) In this unexpectedly moving
book, the 18th of Robert B. Parker's Spenser detective novels, we get glimpses
of the righteous detective's childhood and his initiation into manhood.

PRIOR CONVICTIONS. By Lia Matera. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Willa Jansson, one
of the most articulate and surely the wittiest of women sleuths at large in the
genre, finds herself compromised in a securities fraud case involving 60's
radicals.

RUMPOLE A LA CARTE. By John Mortimer. (Viking, $18.95.) The eighth collection of
stories about the barrister; that they continue to be so enjoyable is a mark of
both the author's craftsmanship and his natural talent.

A SCANDAL IN BELGRAVIA. By Robert Barnard. (Scribners, $17.95.) A shocking tale
of murder and corruption in which Mr. Barnard never loses control of his
polished form.

THE SHADOW OF THE SHADOW. By Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d. (Viking, $18.95.) This
spellbinding novel, which takes place in Mexico City in 1922, is about a little
band of intellectuals caught up in a political conspiracy.

THE SONG DOG. By James McClure. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $17.95.) In a
fresh-as-paint prequel, set in 1962, we learn how the author's ratchet-tongued
South African detective, Lieut. Tromp Kramer, met his Zulu partner, Sgt. Mickey
Zondi.



Current Affairs and Social Commentary

BACKLASH: The Undeclared War Against American Women. By Susan Faludi. (Crown,
$24.) A bracing look, by a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, at the reaction
against women's progress -- led, she argues, by a shrewd coalition of
conservative forces, abetted by movie makers, writers and journalists.

THE BEAUTY MYTH: How Images of Beauty Are Used Against Women. By Naomi Wolf.
(Morrow, $21.95.) A sweeping, vigorous book about the ways women enslave
themselves -- and their bank accounts -- to an industry that promises physical
perfection.

BERLIN JOURNAL: 1989-1990. By Robert Darnton. (Norton, $22.95.) With an
appreciation for Berlin's cynical humor, Mr. Darnton interprets the significance
of the days of the collapsing wall.

BLOOD OF BROTHERS: Life and War in Nicaragua. By Stephen Kinzer. (Putnam,
$24.95.) Mr. Kinzer, who reported for The Times from Nicaragua from 1983 to
1989, examines United States policy and Sandinista rule during the period; both
get failing marks.

BRINGING DOWN THE GREAT WALL: Writings on Science, Culture, and Democracy in
China. By Fang Lizhi. (Knopf, $19.95.) A comprehensive selection of the written
(and spoken) words of the witty, passionate, tenacious and articulate Chinese
scientist and dissident who at present is living in the United States.

CHAIN REACTION: The Impact of Race, Rights, and Taxes on American Politics. By
Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. (Norton, $22.95.) A candid, insightful
account of the fortunes of the Democratic Party in the last 30 years that finds
the party's powerful reform wing detached from reality and its Congressional
membership lacking creativity and the will to act.

CHUTZPAH. By Alan M. Dershowitz. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) Afraid of rocking the
boat, too many American Jews see themselves as guests in someone else's land, an
attorney and civil libertarian argues; the solution, he says, is more chutzpah!

THE DEMOCRATIC WISH: Popular Participation and the Limits of American
Government. By James A. Morone. (Basic Books, $22.95.) Mr. Morone contends that
Americans don't really know what they want government to do; consequently,
reform efforts merely add more unresponsive layers of government.

DEN OF THIEVES. By James B. Stewart. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) In his forceful,
detailed, spicy record of the insider-trading scandals of the 1980's, James B.
Stewart, the front-page editor of The Wall Street Journal, pulls no punches and
exposes the corruption of capitalist markets.

THE END OF LAISSEZ-FAIRE: National Purpose and the Global Economy After the Cold
War. By Robert Kuttner. (Knopf, $22.95.) An economics correspondent for The New
Republic takes issue with what he views as the myth of a pure market economy and
suggests an alternate reality, in a richly detailed book that will have to be
taken into account by anyone assessing the present state of the world economy.

FEMINISM WITHOUT ILLUSIONS: A Critique of Individualism. By Elizabeth
Fox-Genovese. (University of North Carolina, $24.95.) An insightful and
important book by a professor of history at Emory University, challenging the
culture's embrace of absolute individual right and feminism's unquestioning
acceptance of it.

FOR THE COLOR OF HIS SKIN: The Murder of Yusuf Hawkins and the Trial of
Bensonhurst. By John DeSantis. (Pharos, $18.95.) Mr. DeSantis, a reporter both
relentless and compassionate, spikes many myths in his account of the killing
and its aftermath.

THE GERMAN COMEDY: Scenes of Life After the Wall. By Peter Schneider. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $21.) Caustic notes and reflections by a German liberal on the
first year of unification.

THE GOOD SOCIETY. By Robert N. Bellah, Richard Madsen, William M. Sullivan, Ann
Swidler and Steven M. Tipton. (Knopf, $25.) This passionate sequel to "Habits of
the Heart" is a defense of participatory democracy, arguing that democratic
reform is linked to personal transformation.

THE HIDDEN WAR: A Russian Journalist's Account of the Soviet War in Afghanistan.
By Artyom Borovik. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) One of the first
Soviet journalists to give his readers an honest glimpse of the war, Mr. Borovik
concerns himself in these reports with the conflict's cost in lives and spirit.

HIGH ROLLERS: Inside the Savings and Loan Debacle. By Martin Lowy. (Praeger,
$24.95.) A clear, detailed, impartial analysis of the savings and loan mess that
blames no single person, institution or incident but traces the roots of the
debacle to the double-digit inflation and double-digit interest rates of the
1970's.

THE HOLE IN THE FLAG: A Romanian Exile's Story of Return and Revolution. By
Andrei Codrescu. (Morrow, $21.) The poet and essayist Andrei Codrescu gives us a
gripping account of the mysterious Romanian revolution and a crisp portrait of
the country's disquieting contrasts.

HOPE AND HISTORY: Why We Must Share the Story of the Movement. By Vincent
Harding. (Orbis, $10.95.) A collection of essays about the larger meanings of
the civil rights movement, written in an incantatory prose that does honor to
the religious imperative of the movement itself.

INDIA: A Million Mutinies Now. By V. S. Naipaul. (Viking, $24.95.) Mr. Naipaul's
third nonfiction book about India is an elegant documentary tour in which no
detail is insignificant; it is also, for a remarkable change, moderately hopeful
for the nation's future.

IN SEARCH OF HUMAN NATURE: The Decline and Revival of Darwinism in American
Social Thought. By Carl N. Degler. (Oxford University, $24.95.) A masterly guide
to the history of the nature/nurture debate and the reverberations of Darwinian
ideas in both popular and academic social thinking.

INSIDE CENTRAL AMERICA: Its People, Politics, and History. By Clifford Krauss.
(Summit, $19.95.) An acute survey by a New York Times correspondent who finds
that the region's problems are of native growth, though United States meddling
hasn't helped.

IN THE REALM OF A DYING EMPEROR, by Norma Field. (Pantheon, $22.) Absorbing
reporting by a scholar, half Japanese by parentage, on three incidents in which
Japanese society treated nonconformity as simply perverse.

THE LAST FINE TIME. By Verlyn Klinkenborg. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Klinkenborg's
talent for evoking time and place shines in this respectful, affectionate
account of a family (into which he later married) and a neighborhood in a
Buffalo that is no more.

MAKE NO LAW: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment. By Anthony Lewis.
(Random House, $25.) A New York Times columnist's splendid account of a libel
suit against The Times that resulted in one of the most significant of all
press-freedom cases.

MOLLY IVINS CAN'T SAY THAT, CAN SHE? By Molly Ivins. (Random House, $23.) An
irreverent and often hilarious collection of previously published pieces on
everything from Debutantes for Christ to the Iran-contra affair.

THE MONEY MACHINE: How KKR Manufactured Power & Profits. By Sarah Bartlett.
(Warner, $24.95.) A readable and insightful examination of the company that
perfected the leveraged buyout, by a Times reporter who doesn't hesitate to
identify heroes and villains.

THE OUTLAW STATE: Saddam Hussein's Quest for Power and the Gulf Crisis. By
Elaine Sciolino. (John Wiley & Sons, $22.95.) A popular history, by a reporter
for The Times, of the rise to power and methods of control of Mr. Hussein in his
state and the region.

PANAMA: The Whole Story. By Kevin Buckley. (Simon & Schuster, $21.95.) A
journalist's history of the bizarre relationship between a bemused United States
and the slippery, unsavory but sometimes, alas, useful Panamanian dictator Gen.
Manuel Antonio Noriega.

PRAYING FOR SHEETROCK. By Melissa Fay Greene. (Addison-Wesley, $21.95.) An
exciting book, reported intimately and extensively, about a black community in
rural Georgia that rose from passivity to civil-rights militancy and subsided
again to calm over the last decade and a half.

THE PRIZE: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money, and Power. By Daniel Yergin. (Simon &
Schuster, $24.95.) A comprehensive, careful book that pulls together reams of
information in its analysis of modern society's dependence on a resource it
cannot control.

THE PROMISED LAND: The Great Black Migration and How It Changed America. By
Nicholas Lemann. (Knopf, $24.95.) A skillful, energetic account of the migration
of 6.5 million black people from rural South to urban North between 1910 and
1970.

REFLECTIONS OF AN AFFIRMATIVE ACTION BABY. By Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books,
$23.) A Yale law professor, himself a beneficiary of affirmative action
programs, argues that what we say we want -- diversity -- won't be attained by
enforcing orthodoxy, on this subject or on others.

THE SAMSON OPTION: Israel's Nuclear Arsenal and American Foreign Policy. By
Seymour M. Hersh. (Random House, $23.) This readable and fascinating study of
the dynamic driving Israel's not-so-secret nuclear program and the United
States' reluctance to stop it reveals that Israel may have hundreds of thousands
of nuclear warheads pointing at Soviet and Arab targets and that its nuclear
forces may have been put on alert thrice.

SAVAGE INEQUALITIES: Children in America's Schools. By Jonathan Kozol. (Crown,
$20.) The author of "Death at an Early Age" argues vigorously that our public
schools, as public facilities, should offer the same quality of education
everywhere.

STREETWISE: Race, Class, and Change in an Urban Community. By Elijah Anderson.
(University of Chicago, $19.95.) A sharply observed stoop-level study of two
Philadelphia neighborhoods -- one gentrifying, the other in total collapse.

THERE ARE NO CHILDREN HERE: The Story of Two Boys Growing Up in the Other
America. By Alex Kotlowitz. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.95.) A sensitive and
unremitting survey of the life and times of Lafeyette and Pharoah Rivers, their
family and the Chicago housing project they live in.

THREE BLIND MICE: How the Networks Lost Their Way. By Ken Auletta. (Random
House, $25.) An account of the decline of the Big Three since 1984, replete with
detail that gives cause for wonder how the networks maintained their oligopoly
as long as they did.

THE TRUE AND ONLY HEAVEN: Progress and Its Critics. By Christopher Lasch.
(Norton, $25.) Contentious, provocative and polemical, Mr. Lasch argues that the
idea of progress as now understood by liberals rests on untenable beliefs about
expanding consumption to which lower-middle-class values are the antidote.

TWILIGHT OF EMPIRE: Inside the Crumbling Soviet Bloc, by Robert Cullen.
(Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) Collected essays, mostly from the last two years, by
a Moscow correspondent whose sense of what was happening has proved remarkably
reliable.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMBITION: Politicians, Power, and the Pursuit of Office. By
Alan Ehrenhalt. (Times Books/Random House, $23.) In this brilliant analysis of
what's wrong with politics today, Alan Ehrenhalt argues that we are governed by
a generation of ambitious career officeholders who care only about winning the
next election.

A VERY THIN LINE: The Iran-Contra Affairs. By Theodore Draper. (Hill & Wang,
$27.95.) A richly detailed, formidably researched analysis concludes that the
Iran-contra cover-up was no aberration, but evidence of what can happen when a
President overreaches himself.

WHY AMERICANS HATE POLITICS. By E. J. Dionne Jr. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) No
wonder the public is fed up with politics and government: both liberals and
conservatives are ideologically bankrupt and still fighting the battles of the
1960's, according to a journalist's cogent, stimulating analysis.

WHY GORBACHEV HAPPENED: His Triumphs and His Failure. By Robert G. Kaiser.
(Simon & Schuster, $24.95.) A journalist's skillful chronicle of Mikhail S.
Gorbachev's era offers a gripping and insightful analysis of a noble experiment
gone awry.

>Essays, Criticism and Letters

THE CROOKED TIMBER OF HUMANITY: Chapters in the History of Ideas. By Isaiah
Berlin. (Knopf, $22.) Wise and learned essays that echo one of the historian's
favorite themes -- pluralism versus utopianism. Pluralism is recommended.

FIEDLER ON THE ROOF: Essays on Literature and Jewish Identity. By Leslie
Fiedler. (Godine, $19.95.) The bad boy of literary criticism weighs his
assimilationism against his preoccupation with Jewish figures and themes.

GOOD BOYS AND DEAD GIRLS: And Other Essays. By Mary Gordon. (Viking, $19.95.)
Like her novels, Ms. Gordon's essays are sustained by a powerful moral vision,
and are at their best when life, art and Irish Catholicism are the subjects.

LETTERS FROM A LIFE: The Selected Letters and Diaries of Benjamin Britten,
1913-1976. Edited by Donald Mitchell and Philip Reed. (University of California,
$125.) This absorbing two-volume collection documents better than ever before
Britten's place in the artistic world and his life with the tenor Peter Pears.

MODERNITY ON ENDLESS TRIAL. By Leszek Kolakowski. (University of Chicago,
$24.95.) A historian of philosophy argues in these handsome, pessimistic essays
that our 20th-century sense of crisis will not go away; we'll just have to
muddle through.

MY FRANCE: Politics, Culture, Myth. By Eugen Weber. (Belknap/Harvard University,
$24.95.) Delightful, highly personal essays by a resolutely untheoretical
Romanian-born historian whose life's work has transformed the study of the
French past.

NEW WORLD AVENUE AND VICINITY. By Tadeusz Konwicki. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$24.95.) A sort of writer's diary of the 1980's by the great Polish jester and
grump, confronting the nation's apparently hopeless predicament with ironic
detachment.

ODD JOBS: Essays and Criticism. By John Updike. (Knopf, $35.) Mr. Updike's
fourth volume of higher journalism shows a mind at once crammed and uncluttered,
with courage to tackle any subject.

OPERA AND ITS SYMBOLS: The Unity of Words, Music, and Staging. By Robert
Donington. (Yale University, $29.95.) A book-length essay by a performer and
scholar that argues for a fusion of production elements into an archetypal,
myth-endowed whole.

PARLIAMENT OF WHORES: A Lone Humorist Attempts to Explain the Entire U.S.
Government. By P. J. O'Rourke. (Morgan Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.)
Angry, boisterous essays that ridicule elected representatives as "yea-saying
ballot leeches," the Supreme Court as "nine old nags in black muumuus" and the
members of the press as "America's professional bed-wetting class."

A PASSIONATE APPRENTICE: The Early Journals, 1897-1909. By Virginia Woolf.
Edited by Mitchell A. Leaska. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $24.95.) The
scrupulously edited contents of seven notebooks that show a teen-ager growing
into a writer.

SIGNS OF THE TIMES: Deconstruction and the Fall of Paul de Man. By David Lehman.
(Poseidon, $21.95.) A poet, critic and journalist examines a literary philosophy
and the flap that ensued when the Nazi-shaded past of a leading practitioner
showed up.

THE USES OF ERROR. By Frank Kermode. (Harvard University, $24.95.) Reviews
published between 1967 and 1989 by a scholar and critic who knows how to speak
to common readers, and likes to.

Fiction

THE ACCIDENT. By David Plante. (Ticknor & Fields, $18.95.) Mr. Plante's 12th
novel is a relentlessly compressed little story of moral analysis about faith
and loss of faith, with the mystery of God's intentions for humanity at its
center.

AFRICAN VISAS: A Novella and Stories. By Maria Thomas. (Soho, $19.95.) Funny,
poignant, incisive, sexy, polished and enlightening fiction that makes wise use
of its author's life in Africa.

AFTER SHOCKS/NEAR ESCAPES. By Stephen Dobyns. (Viking, $19.95.) This
intelligently conceived novel begins with a massive earthquake in Chile in 1960
and examines the shakiness of the ground we stand on, both literally and
metaphorically.

ALL-BRIGHT COURT. By Connie Porter. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A beautiful and
profound first novel about a community of black steelworkers and their families
whose hopes have been betrayed by the violence of the 1960's and the layoffs of
the 70's.

ALONE. By David Small. (Norton, $19.95.) Mr. Small's third novel concerns a
damaged family yearning for love that's not to be had; its big themes are
parenthood, solitude, the loss of the beloved.

ANGIE, I SAYS. By Avra Wing. (Warner, $16.95.) A spirited, engaging first novel
about a half-Italian, half-Jewish, wisecracking 30-year-old secretary from
Brooklyn in search of a better life.

BET THEY'LL MISS US WHEN WE'RE GONE. By Marianne Wiggins. (HarperCollins,
$19.95.) Virtuoso short stories, all dealing with the limits of memory, language
and thought.

BEYOND THE CURVE. By Kobo Abe. (Kodansha, $18.95.) The dozen stories in Mr.
Abe's first story collection in English place his boundlessly confident
protagonists in impossible situations.

BEYOND DESERVING. By Sandra Scofield. (Permanent Press, $21.95.) This wickedly
observant novel circles around the pains and joys of a family of macho men and
the women who are married to them; it suggests that rogues may indeed be
amiable, or at least tolerable.

BLUE RIVER. By Ethan Canin. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A novel in acute prose,
charged with uncomfortable but inescapable family themes, confronting a good
brother with a bad one.

BODY SNATCHER. By Juan Carlos Onetti. (Pantheon, $23.) A fabulist's delight,
published in Spanish in 1964, by a Uruguayan novelist whose nominal protagonist
pursues two ambitions: to achieve "a perfect woman and a perfect bordello."

THE BOOK OF SAINTS. By Nino Ricci. (Knopf, $19.) A beautifully paced first
novel, almost mythological in its impact, about a poor Italian mountain village
and a family left behind by immigration.

BRAZZAVILLE BEACH. By William Boyd. (Morrow, $21.) This clever novel by a
champion storyteller concerns vanity, marriage, civil war, chaos theory and a
woman who's better at loving chimps than humans.

BRIEF LIVES. By Anita Brookner. (Random House, $20.) A meditative, quiet novel
that reveals the depth beneath the calm of a woman's constricted life, by a
sovereign creator of such novels.

BROTHERLY LOVE. By Pete Dexter. (Random House, $22.) The tragic life story, told
with vividness and force, of a working-class man condemned by fate and the rules
of his society -- a South Philadelphia neighborhood where life is brutal and
unforgiving.

THE CAMPAIGN. By Carlos Fuentes. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) A vast
social, intellectual and political panorama appears in this highly entertaining
novel, which focuses on the decade of Latin America's independence struggle,
from 1810 to 1820.

A CERTAIN FINKELMEYER. By Felix Roziner. (Norton, $19.95.) A profoundly comic
novel about life in the Soviet Union before glasnost and all that, finished --
but not published -- in 1975.

CHICAGO LOOP. By Paul Theroux. (Random House, $20.) A hard, unrelentingly bleak
novel that is an exploration of one man's violent sexual nightmare, his crime
and his punishment.

CHINA BOY. By Gus Lee. (Dutton, $19.95.) This hilarious and poignant
coming-of-age novel filters the customs and mores of the American present
through those of the Chinese past.

CITY OF THE MIND. By Penelope Lively. (HarperCollins, $20.) An elegant, erudite
novel that evokes the successes and misfortunes encoded in the bricks and paving
stones of London.

CLOSING ARGUMENTS. By Frederick Busch. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) Mr. Busch's
15th book of fiction is a tight, dense, dark, complicated novel about child
abuse, sex, violence, war and law.

THE CONTINUING SILENCE OF A POET: The Collected Stories of A. B. Yehoshua.
(Penguin, Paper, $9.95.) The realities and contradictions of Israeli life,
plumbed by a renowned storyteller.

CRACKING INDIA. By Bapsi Sidhwa. (Milkweed Editions, $18.95.) Ms. Sidhwa, a
Pakistani who writes in English, offers heartbreak and slapstick in this novel
about an 8-year-old girl caught up in the horrors of the partition of India in
1947.

A CURE FOR DREAMS. By Kaye Gibbons. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $14.95.) An
engagingly personal novel set in the North Carolina community of the author's
two previous novels; this anecdotal tale of three generations of family history
reveals a maturity of vision.

A DANGEROUS WOMAN. By Mary McGarry Morris. (Viking, $19.95.) In Ms. Morris's
second novel an emotionally disturbed young woman struggles against traps of
circumstance and personality that offer no real hope of escape.

DARCY'S UTOPIA. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $18.95.) An unflinching satirical novel
whose heroine's zeal to remodel the world makes her a media sensation and the
founder of a new religion.

DAUGHTERS. By Paule Marshall. (Atheneum, $19.95.) This brave novel examines the
state of black people's lives in the United States and on a Caribbean island,
and calls urgently for revising the relations between men and women.

DEAD CERTAINTIES: (Unwarranted Speculations). By Simon Schama. (Knopf, $21.) The
death of a British general and the murder of a Massachusetts doctor are the
actual incidents around which a historian dexterously weaves multiple accounts,
both real and invented, that blend the historical and the poetic.

THE DIAMOND LANE. By Karen Karbo. (Putnam, $21.95.) A wonderfully comic novel
about savvy Hollywood outsiders trying to get in -- and to juggle their
disastrous but funny love lives.

DIRTY TRICKS. By Michael Dibdin. (Summit, $18.) Mr. Dibdin's fifth novel, a
highly sophisticated entertainment set in present-day Britain, mines the themes
of sex, murder and social climbing with much more and better humor than is
customary.

DRINKING DRY CLOUDS: Stories From Wyoming. By Gretel Ehrlich. (Capra, Paper,
$9.95.) Eloquent and often comic linked pieces set in the West in the 1940's, in
which the humor derives not from wit but from the characters' bewilderment.

EVE'S TATTOO. By Emily Prager. (Random House, $19.) The heroine in this
admirable and compassionate novel is a magazine columnist named Eve who becomes
so obsessed with a strikingly similar-looking woman in a photograph taken at
Auschwitz in 1944 that she has her arm tattooed with the ID number of the
prisoner and makes up various biographies for her.

FATHER MELANCHOLY'S DAUGHTER. By Gail Godwin. (Morrow, $21.95.) The author's
10th book of fiction -- about a young woman, her minister father and the woman
who abandons them both -- has a number of real satisfactions.

THE FIREMAN'S FAIR. By Josephine Humphreys. (Viking, $19.95.) Set on a barrier
island off the South Carolina coast, this warm and comfortable novel about love
and community is far better written than most.

A FOREIGN WOMAN. By Sergei Dovlatov. (Grove Weidenfeld, $17.95.) A wild and,
alas, posthumous novel whose Soviet yuppie heroine ends up in the brightly
evoked emigre world of Queens.

THE FORESEEABLE FUTURE. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $21.95.) Three longish
short stories that invoke the meditative and retrospective powers of the form to
show us people whose interior lives enable them to survive in the ordinary
world.

1492: The Life and Times of Juan Cabezon of Castile. By Homero Aridjis. (Summit,
$21.95.) A powerful historical novel that re-creates the woeful year in history
when Granada fell and the Jews were expelled from Spain -- and, oh yes, when
Columbus sailed westward for the Indies.

GERONTIUS. By James Hamilton-Paterson. (Soho, $19.95.) A wonderfully readable
fictional account of a little-examined period in the life of the English
composer Edward Elgar.

A GLIMPSE OF SCARLET: And Other Stories. By Roxana Robinson. (Edward
Burlingame/HarperCollins, $18.95.) A stunning first collection of stories,
chiefly concerning lost familial love and the struggle to rebuild it.

THE GOLD BUG VARIATIONS. By Richard Powers. (Morrow, $25.) With stunning
virtuosity, Mr. Powers's novel employs every trick of structure, metaphor and
pun to inspect the career of a young scientist who ends up a dead-end computer
programmer.

THE GOLDIN BOYS: Stories. By Joseph Epstein. (Norton, $19.95.) The first book of
fiction by this notable essayist is made of beautifully realized short stories,
set mostly in Chicago and among Jews, rich in the experience of families, lovers
and money.

GRINGOS. By Charles Portis. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A high-rolling
picaresque novel propelled by the author's love for his characters, for Mexico
and for the eccentricity and pathos of both.

LOS GUSANOS. By John Sayles. (HarperCollins, $22.95.) This fierce, profuse novel
follows an exile family in Miami through a complex history of heroic and
disastrous efforts at Cuban liberation.

HARLOT'S GHOST. By Norman Mailer. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Mailer's whopping
(1,328 pages) novel, full of real as well as imaginary people, takes an
epic-size look at world and national events over the last few decades from the
point of view of three aristocratic Yankees who work for the C.I.A.

HEAT: And Other Stories. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton,
$21.95.) The best of the stories in this collection effectively confine great
chunks of rage and hatred on the psychological, internal level.

AN HONORABLE PROFESSION. By John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.95.) Mr. L'Heureux's
13th book is a risky combination: a thriller, a philosophical, melodramatic
novel of sexual possession, a satire of small-town mores in New England.

HOW THE GARCIA GIRLS LOST THEIR ACCENTS. By Julia Alvarez. (Algonquin Books of
Chapel Hill, $16.95.) This collection of interwoven stories by a
Dominican-American writer captures the immigrant's experience of being on the
threshold between alienation and assimilation.

HOW TO MAKE AN AMERICAN QUILT. By Whitney Otto. (Villard, $18.) This intricate
little first novel about a women's quilting circle in central California is at
once a history of social change, a tribute to an art form mostly reserved for
women and a demonstration of how individual lives fit together in a community.

HUNTING THE WILD PINEAPPLE. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) No one fares very
well in these compassionate but dark-edged stories by the prolific Australian
novelist.

IMMORTALITY. By Milan Kundera. (Grove Weidenfeld, $21.95.) Mr. Kundera's
thoughtful, somewhat daunting novel of reflection and discourse is full of
stylistic and narrative felicities.

IN THE CENTER OF THE NATION. By Dan O'Brien. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) Set in
South Dakota, this eloquent novel revolves around issues both ecological and
humane -- the unsettling of the land, the values of the loners who undertake a
rancher's life.

THE INDIAN LAWYER. By James Welch. (Norton, $19.95.) This fine fourth novel by
Mr. Welch (himself a Native American) is his first to follow the complex
relationships of whites and Indians into the world of white-collar
professionals.

INHERIT THE MOB. By Zev Chafets. (Random House, $19.) A hilarious novel in which
a respectable journalist's uncle Max dies, leaving him the last of the great
American Jewish gangs.

JERNIGAN. By David Gates. (Knopf, $21.) Mr. Gates's profoundly sorrowful first
novel concerns a father crippled by alcoholism, emotional turmoil -- or drought
-- and perpetual irony.

JUMP: And Other Stories. By Nadine Gordimer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.)
Stories full of Ms. Gordimer's usual moral and political intelligence, her
painstaking eye for detail, her commitment to social redemption.

KISS OUT. By Jill Eisenstadt. (Knopf, $19.95.) A novel of extravagant wackiness,
eccentricity and exuberance, featuring a Queens rock singer who loves a virgin
from New Jersey.

THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE. By Amy Tan. (Putnam, $22.95.) A Chinese matriarch in San
Francisco unfolds the harrowing story of her life in Ms. Tan's second novel,
which poses, in a Tolstoyan tide of events, large questions of fate,
circumstance and free will.

LADY'S MAID. By Margaret Forster. (Doubleday, $19.95.) This lucid and graceful
novel is a fictional account of the love story of Elizabeth Barrett and Robert
Browning, as seen through the eyes of the servant who made it possible.

THE LAST VOYAGE OF SOMEBODY THE SAILOR. By John Barth. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
An ingenious multi-story fiction, in which a Barth-resembling hero voyages back
and forth between the Chesapeake Bay and Burton's "Thousand and One Nights."

THE LATE NIGHT MUSE. By Bette Pesetsky. (HarperCollins, $20.) A disturbing
cautionary fable for writers about a poet who finds she is dying and tries to
put her literary life in order.

THE LAUGHING SUTRA. By Mark Salzman. (Random House, $18.95.) A robust,
preposterous novel concerning a Chinese Buddhist lad's effort to recover a
sacred text from America, with the help of a supernatural hero thousands of
years old.

LIVE FREE OR DIE. By Ernest Hebert. (Viking, $19.95.) The fifth in a series of
novels about Darby, N.H., draws to a conclusion Mr. Hebert's vigorous saga of
several families, both upper-crust and underdog, whose sense of community has
been wasted by history.

LOVE AND GARBAGE. By Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $20.) A writer turned street sweeper is
enmeshed in a love triangle in this satisfying Czechoslovak novel of conflict
and contradiction.

THE MACGUFFIN. By Stanley Elkin. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Mr. Elkin's
besotted, betroped high style, pleading for the power of talk, is at its work in
this tale of a municipal bureaucrat looking for meaning not of his own making.
Fat chance!

MAGIC HOUR. By Susan Isaacs. (HarperCollins, $21.95.) A murder in the Hamptons
is the pretext of this sparkling mystery-romance, in which the investigator
falls in love with his own chief suspect.

MAKING HISTORY. By Carolyn See. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Terrible things
happen in this novel to a man who tries to engineer a better country, without
suffering, evil or original sin.

MALINA. By Ingeborg Bachmann. (Holmes & Meier, $24.95.) An intense, courageous
novel that projects an unconventional triangle on a nasty background of
corrupted language and power.

MAO II. By Don DeLillo. (Viking, $19.95.) A dark, dazzling, discursive novel in
which writers, terrorists and hostages converge to adopt one another's functions
and take one another's places in the historical imagination of the world.

MARIETTE IN ECSTASY. By Ron Hansen. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $20.) The
unusual subject of this novel -- the progress in devotion of a postulant whose
experiences threaten her convent -- is sustained by its clear, polished prose.

MENDELSSOHN IS ON THE ROOF. By Jiri Weill. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.95.) A
brilliant novel that renders wartime Prague as seen by its triumphant but
ultimately futile German masters.

THE MIRACLE GAME. By Josef Skvorecky. (Knopf, $22.95.) Raffish, acrimonious
Danny Smiricky sleeps through the "miracle" of the title in this
incident-crammed, gritty and lyrical novel of Czechoslovakia and its travails
from 1949 to 1970.

A MODEL WORLD: And Other Stories. By Michael Chabon. (Morrow, $18.95.) Short
fiction of kaleidoscopic beauty that explores estrangement and other modern
phenomena.

MURTHER & WALKING SPIRITS. By Robertson Davies. (Viking, $21.95.) The narrator
is murdered in the first line of this tremendously enticing novel, and
thereafter his spirit flits around -- learning of his ancestral past in Holland,
Wales and North America, watching seances from the dead's point of view and,
slowly, getting revenge.

THE NIGHT TRAVELLERS. By Elizabeth Spencer. (Viking, $21.95.) Personal
relationships, not historical events, hold together this strong novel that deals
with civilians who felt obliged to resist the Vietnam War, even unto violence.

OBJECT LESSONS. By Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $19.) This engaging,
entertaining first novel concerns a huge Irish Catholic family; its focus is the
coming of age of Maggie Scanlan, age 13.

ON THE EVE OF UNCERTAIN TOMORROWS. By Neil Bissoondath. (Clarkson N. Potter,
$18.95.) In these stories of exile by a Trinidadian now living in Canada, the
West stands in for a dream denied, and for most of his emigres there is no going
back.

PALACE OF DESIRE: The Cairo Trilogy II. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, $22.95.)
The second novel in the celebrated trilogy of the 1988 Nobel Prize winner opens
in the early 1920's and relates the ups and downs of a Cairo family.

PANGS OF LOVE: Stories. By David Wong Louie. (Knopf, $19.) This inventive first
collection of short stories tends to feature protagonists with an unstable sense
of identity, forced either to reinvent themselves appropriately or to sink into
isolation.

PATCHWORK. By Karen Osborn. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) A strong first
novel of three women who grow old in a Southern mill town, looking for autonomy
in a man's world.

PETER DOYLE. By John Vernon. (Random House, $22.) Mr. Vernon's energetic third
novel takes us from the squalid New York of the Gilded Age to the weird open
spaces of Colorado, along with a picaresque hero and a couple of Bonapartes, one
a cyborg.

PINOCCHIO IN VENICE. By Robert Coover. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A
Professor Pinenut, retired from an American university, is the hero of Mr.
Coover's Rabelaisian burlesque version of Collodi's puppet fable.

PLAYING THE GAME. By Ian Buruma. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) A curious fancy
-- half novel and half travelogue -- in which Benjamin Disraeli, Oscar Wilde and
the great Indian cricketer K. S. Ranjitsinhji share a huge joke on the English.

POLITE SEX. By James Wilcox. (HarperCollins, $19.95.) A different species of
aspiring-actress-in-New York novel, in which we see how life worked out for an
earnest Smith graduate from the South.

THE REVOLUTION OF LITTLE GIRLS. By Blanche McCrary Boyd. (Knopf, $19.) This
spare and precise novel of a South Carolina girl who becomes a well-adjusted gay
woman doubles as a circuitous feminist guide through 30 years of American life.

THE RISE OF LIFE ON EARTH. By Joyce Carol Oates. (New Directions, $16.95.) A
concentrated, single-minded, compact novel that explores the life and
consciousness of an abused little girl who grows up to be a hospital worker bent
on secret deadly acts.

THE RUNAWAY SOUL. By Harold Brodkey. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) In the
writing for close to 30 years, this long, bold and puzzling novel concerns a
famous writer's exploration of his own mind and efforts to recapture his
deceased adoptive family.

SAINT MAYBE. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf, $22.) Anne Tyler's 12th novel is the
arresting, intimate, oddball story of a man overwhelmed by guilt over the death
of his brother who sets out to redeem himself by joining the Church of the
Second Chance, giving up sex and helping to raise the brother's orphaned
children.

SARAH CANARY. By Karen Joy Fowler. (Holt, $21.95.) An accomplished, if strange,
first novel that takes place in a Pacific Northwest dreamscape of the 1870's,
organized, sort of, around a Chinese laborer and a mysterious woman in black.

SCUM. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) Another trip
back to the master Yiddish novelist's Warsaw just after the turn of the century,
this time in the company of Max Barabander, a rich, self-pitying liar and former
thief.

SEA OF LENTILS. By Antonio Benitez-Rojo. (University of Massachusetts, $22.95.)
Four narratives, loosely founded on Spanish chronicles of the conquest of the
Americas, collide and impinge in this convincing, unsettling novel by a Cuban.

THE SECOND BRIDEGROOM. By Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) This
energetic and ebullient first volume in a historical trilogy that ends with the
already published "Captivity Captive" is narrated by a convict who is shackled
to a corpse for a time and then adopted by Australian aborigines.

SWALLOW HARD. By Sarah Gaddis. (Atheneum, $19.95.) An elegiac first novel that
revolves about the unmastered feelings between a talented young woman and her
surly genius of a father.

SWEET EYES. By Jonis Agee. (Crown, $18.95.) A year of sin, passion, cracked
Formica and Willie Nelson tunes in fictional Divinity, Iowa, where crazed people
yearn to tell their life stories.

THE SWEET HEREAFTER. By Russell Banks. (HarperCollins, $20.) The author of
"Continental Drift" coolly but generously engages an appalling theme: a town's
need to fix the blame for a dreadful school bus accident so the world will make
sense again.

TALKING IT OVER. By Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $21.) Mr. Barnes's sixth novel --
credible, moving, funny and frightening -- concerns an impossible love triangle
and raises, like his previous books, some risky questions about the nature of
fiction itself.

THE TATTERED CLOAK: And Other Novels. By Nina Berberova. (Knopf, $21.) Actually
six novellas or longish stories by a Russian emigre, most of them brilliantly
impressionistic evocations of the Russian enclave in Paris before and during
World War II.

THEREAFTER JOHNNIE. By Carolivia Herron. (Random House, $18.95.) This lyrical
first novel, in which the daughter born of an incestuous relationship emerges as
a kind of messiah, adds a mythic dimension to the African-American experience.

THE THIRTEEN-GUN SALUTE. By Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $19.95.) The latest in an
admirable series of romances, set in Lord Nelson's navy, whose themes include
friendship and music, poetry, food, scholarship and the delights of nature.
Honest!

A THOUSAND ACRES. By Jane Smiley. (Knopf, $23.) The perils of family and
property, the difficulty of being a daughter, inform this novel in which an
Iowan divides his farm among his children.

TIME'S ARROW: Or, The Nature of the Offense. By Martin Amis. (Harmony, $18.) In
this poignant and savagely indignant novel, Mr. Amis explores what life would
feel like if time ran backward, and so, as in psychoanalysis or detective
fiction, the climax is what happened long ago.

TO KNOW A WOMAN. By Amos Oz. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$19.95.) A claustrophobic, mercilessly domestic novel, in which an Israeli
widower, a retired spy, contrives strategies for getting through the day.

TOO LOUD A SOLITUDE. By Bohumil Hrabal. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.)
Published in Czechoslovakia 14 years ago, this irresistibly eccentric romp
concerns the life of a gigantically passionate man whose job is the bundling of
books to be pulped.

TRAFFIC AND LAUGHTER. By Ted Mooney. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Mooney's funny novel,
fearlessly experimental, works some changes on our world: for example, the
atomic bomb, if used, will ignite the atmosphere, incinerating everything.

THE TRANSLATOR. By Ward Just. (Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.) A
cunningly ironic novel about an expatriate German translator in Paris who tries
to escape history, nationality, politics and the memories of World War II.

THE TRENCH: Volume Two of the "Cities of Salt" Trilogy. By Abdelrahman Munif.
(Pantheon, $25.) Mr. Munif's powerful novel of the making of a rich, corrupt oil
state goes far to deepen, correct and humanize our views of Arabs and Arab
culture.

TROPICAL NIGHT FALLING. By Manuel Puig. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) This
compressed, elliptical, posthumously published novel, told entirely through
dialogue, letters and police reports, is set in Rio de Janeiro and concerns two
middle-class Argentine sisters, their neighbor, a doorman and a 13-year-old
nanny.

TWO GIRLS, FAT AND THIN. By Mary Gaitskill. (Poseidon, $18.95.) Ms. Gaitskill's
grim first novel is about an obese young woman paralyzed by childhood wounds and
an elegant journalist who expresses herself in sadistic sexual relationships.

TYPICAL. By Padgett Powell. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) Short stories, some
very short, well using all the tricks of distillation, timing, bull's-eye
observation and Southern colloquial speech.

TYPICAL AMERICAN. By Gish Jen. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) Gish
Jen's first novel explores the transformation of Chinese immigrants into
Americans, chiefly through the agency of greed, in prose of epigrammatic
swiftness.

THE VOICE OF AMERICA. By Rick DeMarinis. (Norton, $18.95.) Fidelity -- between
mother and son, husband and wife, soldier and nation -- is the issue in these
fierce, often hilarious short stories.

THE WEIGHT OF WINTER. By Cathie Pelletier. (Viking, $22.95.) In this sharp,
strong novel, vicious inbred families in a small Maine town cope with hopeless
situations and with weather so cold that even the trees are "stunned above their
roots."

WHAT WAS MINE: Stories. By Ann Beattie. (Random House, $20.) Portraits of
forlorn men and unpredictable women from an author whose famous detachment has
given way to greater tenderness.

THE WHITE CASTLE. By Orhan Pamuk. (Braziller, $17.50.) A canny novel of slavery
and intrigue in 17th-century Istanbul, from a young Turkish writer with the
narrative zip of Scheherazade.

WHITE PEOPLE. By Allan Gurganus. (Knopf, $21.95.) Eleven stories, sharp of eye
and ear, all accessible, all evidently the product of a storyteller who knows
and loves his work.

WHO DO YOU LOVE. By Valerie Sayers. (Doubleday, $18.95.) Ms. Sayers brings
humor, irony, history both national and family, and a fascinating setting all to
bear on 37-year-old Dolores Rooney in this affecting novel of 24 hours in Due
East, S.C.

WILDERNESS TIPS. By Margaret Atwood. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $20.) The
well-constructed, tough-minded short stories in Ms. Atwood's third collection
feature such oddities as a pickled tumor, a bog man and Manuel Noriega.

WITH FIRE AND SWORD. By Henryk Sienkiewicz. (Copernicus Society of
America/Hippocrene, $24.95.) Thundering hoofbeats pound the Ukrainian plains in
this extravagant historical novel of Polish gentry and rebellious Cossacks in
the 17th century, first published in Polish in 1884 by the author of "Quo
Vadis."

WLT: A Radio Romance. By Garrison Keillor. (Viking, $21.95.) This loosely
constructed, exuberant but surprisingly dark novel about the birth, prosperity
and decline of a wild, down-home Minneapolis radio station is held together by
the nostalgia that made Mr. Keillor famous.

WOMAN HOLLERING CREEK: And Other Stories. By Sandra Cisneros. (Random House,
$18.) Unforgettable characters march through a satisfying collection of tales
about Mexican-Americans who know the score and cling to the anchor of their
culture.

A WOMAN'S STORY. By Annie Ernaux. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) Almost
giving up the pretense of fiction, the French writer Annie Ernaux, who has been
compared to Simone de Beauvoir, writes powerfully of a once-ungrateful daughter
remembering her mother's slow death from Alzheimer's disease in a suburb of
Paris.

THE WOMEN OF WHITECHAPEL AND JACK THE RIPPER. By Paul West. (Random House, $22.)
In a gloriously farfetched novel, true crime's most enduring unsolved mystery
begins with an idyllic romance between a shopgirl and a prince.

ZELDA FITZGERALD: The Collected Writings. Edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli.
(Scribners, $24.95.) All the literary work of this tragic figure, the wife and
muse of F. Scott Fitzgerald, showing an offbeat intelligence and a free-flowing
wit.

History

ABRAHAM LINCOLN AND THE SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION. By James M. McPherson.
(Oxford University, $17.95.) The author of "Battle Cry of Freedom" takes issue
with the propositions that the Civil War achieved nothing much and that Lincoln
didn't really know what he was up to.

AMERICAN NERVOUSNESS, 1903: An Anecdotal History. By Tom Lutz. (Cornell
University, $29.95.) A witty, concrete, gossipy study of neurasthenia, the
disease that racked nearly every self-respecting member of the Edwardian
brainworking classes.

BARONS OF THE SKY. From Early Flight to Strategic Warfare: The Story of the
American Aerospace Industry. By Wayne Biddle. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) Not so
much the glories of men in their flying machines as a timely history of how the
United States Government's military contracts have sustained the aerospace
industry for almost a century.

THE BIRTH OF THE MODERN: World Society 1815-1830. By Paul Johnson.
(HarperCollins, $35.) A tasty social history, spiced with gossip and anecdote,
of the 15 years Mr. Johnson argues were the changingest ever, what with steam
power, cheap books, mass advertising, rebellions, uprisings and middle-class
arrivisme.

THE CRISIS YEARS: Kennedy and Khrushchev, 1960-1963. By Michael R. Beschloss.
(Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $29.95.) A fascinating narrative of the three
years during which two theatrically inclined and relatively inexperienced
leaders led the superpowers as close to Armageddon as they have ever been.

THE DESTRUCTIVE WAR: William Tecumseh Sherman, Stonewall Jackson, and the
Americans. By Charles Royster. (Knopf, $30.) A fresh narration of the Civil War,
arguing that the conflict's devastating violence was inherent from the
beginning.

DREADNOUGHT: Britain, Germany, and the Coming of the Great War. By Robert K.
Massie. (Random House, $35.) A massive account of the breakdown of the European
status quo in the late 19th century and the rivalry that led to the catastrophe
of 1914.

THE DUEL. 10 May-31 July 1940: The Eighty-Day Struggle Between Churchill and
Hitler. By John Lukacs. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) A convincing argument that
the particular personalities and decisions of these antagonists determined the
future of the world.

ELECTRIFYING AMERICA: Social Meanings of a New Technology, 1880-1940. By David
E. Nye. (MIT, $29.95.) A deep historical probing into the everyday significance
of utility-provided electricity and the changes it has wrought.

FALLEN LEAVES: The Civil War Letters of Major Henry Livermore Abbott. Edited by
Robert Garth Scott. (Kent State, $27.) These candid letters of a conservative,
well-to-do Harvard graduate who brought his manservant with him to the
battlefield when he joined the 20th Massachusetts Regiment are filled with grim
humor and the horrors of war.

FREE AT LAST? The Civil Rights Movement and the People Who Made It. By Fred
Powledge. (Little, Brown, $29.95.) An ample history, frankly partisan but
generously comprehensive, of the nonviolent activists of the 1960's and their
opponents.

FREEDOM. Volume One: Freedom in the Making of Western Culture. By Orlando
Patterson. (Basic Books, $29.95.) The first of a projected two volumes on the
origins of the idea of freedom focuses primarily on Greek and Roman societies,
glances at the Middle Ages and concludes that in Western societies it was
slavery that produced an awareness of the value of freedom.

FROM LENIN TO LENNON: A Memoir of Russia in the Sixties. By David Gurevich.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $21.95.) A dryly witty account of totalitarian life
along the Volga offers an important lesson: the most typical horrors are not
savage repressions but the routine humiliations of the average citizen.

A HISTORY OF THE ARAB PEOPLES. By Albert Hourani. (Belknap/Harvard, $24.95.)
This splendid, monumental, old-fashioned narrative history of the Arab peoples,
starting with the Arab world before Islam and ending with the Arab world in the
1980's, is written with grace, wisdom, empathy and a sense of the irony of human
history.

HITLER'S JUSTICE: The Courts of the Third Reich. By Ingo Muller. (Harvard
University, $29.95.) A shocking history, by a former German law professor, of
the corruption of justice by the legal establishment during the Nazi period --
and even later.

IN MORTAL COMBAT: Korea, 1950-1953. By John Toland. (Morrow, $25.) A
distinguished military historian's examination of a war so humiliating for the
United States that attention to avoiding the same mistakes may have contributed
to defeat in Vietnam.

THE INVENTION OF ARGENTINA. By Nicolas Shumway. (University of California,
$34.95.) An absorbing discussion of Argentina's founding fathers, arguing that
their failure to agree on a model of the national destiny led to national
collapse.

ISRAEL'S SECRET WARS: A History of Israel's Intelligence Services. By Ian Black
and Benny Morris. (Grove Weidenfeld, $24.95.) A thoroughly documented
demystification of Israel's three spy services, including blunders as well as
triumphs.

LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO WAR: December 7, 1941. By Stanley Weintraub. (Truman
Talley Books/Dutton, $26.95.) In this roving-camera view of the day Japan
attacked an unprepared America, Stanley Weintraub amasses some highly readable
detail on what was happening all over the world.

ON THE ALTAR OF FREEDOM: A Black Soldier's Civil War Letters From the Front. By
Corporal James Henry Gooding. Edited by Virginia Matzke Adams. (University of
Massachusetts, $21.95.) This, the only sustained account of life in a black
Civil War regiment, is a slender sheaf of ornately written letters, penned by a
soldier in the 54th Massachusetts and originally published in The New Bedford
Mercury.

ONE OF US: Richard Nixon and the American Dream. By Tom Wicker. (Random House,
$24.95.) A scrupulous and unconventional account by a Times columnist that
agrees with the emerging consensus about Mr. Nixon's great abilities, but
locates his accomplishments more in domestic than foreign affairs.

PERFECT CITIES: Chicago's Utopias of 1893. By James Gilbert. (University of
Chicago, $27.50.) This subtle and nuanced re-examination of Chicago's World's
Fair of 1893, with its utopian visions for the future, lends perspective to
today's debates about whether there should be a homogeneous American culture.

POVERTY AND COMPASSION: The Moral Imagination of the Late Victorians. By
Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf, $30.) A pioneering study of the Victorians'
response to poverty, showing that the spirit of the age was serious, committed
and benevolent.

THE RITUALS OF DINNER: The Origins, Evolution, Eccentricities, and Meaning of
Table Manners. By Margaret Visser. (Grove Weidenfeld, $22.95.) A learned romp
through the rituals created to prevent cannibalism and other social ills.

THIS PEOPLE'S NAVY: The Making of American Sea Power. By Kenneth J. Hagan. (Free
Press, $27.95.) A critical institutional history, in vivid, precise prose, of
the United States Navy to 1990.

>Poetry

THE CITY IN WHICH I LOVE YOU. By Li-Young Lee. (BOA Editions, Cloth, $18; Paper,
$9.) Explosive and earthy poems by an audacious and passionate poet-traveler who
takes great chances in verse that is colloquial and metaphysical at the same
time.

CRIME AGAINST NATURE. By Minnie Bruce Pratt. (Firebrand Books, Cloth, $18.95;
Paper, $8.95.) These poems have an emphatic perspective -- that of a feminist,
lesbian mother -- derived from personal experience. They have a familiar,
elegant tonal beauty, but each one is a verbal emergency, original and
startling.

FLOW CHART. By John Ashbery. (Knopf, $20.) This 216-page poem, John Ashbery's
most various and beautiful book, seems to meditate on the whole world and all
literature. It is filled with stories, and only at the end do we realize we have
been looking at one underlying story -- Mr. Ashbery's life.

JAGUAR OF SWEET LAUGHTER: New & Selected Poems. By Diane Ackerman. (Random
House, $18.) Diane Ackerman is the great dramatist and explorer of the sensual
world; her poems probe, open, take off lids, peel back covers, taste, sniff.
There is no limit to her curiosity, and she is constantly discovering surprises.

LIVING WILLS: New & Selected Poems. By Cynthia Macdonald. (Knopf, $21.95.)
Cynthia Macdonald's voice is prodigiously flexible; she can write about anything
in gorgeous, baroque verse. Her later work shows movement toward longer poems
about life and family.

MADOC: A Mystery. By Paul Muldoon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.95.) This
ingenious tale of what might have happened if Coleridge had really established
his utopia in America, by one of Ireland's best poets, is filled with
characteristic Muldoonish pranks that will amuse and puzzle readers for a long
time.

OLD AND NEW POEMS. By Donald Hall. (Ticknor & Fields, Cloth, $24.95; Paper,
$12.95.) Donald Hall is our time's great elegist. In this collection of verse
from the last 15 years he celebrates the passing of people and things with
grieving joy in burly lines that are classical in dignity and perfectly
readable.

SELECTED POEMS. By Robert Creeley. (University of California, $25.) If Robert
Creeley can get his point across with fewer syllables, so much the better. He is
a some-assembly-required poet; his readers have to bring a certain amount of
personal experience to his work to get the most from it.

WAKING. By Tom Sleigh. (University of Chicago, Cloth, $20; Paper, $8.95.) Tom
Sleigh's precision marks him as the diamond cutter of poetry; his verse has a
tense musicality, and his ability to convey exact emotions, even the state of
consciousness itself, is unerring.

THE WORLD OF THE TEN THOUSAND THINGS: Poems 1980-1990. By Charles Wright.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) These poems can be read as a single poetic
sequence like John Berryman's "Dream Songs." They chart a spiritual quest, an
investigation of relations between the visible world and the invisible.

Popular Culture and the Arts

THE ADVENTURES OF AMOS 'N' ANDY: A Social History of an American Phenomenon. By
Melvin Patrick Ely. (Free Press, $22.95.) A Yale historian examines one of
America's greatest cultural enigmas -- the amazing popularity, among blacks as
well as whites, of "Amos 'n' Andy" on radio for more than 30 years.

CESAR PELLI: Buildings and Projects 1965-1990. Introduction by Paul Goldberger.
Essays by Mario Gandelsonas and John Pastier. (Rizzoli, Cloth, $50; Paper, $35.)
Drawings and photographs of buildings and models, accompanied by short essays
about Cesar Pelli, an architect known especially for his large-scale
compositions in reflective glass.

CHILDREN OF WAR, CHILDREN OF PEACE: Photographs by Robert Capa. Edited by
Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan. (Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown, $50.)
Photographed in China, Spain and other harsh places in the 1930's and 40's,
Capa's children have the look of crushed adults baffled by the world around
them.

DEAD ELVIS: A Chronicle of a Cultural Obsession. By Greil Marcus. (Doubleday,
$25.) A longtime contributor to The Village Voice and Rolling Stone gives us the
posthumous phase of Elvis Presley's transformation in American culture, in the
form of record reviews, book reviews, essays, pastiches and parodies written
since 1975.

THE DEVIL'S CANDY: "The Bonfire of the Vanities" Goes to Hollywood. By Julie
Salamon. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) An insightful look at how one producer's
irresistible urge to make a movie out of Tom Wolfe's novel led to an obscenely
expensive flop.

THE EMERGENCE OF CINEMA: The American Screen to 1907. By Charles Musser.
(Scribners, $60.) THE TRANSFORMATION OF CINEMA, 1907-1915. By Eileen Bowser.
(Scribners, $60.) AN EVENING'S ENTERTAINMENT: The Age of the Silent Feature
Picture, 1915-1928. By Richard Koszarski. (Scribners, $60.) The first three
volumes of "History of the American Cinema," a projected 10-volume series edited
by Charles Harpole, are accurate, all-inclusive and appealing; they live up to
extravagant promises.

MATISSE, PICASSO, MIRO AS I KNEW THEM. By Rosamond Bernier. (Knopf, $50.) This
expertly edited and beautifully illustrated collection of the lectures on great
artists given at the Metropolitan Museum by Rosamond Bernier, a founder of the
art magazine L'Oeil, is a mix of esthetic exposition, reminiscence and quotation
from artists, and it evokes a simpler and smaller art world.

MOVIE LOVE: Complete Reviews 1988-1991. By Pauline Kael. (William Abrahams/
Dutton, $24.95.) The latest collection of reviews from The New Yorker's
combative and fervent film critic includes her effusions over "My Left Foot" and
her vitriol about "Dances With Wolves."

ON BROADWAY: A Journey Uptown Over Time. By David W. Dunlap. (Rizzoli, $65.) An
arresting, authoritative look at the past and present of Manhattan's 17-mile
main street, by a reporter for The New York Times who takes fine photographs as
well.

PASSAGE: A Work Record. By Irving Penn. (Knopf, $100.) The most complete and
elaborately reproduced collection of the great photographer's work -- produced
on assignment for Conde Nast and on his own time -- spans his 50-year career and
illustrates an overriding impulse to show that beauty resides as much in sagging
flesh and obdurate metal as it does in the supple figures and flowing gowns of
fashion models.

THE THRILL OF FEAR: 250 Years of Scary Entertainment. By Walter Kendrick. (Grove
Weidenfeld, $21.95.) A lively, informative treatment of the pleasures of goose
bumps.

Religion, Philosophy and Mythology

THE BLACK CHURCH IN THE AFRICAN AMERICAN EXPERIENCE. By C. Eric Lincoln and
Lawrence H. Mamiya. (Duke University, Cloth, $47.50; Paper, $18.95.) A study
both broad and deep of the "invisible institution" that has been a vehicle of
social and spiritual transformation for two centuries.

CHAPTER AND VERSE: A Skeptic Revisits Christianity. By Mike Bryan. (Random
House, $22.) An agnostic exposes himself to the evangelical zeal of the Southern
Baptists at Criswell College in Dallas and emerges with this deft, revealing and
eminently fair exploration of the ethical and theological debates taking place
in seminaries across America.

DEBORAH, GOLDA AND ME: Being Female and Jewish in America. By Letty Cottin
Pogrebin. (Crown, $22.) A defiant book by one of the founding editors of Ms.
magazine chronicling her personal journey back to Judaism and her attempt to
create a life that reconciles her religion and feminism.

ENCOUNTERING MARY: From La Salette to Medjugorje. By Sandra L. Zimdars-Swartz.
(Princeton University, $24.95.) A fascinating study of seven apparitions of the
Virgin Mary reported since 1846 and of how such events, usually cryptic at
first, are interpreted and accepted -- or not -- by ecclesiastical authority.

EUNUCHS FOR THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN: Women, Sexuality and the Catholic Church. By
Uta Ranke-Heinemann. (Doubleday, $21.95.) A historical critique of the Roman
Catholic Church's attitude toward women and sexuality by a German Catholic and
professor of the history of religion; few theologians have targeted church
sexual teaching from so many angles or as trenchantly.

FREUD'S MOSES: Judaism Terminable and Interminable. By Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi.
(Yale University, $25.) An elegant, suggestive, subtle examination of Freud's
preoccupation with a historical figure who resembled himself in interesting
ways.

IRON JOHN: A Book About Men. By Robert Bly. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) A poet's
timely examination of the male psyche and the need men seem to have for a
spiritual infusion from myths and mentors to help them manage the change from
child to adult.

THE MYTHOLOGY OF MEXICO AND CENTRAL AMERICA. By John Bierhorst. (Morrow,
$14.95.) In his third volume of native American mythology, Mr. Bierhorst tracks
shared beliefs and common experiences from a wide range of sources.

SAGES AND DREAMERS: Biblical, Talmudic and Hasidic Portraits and Legends. By
Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $25.) A gifted storyteller reinvigorates and demystifies
Hasidic and Talmudic masters and characters from the Bible by showing their
human side.

THE SEARCH FOR GOD AT HARVARD. By Ari L. Goldman. (Times Books/Random House,
$20.) A Times reporter's engaging account of a year at the Harvard Divinity
School.

THE SPIRITUAL LIFE OF CHILDREN. By Robert Coles. (Peter Davison/Houghton
Mifflin, $22.95.) Showing again how much can be learned by paying attention, Dr.
Coles explores the role of religious thought in creating wholeness in children's
lives.

Science Fiction

BRAIN CHILD. By George Turner. (Morrow, $20.) An updated "Frankenstein" by an
Australian, this novel brilliantly unpacks the secrets of the Nursery Project,
in which scientific tinkering with the human genome has created three groups of
unlovable supermen and superwomen.

CARVE THE SKY. By Alexander Jablokov. (Morrow, $21.95.) Set in a vibrant 24th
century not unlike 14th-century Burgundy, this story brings to life a society
where the attainment of power and the appreciation of beauty are not seen as
mutually exclusive aims.

THE CULT OF LOVING KINDNESS. By Paul Park. (Morrow, $20.) The third novel in
"The Starbridge Chronicles" takes the long view of human history; the
iconoclastic successors to the haughty Starbridge clan become the oppressors.

THE DARK BEYOND THE STARS. By Frank M. Robinson. (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95.) This
epic clash of wills and generations -- between the old members of the starship
Aston, who have been searching in vain for new forms of life, and their
descendants, who want to return to Earth -- is a fresh look at the Christopher
Columbus syndrome.

DAYS OF ATONEMENT. By Walter Jon Williams. (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95.) This
genre-straddling blend of science fiction and police procedural features Loren
Hawn, a Southwestern Columbo who is a lot smarter than he looks, able both to
poke into the mysteries of high-energy physics at the tight-lipped research lab
outside of town and to take the law into his own hands.

DEATH QUALIFIED. By Kate Wilhelm. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) This novel about the
mathematics of chaos and the chaos of the human heart concerns a burned-out
attorney defending a woman accused of murdering her estranged husband, who
happened to be linked to a team of scientists redefining the fabric of reality.

MESS-MEND: Yankees in Petrograd. By Marietta Shaginian. (Ardis, $35.) A strange
historical artifact, this novel, written by a Muscovite under the pseudonym Jim
Dollar and published in biweekly installments in the Soviet Union in 1923, has a
proletarian hero named Thingsmaster who leads the Mess-Mend union against the
terrible international capitalists.

THE RAGGED WORLD. By Judith Moffett. (St. Martin's, $18.95.) This adult novel
deals with little furry aliens and time travel, but its main focus is on
ordinary and not-so-ordinary people caught up in events that, for all their
cosmic significance, are played out on what can only be called a domestic scale.

THE SILICON MAN. By Charles Platt. (Spectra/Bantam, Paper, $4.50.) The author
imagines what it would be like to be reconstituted as an "infomorph," a computer
program so carefully modeled on the human brain that it can "experience" any
sensory input it chooses. Mr. Platt's musings lead to some unsettling
conclusions.

STRANGER SUNS. By George Zebrowski. (Spectra/Bantam, Paper, $4.50.) This playful
but deadly earnest romp through space, time and alternative realities shows that
while you can't go home again, you might be able to find something that's just
as good or better.

XENOCIDE. By Orson Scott Card. (Tom Doherty/Tor, $21.95.) In this artful
narrative is a moral question that will keep readers pleasurably off balance:
Can such an awful act as xenocide, killing off an intelligent alien species, be
justified if it is done in the name of self-defense?

Science, Medicine and Psychology

THE ARROW OF TIME: A Voyage Through Science to Solve Time's Greatest Mystery. By
Peter Coveney and Roger Highfield. (Fawcett Columbine, $22.50.) A physicist and
a science editor take on the directionality of time in the light of current
research.

BULLY FOR BRONTOSAURUS: Reflections in Natural History. By Stephen Jay Gould.
(Norton, $22.95.) A provocative, spirited collection -- his best so far -- by
the Stan Musial of essay writing.

THE CHANGING ATMOSPHERE: A Global Challenge. By John Firor. (Yale University,
$19.95.) Mr. Firor, an atmospheric scientist, argues that man-made environmental
change is inevitable and that further inaction will complicate our survival.

CHILDHOOD. By Melvin Konner. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) This companion volume to a
PBS television series brings together current knowledge on how children around
the world -- from a kibbutz in Israel to the Kalahari Desert -- change both
physically and emotionally, from conception to adolescence.

THE CULTURE OF PAIN. By David B. Morris. (University of California, $29.95.) A
sensitive literary scholar's fascinating tour of what hurts, both mentally and
physically, and of what is, and has been, thought about pain in Western culture.

CYBERPUNK: Outlaws and Hackers on the Computer Frontier. By Katie Hafner and
John Markoff. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) The passion and revenge of computer
hackers, told in three separate stories -- one about "phone phreaks" in Los
Angeles, one about a West Berliner who passed military secrets to the K.G.B. and
one about a Cornell University student who sent a virus through the nation's
computer network.

THE DINOSAUR MAN: Tales of Madness and Enchantment From the Back Ward. By Susan
Baur. (Edward Burlingame/ HarperCollins, $19.95.) An empathic book that portrays
the uncommon worlds of schizophrenic patients in mental hospitals and shows how
their delusions help them survive.

EXPLORING SPACE: Voyages in the Solar System and Beyond. By William E. Burrows.
(Random House, $24.95.) An exuberant paean to American planetary exploration,
embedded in a detailed history of the space effort, by a veteran reporter.

FEMALE PERVERSIONS: The Temptations of Emma Bovary. By Louise J. Kaplan. (Nan A.
Talese/Doubleday, $24.95.) A fascinating, ambitious study by a psychoanalyst who
argues that such conduct as shoplifting and compulsive sexy dressing are the
female equivalents of more familiar male paraphilias.

IN THE PALACES OF MEMORY: How We Build the Worlds Inside Our Heads. By George
Johnson. (Knopf, $22.95.) A lucid examination by a science journalist and Times
editor of work in progress toward the understanding of human intelligence.

THE JOY OF INSIGHT: Passions of a Physicist. By Victor Weisskopf. (Basic Books,
$24.95.) The memoirs of a gifted thinker remarkable for the breadth of his
culture and of his sympathies.

LONELY HEARTS OF THE COSMOS: The Scientific Quest for the Secret of the
Universe. By Dennis Overbye. (HarperCollins, $25.) A vivid journalistic history
of the amazing discoveries -- as well as the amazing speculations -- of the last
20 years of cosmology.

THE MAN WHO KNEW INFINITY: A Life of the Genius Ramanujan. By Robert Kanigel.
(Scribners, $27.95.) The captivating rags-to-mathematical-riches tale of a poor,
uneducated Brahmin Hindu from south India whose genius expressed itself in the
rarefied field of number theory.

MODELS OF MY LIFE. By Herbert A. Simon. (Basic Books, $26.95.) The Nobel
laureate's autobiography shows his scientific activity -- most notably, his work
in artificial intelligence -- as a deeply personal enterprise, a product not of
irresistible technology but of the esthetic and self-examination of the
researcher himself.

TELL ME A STORY: A New Look at Real and Artificial Memory. By Roger C. Schank.
(Scribners, $19.95.) An impressive book, and fun to read, about human
intelligence and its dependence on the stories we know and retell.

VIRUS HUNTING. AIDS, Cancer, and the Human Retrovirus: A Story of Scientific
Discovery. By Robert Gallo. (New Republic/Basic Books, $22.95.) A scientist's
formidable defense of his own version of the events leading up to the discovery
of the AIDS virus.

WALKING WITH THE GREAT APES: Jane Goodall, Dian Fossey, Birute Galdikas. By Sy
Montgomery. (Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) This shrewd,
thought-provoking book about three amazing women sent into the field by Louis
Leakey shows that it was not only their sharp eyes but their deep commitment and
sympathy that allowed them to understand the great apes.

WITNESSES FROM THE GRAVE: The Stories Bones Tell. By Christopher Joyce and Eric
Stover. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A satisfyingly grisly guide, by two science
writers, to the techniques and achievements of forensic anthropology.

Spies & Thrillers

CATALYST. By Philip Cornford. (Bantam, $19.50.) An original, ambitious and
entirely successful novel that is partly about espionage but mostly about
ordinary Russians of the Gorbachev generation.

CRIMES OF THE CITY. By Robert Rosenberg. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A superior,
well-written thriller that introduces Avram Cohen, a police detective in
Jerusalem, and concerns the slaying of two nuns in a Russian Orthodox convent.

THE DECEIVER. By Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $22.50.) Dedicated to cold warriors
everywhere, these four linked and richly nuanced novellas feature an endearing
51-year-old British spy named Sam McCready.

FOREIGN EXCHANGE. By Larry Beinhart. (Harmony, $19.) A cynical, at times
hilarious book, by an elegant writer, that spoofs the spooks of the C.I.A.

THE SECRET PILGRIM. By John le Carre. (Knopf, $21.95.) An intriguing amalgam of
meditation, fictive autobiography and numerous spy stories whose protagonist, a
man named Ned, will be familiar to Mr. le Carre's fans.

SUGARLAND. By Phillip Finch. (St. Martin's, $18.95.) A San Francisco insurance
investigator looks into the possible death of a man in the Philippines; the
writing is altogether expert.

THE SUM OF ALL FEARS. By Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) A vivid page-turner in
which the intrepid Jack Ryan battles post-cold war geopolitical terrors --
Palestinian terrorists, European radicals and former East German secret police
and military scientists, who join forces and get hold of an Israeli nuclear
weapon.

WET WORK. By Christopher Buckley. (Knopf, $19.95.) Bodies pile up in this
satirical thriller as its wealthy protagonist goes after the system that
provided a fatal drug overdose to his granddaughter.

WHITE RUSH/GREEN FIRE. By Mark McGarrity. (Morrow, $20.) Mr. McGarrity, who as
Bartholomew Gill is the author of a series of Irish police procedurals, has
written a superb suspense novel about the drug trade in the Bahamas.

Sports

BASEBALL IN '41: A Celebration of the Best Baseball Season Ever -- in the Year
America Went to War. By Robert W. Creamer. (Viking, $19.95.) A memorable book
that brings back the year Joe DiMaggio hit safely in 56 straight games, Ted
Williams hit .406 and the Brooklyn Dodgers won their first pennant in 21 years.

COLLISION AT HOME PLATE: The Lives of Pete Rose and Bart Giamatti. By James
Reston Jr. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins, $19.95.) A dual biography that does
justice to these two men who seemed at times to be the id and the ego of modern
baseball.

CORNER MEN: Great Boxing Trainers. By Ronald K. Fried. (Four Walls Eight
Windows, $21.95.) And IN THE CORNER: Great Boxing Trainers Talk About Their Art.
By Dave Anderson. (Morrow, $20.) Like good corner men, the authors of these two
books are unobtrusive. In chronicling the unique and dying art of training
boxers, they have managed to complement each other's work wonderfully -- with
Mr. Anderson rendering a straight oral history of current and recent trainers
and Mr. Fried giving longer biographies and chapters on old-time trainers.

HARD COURTS. By John Feinstein. (Villard, $22.50.) A year's worth of juicy and
unflattering anecdotes about the greats and ingrates of professional tennis,
gleaned from interviews with more than 100 players and their agents and coaches.

I HAD A HAMMER: The Hank Aaron Story. By Henry Aaron with Lonnie Wheeler.
(HarperCollins, $21.95.) A beautifully written rendition of the incredible
journey of Henry Aaron as well as of the struggle of African-Americans to play
major league baseball.

MUHAMMAD ALI: His Life and Times. By Thomas Hauser. (Simon & Schuster, $24.95.)
The definitive biography, compiled from the recollections of more than 150
people who have known the great boxer.

MY FAVORITE SUMMER 1956. By Mickey Mantle and Phil Pepe. (Doubleday, $18.95.)
The story of Mickey Mantle's brilliant season, told with much fine shrewdness
and humor here.

TED WILLIAMS: A Baseball Life. By Michael Seidel. (Contemporary Books, $19.95.)
And TED WILLIAMS: A Portrait in Words and Pictures. Text by Glenn Stout. Edited
by Dick Johnson. (Walker, $24.95.) Two books about the Boston Red Sox outfielder
whose real power was at the plate -- one, by the author of "Streak: Joe DiMaggio
and the Summer of '41," provides a rounded biography of Williams; the other,
written by a freelance sportswriter in collaboration with the curator of the
Sports Museum in Boston, presents a lively and reverential mixture of narrative,
photographs and short essays by assorted Williams fans.

A WHOLE DIFFERENT BALL GAME: The Sport and Business of Baseball. By Marvin
Miller. (Birch Lane/Carol, $21.95.) The man who rewrote the rules of
labor-management relations in baseball has written a sometimes insightful,
sometimes bitter memoir about the pain and triumphs of the players' union.




Travel, Nature and Adventure

AFRICAN SILENCES. By Peter Matthiessen. (Random House, $21.) Three extended
essays on Africa by a distinguished nature writer whose environmental warnings
and descriptions of destructive social forces are as urgent and relevant as
ever.

BAGHDAD WITHOUT A MAP: And Other Misadventures in Arabia. By Tony Horwitz.
(Dutton, $19.95.) A journalist's amusing, often insightful record of being at
loose ends for two years among people whom we do not understand very well, and
vice versa.

BURNING BUSH: A Fire History of Australia. By Stephen J. Pyne. (Holt, $27.95.)
This exhaustive history of the interaction of nature, fire and mankind on a
strange and distant (from us) continent is a major contribution to the
literature of environmental studies.

CHASING THE MONSOON. By Alexander Frater. (Knopf, $21.) A delightful, unusual
travel book, full of amusing perceptions about India and its inescapable links
with the past, recent and remote.

GAME WARS: The Undercover Pursuit of Wildlife Poachers. By Marc Reisner.
(Viking, $19.95.) Rambunctious reporting about the thriving business of wildlife
poaching as seen through the eyes of Dave Hall, a voluble and egotistical
undercover agent working for the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.

HUNTING MISTER HEARTBREAK: A Discovery of America. By Jonathan Raban. (Edward
Burlingame/HarperCollins, $25.) An Englishman with a gift for observation
follows an 18th-century spectral guide in a search for this country's great good
place.

THE LADY AND THE MONK: Four Seasons in Kyoto. By Pico Iyer. (Knopf, $22.) An
affectionate, beautifully written book, arising from curiosity about a land at
once so high-tech and so traditional; the author encountered many surprises,
love not the least of them.

THE LAST ITALIAN: Portrait of a People. By William Murray. (Prentice Hall,
$21.95.) Mr. Murray's second volume of casual essays about Italy and its
civilization is partly just fine journalism, partly a lover's keen, observant
diary of his affair.

TURKISH REFLECTIONS: A Biography of a Place. By Mary Lee Settle. (Prentice Hall,
$19.95.) A diverting mixture of travelogue, history, polemic and contemporary
portrait that is a model of how to take pleasure in places and people along
paths not lately beaten.

WILD PEOPLE: Travels With Borneo's Head-Hunters. By Andro Linklater. (Morgan
Entrekin/Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) A wacky account, by a British journalist, of
a sojourn in Sarawak.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing by Maurice Sendak

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Staving Off the Silencers

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis;  Anthony Lewis, a Times columnist, is the author most
recently of "Make No Law: The Sullivan Case and the First Amendment."

SECTION: Section 6; Page 72; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4014 words


AMERICANS HAVE MORE freedom to think what we will and say what we think than any
other people on earth. We can denounce politicians in uninhibited language. We
can read books banned in Britain or Israel. We can even burn our flag, as a
political protest, without fear of punishment.

All this we owe to the unflinching guaranty in the First Amendment: "Congress
shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press." Those
bold words were added to the Constitution, along with the rest of the Bill of
Rights -- the first 10 amendments -- on Dec. 15, 1791. We approach the
anniversary secure in the knowledge that Americans have been free to speak and
publish without fear for 200 years.

So we believe. But it is not so simple. The First Amendment did not make us free
when it was ratified in 1791. Far from it. Not until 1927 did anyone claiming a
constitutional right to freedom of speech or press win a case in the Supreme
Court. Those clauses of the First Amendment have been given meaning only by a
turbulent history.

Just seven years after the First Amendment was adopted, we had a close brush
with the tyranny of silence. The President was John Adams, a Federalist, and the
Federalists controlled Congress. In the summer of 1798, they pushed through a
Sedition Act that made it a crime to publish false, malicious comments about the
President or Congress. It did not reach nasty attacks on the Vice President,
Thomas Jefferson -- who was the leader of the oncoming opposition, eventually to
be the Democratic Party. It was partisan legislation, designed to silence the
opposition in the run-up to the election of 1800. Indeed, the law was to expire
on the next Inauguration Day, March 4, 1801.

Just how repressive the Sedition Act could be was made clear by the first
prosecution under it. Matthew Lyon, a Jeffersonian Representative from Vermont,
had written a letter to the editor of a Vermont paper saying that President
Adams was engaged in "a continual grasp for power, in an unbounded thirst for
ridiculous pomp, foolish adulation and selfish avarice." It was characteristic
political slanging of the day -- or any day in this country. But an indictment
charged that the words were "scurrilous, feigned, false, scandalous, seditious
and malicious." Lyon was convicted and sentenced to four months in prison and a
fine of $1,000, a huge sum then and one that he could not pay. He remained in
prison.

Jefferson and James Madison, who had drafted the First Amendment as a member of
the House, worked to arouse the states against the Sedition Act. Worried that
they would be prosecuted themselves, they acted in secret. Such was the mood of
fear created by the act.

Madison wrote the classic American argument for freedom of political speech,
passed by the Virginia Legislature as the Virginia Resolutions. "The Sedition
Act," he said, "ought to produce universal alarm, because it is leveled against
the right of freely examining public characters and measures, and of free
communication among the people thereon, which has ever been justly deemed the
only effectual guardian of every other right." He went on to make a fundamental
point about the American political system. "In this country," he wrote, "the
people, not the Government, possess the absolute sovereignty." He was drawing a
distinction from Britain, and the distinction is still true today: Parliament is
sovereign, and the people have no rights in law if Parliament restricts their
freedom.

Madison's argument added up to a theory of not only the First Amendment but the
entire constitutional structure. If the people are sovereign, they must be free
to examine and criticize those whom they choose to govern from time to time. It
is the premise -- the Madisonian premise, it is fair to say -- of democracy.

Not everyone agreed with Madison, of course. John Marshall, later the great
Chief Justice, was a Federalist candidate for Congress in Virginia in 1799 and
defended the Sedition Act. The state, he said, must be able to protect itself
"from the attempts of wicked citizens to disturb the public repose." Government
could not be secure "if by falsehood and malicious slander it is to be deprived
of the confidence and affection of the people." It was a paternalistic view, and
very English. If it had prevailed, this would be a different country.

The constitutionality of the Sedition Act was never tested in the Supreme Court
before it expired. But it provoked a great political test. The Adams
Administration used the act to prosecute the owners and editors of all the
leading Jeffersonian newspapers. The tactic proved to be disastrous. Public
outrage, spurred by Jeffersonian talk of tyranny, helped Jefferson to defeat
Adams in 1800. When he took office, Jefferson pardoned all those who had been
convicted under the Sedition Act.

FOR MORE THAN A CENTURY AFTER that episode, the speech and press clauses of the
First Amendment lay essentially dormant. The Supreme Court, starting in the
latter part of the 19th century, read the Constitution more and more to protect
property. It was hostile to claims of free expression. How hostile became
evident when the United States entered World War I and Congress passed an
Espionage Act that made it a crime to obstruct the war effort or military
recruitment.

In 1918, Eugene V. Debs, five times the Socialist Party's candidate for
President, was charged under the Espionage Act for a speech in which -- in
passing -- he expressed sympathy with men jailed for counseling others on how to
avoid the draft. He was convicted and sentenced to 10 years in prison. He argued
that the conviction violated his rights under the First Amendment. But the
Supreme Court unanimously rejected the claim, in an opinion by Justice Oliver
Wendell Holmes Jr.

Think of the Debs case in comparison with what happened during the Vietnam War,
when hundreds of thousands of Americans opposed the war and none went to prison
for mere words. How did we get from the Debs decision to where we are today,
when dissidents can rail against Government policy in wartime? How has the
received meaning of the First Amendment so changed?

An extraordinary process has taken place, starting just a few months after the
Debs decision in 1919, when another Espionage Act case came along. Three
anarchists and a socialist had protested President Wilson's dispatch of troops
to intervene in Russia after the Bolshevik Revolution, throwing leaflets from
the top of buildings in the garment district in New York. For that, they were
convicted -- three sentenced to 20 years in prison and the fourth to 15. The
Supreme Court again found no protection for their expression in the First
Amendment. But this time, Justice Holmes, joined by Justice Louis D. Brandeis,
dissented. It was the first Supreme Court opinion arguing that freedom of speech
had been unconstitutionally abridged.

"Persecution for the expression of opinions seems to me perfectly logical,"
Holmes wrote. "If you have no doubt of your premises or your power and you want
a certain result with all your heart, you naturally express your wishes in law
and sweep away all opposition. . . . But when men have come to realize that time
has upset many fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than the
foundations of their own conduct that the ultimate result desired is better
reached by free trade in ideas -- that the best test of truth is the power of
the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market. . . . That
at any rate is the theory of our Constitution. It is an experiment, as all life
is an experiment. . . . While that experiment is part of our system I think that
we should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check the expression of
opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught with death. . . ."

Over the next 10 years, Holmes and Brandeis, in dissent, wrote many moving
tributes to free speech. Brandeis: "Those who won our independence . . .
believed that freedom to think as you will and speak as you think are means
indispensable to the discovery of political truth. . . . Fear of serious injury
alone cannot justify suppression of free speech. . . . Men feared witches and
burnt women." Holmes: "If there is any principle of the Constitution that more
imperatively calls for attachment than any other it is the principle of free
thought -- not free thought for those who agree with us but freedom for the
thought that we hate."

Gradually, over time, those dissents became the law of the First Amendment.
Holmes and Brandeis, and other Justices after them, persuaded the country -- and
the Court -- that freedom of expression was a paramount constitutional value.

HISTORY CAME FULL CYCLE IN 1964, WHEN the Supreme Court returned to Madison's
spacious vision of the First Amendment. The case was New York Times v. Sullivan.
The Times had published a full-page advertisement seeking support for Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. and the struggle to win blacks the vote and other civil rights
in the South. The ad spoke of brutal tactics by the police and other white
officials to put down the civil rights movement. It named no names; but L. B.
Sullivan, a city commissioner of Montgomery, Ala., sued for libel, claiming that
brutality would be attributed to him because he was in charge of the Montgomery
police. An all-white jury awarded him all he had demanded in damages: $500,000,
the largest libel verdict in Alabama history. Other Alabama officials sued over
the advertisement, and across the South officials seized on libel suits as a new
way to keep the national press from covering the civil rights struggle -- by
intimidation.

The press then was playing a crucial part in the civil rights debate, reporting
more fully than ever on the savageries used to keep blacks segregated and
powerless in the South. As Americans learned about those realities, the pressure
for national political action grew. Congress passed a series of civil rights
laws. Blacks began to vote in substantial numbers, and the politics of the
region was transformed.

In short, the system worked as Madison thought it should: an informed public
shaping Government policy. It could not have worked in the same way if
Sullivan's libel suit and the others that followed had succeeded in scaring away
press coverage of the racial issue in the South. The suits were, therefore, a
profound challenge to the Madisonian view of the First Amendment -- to its
function of assuring open political discussion. But when the Sullivan case came
to the Supreme Court, there was a great historical obstacle to applying the
First Amendment to it. Libel had always been treated as outside the amendment's
protection. No libel judgment, however extreme, had ever been held to violate
the Constitution.

Justice William J. Brennan Jr., writing the opinion of the Court in the Sullivan
case, cut through that obstacle. The form of a libel action could not obscure
the reality, he said, the reality of an attempt to foreclose expression "on one
of the major public issues of our time."

Did the First Amendment, then, protect critical comments on Southern officials?
Justice Brennan made the Sedition Act of 1798, and the battle against it, the
crux of his analysis. He quoted Madison on how the act interfered with the right
to examine "public characters and measures." He concluded: "Although the
Sedition Act was never tested in this Court, the attack upon its validity has
carried the day in the court of history." It was an extraordinary moment: 163
years after the Sedition Act expired, the Supreme Court held it retrospectively
unconstitutional.

We live in a society of "uninhibited, robust and wide-open debate," Justice
Brennan said, and public officials must live with "sometimes unpleasantly sharp
attacks." Because error is inevitable in free debate, not even mistaken
criticism can be grounds for an official's libel suit, so long as the
misstatement was not deliberate or made with awareness of its probable falsity.
Sullivan's $500,000 judgment was reversed, and all the other Southern libel
suits that threatened to keep the press away from the civil rights story fell
away.

In the years after the Sullivan decision, the Supreme Court applied the
Madisonian principle of free expression to a wide range of factual situations.
When the Georgia Legislature refused to seat Julian Bond as an elected member
because he had sympathized with draft resisters during the Vietnam War, the
Court held unanimously that Bond's First Amendment right to free speech had been
violated. The facts were remarkably similar to those in Eugene Debs's case; the
result was the opposite.

"Freedom for the thought that we hate," which Holmes had urged in dissent,
became a reality. The Supreme Court reversed the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan
speaker who said that "the nigger should be returned to Africa, the Jew returned
to Israel." The Court held that a speaker may not be punished for advocating
even the use of force or illegality unless the speech is intended to incite
imminent lawlessness and is likely to. A lower Federal court held
unconstitutional local ordinances designed to block a march by American Nazis
through Skokie, Ill., where many survivors of the Holocaust lived.

Savage ridicule of the eminent is also protected now by the First Amendment.
Hustler magazine in 1983 published a parody of a Campari advertisement
suggesting that Jerry Falwell, the minister and leader of the Moral Majority,
had had a drunken incestuous rendezvous with his mother in an outhouse. A jury
awarded Falwell $200,000 in damages for intentional infliction of emotional
distress. The Supreme Court held unanimously that the First Amendment protected
Hustler. There could be no damages for ridicule, Chief Justice William Rehnquist
said, however savage, unless readers would take an attack as factual and it was
deliberately false. And no one would take the Hustler parody as a statement of
facts.

Finally, there were the two flag-burning cases in 1989 and 1990. Majorities of 5
to 4 held that burning an American flag as a political protest was expression
protected by the First Amendment. President Bush called for a constitutional
amendment to protect the flag. Congress at first seemed ready to agree, but more
and more members -- and their constituents -- came to doubt the wisdom of
tampering with the First Amendment. The flag amendment fell short of the
necessary majorities in Congress, and the issue disappeared -- perhaps a sign
that Americans, or a good many of them, now really accept the idea of freedom
for the thought that we hate.

BUT HISTORY IS SELDOM A NICE progressive curve upward, and the modern history of
First Amendment interpretation has hardly been that. There have been many dark
passages.

Fear of Communism led to successive waves of repression. In the Palmer raids of
1920, Federal agents arrested 4,000 supposed radicals in a single night. Joe
McCarthy and other Congressional demagogues feasted on anti-Communism after
World War II. Security checks carried out by grossly unfair and inaccurate
methods were imposed on Federal Government workers. Blacklisting savaged the
entertainment world. And the Supreme Court did very little to hold these
outrages up to the light of the First Amendment.

The low point in the Court's modern record was probably its 1951 decision
sustaining the conviction of American Communist Party Leaders for conspiring to
teach the necessity of overthrowing the Government. A majority, rejecting First
Amendment claims, said this group of pathetically ineffectual figures presented
a danger serious enough to justify overriding the principle of free speech for
ideas that we loathe. The premises of that decision have been eaten away since
the Sullivan case, vindicating Justice Hugo Black's dissenting hope that "in
calmer times, when present pressures, passions and fears subside, this or some
later Court will restore the First Amendment liberties."

WHERE, THEN, DOES THe FIRST Amendment stand as it approaches its 200th birthday?
How true are we to Madison's vision of sovereign citizens informed on public
matters and freely debating them? How free are we to speak and write what we
will?

For me, the most worrying contemporary threat to First Amendment values is the
growth of secrecy in the Federal Government. The fear of Communism and the
reality of the cold war led successive Administrations to say that national
security required more and more of their business to be done in secret. The
national security claim was no doubt sincerely made in many instances, but there
is no doubt, either, that it was greatly exaggerated. Officials naturally find
life easier if they do not have to explain and defend their policies.

The Supreme Court has been at its worst in dealing with the growth of secret
government. Rather than applying the independent scrutiny that the First
Amendment ordinarily evokes from judges, the Court has bent over backward --
cringed might be a better word -- to defer to national security claims by the
Government.

The Court ignored First Amendment interests in the important case of Frank
Snepp. A C.I.A. official in Vietnam during the war, Snepp was distressed that at
the end the United States left behind many of our Vitnamese intelligence sources
-- and files containing their names, which made it certain that they would be
mistreated. He wrote a book, "Decent Interval," criticizing high United States
officials, and published it without first submitting it to the agency for
review, as he had promised to do. The Government sued him.

A majority of the Supreme Court was so moved by the C.I.A.'s secrecy claims that
it decided the case against Frank Snepp without letting his lawyers brief or
argue the case. The Court held that his promise to clear any manuscripts was a
binding contract and that for violating it he must turn his gross receipts from
the book over to the Government: nearly $200,000 so far, an amount far larger
than the penalty for many grievous crimes. The Court did so even though the
Government conceded for purposes of the case that Snepp had disclosed no
classified information in the book. It also put Snepp under a lifelong
injunction requiring him to clear with the C.I.A. anything he proposes to write
or speak about Vietnam or intelligence matters. He has had to clear book reviews
and the manuscript of a novel.

On the strength of the Snepp case, the Reagan Administration asked hundreds of
thousands of Federal employees to sign secrecy agreements, promising not to
write or speak about their work without official approval, even after leaving
the Government, for the rest of their lives. We have always relied on former
officials to give us insights into the Government. But when their words are
submitted to censors, there will always be a tendency to remove the merely
embarrassing. Two former Directors of Central Intelligence, William Colby and
Stansfield Turner, wrote books after leaving office, submitted them for
clearance and complained that C.I.A. censors had removed harmless passages.

In a broader sense, growing secrecy has taken us away from the Madisonian vision
of a Government accountable to the sovereign public. The result is a profound
departure from the Madisonian -- the constitutional -- premise of
accountability. For example, the Framers of the Constitution took particular
care to assure that Americans would know how public money was spent. They wrote
this exceptionally explicit provision into Article I: "No money shall be drawn
from the Treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made by law; and a
regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all public
money shall be published from time to time."

In violation of that clause, the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies are
financed in secret, with no published account of their spending. Billions of
dollars more are spent on secret weapons projects in what has been called "the
black budget." The claim is that secrecy is required by national security. But
unwise policy also thrives in the dark, where there can be no criticism or
correction, and so do waste and corruption. The hearings on Robert Gates's
nomination to be Director of Central Intelligence showed that the C.I.A. had
persistently exaggerated Soviet economic and political strength -- an analysis
that would surely have been corrected if it had been subject to wider critical
examination.

But the Supreme Court, when it had the question of the constitutional clause
requiring public accounting of public money before it, once again deferred to
the claim of secrecy, It held that members of the public have no standing to
challenge the flagrant violation of the clause, so that guarantee has become a
dead letter.

The American press has, on the whole, done well in recent decades from the
Surpeme Court's renewal of Madison's vision. Emboldened by New York Times v.
Sullivan, it has tried harder -- if not consistently -- to penetrate the surface
of Government rather than accept official statements as gospel. The First
Amendment is not much help when the Government closes off access to the facts,
by silencing a source like Frank Snepp or keeping reporters away from the
fighting in the Persian Gulf war. But when the press finds something out, the
Supreme Court has said the First Amendment ordinarily keeps the Government from
stopping publication. The Court allowed The New York Times and The Washington
Post to print the Pentagon Papers despite Government claims that grave national
security claims would be disclosed -- claims that former officials now admit
were nonsense.

The conservative shift in the Supreme Court in recent years has not so far
brought any fundamental weakening in the protection of free speech and a free
press -- with one menacing exception. In the case of Rust v. Sullivan last term
-- the gag rule case -- a 5-to-4 majority upheld a Reagan Administration
regulation forbidding doctors in family planning clinics financed in any part by
the Federal Government to discuss abortion with patients or even refer them to
doctors who would. The precedent is worrying because so many private
institutions in this country now rely on Federal funds; universities, public
libraries, scientific laboratories, museums and other arts institutions. May
officials in Washington now tell all of them what subjects may be discussed in
their halls?

THERE CAN BE no permanent assurance of safety in the speech or press clauses of
the First Amendment, or in any provision of the Constitution. We rely on our
fundamental law, and rightly so, but history shows that the words have to be
given meaning by each generation of judges -- and citizens.

But this is a good time to celebrate the First Amendment, for reasons quite
apart from the anniversary. In a place and circumstances remote from what James
Madison could have imagined, his premise that free speech and a free press make
democracy possible has just had a dramatic demonstration.

The Soviet political system, which had ruled by repression for nearly 74 years,
was overthrown in days. And freedom of speech and press played a critical part
in those stunning events. In five years of Mikhail Gorbachev's glasnost, all
kinds of independent channels of communication had opened up: newspapers,
magazines, television and radio. The first thing the coup plotters tried to do
was to silence those voices, but they failed. Boris Yeltsin broadcast on
makeshift equipment from inside the Russian Parliament building. Newspapers
somehow were printed. The facts got out. From them, and from the experience of
freedom, people drew the courage to resist tyranny.

Speaking truth to power is never going to be easy, not even after 200 years.
Indeed, the very idea of unregulated speech remains daring. "The constitutional
right of free expression is powerful medicine in a society as diverse and
populous as ours," Justice John Marshall Harlan wrote in 1971. But it is, as
Holmes said, our great experiment.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WESTCHESTER GUIDE

BYLINE: By Eleanor Charles

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 28; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words



PEARL HARBOR, REVISTED

Saturday will mark the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
A film and commemorative program will take place at 8 P.M. Saturday in Peekskill
at the Paramount Center for the Arts, 1008 Brown Street.

Music and songs will be followed by 1941 newsreel footage of the attack. By
special arrangement with 20th Century-Fox, what is apparently the last
large-screen print of "Tora! Tora! Tora!" will be shown.

The film won praise for its even-handed portrayal of the people and events
leading up to and including the attack. The cast includes Joseph Cotten, Jason
Robards, Martin Balsam, James Whitmore, Soh Yamamura and Takahiro Tamura.

Admission will be $7; children, veterans and members of service groups, $5.
Servicemen who were in Honolulu at the time of the Pearl Harbor attack will be
admitted free.For more information, call 739-2333.

STUDYING BUCKYBALLS

Buckyballs are molecules. Really. Their full name -- Buckmintserfullerenes --
and the nickname were bestowed by Dr. Richard E. Smalley, chairman of the Rice
University Quantum Institute in Texas. The name buckyball was inspired by the
resemblance of the molecules' hollow soccer-ball shape to the architect R.
Buckminster Fuller's geodesic domes. Dr. Smalley will give a lecture on the work
that he and colleagues have done in exploring this new field of "fullerenes" at
8 P.M. Thursday in the Academic Arts Theater of Westchester Community College in
Valhalla.

The discovery of this molecule, a third form of carbon composed of 60 carbon
atoms, could have wide-ranging consequences. The molecules are said to be
unusually stable and may be the ancient ones that provided the first nuclei
around which solid objects formed.

Laboratories are expected to begin scrambling for patents in affected fields
that include microelectronics, superconductors, batteries, lubricants, medicines
and catalysts. Admission to the lecture is free. For more information, call
285-6718.

JAZZ AT 8

The Westchester Conservatory of Music series Women in Jazz continues with a
concert by the Connie Crothers-Lenny Popkin Quartet at 8 P.M. Friday in the
conservatory's cabaret, 20 Soundview Avenue, White Plains.

The group, just back from a tour of Belgium, the Netherlands, France and
Luxembourg, recently released its sixth CD, "In Motion," on the New Artists
label. Other recordings, including "New York Night," were made live at the Blue
Note in Manhattan.

Connie Crothers is the pianist, Carol Tristano the drummer, Lenny Popkin the
tenor saxophonist and Cameron Brown, the bassist. The price is $8,students and
the elderly $6 at the door. For information, call 761-3715.

MRS. LINCOLN'S SORROW

Page Hedden Wilson has made a career out her one-woman plays based on the lives
of strong, frequently controversial women in history. At 7:30 P.M. Wednesday in
the Chappaqua Library she will present "Proud Sorrow," in which she portrays
both Mary Todd Lincoln, wife of President Lincoln, and Varina Howell Davis, wife
of Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederacy.

The production opened last March in Connecticut, adding to Ms. Wilson's
repertory of monologues about Agatha Christie, Ellen Terry, Dolley Madison and
Edith Wilson, wife of President Woodrow Wilson.

Mary Lincoln's loss of three children and her commitment to an insane asylum by
one of her sons are among the events in "Proud Sorrow." Mrs. Davis, outspoken in
her conviction that education rather than Civil War was the proper way to end
slavery, wished that she and her husband could go back to living like ordinary
people.

The library is at 195 South Greeley Avenue; there is no admission fee. Call
238-4779 for more information.

OLD TALE WITH A TWIST

Hans Christian Andersen may well have approved of the international spin put on
his tale of "The Emperor's New Clothes" by the National Children's Repertory
Theater of Milwaukee, to be performed today at 3 P.M. in the Peforming Arts
Center at the State University of New York at Purchase.

The story has been moved to Japan and is now accompanied by a score adapted from
Gilbert and Sullivan's "Mikado." And why not? After all, if the show is about
clothes, why not make them magnificent, with gorgeous kabuki-style robes and
elaborate headdresses?

Among the characters fashioned from "The Mikado" is Sing-Song, the Lord High
Commissioner of Important Things. He is the unlucky official who hires two con
men to make new royal robes.

The show is for children 4 through 11 years old. Tickets are $12 and $17. The
box office number is 251-6200.

REPORTER'S WAR YEARS

Philip Caputo will recap his 30 years as a foreign correspondent for The Chicago
Tribune at 8 P.M. Wednesday in the Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. of Mid-Westchester at 999
Wilmot Road in Scarsdale.

Mr. Caputo has covered wars in Vietnam, Israel, Afghanistan and Lebanon and
limps as a result of injuries inflicted by Palestinian guerrillas. His most
recent book is "Means of Escape: Memoirs of the Disasters of War"
(HarperCollins; 1991). "A Rumor of War," a book about Vietnam (Holt, Rinehart;
1977) is considered a journalistic classic.

Admission to the program will be $5, and reservations can be made by calling
472-3300.

SANTA IN LARCHMONT . . .

St. John's Church at 4 Fountain Square in Larchmont will close its centennial
year with a holiday bazaar from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. Saturday. Proceeds will go to
several organizations including the HOPE Food Pantry in New Rochelle, the
Children's Corner after-school program in Larchmont, My Sister's Place, a county
shelter for battered women, and community services in Mamaroneck.

Items to be sold include toys, jams, books, audio cassettes, videocassettes,
games, holiday centerpieces and wreaths, crafts and baked goods. An activities
center for children will keep them busy making holiday items, and Santa will
visit from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.

Russel Harvey, a member of the National Cartoonists' Society, will do
caricatures for $15 in color and $10 in black and white. Admission is free.

. . . AND ELSEWHERE

St. Nicholas and other traditions of the Early American Christmas will be
observed at Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown from 5 to 9 P.M. Friday through
Sunday. Activities include baking cookies in the fireplace, storytelling by
interpreters performing as African slaves of the Philipse family, country
dancing, nondenominational candlelight services at the Old Dutch Church across
the street and walks by lantern light to the busy gristmill and barns.

The table will be set for a feast, and wooden shoes filled with straw and
carrots for St. Nick's horse will be on the hearth, to be replaced with treats
from St. Nicholas.

Peter G. Rose, a food historian and author, will present a slide show and
lecture on foods brought to America by the Dutch, particularly those associated
with St. Nicholas and the holidays. Samplings of patterned Dutch breads made
from 17th-century recipes will be distributed.

The house, like all Historic Hudson Valley properties, is decorated with
replicas of early Dutch- and English-style swags, trees, toys, foods and
wreaths. Admission is $7.50 for adults, $5 for children 6 to 17. Hot mulled
cider and Dutch ginger cookies will be for sale. Call 631-8200 for more
information.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HEADLINERS;
Unwelcome Back

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 162 words


Many Cambodians who lost loved ones during the bloody regime of the Khmer Rouge
in the 1970's were on hand last week to greet Khieu Samphan, a senior Khmer
Rouge official who returned to Phnom Penh to take part in United
Nations-sponsored peace talks. The angry mob cursed him, beat him and very
nearly strung him up from a ceiling fan before soldiers and police came to his
rescue. Mr. Khieu Samphan, the chief negotiator for the Communist guerrilla
group in talks aimed at ending the country's most recent civil war, was
immediately hustled back to Thailand, where he has been in exile since Vietnam
invaded and drove the Khmer Rouge out of power in 1978. Some diplomats expressed
fear that the incident, in which Mr. Khieu Samphan did not appear to be
seriously hurt, might jeopardize coming free elections in which the Khmer Rouge
will be allowed to participate. Cambodian leaders and U.N. officials are to meet
this week in Bangkok to discuss the situation.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khieu Samphan (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

What Foreign Policy?

BYLINE: By James Webb;  James Webb was Assistant Secretary of Defense and
Secretary of the Navy in the Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


The Democratic challengers to President Bush have apparently decided to cede him
his experience in foreign affairs and instead to focus on domestic issues,
particularly the economy. This would be a mistake.

Americans demand a President who is adroit in the international arena. The
Democrats' retreat from an affirmative foreign affairs role since the middle of
the Vietnam War coincides exactly with their failure in Presidential elections.
Allowing Republicans to continue setting the foreign policy agenda while arguing
from the back bench befits a legislator or perhaps a governor, but not a
President.

We need this debate. In previous years, especially before the collapse of
Eastern Europe and the unhinging of the Soviet Union, it was not necessary for
leaders to outline the specific maxims under which they would conduct foreign
affairs. Our economy was clearly the world's strongest. And despite sometimes
vitriolic argument over the appropriate mix of military, diplomatic and economic
levers, we were united in our desire to contain expansionist Communism.

The still fragile resolution of the cold war was in many ways a Pyrrhic victory
for the U.S. We lost more than 100,000 young men fighting Communist soldiers in
Asia. For the first time in our history we stationed large standing forces in
foreign countries in peacetime -- almost one-third of our Army and nearly 40
percent of our tactical Air Force were assigned to Europe's defense alone. We
bled our economy white and saw our standard of living decrease as countries
benefiting from our protection refurbished, became our competitors and now
threaten to become our economic superiors.

As new power centers emerge, the U.S. is frequently viewed as a passive
observer. The European Community is moving toward fiscal and possible federal
union. Asia is transforming itself, with Japan at the economic center and China
the political and military fulcrum. Except for our military power, the U.S. is
bringing less and less to the table.

Mr. Bush, while correctly rejecting renewed calls for isolationism, has failed
to articulate the direction in which our country must move. Behind the constant
motion, his foreign policy suffers the same disabilities as his domestic policy.

It is mostly reactive rather than visionary. Secretary of State James Baker
deserves high marks for postwar efforts in the Mideast, and Mr. Bush should not
be strongly faulted for his lack of specific policies to address rapid change in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. But this Administration's policies have
hardly been guided by concrete principles.

Here are some of the confusing "lessons" from the last three years:

The violation of a nation's territory is wrong when Iraq attacks Kuwait, but
acceptable when we quietly cede Lebanon to a rearmed and unrepentant Syria.

Democratic evolution is vital when Soviet citizens take their government back
from a hard-line coup, but not of consequence when the Chinese ask for continued
most-favored-nation status after the slaughter at Tiananmen Square, or in the
Arab nations that so cleverly made use of our military assets against Iraq.

We will normalize relations with Vietnam if it supports internationally
supervised elections in Cambodia, but will not ask that it honor its commitment
in the 1973 Paris Peace Accords to hold internationally supervised elections in
Vietnam.

U.S. foreign policy lacks clear principles because it depends greatly on
personal ties. Mr. Bush seems to believe in the existence of a fraternity of
world leaders who can get along and make a deal, no matter the degree of their
tyranny or the ideology that drives them. His courting of Hafez al-Assad is
dangerous. In the time Syria has been our "ally" it has consolidated its hold on
Lebanon, destroyed the Christian Phalange militia, acquired Scud-C missiles from
North Korea, and is now rumored to be receiving arms shipments from the Soviets
and nuclear assistance from China.

This is the kind of costly realpolitik that led to the two military engagements
Mr. Bush has savored since becoming President: fighting against tyrants in Iraq
and Panama who only a few years earlier had received the active support of Mr.
Bush and our Government.

The President's curiously soft treatment of the Chinese has caused widespread
reverberations. The East Asian land mass has grown even more repressive as
Europe has become more free. China, with a fifth of the world's population, is
asserting itself as the dominant military and political power in Asia, and is
now a major arms dealer.

One of China's principal strategies is to erect an alliance against U.S.
pressure for political liberalization. China seems also to favor nuclear
proliferation, reportedly assisting Iran, Pakistan and possibly Syria in this
regard.

The impact of the soft American treatment can be seen in China's recent
rapprochement with Vietnam, a historic enemy. In 16 years the inept Hanoi
Government has driven two million of its best and brightest people into exile,
and destroyed an economy that today provides a per capita income of only $180 a
year.

After the Tiananmen massacre, Vietnam's Communists conducted their own
crackdown, the country's most brutal since 1975. They are vastly unpopular at
home. They are also desperate for cash, Soviet aid having dried up almost
completely over the past two years.

With no cards to play, Vietnam has also followed China's lead in maneuvering the
U.S. into normalizing relations without having to liberalize politically. Mr.
Bush's road map for normalization, conceived solely as a reward for Vietnam's
cooperation in Cambodia and on the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue, asks for no democratic
reforms from one of the world's most repressive systems. This is an abominable
failure, given our special responsibility to address the plight of those who
stood by the U.S. in the war.

Nor does the policy mention the 1973 Paris Peace Accords, signed by the
Vietnamese Communists, which guaranteed that "the South Vietnamese people's
right to self-determination is sacred, inalienable and shall be respected by all
countries," and that they "shall decide themselves the future of Vietnam through
genuinely free and democratic elections under international supervision."

U.S. policy avoids facing new economic realities. Economic power directly
correlates with national security. Mr. Bush and others ignore that, and
particularly its relevance to Japan's rise, at our collective peril.

It is estimated that within two decades Japan will have the world's strongest
economy. It has achieved this growth by adopting an aggressive national
strategy, spearheaded by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry.
Defying conventional wisdom regarding the ill effects of protectionism, Japan
has protected home markets and dumped products at reduced prices abroad, driving
out -- and in many cases destroying -- domestic competition until the only
products available are Japanese. Mr. Bush and his allies like to call this "free
trade."

Furthermore, the radical devaluation of the dollar agreed on by the U.S. in 1985
has not altered our trade imbalance. Rather, it has allowed Japan, which imports
all its oil, an incredible windfall: since oil is bought with dollars, cheaper
dollars mean cheaper oil. In 1981, Japan spent more than 5 percent of its gross
national product on oil. That figure has dropped to about 1 percent, allowing
Japan billions of excess dollars to spend on American capital assets.

Mr. Bush and "free trade" economists debunk concerns about the Japanese buying
trend, pointing out that it creates jobs -- no matter that the profits from our
labor go back to Japan, where they can be used to purchase even more capital
assets. In the old days they called this "colonialism."

To date, Mr. Bush has neither the strategy nor the will to address these
inequities. If they are not addressed, we must accept a grave national truth: we
have become so dependent on the Japanese for capital investment and in the
financing of our debt that we have lost our ability to protect our long-term
interests.

These issues beg for debate. And no Democrat is likely to unseat George Bush
without taking them on.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 1, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Japan and the U.S. Share an Uneasy Artistic Peace

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SHAPIRO;  Michael Shapiro is the author of "Japan: In the
Land of the Broken-Hearted."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1788 words


From the bombing of Pearl Harbor to the purchase of Rockefeller Center, the
relationship between the United States and Japan has been burdened with seminal
moments. But one of the most revealing encounters took place not during combat
or in a boardroom but on film.

The moment came in Ron Howard's 1986 movie, "Gung Ho," in which a Japanese car
maker reopens an abandoned American plant. The Americans, unable to impress
their Japanese employers, offer a deal: they will match the production record of
their Japanese counterparts to keep the plant open. As they fairly kill
themselves just to stay even, it becomes clear that nothing short of chicanery
will help. Their shop steward confronts the austere company president, trying to
make up for the missing cars with sheer enthusiasm.

There is a pause. Then, with words that tell more than any joint communique
could about where matters now stand between America and Japan, the president
looks at the shop steward and says: "I like you. You make me laugh."

Saturday is the 50th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, the
event that first made Americans see Japan as a power and a threat. For all of
the books explaining Japanese ways to Americans, and despite Japan's embrace of
American pop culture, the relationship remains one of two peoples who see the
world and their places in it in profoundly different ways.  Between them stir
accusations, threats and stereotypes -- geisha and samurai; violent crime and
Mickey Mouse. And in the darkest moments, memories of Pearl Harbor and Hiroshima
come to the surface.

If the arts -- especially film -- have perpetuated some of the worst stereotypes
and the most naive images, they have also provided moments of clarity, when the
real fears felt on both sides of the Pacific come to life. Dealing in the realm
of emotion rather than policy, creative artists can offer glimpses into the
passions at the heart of the relationship -- the contempt and pity many Japanese
have come to feel toward the United States, the fear and mistrust that the idea
of Japan now conjures for many Americans.

After the War
Stereotypes Hide Shifting Truths

If the Japan portrayed in recent American films has a parallel, it is the
America portrayed in Japanese films of the 1950's and 60's. Each nation is cast
as an invader -- Japan, now, devouring American assets; America, then, imposing
itself on occupied Japan.

In Shoei Imamura's "Pigs and Battleships" (1961), America was embodied by
whoring servicemen, pouring off their ships in search of Japanese prostitutes.
There were also the faceless Americans who ran over and killed a Japanese
gangster in Masaki Kobayashi's "Black River" (1957) and the brutal G.I. who
enlisted a temple novice to abort his Japanese girlfriend's pregnancy in Kon
Ichikawa's "Conflagration" (1958).

"In the 1950's, all American characters were portrayed as conquerors," said
Keiko MacDonald, a professor of Japanese history and film at the University of
Pittsburgh. "This situation completely reversed in the 1970's."

Indeed, in Hiroshi Teshigahara's 1972 "Summer Soldiers," a product of a
wealthier and more confident Japan, America was represented by Vietnam deserters
who were offered refuge in Japan. By 1979, in Hiroshi Yamada's "Tora's Dream of
Spring," an American -- lost, broke and in need of a mentor -- could be seen
sitting at the knee of the classic Japanese film figure Tora-san, a love-lorn
peddler. And in Masahiro Shinoda's 1984 "MacArthur's Children," Americans became
well-meaning soldiers of the Occupation, losing at baseball to a team of
determined Japanese schoolchildren.

Until recently, Americans, still convinced that the Japanese wanted only to be
like them, were largely unaware of the change. Even as Japan grew more powerful,
Tokyo's official attitude toward the United States remained one of unflagging
admiration and fidelity. That the movies were saying something very different
was consistent with the Japanese notion of truth, which exists on two levels:
"tatemae," truth that is spoken, and "honnae," truth that is meant. Film
reflected the essential truth seldom spoken.

Back when Japan was seeing an all-powerful America on film, America saw Mickey
Rooney in "Breakfast at Tiffany's" (1961), with buckteeth and glasses, as the
embodiment of the Japanese man. And in Woody Allen's "What's Up, Tiger Lily?"
(1966), the voices in a Japanese film were replaced by those of American actors
for comic effect. On Dec. 7, 1966, the 25th anniversary of Pearl Harbor, "What's
Up, Tiger Lily?" was playing in New York.

By the time of "Gung Ho," two decades later, the shift in the essential truth of
Japanese attitudes had become so apparent that an American director could show a
group of Japanese hovering around a broken scale model of an automobile,
laughing at the "American car."

For Americans, meanwhile, Japan has become the world that the lone New York cop
played by Michael Douglas in Ridley Scott's 1989 "Black Rain" found so
threatening and impenetrable. Mr. Scott's vision of Japan was one of neon and
shadows and powerful men. An underworld boss menacingly told the American: "You
shoved your values down our throat. We forgot who we were. I am paying you
back."

Even when not so dark, the images could be telling. The young Japanese couple in
Jim Jarmusch's "Mystery Train" (1989), for instance, trudged through Memphis
oblivious to urban decay, searching for the spirit of Elvis Presley and the
1950's America that the young Japanese so cherish.

Images of the Present
Conflict, Blame And Paranoia

In movie houses and theaters today, the encounter between Japan and America
takes other forms. A wealthy Japanese man battles with a jobless American auto
worker in Hi roaki Yoshida's new film "Iron Maze." A Japanese-American
apologizes to his aging aunt for not knowing that her husband had been
incinerated at Nagasaki in Akira Kurosawa's forthcoming film "Rhapsody in
August." And a paranoid American becomes convinced that the Japanese businessman
taking over his company was once his prison camp guard in Jill Shearer's play
"Shimada," scheduled for New York this spring.

"Iron Maze," in particular, makes vivid the conflict and passions between two
peoples. A wealthy Japanese man "buys" a moribund American steel town and
dispatches his son, Junichi Sugita, to see what can be made of it. Sugita, tall
and dapper, arrives in a white Mercedes-Benz convertible with his blond American
wife. He wants to replace the mill with an amusement park. To the steelworkers,
led by a man named Barry, Sugita becomes "the Jap."

"From Sugita's point of view, the steel mill is just heavy rusting iron," Mr.
Yoshida said in a recent conversation. "It's something useless. He believes he's
doing a very good thing for everybody. But for the American, Barry, his
grandfather and father had the same job he did. The entire town worked in the
mill. For him it's like a church, a holy place. He doesn't want Sugita to treat
the mill like garbage. You can't say which one is right or wrong."

Nor can you be sure just what to make of the title character in "Shimada," said
the play's director Simon Phillips. When the play opened in Australia in 1987,
many critics regarded it as a warning of the Japanese economic invasion. But Mr.
Phillips insisted that it is designed to let audiences make up their own minds
about Japan today.

"Shimada," Mr. Phillips said, goes to the heart of both Australian and American
perceptions of the Japanese -- that they remain elusive and, with their growing
power, threatening. "This is a play about perceptions -- how a culture is
perceived by a people who have no understanding. Because we can't make the sum
add up, there will always be a sinister idea."

Mr. Kurosawa, for his part, offers in "Rhapsody in August" a picture of a
sensitive American -- played by Richard Gere, speaking Japanese -- who
appreciates the suffering of the Japanese people. And the director is quick to
poke fun at the generation approaching middle age, those who still fawn over a
wealthy American cousin.

But what rankles many Americans who have seen the film is Mr. Kurosawa's
avoidance of the issue of blame. The aging aunt delivers a speech blaming the
suffering of war's victims on war itself, as if war were a player and not an act
of players. In reality, victims of Japanese aggression in World War II are left
to wonder when the nation will accept responsibility for its most heinous
wartime acts.

The war, of course, remains at the core of the encounter between Japan and
America, from questions of responsibility and relative degrees of suffering to
the troubling but inevitable comparisons now drawn in America between Japan's
military expansion in the 1930's and its economic domination today. As many
Japanese angrily ask how often they have to apologize for the war, many
Americans contend that they have not done so even once.

A Way to the Future
Being Different, And Accepting It

Still, there is a growing sense that the issue is at last being engaged through
the arts -- although that is not always the case. "Esthetics is a way to paper
over those conflicts," said Stefan Tanaka, a history professor at Clark
University in Worcester, Mass. Mr. Tanaka's work involves American perceptions
about Japanese art. He argued that too often curiosity has not extended beyond
an appreciation of the myths two peoples see in one another -- myths born of the
images found in their art.

"It's kind of like the Dr. Feelgood approach," he said. "You avoid the issue.
It's a fake understanding. We believe that if we talk to each other, we'll
understand."

If theater and movies offer, at least in America, a new and sometimes troubling
view of where the two nations find themselves, they also offer glimpses of what
could be. Among the entries at the New York Film Festival this fall was Alan
Berliner's "Intimate Stranger," the story of his grandfather. An Egyptian Jew
who settled unhappily in Brooklyn after the war, the grandfather set off for
Japan, where he resumed a career as a middleman in the cotton trade. He would
spend 11 months a year in Japan, working slavishly for his company and all but
ignoring his family.

When Mr. Berliner went to Osaka to make his film, he found that his grandfather
had been rewarded not with a great deal of money or with friendship. Instead,
Mr. Berliner said, his grandfather was called "honorable special foreigner." He
was different, and people cared for him deeply. He embraced his role and
recognized that fundamentally he was not the same as the people around him. And
though that did not bring him complete acceptance, it at least brought
contentment.

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A scene from Akira Kurosawa's film "Rhapsody in August" with,
from left, Tomoko Ohtakara, Sachiko Murase and Hidetaka Yoshioka--avoiding the
issue of blame (Orion Classics) (pg. 1); Hiroaki Murakami, foreground, as
Junichi Sugita in "Iron Maze"--"the Jap," to American steelworkers (Edward R.
Pressman/Oliver Stone); Michael Keaton, right, pulls his Japanese boss, Gedde
Watanabe, back to shore in "Gung Ho"--a shift in postwar attitudes (Paramount
Pictures) (pg. 20)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Town Learns Indians Are Taking Most of It Back

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words

DATELINE: CARROLLTON, N.Y.


Dayrll Wetherby drove every nail in his house here.

A Vietnam veteran, he spent a decade building the split-level home: He hauled
the stone for the foundation from a creek, felled and milled oaks for the
three-inch-thick stairs, laid the floor joints, and hoisted the roof's center
beam on his back.

But now the Seneca Indians are claiming the ownership of not just the Wetherbys'
land, but their house and the homes of about 6,600 other residents of this
village and the nearby town of Salamanca, a once bustling railway hub that is
the only town in the country built almost entirely on an Indian reservation.

When the Wetherbys moved their house a mile to get it off the reservation, the
tribe's leader said the Senecas still owned it. And in an explosive war of
nerves, about 50 families have obtained permits to dynamite their homes rather
than to turn them over to the Senecas.

Residents Increasingly Militant

"They say, 'If I can't have it, nobody is going to have it,' " said Joseph
Fluent, president of the Salamanca Coalition of United Taxpayers or Scout, a
group of 1,200 increasingly militant residents who captured every municipal
office in recent elections. "I don't think they're going to accept the
situation."

The residents have demanded a Congressional hearing that could reopen a wound
bandaged over last month when President Bush signed an agreement to pay the
Indians a total of $60 million to make up for decades of exploitation.

The battle has already exposed long-simmering tensions between the Indians and
the non-Indian residents, many of whom built homes, businesses and factories on
land leased 99 years ago for as little as $1 a year.

Both sides see themselves as victims fighting to preserve their heritage and to
correct wrongs forced on them by outsiders. The Senecas say that residents are
merely trying to continue a tradition of taking advantage of the Indians.

"This is just a sheep in wolf's clothing," said Calvin John, the Seneca
President. "Their real beef is the rental payment. They've become accustomed to
cheap rent. All we're interested in is getting our land back. We need it because
we're running out of land for our own people."

Leases and Liquor

The dispute's roots stretch back centuries to when the area was a speck in a
vast Seneca territory. When the first railroad companies began to lay tracks
through the Allegheny River Valley in the mid-1800's, white settlers started
making deals with the Senecas. Many were illegal, but by the time they were
questioned, the city was thriving. Bowing to intense lobbying, Congress
validated the leases in 1875.

Then in 1892 tribal leaders were reportedly plied with liquor and coerced into
signing a 99-year-agreement that all sides now agree was unjust. Negotiations to
renew the lease, which expired Feb. 19, sputtered for a decade, creating
uncertainty that accelerated the town's decline.

Driving through Salamanca now is like moving into America's Depression past: one
low-slung, boarded-up building after another. Industrial skeletons sit vacant on
shadowy side streets, ghosts of an era when the city was alive with a promising
future and when freight cars, filled with logs, rattled dishes in dining rooms
on the way to eastern markets.

The poverty becomes even more desperate outside of town, where most of the
reservation's 3,500 Senecas live in ramshackle huts without plumbing.

A Sovereign Nation

The tension was only aggravated by last year's announcement of the new lease. It
raised some rents to $2,000 a year, from as little as $1, as part of a 40-year
lease worth a total of $800,000 annually, and called on the state and Federal
governments to pay the Senecas $60 million.

The deal outraged many residents. And since 90 percent of Salamanca is on the
Allegany Reservation, a sovereign nation nestled against the Pennsylvania border
60 miles south of Buffalo, they cannot sue the Senecas for contract violations.

"I'm a World War II veteran and lost a boy in Vietnam and I don't have any
rights," protested Ronald Havers, a 67-year-old resident.

Members of Scout were also infuriated by the failure to address the question of
who owns the homes, which under New York State law are assumed to belong to the
landlord, the Indians. Both sides said the issue would have complicated the
already intractable negotiations.

Jennifer Coleman, a lawyer for Scout who unsuccessfully challenged the deal,
said she was rebuffed when she tried to raise the question. "We were told we're
crazy," she said. "We were told the nation would never assert their ownership."

'It Was the American Dream'

But the residents worried.

When Mr. Wetherby moved into his house with his wife, Gail, there was little
more a frame covered by black plastic. The bitter winter wind, sweeping off Lake
Erie nearby, whistled through the home. To keep warm, the couple huddled around
a wood stove in the basement.

"Our house: it was the American dream," Mrs. Wetherby said. She said she was so
upset about the prospect of losing it that she couldn't sleep. "I wanted peace,
just peace," she said.

Her husband added: "This house is where my kids were born. Knowing that this
situation is only going to get worse, I felt no one is going to take my home
from me. No one."

Two months ago, the Wetherbys tried to make sure. They jacked up the house and
moved it to a plot of family land a mile off the reservation. In a carefully
worded letter, Mr. John, the Seneca leader, responded by laying claim to the
home and demanding that the Wetherbys restore the property to its "original
condition, usefulness and value."

Representative Amory Houghton Jr., the Corning Republican who represents the
area and helped broker the lease, dismissed the residents' fears and said they
should refocus their energies on rebuilding the town's economic base.

"There are many uncertainties in life," he said. "Can a problem be made out of
it? Absolutely, as there can be out of anything. But the whole tone has to be
moved from the past to the future. We're asking the community to concentrate on
building what could be a very exciting place. The Indians own the land. Period.
Paragraph. End of story."

But Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, while advising residents
to make another effort to work out a compromise with the Senecas, said he
expected that Congress would have to enter the dispute.

"These people shouldn't be abandoned," he said. "Do you just allow people to be
dumped? No."

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "I don't think they're going to accept the situation," Joseph
Fluent said of his group of 1,200 residents who are fighting the Seneca Indians'
claim to ownership of the town of Salamanca, N.Y. (pg. B1); "All we're
interested in is getting our land back," said Calvin John, head of the Seneca
Nation of Indians, which claims it owns Salamanca, N.Y. "We need it because
we're running out of land for our own people." (pg. B5) (Joe Traver for The New
York Times)

Map of New York showing location of Salamanca. (pg.B5)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 2, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Lobbyist on Civil Rights Wins Despite Hostility

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


Believe it or not, Ralph Neas, the executive director of the Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights, is feeling a bit nostalgic for his battles with the
Reagan Administration.

Despite strong ideological differences with Ronald Reagan, Mr. Neas could often
gain a sympathetic ear from White House moderates like James A. Baker 3d and
Kenneth M. Duberstein, who were each chief of staff.

These days, things are different. Last month, Mr. Neas was not invited to the
signing of the civil rights bill that was just passed, a sign that he no longer
had friends in the White House.

"In many ways things are worse under the Bush Administration than they were
under Reagan," said Mr. Neas, whose group is a coalition of 185 organizations
representing members of racial and religious minorities, women, the elderly, the
disabled and homosexuals.

Hired by the Leadership Conference two months after Mr. Reagan's inauguration,
Mr. Neas (pronounced NIECE) achieved some successes in the face of unremitting
hostility, from the extension of the Voting Rights Act in 1982 to the rejection
of Robert H. Bork for the Supreme Court in 1987 and the toughening of Federal
housing discrimination laws the next year.

"He's awesome," said Clint Bolick, vice president of the Institute for Justice,
a conservative public-interest law firm, and a constant antagonist of Mr. Neas.
"I wish he weren't so, and my career is dedicated to making him less effective.
But, I've got to admire him. He's the Babe Ruth of civil rights lobbyists."

Flattering as this sounds, it is not the universal view. Some, even among his
allies, find Mr. Neas a bit of a self-publicist. Others point out that outside
events contributed to the accomplishments in his ledger.

Indeed, though the Leadership Council opposed the nomination of Clarence Thomas
to the Supreme Court, it was unable to derail his confirmation. And on the civil
rights bill, Mr. Neas struggled to hold onto wavering Democrats until the
emergence of David Duke in Louisiana and the sexual harassment allegations of
Anita F. Hill changed the political atmosphere.

A Senate staff member attributed the passage of the bill on circumstances and
the "doggedness" of Senator John C. Danforth, a Missouri Republican, in bringing
President Bush around to a compromise. "It was not Ralph Neas and the civil
rights groups," the staff member said. "They were totally outside the political
dynamic."

Still, during the measure's contentious two-year passage through Congress -- a
process Mr. Neas termed a "political and legislative roller coaster" -- the bill
more than once appeared close to death on several occasions. It has become law
mainly because Mr. Neas and others in the coalition would not let it die.

"I'm sure people will say it's because of Anita Hill and Duke," said Lawrence Z.
Lorber, a Washington lawyer who represents businesses in civil rights cases.
"But Ralph kept it going. He kept the ball in the air, and if you can keep the
thing in play long enough something will always happen."

A Target for Friend and Foe

As a visible symbol of the civil rights movement in Washington, Mr. Neas is a
prominent target for both friend and foe. At one point during the back and forth
over this year's civil rights bill Mr. Neas was castigated by President Bush as
"some self-appointed guy up there in Washington who calls all the shots."

At other times he has been criticized by Democrats for acting more like a
legislator than a lobbyist. Some Democrats also see him as a spokesman for an
agenda that is hurting the party in national elections.

"Because he is so visible and promotes his own visibility so effectively, any
time you are looking for a target he's right in front of you," said Charles
Kamasaki, the vice president of the National Council of La Raza, a Hispanic
rights lobbying group in Washington.

Anger From Members

Mr. Neas has a reputation for loving the spotlight. "I remember a few years ago
during the Bork hearings," said an official with a civil rights organization who
insisted on anonymity, "he came into a meeting and was talking about how he hit
a grand slam: an appearance on 'Nightline' the night before, on the front page
of The Washington Post, and The New York Times that day, and 'Good Morning
America' that morning."

Indeed, several years ago a number of civil rights groups became angered when a
book about lobbyists in Washington gave most of the credit for the extension of
the Voting Rights Act to Mr. Neas. Some groups in the conference, in particular
the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund, tried to set up a committee to
re-evaluate how the coalition made decisions, a move that could have reduced the
power of Mr. Neas.

All Mr. Neas will say publicly about the incident is that it was "a learning
experience five or six years ago that has helped me perform my job as executive
director better."

The pat phrasing for the record is characteristic. Reporters are used to asking
Mr. Neas a question and hearing these words in reply: "Can we talk off the
record first?"

A Life of Contradictions

Mr. Neas's life confounds attempts at pigeon-holing. He is a 45-year-old white
able-bodied Catholic heterosexual male speaking for sexual, racial and other
minorities. He is a Republican in an organization tied most closely to the
Democrats. Affiliated with liberal groups, he attended military school as a
teen-ager, loves Tom Clancy novels and supported the Vietnam war as a college
student in the 1960's, though he says now he was increasingly discomfited by the
conflict.

"There are a number of things in my life that surprise people," Mr. Neas said
during an interview.

Born in Massachusetts, he is a graduate of Notre Dame whose life-long passions,
in addition to civil rights, are the Boston Red Sox, the Boston Celtics and
Notre Dame football. When he first learned that his wife's grandfather played
tackle next to Knute Rockne on the 1913 Notre Dame football team, Mr. Neas said,
"The clouds parted and a shaft of light beamed down on her face." He proposed to
his wife during the seventh-inning stretch of Game 5 of the 1986 World Series.
If they did get married, he told her, it would be neat to say that he first
broached the idea "on sacred turf: Fenway Park."

"I've always said that Notre Dame and the Celtics taught me how to win," Mr.
Neas says. "The Red Sox have taught me how to cope with life: You must have
measured expectations."

Another teacher began lessons one day in February 1979, when Mr. Neas, who was
then an aide to Senator Dave Durenburger, felt a numbness in his hands and feet.
A few days later on the trip to the Senator's home state of Minnesota, he was
stricken by Guillain-Barre syndrome, a paralyzing neurological disorder that
attacks perhaps 4,000 Americans each year. He spent 155 days in the hospital,
more than 100 of them in intensive care.

"It was literally a total collapse," Mr. Neas said. "The only thing working in
my entire body was my heart. Everything else had to be assisted. Machines helped
me breathe. They fed me. I couldn't even remove wastes on my own."

The disease distorted nerve signals. "A back rub was like sticking a knife in
me," he said. "At best it was like I had a giant toothache all over my body."

Several times during his stay, his breathing tube stuck into his throat fell out
when he was alone at night, and he could not re-insert it, press a buzzer to
summon help or cry out.

"You think about staying alive," Mr. Neas said when asked what what goes through
someone's mind then. "It was a constant to me that I had to survive, and I
wouldn't give up. When you are going through something like this you really have
to live hour by hour, minute by minute, second by second."

A Difficult Job

Ralph Neas likes to joke that his experience with Guillain-Barre helped prepare
him for his present post. His is one of the more difficult lobbying jobs in
Washington. The Leadership Council has no political action committee, it deals
with thorny, emotional issues that most lawmakers wish would simply disappear
and attempts at compromise can generate anger even from supporters.

Last spring, when the Leadership Conference engaged in ultimately fruitless
talks with the Business Roundtable in the hope of forging a compromise civil
rights measure, some Democratic lawmakers chafed at having outsiders drafting
legislation.

"Who the hell does Ralph Neas think he is?" Representative Jack Brooks, the
Texas Democrat who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, asked at the time.
"He thinks he makes laws. Well, he don't make laws. I make laws."

NAME: Ralph G. Neas

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "In many ways, things are worse under the Bush Administration
than they were under Reagan," said Ralph Neas, left center, executive director
of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights. Mr. Neas was meeting in the
Capitol as the Senate debated the civil rights bill recently. (Paul Hosefros/The
New York Times)

Chart: "Ralph Graham Neas"

Born: May 17, 1946

Hometown: Brookline, Mass.

Education: A.B., University of Notre Dame; J.D., University of Chicago Law
School.

Career Highlights: 1969-70, law clerk; 1971-72, legislative attorney,
Congtressional Research Service; 1973-1978, legislative assistant to Senator
Edward W. Brooke; 1979-80, chief legislative assistant to Senator Dave
Durenberger; 1981-present, executive director of the Leadership Conference on
Civil Rights.

Hobbies: Tennis, Notre Dame football, reading biographies and history books,
going to the movies.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Dioxin and Former Maker Go on Trial

BYLINE: By EVELYN NIEVES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, Dec. 2


A long-anticipated trial pitting scores of local residents against the Diamond
Shamrock Corporation, which manufactured Agent Orange here in the 1950's and
60's, opened today with a lawyer for the plaintiffs arguing that the company had
recklessly endangered the health of its workers and knowingly exposed residents
and businesses near its plant to the potentially harmful effects of dioxin.

But the defense contended that Diamond Shamrock had acted reasonably and
countered that there was no proof that dioxin, an unwanted byproduct of Agent
Orange and other herbicides, harmed any of the plaintiffs.

Paul M. Monzione and Michael Gordon, the lawyers representing 72 former plant
employees, their families and local residents and businesses, seek to prove that
Diamond Shamrock knew it was creating a health hazard as far back as the 1950's,
when several workers were treated for chloracne, a skin condition associated
with dioxin exposure. In his opening remarks Mr. Monzione said that the plant
operated under "deplorable conditions" that allowed an explosion in 1960, when
dioxin was released in the air, and that it "intentionally contaminated the
Passaic River" by disposing of toxic waste there.

The negligence suit focuses on several categories of plaintiffs: former workers
seeking damages for dioxin-related ailments ranging from chloracne to enlarged
livers and increased fats in their bloodstreams; family members of former
workers; businesses near the plant site that were forced to close or lost
revenue because of the stigma attached to the area, and residents near the
plant. The neighbors want Diamond Shamrock to pay for their health monitoring
and for the stress they suffered when their yards were ripped up and their homes
inspected by workers in protective gear seeking samples of dioxin-contaminated
soil.

The defense, judging by opening remarks delivered by John Flaherty and George
McCarter, will probably focus most of its case on the most serious charges of
physical and mental injury claimed by several people who worked for Diamond
Shamrock or for the company that leased the site after Diamond Shamrock closed.

Mr. Flaherty went through the cases of five former plant workers, seeking to
disprove that their suspected ailments were a result of dioxin exposure. One
worker, who claims to have an enlarged liver, Mr. Flaherty said, later went to
work at a brewery. "Alcohol may have something to do with his enlarged liver,"
he said.

The jury trial, before Superior Court Judge Leo Yanoff in Essex County, is a
culmination of various civil suits against Diamond Shamrock that have been filed
since 1983, when dioxin was discovered at and near the former plant site.

Diamond Shamrock manufactured Agent Orange in Newark from 1951 to 1969. The
chemical was used to defoliate thousands of acres of vegetation in Vietnam. The
company's plant is in the Ironbound section, a largely industrial area
surrounded by railroad tracks near the Passaic River. The Dallas-based
corporation has reorganized and is now the Maxus Energy Corporation.

Dioxin's Risk Is Disputed

Dioxin levels as high as 51,000 parts per billion were found in the soil at the
site in the spring of 1983. At the time, the United States Environmental
Protection Agency had established a limit of one part per billion in soil. The
limit was based on continuous exposure to dioxin over a lifetime that could lead
to one cancer fatality per million population.

The issue of dioxin's deadliness is now mired in controversy. The Environmental
Protection Agency is re-evaluating the public health risk from sources of dioxin
found in Newark and Raritan Bays, the Hudson River and other sites around the
country, including Times Beach, Mo., the town evacuated in 1982 and 1983 because
the soil was contaminated with dioxin.

If the plaintiffs' case proceeds as planned, the jury will in effect be asked to
decide whether dioxin is the most harmful toxin known to humans, a claim
frequently made by environmental officials until the last year or so. Some
experts now say that exposure to the chemical is no more risky than a week of
tanning.

Mr. Monzione said that the trial could reopen cases for Vietnam veterans who
were exposed to Agent Orange and settled for less money than their cases were
worth or whose cases were dismissed.

The trial, which resumes on Tuesday, is expected to last about two months. The
plaintiffs plan to call about 85 witnesses. Mr. McCarter, the defense lawyer,
said he and his associates would listen to the former workers' case before
deciding how many witnesses to call.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In California, New Talk Of Limits on Immigrants

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 2


When times were good in the 1980's, California largely welcomed the millions of
domestic and foreign immigrants who flooded into the state. But now that times
have turned tough, a cry has risen to narrow the gates to the Golden State.

The cry has been led by Gov. Pete Wilson, a Republican, who has been saying that
immigrants, foreign and domestic, are putting the state in a fiscal squeeze by
using more in services than they pay in taxes. Critics say it is nothing more
than an racist attempt to find a scapegoat for the intractable social problems
that have been building in California for two decades.

Almost from the Gold Rush days, California has vacillated between welcoming
immigrants and resenting them. Thousands of Chinese laborers were brought in to
build the railroads before the turn of the century, and then were excluded in a
wave of anti-Chinese hysteria. During the Depression, waves of Okies migrated in
search of opportunity and found hostility.

The latest great wave of immigration during the 1980's, when millions of
immigrants from other states and from Asia and Latin America poured into
California, added to the state's political power and wealth. Although a few
environmentalists raised doubts about how many more people the state could
absorb, the subject of controlling population was taboo in polite circles, where
people feared being accused of racism.

Breaking the Taboo

But suddenly that taboo has been broken. The state is mired deep in recession,
and Governor Wilson says there are no longer enough taxpayers to support the
growing ranks of tax receivers, many of them immigrants. He visited Washington
on Nov. 25 to ask for more Federal help for California, which absorbed 35
percent of all the legal foreign immigrants to the United States during the last
decade.

And in an interview in the Nov. 18 issue of Time magazine, the Governor argued
that the state must reduce the "magnetic effect" of its generosity. While he
does not claim that immigration is the central reason for California's fiscal
troubles, he has said welfare payments that average $660 a month, nearly double
the national average, are attracting immigrants here.

Governor Wilson's comments have set off a spirited debate, with some critics
drawing parallels to the recent campaign for governor in Louisiana, where David
Duke, a former Ku Klux Klan leader, ran as a Republican on a platform that some
saw as racist and anti-immigrant.

State Senator David Torres, a Los Angeles Democrat who was chairman of a special
Joint Legislative Committee on Refugee Resettlement, said Mr. Wilson "ought not
to use the immigrants as the scapegoat for failed economic policies."

Governor Wilson has denied any racist intent. The state's dominant newspaper,
The Los Angeles Times, agreed but editorialized Wednesday that the Governor's
words could be misinterpreted as "the search not for answers but for scapegoats,
political or otherwise."

Staggering Growth

The debate has underscored the fragility of the social compact of California,
the most ethnically diverse state in the nation. According to the Census Bureau,
the state gained a staggering 6.1 million in population over the last decade and
now is home to 29.8 million. Of that increase, a little more than half came from
migration, about evenly divided between migrants from other states and from
foreign countries, not counting illegal immigration.

By most analyses, this immigration played a major role in the California boom by
providing a cheap labor force and large numbers of entrepreneurs starting up
businesses who added to the demand for housing and services. As recently as
1988, the state returned $1 billion in rebates to taxpayers.

But this year, the state was forced to bridge a $14.3 billion budget gap, a gap
that is still growing. According to a recent analysis by the state's Department
of Finance, this is largely because of a rapid population shift in which the
number of young people, who need schooling and other services, has exploded and
economically productive people between the ages of 45 and 64 have moved out of
state.

Should these demographic changes persist, the report stated, this "imbalance
between taxpayers and tax receivers" could cause a $20 billion budget gap by the
year 2000. By that time, it estimated, the state's dependency rate -- that is,
the proportion of people under 18 and over 64 years old, who tend to need social
services -- would rise from 58 percent today to 68 percent.

Immigrants on Welfare

The department attributed the fiscal troubles in part to immigrants. It said
that in 1990, foreign immigrants accounted for 4.5 percent of the caseload of
Medi-Cal, the state's medical aid program for low-income persons, as against 1.3
percent in 1980. The caseload will increase to nearly 13 percent by the year
2000, it projected.

Experts link the reason for the demand on social services to several factors,
including new laws and the change in the type of migrants from other states.
Kassy Perry, spokeswoman for the state's Health and Welfare Agency, cited the
Federal Immigration Reform Act passed by Congress in 1986 that granted amnesty
to millions of illegal immigrants and other Federal laws that made about 300,000
additional persons eligible for Medi-Cal in 1988.

And while illegal aliens are ineligible for welfare, their American-born
children are not, and the Supreme Court has ruled that local schools must accept
such children. Caseloads forAid to Families with Dependent Children, the state's
main welfare program, have tripled to two million over three years.

And refugees, mainly from Vietnam, Cambodia and other Southeast Asian countries,
who have settled in California in recent years have been a particular burden.
Forty percent of the refugees go on welfare in their first year, Ms. Perry said.
About 7 percent of the general population is on welfare.

But it is not just foreign immigrants who are burdening California services.
Seven percent, or more than 140,000 people, of the Aid to Families with
Dependent Children caseload is accounted for by persons who moved to California
from other states in the last 12 months.

Avoiding the Question

The issue of controlling population has long been a delicate one, tinged as it
is with racial and ethnic overtones. The question was avoided in a recent report
by a panel at the Sacramento campus of the California State University, which
was trying to achieve some consensus on growth management among interest groups.

Environmentalists tried to get a discussion going on the subject, but their
attempt was rejected by Hispanics on the panel. "That was a sign of how
difficult the issue is, especially if your parents were illegal," Larry Orman,
executive director of the Greenbelt Alliance, a nonprofit group that promotes
the preservation of undeveloped land around San Francisco, said last week in an
interview. "How long can California maintain an open-door policy for immigrants
who require services? Even if they climb out over time, California has only so
much resources financially."

Another member of the panel, Fernando J. Guerra, chairman of the Chicano Studies
Department at Loyola Marymount University, whose parents came from Mexico, said
in an interview that the focus on immigrants was "classic scapegoating." He
argued that the critics of immigration fail to take into account the role
immigrants have had in fueling the economy.

But George J. Borjas, an economist at the University of California at San Diego,
author of "Friends or Strangers" (Basic Books), a 1990 book on the economic
effects of immigration, maintained that there is some validity to Governor
Wilson's statements.

"The new immigrants are joining the welfare system at a much higher rate than
the older immigrants," he said. "It's a net loss for the country. They're taking
more out than they're putting in. They seem to be more unskilled and they have
less education."

Another expert on immigration, Julian L. Simon, a professor of business
administration at the University of Maryland and author of the 1989 book "The
Economic Consequences of Immigration" (Basil Blackwell), agreed that in the
short run new immigrants may represent a burden to the state.

"But in the long run, California is definitely helped by immigration," he said.
"It's important to focus on the long-run situation rather than the little
blips."

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Where New Californians Came From" shows net increase in the
state's population from each source from '81 to '90 (Source: California
Department of Finance)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 3, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Give the Haitians Safe Haven

BYLINE: By Naomi Flink Zucker and Norman L. Zucker;  Naomi Flink Zucker and
Norman L. Zucker are authors of "The Guarded Gate: The Reality of American
Refugee Policy."

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: KINGSTON, R.I.


The tragedy of the Haitian refugees mandates that Congress enact a new law that
would grant them, and possibly other future refugees, temporary protected status
in the U.S. Under this status, the Haitians would be allowed to remain in this
country until conditions at home justified their return.

Temporary protected status already exists in law under an amendment to the
Immigration Act of 1990. Under that provision, the Attorney General may grant
such status to noncitizens when he finds they cannot return to their countries
because of internal disorder or armed conflict, among other conditions. Most
recently, the Attorney General has granted Salvadorans, Kuwaitis, Lebanese and
Liberians safe haven.

Temporary protected status is granted to groups, not individuals. Unlike
political asylum, it does not give refugees such benefits as welfare assistance
by states and Federal cash and medical assistance, and does not lead to
permanent residence and eligibility for citizenship.

Why should Congress enact a safe haven law when it has vested authority to grant
such haven in the Attorney General? First, because Justice Department decisions
have been almost exclusively political, reflecting White House foreign policy
and electoral concerns. Federal courts have ruled since 1980 that the department
has denied asylum, due process of law and equal protection to Haitians and other
groups irrespective of the merits of their claims to asylum.

Second, because the amendment is too broad: for example, it permits safe haven
after natural disasters such as earthquakes and floods; in such cases,
humanitarian aid is more useful. The primary need is for protection from
political upheaval of the kind that has made life in Haiti intolerable since the
coup that overthrew the democratically elected President, Jean-Bertrand
Aristide.

Given the Justice Department's hostility to Haitians since at least 1975, when
they started arriving in the U.S. in large numbers, it is not surprising that
the department, as a defendant, argued yesterday in Federal court in Miami that
a court order barring their forced repatriation should be overruled.

Similar cases had been brought against the department under the Refugee Act of
1980. After 25 years of patchwork legislation that admitted various groups, this
act established a uniform standard and procedure for admitting and resettling
political refugees. But it deals only with individuals needing permanent
resettlement; it ignores groups that want temporary protection because of
threatening conditions at home.

A new law on temporary status could meet group problems. It could deal with
these conditions: a civilian government that is unable to maintain order and
protect its citizens; a military government that represses and kills; a civil
war that endangers civilians throughout their country; population displacements
that result in extreme hardship; forced exodus, and repression or human rights
violations by an occupying country.

Congress, not the politically capricious Attorney General, should determine if a
group is eligible for temporary status, for how long (whether it should be
extended) and if work permits would be granted.

Critics of protection argue, validly, that safe haven seems never to be
temporary -- that arrivals never leave. But the Immigration and Naturalization
Service has proved that bureaucratic inertia need not prevail, for it has
repatriated Haitians, Salvadorans, Guatemalans and Iranians.

The new law could legalize the status of large numbers of Haitians and
Guatemalans here illegally, as the 1990 law did for Salvadorans and a 1966 act
did for Cubans.

A further regularizing of immigration law would make it harder for the U.S. to
practice the hypocrisy that leads it to oppose the forced repatriation of
Vietnamese "boat people" from Hong Kong while it wants to forcibly return
desperate Haitians to a constant hell.

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE AIDE PLEDGES TO RETURN

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: PATTAYA, Thailand, Dec. 3


The senior Khmer Rouge leader who was attacked last week by a revenge-seeking
mob in the Cambodian capital, Phnom Penh, said today that he would return to the
city under terms of an agreement intended to salvage the United
Nations-sponsored peace treaty for Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge official, Khieu Samphan, who bore an inch-and-a-half scar on his
forehead from the attack, smiled and answered "yes" when asked by reporters
whether he intended to return soon to Phnom Penh.

Mr. Khieu Samphan, a central architect of policies that resulted in the deaths
of more than one million Cambodians when the Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia in the
1970's, was in this Thai resort city for an emergency meeting of Cambodia's
Supreme National Council, called to discuss last Wednesday's mob attack on him
and other Khmer Rouge officials.

The council is made up of representatives of the Cambodian Government installed
by Vietnam and the three rebel groups, including the Khmer Rouge, that sought
the overthrow of the Phnom Penh regime during 12 years of civil war.

Shouts of 'Kill! Kill!'

Under the United Nations-brokered peace treaty signed in late October in Paris,
the council is supposed to take part in running Cambodia until free elections
can be held in 1993.

In the attack, witnesses said, a mob of dozens of Cambodians shouting "Monster!"
and "Kill! Kill!" ransacked a two-story villa being used by the Khmer Rouge and
cornered Mr. Khieu Samphan in an upstairs room, pummeling him with stones and
fists.

Though the accounts differ, some witnesses say troops and police officers under
the control of the Vietnamese-installed Government did little to stop the
frenzied mob as it crashed through the fence around the compound and searched
for Mr. Khieu Samphan.

According to a draft communique released after today's meetings in Pattaya, the
Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, has agreed that an incident like last
Wednesday's attack will "never be allowed to reoccur" and that Mr. Khieu Samphan
and his colleagues will be allowed to live in the well-protected headquarters
building of the Supreme National Council.

Khmer Rouge's Return

Mr. Hun Sen said after today's meeting at a resort hotel in Pattaya that "in the
next few days, the Khmer Rouge will return to Phnom Penh."

The meeting also included representatives of the five permanent members of the
United Nations -- the United States, the Soviet Union, Britain, France and China
-- and was described by all sides as cordial.

A senior aide to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former monarch and its
newly restored head of state, said the Prince had also agreed to make a
televised address urging Cambodians not to demonstrate when the Khmer Rouge
attempts to return to the capital.

Mr. Khieu Samphan, an economist and the leading economic theorist in the Khmer
Rouge, is believed by some historians to have drafted the plan that resulted in
the complete evacuation of Phnom Penh at gunpoint hours after the Khmer Rouge
overran the capital in April 1975 at the start of its four-year reign of terror.

The Khmer Rouge was overthrown in 1979 in a Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.
While the Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese-installed regime that replaced it were
born under the banner of Communism, both now insist they embrace the concepts of
free markets and multiparty democracy.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Rights Advocate Is Said to Get 20-Year Term

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 3


Vietnam has sentenced Nguyen Dan Que, a physician who tried to form a human
rights movement, to 20 years' imprisonment and 5 years of house arrest on
subversion charges, according to reports from the Vietnamese national press
agency. Dr. Que's trial and sentencing took place on Nov. 29 in Ho Chi Minh
City, formerly Saigon.

Dr. Que's arrest on treason charges earlier this year brought protests from
members of Congress and many professional organizations in the United States and
Europe.

The Vietnamese press agency, announcing the conviction, said Dr. Que, 49 years
old, had been found guilty of using his links to Amnesty International to send
documents abroad, where "reactionary forces used them to denigrate Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Smith Accuser Was 'Very Shook Up' After Incident, Her Friend Testifies

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., Dec. 3


The woman who has accused William K. Smith of raping her last March was
"hysterical" and "very shook up" immediately after the incident, the friend whom
she summoned to the Kennedy estate told a Florida jury yesterday.

"She was literally shaking and she looked messed up, her hair and makeup was
running," the witness, Anne Mercer, told the prosecutor on the second day of Mr.
Smith's sexual battery trial in Palm Beach County Circuit Court. "She said she
had been raped." Moments later, the witness added, she encountered a
"disheveled" Mr. Smith and asked him how he could have done what he did. His
response, she said, was simply to shrug his shoulders.

But the 33-year-old Ms. Mercer, who had accompanied the complainant to the Palm
Beach nightspot where she had met Mr. Smith earlier in the evening, was quickly
subjected to a blistering cross-examination by his chief lawyer, Roy E. Black of
Miami. He got her to acknowledge several inconsistencies in her account, and
suggested that she had spiced up her testimony to make it more marketable for
television.

The program "A Current Affair" had previously paid Ms. Mercer $40,000 for two
interviews, money that she and a friend spent on a Mexican vacation.

In her testimony today, Ms. Mercer backed off her assertion to a police
investigator that the complainant had told her that Mr. Smith had raped her
twice and that one of those times his uncle, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, had watched.

Interview on Television

She admitted, too, that she had failed to tell the police things that she
subsequently told interviewers from the tabloid television show. These included
the full details of a hostile encounter she had had with Senator Kennedy at the
nightspot, Au Bar, earlier in the evening and the fact that the complainant had
introduced Mr. Smith to her there as "William Kennedy Smith." Earlier, she told
police she had not been told his name.

"It became 'William Kennedy Smith' when you realized how you could cash in on
the Kennedy name, isn't that true?" Mr. Black asked.

After a day devoted largely to legal minutiae, Ms. Mercer's appearance aroused a
sluggish courtroom. When she disclosed that she had received $40,000 from "A
Current Affair," a gasp went up, prompting Judge Mary E. Lupo to threaten to
clear the gallery.

A 'Hysterical' Call

In her direct examination, Ms. Mercer, a former clerk at several fashionable
Palm Beach boutiques, recalled receiving a "hysterical" call from the
complainant around 4:15 A.M., roughly an hour and a quarter after she had seen
the complainant and Mr. Smith leave Au Bar for the Kennedy compound. Within 15
minutes, she said, she and her boyfriend were at the family estate. There, she
said, her hysterical friend told her she had been raped and repeatedly asked for
her shoes.

Ms. Mercer said she then followed Mr. Smith down to the beach to look for them.
After they had failed to find them, she went back to the house to fetch her
friend. "I said, 'Let's get out of here,' " she said. Once they had returned to
her house, Ms. Mercer said, the complainant "had her knees up to her chest, and
when we tried to talk to her she would jump like she didn't want someone to
touch her."

Even under the gentle questioning of Moira K. Lasch, the prosecutor, Ms. Mercer,
a tall blond woman wearing a blue blazer and strings of pearls, was somber and
nervous. She spoke in a monotone, pursed and moistened her lips frequently, and
wiped her eyes and brow repeatedly.

But she very nearly crumpled under Mr. Black's unrelenting examination, which
will continue on Wednesday. If she had thought Mr. Smith had really raped her
friend, why had she followed him through the dark house? The dark front lawn?
The dark stairs leading to the dark beach, and then back again? Tape recorder at
the ready, Mr. Black forced her, almost gleefully, to listen to earlier,
different versions of events.

Challenged to explain how her recollections had grown more specific and
titillating over time, she replied: "My memory has been recollected on
particularities." Repeatedly, she insisted that in her televised interviews she
had been "fair to both parties involved."

Mr. Smith, wearing the by-now familiar rumpled brown herringbone sports jacket
that sets him apart from his pin-striped lawyers, arrived at court shortly after
8 A.M. The steady procession of family members attending the trial continued;
accompanying him this morning were not only his mother, Jean Kennedy Smith, but
two of his aunts, Eunice Kennedy Shriver and Ethel Kennedy.

During recesses, Mr. Smith and his cousin, Christopher Lawford, paced the halls.
Twice, knots of people gathered and applauded Mr. Smith as he passed. Mrs.
Lawford and Ethel Kennedy also walked up and down the corridors. The complainant
has yet to appear in court.

Photos of Kennedy Compound

Much of the morning was consumed by the laborious process of introducing into
evidence a series of photographs of the Kennedy compound. Studying police
snapshots of the den, kitchen, pantry and bedrooms, jurors who would normally be
barred by the wall surrounding it got a vicarious tour. It was oddly reminiscent
of another televised tour of another, very different Kennedy residence in
another, more glamorous era -- the one Jacqueline Kennedy gave of the White
House.

The four women and two men on the jury have not been identified, though The Palm
Beach Post, which photographed the more than 100 people interviewed for the
panel, has matched each of them with the questionnaires they filled out before
their selection.

One is a former Army paratrooper decorated seven times in Korea and Vietnam;
another runs a cosmetics company. Three are Roman Catholic, like Mr. Smith; none
are Jewish, which led Mr. Black to complain to the judge on Monday that Jews
were unfairly excluded from the group. (The objection was overruled.) None are
college graduates.

When interviewed by the lawyers a month ago during the selection process, one
juror, a 44-year-old woman from Boynton Beach, responded diffidently to Senator
Kennedy's past. "Years back, the one incident up in Massachusetts," she began.
"He has a tenden -- he's a single man -- different things in that area." Asked
the source of the family's wealth, she replied "I think it was bootlegging,
liquor," but asked what she thought of that, she replied, "That was so many
years ago, I really don't have any opinion."

Earlier today, the court released the 677-page deposition of Mr. Smith's
accuser, taken last month by defense counsel. It includes her most detailed
account to date of her experiences with Mr. Smith on the Kennedy estate, which
she called "repugnant, repulsive, disgusting, and an extremely violent act."

The woman said Mr. Smith had "tackled" her on the lawn in front of the Kennedy
home, hitting her harder than she had ever been hit before. "All I know is he
hit me from behind," she said. "I fell to the ground and he was on top of me,
and I was only concerned with trying to get that pig off of me."

A 'Frightening' Tone

But he fought her off, she said, saying, "Stop it, bitch" in a "frightening"
tone of voice. Asked if he had been carrying any weapon at the time, she
replied, "Himself."

One of Mr. Smith's lawyers, Mark D. Seiden, asked her why she had not screamed
for help afterward, when she went into the house.

"I had just been raped by a Kennedy," she replied. "I didn't feel comfortable in
asking for any of their help."

And why had she not called 911 instead of Ms. Mercer, the woman she had been
with earlier in the evening? "I was fearful of the Kennedy influence," she
replied. "I had just been raped by a Kennedy. And I didn't know what power they
held. I was more comfortable calling a friend."

When the woman told Mr. Smith he had raped her, the complainant said in her
deposition, "he was very arrogant."

"He was very smug and nonconcerned with what he had done to me," she continued.
"He seemed almost proud of it. I was confronting him with his crime, and he did
not seem to care." In fact, she said, he appeared to become annoyed with her.

Mr. Smith's accuser then left the house, but returned to fetch some objects from
it. "I couldn't carry Mr. Smith with me, and he was obviously denying it," the
complainant said. "And so I felt that if I took something from the home, that
would help."

On several occasions, she objected when Mr. Seiden called the incident "the
alleged rape." She said she had not discussed the case with news organizations,
even though "there have been so many lies about me spread through the media from
your organization -- if you would call yourselves an organization."

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jurors at the William K. Smith trial listened to testimony
yesterday from Anne Mercer, who testified against Mr. Smith. Ms. Mercer entered
the courthouse with Raoul Felder, her lawyer. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

KITCHEN BOOKSHELF;
Just the Ticket For Armchair Trips

BYLINE: By NANCY HARMON JENKINS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2538 words


IF cookbooks are anything to go by, Americans are almost insatiably curious
about the foods and food ways of other parts of the world. Maybe the motley of
American ethnic backgrounds is responsible for the appeal of other places, or
maybe it's just dissatisfaction with the familiar and a longing for something
exotic to spice up these dreary times. Certainly it's a lot cheaper, often a lot
more satisfying, too, to settle down for some armchair travel with one or more
of the current crop of books -- as long as the armchair is conveniently set next
to a stove so you can try out a recipe or two.

Among the offerings this holiday season, the armchair adventurer-cook can trek
to South America with the late Felipe Rojas-Lombardi, to Greece with Rosemary
Barron and Turkey with Ayla Algar, to Vietnam with Binh Duong and to Thailand
with Vatcharin Bhumichitr. Go even farther afield with a nonrecipe book about
food, Raymond Sokolov's entertaining discourse on the effects of Columbus on Old
and New World foods. If all that sounds too exotic, France, always high on
cooks' and diners' priority lists, is well represented among the new books, and
there are even a couple of offerings from the South and the Midwest for
unregenerate stay-at-homes.

Something for everyone on your gift list? Possibly, though this compilation
carries just two hard-bound books priced under $25. Cookbook prices have reached
a new high, not easy to swallow even when there is fancy four-color photography.

Sadly, Felipe Rojas-Lombardi died last September, before the first copies of THE
ART OF SOUTH AMERICAN COOKING (HarperCollins, $25) came off the presses. Even
though he didn't live to see it, this magnificent compendium is a fine testament
to his quick and spirited mind and his wide-ranging curiosity. Mr.
Rojas-Lombardi was Peruvian by birth but claimed all South America as his
culinary heritage.

As the chef and owner of the Ballroom restaurant in New York, he was a
first-rate cook and teacher. His recipes are exuberantly flavored with
ingredients that are sometimes a little exotic (banana leaves, fresh sardines,
quinoa) but never too hard to find; moreover, instructions are accurate, finely
detailed and clear enough for novices who are willing to learn. They might start
with guiso de atun, a stunningly simple ragu of fresh tuna and vegetables. For
myself, I can't wait for sweet-corn season to try pastel de choclo, a savory
Chilean pie of spiced meat and corn.

Rosemary Barron is English, but you'd never know it from FLAVORS OF GREECE
(William Morrow, $25), a sparkling collection of recipes developed over many
years of traveling in Greece and teaching its robust and vivid cuisine in
Greece, England and the United States. Greek food is little known in this
country, undeservedly so. The cuisine emphasizes fresh vegetables lightly stewed
in olive oil; quickly grilled meats and seafood, both dressed with lemon juice
and herbs, and long-simmering, aromatic dishes, and is one of the foundations of
the Mediterranean diet so much in the news lately.

This book should do much to correct Greece's unhappy culinary image. The recipes
are clearly presented and remarkably easy to execute. Saganaki, bits of lightly
floured kefalotyri cheese deep-fried and served with lemon and parsley, and
kephtethakia, patties of ground lamb flavored with cumin, are just two of many
preparations that have quickly become standards in my kitchen. This is armchair
traveling at its best.

Next door to Greece and sharing many of its traditions is Turkey, another
Mediterranean country with a long, rich culinary heritage little known in the
United States. CLASSICAL TURKISH COOKING (HarperCollins, $30) by Ayla Algar, the
Mellon lecturer in Turkish at the University of California at Berkeley, is a
splendid introduction to a cuisine that straddles Europe and Asia, drawing on
East and West alike.

Savory rice pilafs, stuffed vegetables and rolled grape leaves, crisp salads
dressed with yogurt and more complex savory pies and turnovers, along with
syrupy Middle Eastern sweets made with rosewater, apricots, figs and walnuts are
among delightful offerings. Most of the ingredients are easy to find in
supermarkets, though a few may require a trip to a Middle Eastern neighborhood.

Binh Duong is chef and owner of Truc Orient Express in Hartford, where he has
attracted considerable acclaim for his extraordinary culinary talent. The SIMPLE
ART OF VIETNAMESE COOKING (Prentice Hall, $30), a cookbook compiled with the
help of Marcia Kiesel, is not just a collection of recipes. Mr. Duong and Ms.
Kiesel went back to Vietnam to research the places, the people, the flavors and
textures he remembers from his childhood (he left when he was 14 years old).

They have skillfully combined a strong sense of traditional culture with modern
American techniques in the kitchen. "Simple" may be a misnomer, for these are
not recipes for rookie cooks, but those who are attracted to the fresh, vivid
flavors of Vietnamese food will want to have this book, if only for the hot and
sour shrimp and lemongrass soup, a sure cure for winter blues.

THAI VEGETARIAN COOKING (Clarkson N. Potter, $30) by Vatcharin Bhumichitr, a
chef in London, is a curiosity. I can't imagine where an enterprising enthusiast
will find some of these ingredients: coriander root, spring flower leaves, and
krachai (in the ginger family) are not exactly household names. But those
interested in Asian vegetarian cuisine will appreciate this introduction to some
decidedly exotic fare. With its list of vegetarian restaurants in Thailand, this
is for real travelers rather than armchair types.

Roald Dahl's tales for children "James and the Giant Peach" and "Charlie and the
Chocolate Factory" are among childhood's great pleasures, especially for the
adults who read them aloud. MEMORIES WITH FOOD AT GYPSY HOUSE (Viking, $30) is
another Dahl tale, one the late author began and his widow, Felicity, completed.
This is a picture of the sort of artlessly charming, comfortably stylish,
unpretentious English country living that makes the characters in those
pseudo-Anglo ads look like hapless wannabes. The food is in the best tradition
of fine English products and careful French technique, and Dahl's comments are
astute.

WHY WE EAT WHAT WE EAT (Summit Books, $22) is the plain-spoken title of Raymond
Sokolov's extended essay on the culinary effects of the New World-Old World
encounter. Mr. Sokolov, who researched much of his text as a columnist for
Natural History magazine, ranges far and wide, from Puerto Rico ("home of the
most fertile and diverse of all our regional cuisines") to Peru to Spain and
back to the Philippines.

New World foods like chilies and chocolate were catalysts for change, but Mr.
Sokolov also looks at foods like wild rice and native persimmons that went
nowhere in particular and spends some effort wondering about American methods
for curing Old World olives and what happened to the 700-odd varieties of apples
that grew in New York State before World War I. The lack of footnotes and
bibliography will irritate food historians, but as an example of an inventive
mind playing with perceptions and ideas, the book is as entertaining as it is
provocative.

Is there anything more to say about la cuisine Francaise? Apparently yes, since
the cookbooks keep coming. Two personal favorites from the current crop:
Patricia Wells's SIMPLY FRENCH (Morrow, $35) and Lind Dannenberg's PARIS BISTRO
COOKING (Potter, $30).

In "Simply French," Ms. Wells, the Paris-based American food authority, presents
the cooking of Joel Robuchon, the chef of Jamin in Paris, who is recognized as
one of the leading practioners of his art in France today. Splendid food, much
of it also has the homely appeal of French country cooking: beef roasted in a
salt crust, rabbit with mustard, and creamy leek and potato soup. Ms. Wells
provides plenty of trucs, little tricks that make great cooking easier, and
observations from the kitchen of one of France's finest restaurants.

"Paris Bistro Cooking" is, at first glance, one more in an endless succession of
glamorous picture books, although the glamour comes from that most plebeian of
institutions, the French bistro. But turn to the recipes for a happy surprise: I
tried the classic mousse au chocolat and a more exotic salad of spinach and
sauteed chicken livers and was thoroughly delighted with both. The book promises
a lot and delivers it.

The latest from Florence Fabricant, who writes about food for The New York
Times, is NEW HOME COOKING (Potter, $30). The book, a collection of menus with
recipes, is in three sections: "Homestyle Dinners"; "Simple Suppers and
Lunches," and "Holiday and Buffet Entertaining." The recipes are clearly
presented and easy to follow, and there are helpful margin notes to explain
unfamiliar ingredients or techniques, as well as introductory comments with
suggestions on how to organize shopping and cooking time.

Finally, and briefly, out of many other cookbooks on publishers' lists, a
special mention to these:

BAKING WITH JIM DODGE (Simon & Schuster, $25) by Jim Dodge with Elaine Ratner
includes masterly recipes for pies, cakes, cookies, breads and other confections
from an accomplished cook and teacher.

SHUCK BEANS, STACK CAKES, AND HONEST FRIED CHICKEN (Atlantic Monthly Press,
$24.95) by Ronni Lundy is an authentic Southern curiosity, with recipes and
reminiscences from home cooks and country music stars like Dwight Yoakam,
Loretta Lynn and Emmylou Harris.

HEARTLAND (Potter, $30) by Marcia Adams presents Midwestern fare from farmhouse
kitchens, barbecue joints, country fairs and city restaurants, with evocative
photos from the heart of the heart of the country.

AMERICAN GAME COOKING (Aris/ Addison-Wesley, $35) by John Ash and Sid Goldstein,
both of whom work for Fetzer Vineyards in Redwood Valley, Calif., offers
first-rate ideas about what to do with the plethora of farm-raised venison and
buffalo available recently and how to handle wild goose, boar, duck and other
huntsman's trophies you might be handed this season.

Ragu of Tuna and Thyme
(Adapted from "The Art of South American Cooking")
Total time: About 1 hour

2 pounds fresh tuna
 1/4 cup all-purpose flour
4 tablespoons olive oil
2 cloves garlic, peeled and minced
2 jalapeno peppers, seeded and minced
2 medium onions, peeled and chopped fine (about 2 cups)
1 tablespoon coarse salt
6 sprigs fresh thyme, tied together with kitchen twine
1 quart water
6 medium potatoes, peeled and cut into 4-by-3-inch pieces (about 2 pounds)
4large green bell peppers, roasted and sliced (see note)
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves.

1. Remove and discard the skin from the tuna, and cut the meat into 16 chunks,
each about 4 inches by 3 inches. Dredge the chunks in the flour, shaking off the
excess.

2. In a saucepan or earthenware casserole, heat the olive oil. Quickly brown the
fish on all sides. With a slotted spoon, remove the chunks to a plate and set
aside.

3. Add the garlic, hot peppers, onions, salt and thyme to the oil, and cook,
stirring frequently, until the onions are lightly golden. Add water, bring to a
boil, and add the potato pieces. Lower the heat, and simmer for 20 minutes or
until the potatoes are barely tender.

4. Add the roasted peppers and the tuna, and cook 10 minutes more. Remove from
the heat, discard the thyme sprigs and adjust the seasonings. Garnish with the
thyme leaves, and serve right from the casserole.

Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

NOTE: To roast peppers, pierce them with a kitchen fork, and hold over a gas
flame, or place on a grill. Cook until the skin is blackened and blistered.
Place in a paper bag for 10 minutes. Remove and peel the skin under running
water.

Meat Patties
(Adapted from "Flavors of Greece")
Total time: 1 1/2 hours

1 1/2 cups minced onion
 1/2 cup water
1 pound lean lamb or beef or a mixture of both, ground fine
1 large potato, peeled and grated
 1/2 cup fresh bread crumbs
2 eggs, lightly beaten
1 tablespoon aged red-wine vinegar, or more to taste
 1/4 cup chopped flat-leaf parsley
1 tablespoon ground cumin
Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
All-purpose flour for dredging
Olive oil for frying or baking
Juice of 1 large lemon.

1. Combine the onion and water in a small saucepan, bring to a boil and simmer
until liquid has evaporated, about 6 minutes. Combine the onion, meat, potato,
bread crumbs, eggs, vinegar, parsley, cumin and a generous amount of salt and
pepper in a large bowl. With your hands or a wooden spoon, mix until blended
well. Add additional vinegar, salt and pepper to taste; the mixture should be
highly flavored. Cover and refrigerate for 1 hour.

2. Moisten your hands with cold water. Form the meat mixture into 3/4-inch
balls, flattening each slightly between your palms, and lightly dredge with
flour.

3. To fry, pour 1/4 inch of olive oil into a heavy skillet over medium-low heat.
When the oil is hot but not smoking, add the first batch of patties; they should
fit comfortably in a single layer. Fry until golden brown on both sides and
cooked through. Drain between two layers of paper towels. Repeat with the
remainder. If you prefer to bake the patties instead of frying them, heat the
oven to 325 degrees, and warm two or more heavy baking sheets. Brush the sheets
with olive oil, and arrange the patties 1 inch apart. Lightly brush the patties
with olive oil, and bake 20 to 25 minutes, turning once. Drain between two
layers of paper towels.

4. To serve, arrange the patties on a platter; sprinkle with lemon juice.

Yield: 4 dozen patties, 8 appetizer servings or 4 main-course servings.
 NOTE: The patties may be served on a bed of shredded romaine lettuce mixed with
thinly sliced scallions, chopped parsley and dried rigani (Greek oregano),
dressed with olive oil, lemon juice, salt and pepper.

Chickpea, Red Pepper And Celery Root Soup With Cilantro
(Adapted from "Classical Turkish Cooking")
Total time: 1 to 1 1/2 hours, plus overnight for soaking

2 tablespoons unsalted butter
1 1/2 cups chopped onions
 1/2 cup chopped carrots
 1/2 cup diced celery root
1 large sweet red pepper, chopped
5 sprigs flat-leaf parsley
3 sprigs cilantro
1 cup chickpeas, soaked overnight
1 cup chicken or meat stock
1 cup half-and-half or milk
Salt
3 tablespoons chopped flat-leaf parsley
3 tablespoons chopped cilantro.

1. Put the butter, onions, carrots, celery root, red pepper and herb sprigs in a
heavy pan, cover and let the vegetables sweat over low heat until they are limp,
about 10 minutes. If mixture looks too dry, splash in some water to keep it from
burning.

2. Drain the chickpeas, and stir them into the other vegetables. Add enough
water to cover the vegetables, cover the pan, and simmer until the chickpeas are
very tender. (The time will depend on the chickpeas' age; count on 30 minutes to
1 hour.)

3. Remove from the heat, and put the soup through a sieve or food mill. Return
it to the pan, and stir in the stock and half-and-half. Taste and season with
salt. Add the chopped herbs, bring to a boil, and serve immediately.

Yield: 4 servings.

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 5, 1991, Thursday

CORRECTION:

Because of a transcription error, the Kitchen Bookshelf column in The Living
Section yesterday misstated the price of "American Game Cooking" by John Ash and
Sid Goldstein (Aris/Addison-Wesley). It is $25.


GRAPHIC: Drawings (pgs. C1 & C10)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

'Boys' Film Leaves Studio Wondering

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 4


Holiday decorations are splashed around the offices of 20th Century Fox, but the
studio is probably the gloomiest in town.

After weeks of elaborate and expensive promotion of "For the Boys," the musical
drama starring Bette Midler and James Caan, it has proved to be an unexpected
box-office disappointment and perhaps the first major casualty of the holiday
season, when moviegoing reaches a peak. The film, a sentimental and elaborately
emotional story about two U.S.O. performers over 50 years, received mixed to
good reviews, and in the studio and in the film industry it was seen as a
potential winner.

But the trade newspaper Daily Variety called it "the holiday's only turkey" this
week, and its dismal performance so far has unleashed a wave of anxiety and
second-guessing about the future of movies aimed at audiences in their 30's,
40's and 50's. Beyond this, the fact that the industry can virtually write off a
major movie after less than two weeks leaves the Fox studio despondent.

Joe Roth, the chairman of 20th Century Fox, said in an interview this week that
he remained hopeful that "For the Boys" would emerge from the doldrums. "The
fact is, we have terrific exit polls, as good as any movie we've released," he
said. "Why haven't we made it so far? I wish I knew. If I knew I'd be able to
correct it. I don't have any brilliant answers."

Some Hope Left

The studio chief, whose record is largely successful, said he hoped the movie
would eventually find an audience, and he cited other films appealing to adult
audiences that also started slowly but eventually gathered momentum. These
included the teary drama "Beaches," which starred Ms. Midler, and "The Verdict,"
a courtroom drama with Paul Newman.

But these films cost less than half the $40 million to $45 million that Fox paid
for "For the Boys," not to mention promotion costs of probably $10 million to
$15 million, making it one of the studio's most expensive and risky films.
Although Fox is still basking in the financial sunshine because of the huge
success of "Home Alone," the third-highest-grossing film in history, after "E.T.
the Extra-Terrestrial" and "Star Wars," its recent movies have been
disappointments. These include, "Dying Young," "Dutch" and "Only the Lonely."

"For the Boys" opened nationally over the weekend, and in New York and Los
Angeles the weekend before. It had grossed a paltry $5.9 million as of Monday,
said Exhibitor Relations Inc., which monitors film releases for theater chains.
In contrast, "The Addams Family" grossed $24.2 million on its first weekend.
Other holiday films that are showing signs of being major successes are "Beauty
and the Beast" and "My Girl."

"Kids went out to see 'The Addams Family' the first or second weekend because
moviegoing for them is like a tribal ritual," Mr. Roth said. "For people over
25, this is not the case. But all of this sounds like an excuse on my part, and
I don't want to do that. I have a lot of faith in this picture."

Reasons for Failure

Film executives at Fox and elsewhere attribute the apparent failure of "For the
Boys" to several factors, including the World War II story line, music that has
little appeal for younger audiences and the film's trailer, which does not make
clear what the movie is about. They also point to the odd relationship between
Mr. Caan and Ms. Midler's characters, who seem to dislike each other and have
little romantic involvement. The film's mixed reviews, strong competition from
other movies and economic conditions were also cited.

One executive said: "What is this film really about? If you look at it in story
and structure terms, it's about two characters who don't fall in love, who don't
physically relate to each other. It's the nature of the story that does this
film in." The executive said that in successful films geared to older audiences,
such as "Driving Miss Daisy" and "On Golden Pond," the relationships were
intense and believable, while the one in this movie was not.

As conceived, the story of "For the Boys" was harder edged, industry executives
said. Ms. Midler, whose company produced the film, has been fascinated for years
by the entertainer Martha Raye, who performed for troops in Vietnam and was
shocked to find herself booed by demonstrators when she returned to the United
States. As a result, executives said, Ms. Midler began shaping a film, with Mark
Rydell, the director, that was to have an antiwar message, with her character
turning against the war, while her partner, played by Mr. Caan, remained a hawk.
During many rewrites, the film was softened considerably and the message
blurred.

One prominent executive called the fate of "For the Boys" sad. "One would like
to think there's an audience out there for this kind of movie," he said. "To
some extent its failure so far may be the tone of the times. People are looking
for escape entertainment. There should be room for 'For the Boys' to flourish,
but there just doesn't seem to be."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bette Midler in "For the Boys." (20th Century Fox)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE LAST U.S. HOSTAGE;
With Americans Free, Former Hostages Tell of Endurance and Resistance

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


The Americans who had been held hostage in Lebanon started to tell their stories
yesterday, pouring out a torrent of details that ranged from how they coped with
the starchy food to how they endured conditions harsher than had previously been
known.

Their statements made it clear that escape was never far from their thoughts,
though they feared that the captives left behind would suffer more if they
tried. Even the telling of their stories in freedom was affected by that
concern, as they began to discuss their ordeals only on the day word came that
the last American captive, Terry A. Anderson, the chief Middle East
correspondent of The Associated Press, had been let go.

They told of captors who disguised themselves by pulling ski masks or empty
flour sacks over their faces. They told of endless hours spent watching karate
movies and Italian-made films about the Vietnam War, days spent reading
everything from the Bible to steamy romance novels.

They told how they tried to exercise their minds as well as their bodies. As the
days turned to weeks, the weeks to months and the months to years, Mr. Anderson
tried to keep his strength by weight lifting. His barbells were water-filled
plastic bottles. He learned Arabic and played solitaire, even, he said, after
hearing on the radio that he had been freed.

The former captives also began to give a fuller picture of the conditions under
which they were taken prisoner and held. Joseph J. Cicippio was knocked
unconscious when he was abducted in 1986 and suffered frostbite while chained to
a balcony. American military doctors said yesterday that Mr. Cicippio and Alann
Steen had suffered brain damage from blows to the head.

"We were slapped around a few times when we misbehaved," said Robert Polhill,
who was held with Mr. Steen for much of three years as a hostage. "We would try
to assert ourselves a little bit, or we would reject certain kinds of foods or
not move quickly when we were going to the toilet." He said his captors knocked
him down a few times, but never drew blood. "They were really pulling their
punches. We only had value to them as long as we were well."

That may have heightened their camaraderie. "Anyone who has been held hostage in
Lebanon was still in chains with their friends who were left their in those
dungeons," said David Jacobsen, who was kidnapped in 1985 and released in 1986.
"It's been a horrible ordeal for all of us, and now maybe we can get on with our
lives."

They spent much of their time chained to furniture, which Mr. Jacobsen called
"the most degrading thing that can happen."

Held in Living Rooms

Mr. Polhill said that after the first three months, he was usually chained by
the wrist rather than by the legs. "Ordinarily we were in typical residential
living rooms, never very tight quarters," he said in an interview. "But the last
place we were in was dug out in a rural barn. There were even some animals
upstairs." He said he was held there until five days before his release on April
22, 1990.

When they were moved, the tensions increased. Some of the former captives have
told how Mr. Anderson was taped from head to toe like a mummy and carried in a
coffin to his new hiding place. Mr. Polhill said he was moved at least 17 times.
"Mostly we were were stuffed in the trunk of a car," he said yesterday. "There
were usually two of us in the trunk at a time. If you've been in Lebanon in the
last 10 years, everything is a bumpy ride."

Sometimes, the freed hostages say, Mr. Anderson banged on the door to demand a
radio from his captors. He marked his 1,000th day as a hostage by ramming his
head against the pale yellow plaster of his cell until he bled. But mostly,
their statements suggest that they settled into a routine in which they tried
not to do anything antagonize their captors.

But the hostages also said they resolved not to let the physical and emotion
strain wear them down. Mr. Anderson said yesterday that he survived by
"stubborness." And Mr. Jacobsen, appearing on the ABC-TV program "Good Morning
America," added, "We decided we weren't going to be victimized. We weren't going
to put the thumbs in our mouth and get in the fetal position and curl up and
die."

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 7, 1991, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A chart on Thursday listing the Americans taken hostage in Lebanon omitted one.
David S. Dodge, acting president of the American University of Beirut, was
seized on July 19, 1982, and released on July 20, 1983.


GRAPHIC: Table: "Before and After: The Americans Who Were Abducted" lists
Americans held hostage in Lebanon, the date of the abduction and the date they
were released or killed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE LAST U.S. HOSTAGE;
Anderson Arrives at Germany Base And Appears Vigorous and Healthy

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 981 words

DATELINE: WIESBADEN, Germany, Dec. 5


Terry A. Anderson, freed by his Iranian-backed captors in Beirut on Wednesday,
looked vigorous and jubilant today as he took his first steps on Western soil
since being kidnapped nearly seven years ago.

Grinning broadly and seemingly bursting with energy, Mr. Anderson bounded out of
an Army helicopter as dawn broke over Wiesbaden. One of the first people he saw
was his sister, Peggy Say, who had worked tirelessly for his release.

They threw their arms around each other, and then Mrs. Say ran her hands over
her brother's face, as if seeking to reassure herself that he was finally free.
Then she began weeping.

"It's great to have a sister like that," he said a few minutes later. "You get
yourself in trouble, and she just comes along and gets you out."

'Thanks for Everything'

Passing a crowd of reporters, Mr. Anderson, who is chief Middle East
correspondent for The Associated Press, stopped to shake hands with several he
recognized.

"Thanks for everything," he told them, his voice breaking with emotion. "It's
been so long. What can I say? It's just great."

The health and vigor that Mr. Anderson displayed was a sharp contrast to the
gaunt appearances and shuffling gaits of some other American hostages released
in recent months. Two former hostages -- Joseph J. Cicippio, who left Germany
today, and Alann Steen, who remains under medical care here -- were both found
to have suffered lasting injuries as a result of beatings administered by their
captors.

Friends said that except for a small bald spot on his head, Mr. Anderson, who is
44 years old, looked very much as he did before he was kidnapped in Beirut on
March 16, 1985. Some were surprised that the former marine and Vietnam War
veteran had survived his ordeal with such apparent success.

A medical bulletin issued late today reported that Mr. Anderson was suffering
from only a few minor ailments. He has a sinus infection that can be treated
with antibiotics, and a minor lung inflammation that doctors said would be
"resolved in several weeks without treatment."

He is also receiving dental care and treatment for a knee pain resulting from an
injury he suffered while in his 20's.

Greeted by Ambassador

Mr. Anderson arrived at the Rhein-Main Air Base near here shortly before
daybreak. He was welcomed by a military honor guard and a warm handshake from
Robert Kimmett, the United States Ambassador to Germany. Mrs. Kimmett presented
him with a bouquet of yellow flowers, which he was carrying when he arrived at
Wiesbaden a few minutes later.

After entering the United States military hospital here, where he will undergo a
series of medical examinations and debriefings, Mr. Anderson appeared briefly on
the hospital balcony flanked by Mr. Cicippio and Mr. Steen. A crowd of about 200
people, many of them soldiers, cheered and clapped for them.

Even journalists, many of whom had come to consider Mr. Anderson a close
colleague even though they had never met him, had trouble maintaining their
reserve. Several applauded and shouted words of welcome at him.

Mr. Anderson ebulliently greeted several relatives, but seemed especially
captivated by his 6-year-old daughter, Sulome, whom he met Wednesday in Damascus
for the first time. She wore a bright red parka, and stood quietly in front of
him as he spoke, his arms draped over her chest.

Hospital officials reported that when they asked Mr. Anderson what he would like
to eat, he ordered a Big Mac hamburger and a strawberry milkshake.

If further medical tests confirm Mr. Anderson's good health, he will probably
leave Germany soon, officials said. He has scheduled a news conference for
Friday, and could depart for the United States soon afterward.

Mr. Anderson's release marked the end of a decade during which United States
policy toward the Middle East was dominated by concern for American hostages
held by radical Islamic factions.

The most important factions were influenced by the Governments of Iran and
Syria, and it was those countries' desire to improve ties to the United States
that led them to begin releasing Western hostages four months ago.

Mr. Anderson was the longest-held American hostage in Lebanon, and the last to
be released. Eight other hostages, including two Americans, are believed to have
been killed by their captors.

The only Westerners now being held in Lebanon are two German aid workers
kidnapped in 1989, Thomas Kemptner and Heinrich Strubig. Diplomatic efforts to
win their freedom increased this week, and a United Nations mediator,
Giandomenico Picco, visited Bonn today to meet with Foreign Minister
Hans-Dietrich Genscher.

The United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar has said he is
determined to see all hostages in the Middle East freed before he leaves office
at the end of this month.

                             --------------------


Sutherland Tells of Suicide Tries

By The Associated Press -- Thomas Sutherland says that he tried to commit
suicide three times while a hostage in Lebanon by pulling a plastic bag over his
head, but that thoughts of his family saved him each time.

The suicide attempts came in late 1986, when his pro-Iranian captors in Beirut
moved him to a tiny underground cell, deprived him of light and isolated him
from fellow captives, Mr. Sutherland said Wednesday night on the ABC program
"Nightline."

"I tried to pull a plastic bag over my head and suffocate myself, but I found
out on each try that it got very painful, and as it got more painful, the vision
of my wife and three daughters appeared before me ever more clearly," he said.

"And I decided each time, 'Gee, I can't go through with this,' and I would pull
it off," he said. "Now, of course, I'm glad I did that."

Mr. Sutherland, a 60-year-old educator, was released in Beirut on Nov. 18 and
returned home this week to Fort Collins, Colo.

NAME: Terry A. Anderson

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arriving yesterday at the United States air base in Wiesbaden,
Germany, Terry A. Anderson rushed to greet his sister, Peggy Say, who had worked
tirelessly for his release from captivity in Lebanon. Page A12. (pg. A1); Terry
A. Anderson, center, was joined yesterday at the U.S. base in Wiesbaden,
Germany, by former fellow hostages, Joseph J. Cicippio, left, and Alann Steen.
Mr. Cicippio later arrived in Norristown, Pa. (pg. A12) (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. John J. Tolson, 76, Dies; Pioneered Army's Helicopter Use

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 478 words


Lieut. Gen. John J. Tolson 3d, retired, who as commander of an Army division in
Vietnam helped pioneer the use of helicopters as a leading instrument of modern
warfare, died Monday at Rex Hospital in Raleigh, N.C. He was 76 years old and
lived in Raleigh.

The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.

It was as commander of the First Cavalry Division (Airmobile) in 1967 and 1968
that General Tolson used the helicopter as a shuttle to quickly move soliders
and supplies to the scene of battles against elusive Vietcong guerrillas and
their North Vietnamese allies.

More than 400 helicopters and 15,000 troops were under his command, and he
deployed them in such major encounters as the relief of Khe Sanh and the
counterthrust to the Communists' Tet offensive of 1968.

"Basically, through his skill as an aviator and his insight as a military
thinker, he saw the value of the machine at his disposal," said R. Steven
Maxham, director of the United States Army Aviation Museum at Fort Rucker, Ala.

Mr. Tolson, a native of New Bern, N.C., studied at the University of North
Carolina and graduated from West Point in 1937. In World War II, he helped to
organize the 503d Parachute Infantry Regiment and served on all its jumps,
including the recapture of Corregidor.

After the war, he trained as an airplane and helicopter pilot, was appointed the
Army's chief of doctrine and combat development and later was commander of
aviation training at Fort Rucker. He wrote a manual on the helicopter's value in
air transport, although at the time many officers remained dubious of its value.

When he put theory into practice in Vietnam, he was at the front line himself.
He logged more than 1,000 hours of combat flying and barely escaped death when
enemy bullets tore through the door and windshield of the helicopter he was
flying.

After his Vietnam tour, he was promoted from major general to lieutenant general
and given command of Fort Bragg, N.C. There he continued to be an innovator.
Publicly acknowledging illict drugs as a growing problem, he granted amnesty and
provided treatment for soldiers who came forward, a departure from the usual
practice of discharging offenders. He also assigned soldiers to help
impoverished towns near the base with medical care, school repairs and other
aid.

General Tolson retired in 1973 as deputy commander of the Continental Army and
for the next four years was secretary of North Carolina's Military and Veterans
Affairs Department. His decorations included the Distinguished Service Cross and
the Distinguished Flying Cross. He was a past president of the Association of
the United States Army.

His survivors are his wife, the former Margaret Jordan Young; two sons, David C.
Tolson of Atlanta and John J. Tolson of Arlington, Va., and a daughter, Harriet
B. Tolson of East Haddam, Conn.

NAME: John J. Tolson

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. John J. Tolson 3d (United States Army, 1967)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 6, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Sinister Problems Hide Under Silly Arguments

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 33; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 875 words



Naked to the Waist
By Alice Elliott Dark
261 pages. Houghton Mifflin. $19.95.

On the surface, the arguments that estrange the couples in Alice Elliott Dark's
new stories seem trivial, even silly. One woman takes issue with her boyfriend's
determination to discipline her naughty new puppy. Another woman seizes upon her
husband's new interest in astral projection as a sign of betrayal. A third woman
grows disillusioned with her fiance when he's unable to participate in a drunken
conversation with a friend.

As orchestrated by Ms. Dark, however, such arguments open out to disclose
sinister secrets and the sad misunderstandings that can accrue between women and
men. In fact, the real problems of her characters turn out to be serious ones --
physical abuse, adultery, heavy drinking -- or the more subtle but intractable
ones of emotional duplicity and resentment.

In the title novella, a well-bred woman from Philadelphia spends months flirting
with a gay friend who is unable to reciprocate her love; and in the wake of his
rejection, she becomes engaged to a macho Vietnam veteran who promises her easy
sexual fulfillment and freedom from her family's expectations. In Ms. Dark's
able hands, this is not simply a tale of a woman on the rebound from one bad
relationship to another; it's a story about the ways in which people delude
themselves about their own passions and dreams, the ways in which people are
shaped by earlier experiences, even as they try to escape them.

The other long story in this volume, "The Interior Studio," is also concerned at
heart with the hold that the past can exert on the present. In this case, a
painter in her 30's finds that childhood memories -- her father's death and her
mother's emotional distance -- overshadow her own marriage and career. When her
mother, Claire, advises her not to have children (as she sees it, they prevented
her from realizing her own ambitions), Lela must not only reassess their own
tortuous relationship, but she must also attempt to separate her own fears and
yearnings from those of her parents.

"Lela's fear of the pain her mother was effortlessly capable of inflicting was
mirrored not only in Claire's eyes, but in her entire body," Ms. Dark writes.
"On the surface, they did not really resemble each other; Lela looked like her
father. Her physical similarity to Claire was a trick of shared mannerisms and
expressions. The mirror that reflected them back at each other was a trick
mirror, costly and unreliable."

The other stories in this volume are filled with similar moments in which Ms.
Dark pinpoints the emotions her characters are feeling and delivers them to the
reader in a neatly tied package of observations. Describing a writer who has
just met a new woman, she notes: "He found himself assuming she would behave as
predictably as one of his characters. The women he wrote about were all
relentlessly independent, no matter what their domestic arrangements."
Describing a man jockeying for conversational advantage with his girlfriend, she
writes: "When their eyes met, Charlie stubbornly made sure he was the last to
look away, though he had an uneasy sense that he was making an empty gesture,
that the advantage he'd unknowingly had only a moment earlier had disappeared."
And describing a woman looking at her new boyfriend, she writes: "He was wearing
a flannel shirt with the sleeves rolled up, a look that reminded her of boys
she'd known in college, who had all copied Neil Young. She quickly instructed
herself not to pretend that Dennis was Neil Young; in her experience, that kind
of association led to big trouble."

Though sentence by sentence, each of the stories in "Naked to the Waist" seems
completely fluent, many of them demonstrate structural weaknesses that undermine
their emotional power. The pacing of scenes is often rushed and staccato, as
though the author were in a rush to finish the story or reluctant to fully
examine the implications of her characters' decisions. And the stories' endings
also tend to feel artificial and forced.

A man who worries that his wife may have a cancerous tumor suddenly realizes she
is pregnant with his child. A woman suspects her husband of having an affair,
not with his actual mistress but with one of his students. A woman who
encourages her sister to leave her abusive husband and come stay with her
abruptly leaves town on a pilgrimage of her own. Again and again, an O.
Henry-esque twist has been forcibly attached to the narrative, and in each case
the ironies are so heavy-handed that the characters are suddenly turned into
marionettes, puppets without a will of their own, made to enact the author's
bidding.

Such problems, however, are common enough in first collections; they are the
sorts of mistakes that can be erased with experience and the careful practice of
craft. They should not blind the reader to the real accomplishments of this
volume or to Ms. Dark's generous talents: her eye for the incongruous detail,
her poised control of language, her instinctive understanding of her characters'
inner lives. If this collection ultimately disappoints, it nonetheless marks the
debut of a genuinely gifted writer and points to greater achievements ahead.

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alice Elliott Dark (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Heineken Pact

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, Dec. 6


Heineken, Europe's largest brewer, has signed a joint-venture agreement to
become the first foreign beer producer in Vietnam, Annemiek Louwers, company
spokeswoman, said. Tiger and Heineken are currently the best-selling imported
beers in the Communist nation of 68 million, which is now undergoing free-market
reforms. Tiger is made by Asia Pacific Breweries in Singapore. Heineken is
investing in the brewery, expecting strong sales potential because of the recent
reforms, the spokeswoman said. Vietnam currently has two state-run breweries
that cannot satisfy domestic demand, Ms. Louwers said.

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Style Makers;
Nancy Haber, Children's Dress Designer

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66; Column 5; Style Desk

LENGTH: 274 words


When a classical harpist moves from Manhattan to Akron, Ohio, where she knows no
one except her husband and daughter, what is she to do?

If she's Nancy Haber, she starts designing extravagant silk or velvet dresses
for little girls, and hires refugee women from Laos and Vietnam to help her sew.

In 1982, Mrs. Haber's husband, Michael, was hired by the University of Akron as
a full professor of music. To move with him and their daughter, Lila, then 2,
Mrs. Haber abandoned her career as a freelance harpist. In Manhattan, she had
played with the New York Philharmonic and the Metropolitan Opera.

But in addition to her music background, she had studied pattern-making, sewing
and draping of children's clothes at the Fashion Institute of Technology.

What she designs are dresses that are lavish, expensive and exquisitely made.
Each dress, including the collar, armholes, bodice and skirt, is lined in Swiss
cotton.

"I don't want to have problems with children saying, 'It's itchy,' " Mrs. Haber
said. The buttons are covered in silk, the silk roses that decorate collars and
waistbands are handmade, and collars are sometimes edged with ruching.

Mrs. Haber found three of her five seamstresses at the International Institute
in Akron, a nonprofit agency that helps immigrants and resettles refugees. "The
Hmong people from Laos are famous for their handwork," Mrs. Haber said. The
women work in Mrs. Haber's home, where they make 250 dresses a year.

The dresses have been sold in stores like Cerutti in Manhattan for three years.
Cerutti sells the burgundy velvet dress with a white silk organza collar and
sleeves for $850.

NAME: Nancy Haber

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nancy Haber, with a handmade velvet dress. (Jim Estrin for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PEARL HARBOR REMEMBERED;
Excerpts of Bush Speech at Ceremony

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 24; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Dec. 7


Following are excerpts from President Bush's address today to World War II
veterans and military families on the 50th anniversary of the attack on Pearl
Harbor, as provided by News Transcripts Inc., a private transcription company.

Over 2,000 men died in a matter of minutes on this site a half a century ago.
Many more died that same day as Japanese forces assaulted the Philippines and
Guam and Wake Island, Midway, Malaya, Thailand, Singapore, Hong Kong. On that
day of infamy, Pearl Harbor propelled each of us into a titanic contest for
mankind's future. It galvanized the American spirit as never, ever before into a
single-minded resolve that could produce only one thing, victory.

Churchill knew it as soon as he heard the news. He'd faced the Nazi conquest of
Europe, the blitz of London, the terror of the U-boats. But when America was
attacked, he declared there was no more doubt about the end. He knew then that
the American spirit would not fail the cause of freedom.

The enemy mistook our diversity, our nation's diversity, for weakness.  But
Pearl Harbor became a rallying cry for men and women from all walks of life, all
colors and creeds. And in the end, this unity of purpose made us invincible in
war and now makes us secure in peace.

.  .  .

Ironically, isolationists gathered together at what was known in those days as
an American First rally in Pittsburgh at precisely the moment the first
Americans met early violent deaths right here at Pearl Harbor.

The isolationists failed to see that the seeds of Pearl Harbor were sown back in
1919 when a victorious America decided that in the absence of a threatening
enemy abroad we should turn all of our energies inward. That notion of
isolationism flew escort for the very bombers that attacked our men 50 years
ago.

.  .  .

And now we stand triumphant for the third time this century, this time in the
wake of the cold war. As in 1919 and in 1945, we face no enemy menacing our
security. And yet we stand here today on the site of a tragedy spawned by
isolationism. And it is here, and we must learn and this time avoid the dangers
of today's isolationism and its economic accomplice, protectionism. To do
otherwise, to believe that turning our backs on the world would improve our lot
here at home is to ignore the tragic lessons of the 20th century. The fact is,
this country has enjoyed its most lasting growth and security when we rejected
isolationism, both political and economic, in favor of engagement and
leadership.

.  .  .

Fifty years ago we paid a heavy price for complacency and over-confidence. That,
too, is a lesson we shall never forget. To those who have defended our country,
from the shores of Guadalcanal to the hills of Korea, and the jungles of Vietnam
to the sands of Kuwait, I say this: We will always remember. We will always be
prepared -- prepared to take on aggression, prepared to step forward in
reconciliation and prepared to secure the peace.

In remembering, it is important to come to grips with the past. No nation can
fully understand itself or find its place in the world, if it does not look with
clear eyes at all the glories -- and disgraces, too -- of the past.

We in the United States acknowledge such an injustice in our own history. The
internment of Americans of Japanese ancestry was a great injustice, and it will
never be repeated.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 8, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Soviets Say They Interrogated U.S. P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 422 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 7


Current and former officials of the K.G.B. have said in interviews for an
Australian television program that Soviet agents interrogated American
servicemen captured in Indochina during the Vietnam War.

The report said some of the interrogations took place after the war ended in
1975 and after Hanoi said all American prisoners had been returned. Some of the
Americans may have been taken to the Soviet Union on regular supply flights from
Vietnam, said the Soviet agents interviewed by "Australian 60 Minutes," which is
modeled after the CBS News program. The Australian program was broadcast on Oct.
27, but its assertions were not publicized in the United States until The San
Diego Union printed an article about the documentary last Sunday.

A spokesman for the Defense Department, Bob Hall, said this week that interviews
with American prisoners who returned after the war had turned up no evidence of
interrogation by Soviet agents. But Mr. Hall said the Pentagon was looking into
the allegations.

Agents interviewed for the program said they believed that Americans who had
been interrogated might have been killed after being returned to the Vietnamese.
The United States, which withdrew its forces from Vietnam in 1973, lists 2,273
Americans as missing in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos.

In the program, a former Soviet navigator identified as Pavel Ponomaryov said he
had helped fly two Americans to the Soviet Union and that he had seen three
other captured servicemen on flights from Vietnam.

Yuri Pankov, a Soviet reporter who took part in making the segment of the
Australian program, titled "Missing in Action," has written an article on the
same subject for the Soviet financial journal Kommersant. He wrote that at least
one American had been taken to the town of Sary Shagan in the republic of
Kazakhstan in the years immediately after the war. The State Department said on
Friday that two diplomats from the American Embassy in Moscow had been sent to
Kazakhstan about two weeks ago to investigate the report but had been forbidden
to go to Sary Shagan, which is in a restricted area.

Oleg D. Kalugin, a former K.G.B. general brought back by President Mikhail S.
Gorbachev to reorganize the intelligence agency after the unsuccessful coup in
August, was among those interviewed for the program. Mr. Kalugin said he headed
an interrogation team in Vietnam from 1975 to 1978 and questioned Americans
there.

The Soviet agents said their goal in the interrogations was to learn about
American equipment.

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SIHANOUK TOURING THE COUNTRYSIDE

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: KOMPONG CHAM, Cambodia, Dec. 8


Prince Norodom Sihanouk traveled into the countryside today to begin what may be
his most important struggle in restoring peace to Cambodia: to introduce himself
to millions of people who have never before seen him and barely know his name.

Dodging pigs and cows and packs of mangy dogs along roads ravaged by the long
civil war, the beaming Prince and his royal entourage set off by motorcade on a
three-day visit to central Cambodia, on his first extended trip into the
countryside since returning home after nearly two decades in exile.

"My children, my children," the 69-year-old Prince said as he gently touched the
faces of schoolchildren and old men and women who were among the tens of
thousands of cheering Cambodians lined up this morning along the 80-mile
motorcade route north from Phnom Penh, the capital. "How are you, my children?"

For elderly Cambodians in the crowd, the ebullient Prince was no stranger, and
they greeted Cambodia's former god-king as a returning hero and peacemaker --
the nation's best and perhaps only hope for peace after a generation of
violence.

Unknown to Many

But as they waved their Government-issued red-white-and-gold Cambodian flags and
joined in orchestrated chants of "Long live the Prince!" many of the younger
Cambodians lining the dusty roadway leading out of Phnom Penh acknowledged that
they had no idea who this jolly man was.

"I'm very excited to be here, but I cannot tell you who Prince Sihanouk is,"
said 15-year-old Noun Visal, giggling nervously.

The Prince make a good start today in winning over the young rural adults whose
support he will need both to preserve the fragile peace in Cambodia and to foil
the Khmer Rouge in its hopes of returning to power. In its four years in power
before Vietnam invaded and installed a Government in 1979, the Khmer Rouge
presided over the deaths of more than a million peoeple in a radical remaking of
society.

The youngsters were especially pleased when the Prince broke free of his
granite-faced, gray-suited North Korean bodyguards -- a gift from his friend,
President Kim Il Sung of North Korea -- to touch the faces and hands of people
in the crowd. Cambodian Buddhists believe that to touch the monarch is to touch
the Lord Buddha.

Elections Planned for 1993

Young rural adults make up a sizable chunk of the Cambodians who are to vote in
internationally supervised elections scheduled for 1993 under auspices of the
United Nations-brokered peace treaty for Cambodia. More than three-quarters of
the country's eight million people live in the countryside.

"We've been urging the Prince to get out into the countryside and be seen,
especially by the young people," a Western diplomat in Phnom Penh said. "The
young people in the countryside are the focus of Khmer Rouge recruitment
efforts, both as voters and as guerrillas."

Mr. Salesh Man, 65, is a Cham Muslim, and like the nearly 200,000 other Muslims
in Cambodia, he and his neighbors were the targets of an especially vicious
brand of persecution by the Khmer Rouge, which saw Islam as a threat to
Cambodian ethnic purity.

"Seventy percent of all Cham people were killed by the Khmer Rouge, and they
burned down our holy mosques," said Mr. Salesh Man, who lost nearly 40 relatives
to the Khmer Rouge. "The Prince must help us to prevent that from happening
again."

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia highlighting Kompong Cham

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 9, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
What to Do Until the World Cup Comes Around?

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


WITH a great deal of envy, I turned on the television set yesterday to watch a
soccer game. It was the best way to prepare for the World Cup draw, which would
be held later in the day in New York. Watch soccer from Italy first, then go to
the Paramount to eat my heart out because we have no national league, we have no
big-time soccer and we must wait three more years for the temporary glory of the
World Cup.

Misty afternoon in Turin. Through the graciousness of WNYC-TV, the greatest
soccer league in the world was in my den. There was Lothar Matthaus, kicking
missiles for Internazionale of Milan. There was Roberto Baggio with his neat
little ponytail, esthetically plunking a penalty kick for Juventus of Turin.

And down on his knees on the grassy pitch, in operatic pose, there was Toto
Schillaci of Juventus, perpetual scowl, beseeching the referee, wondering why
the touch had suddenly deserted him in the semifinals of the last World Cup. In
the summer of 1990, the old city-states of Italy had united in love of the
seemingly humble Sicilian, but now he plods onward for Juventus, lopped off the
national team whenever it assembles.

For 90 minutes, it was possible to be at the heart of world soccer, possible to
dream that someday old Toto would come to New York for some yet-unformed team,
that someday venerable Roger Milla of Cameroon might play for some future team
in Chicago, that we would lift up our lamp to the tired and the poor and the
aged of soccer, to complement our home-grown players in a league we could call
our own.

This is the sadness of the American soccer buff, to know that the Europeans have
leagues and rivalries and histories that go way back, older than the Chicago
Bears, older than the Boston Celtics, older than the New York Rangers, and all
we have are a couple of earnest minor leagues, that abomination known as indoor
soccer, and our memories of the Cosmos, Giorgio and Franz and Carlos Alberto and
Hubert and Pele himself.

Enough jealousy. It was time to get over to the Paramount, where they would
place 141 nations in the draw for the 1994 World Cup, coming not soon enough to
a stadium near you. The World Cup is the most popular sports event in the world,
more anticipated, more gripping, than the Olympic Summer Games.

The United States has been awarded the 1994 World Cup, not because we can play
the sport but because the United States is the home of major corporations with
money to spend. It brings soccer to the United States in 1994, therefore it is
good. Alan I. Rothenberg, the president of the United States Soccer Federation,
said yesterday he is convinced the United States will sell out the games in
1994, but he added candidly that if a national league is not in place by 1995,
"then we will have failed."

While most Americans were surely watching our own version of football, that
willy-nilly game involving 44 helmeted players per side, more than 50 nations
were watching the draw ceremony. The host was Barbara Eden, known all over the
world for reruns of "I Dream of Jeannie" and currently quite available for
industrial conventions and World Cup draws.

They promised us a geography lesson at the World Cup, and sure enough, names
from the front page suddenly popped out of slots. Nicaragua. Cuba. Vietnam.
Libya. Iraq. Lebanon. Lithuania. Latvia. Estonia. Yugoslavia. The Soviet Union,
if they are still in the soccer business or any kind of business next year.

There were four world-class players in the Paramount: fresh from winning the
first women's World Cup in China, Shannon Higgins and Michelle Akers-Stahl of
the United States; Tony Meola, the American goalkeeper in the three losses in
the 1990 World Cup in Italy, and Abedi Pele of Ghana, one of the greatest
players in the world, who had played for his club, Marseilles, on Saturday and
flown over.

Sticking his hand in a glass bowl, Abedi Pele drew out the name of his own
national team, Ghana, for an elimination round with seasoned Algeria and
up-and-coming Uganda, making it possible for a star like Abedi Pele to become
the Ernie Banks of Africa, never reaching the championship round in his sport.
Asked about his country's draw, Abedi Pele said "Difficile," French for
"difficult," exactly the same lament officials from 140 other nations seemed to
be making.

All the Americans can do is wait. The United States does not even play in the
elimination round because it is automatically seeded as host, and many of our
best players have gone to Europe to make a living and improve their game.

Perhaps the World Cup will be merely a one-shot deal, a chance for Europeans and
Japanese to take advantage of the exchange rate and stay in our good hotels and
drive our good interstates and eat fast food and try to get from Seattle to
Miami when their nation advances. But we will have soccer. For five weeks we
will have soccer. In the meantime, thank goodness for WNYC-TV. Grazia, Italia.

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Echoes of Violence: Attica's Story Retold in Court

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1464 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO


It has been 20 years since the tear gas and the bullets broke the morning quiet
in the prison at Attica, not far from here.

But the years sometimes seem like minutes in a paneled Buffalo courtroom, where
for the first time a trial is under way to determine whether former state
officials are legally responsible for the bloodshed that ended the insurrection
at the prison on Sept. 13, 1971, and made Attica a part of American history.

Men who were on both sides of the prison walls that morning have been brought to
tears as witness after witness has been forced to relive memories of the hail of
bullets from officers' guns that left scores of men injured and 10 hostages and
29 inmates dead.

The defendants in the civil liability suit, which seeks $2.8 billion in damages
on behalf of 1,281 inmates, are Vincent Mancusi, the prison warden at the time;
his deputy, Karl Pfeil, and the estates of two men who are now dead, Russell G.
Oswald, then the State Corrections Commissioner, and Maj. John Monahan, the
state police commander in charge of the operation to retake the prison. Under
state law, the state would probably pay any damages assessed against the four.

The suit was filed in 1974, within the statute of limitations. After years of
delays and an appeal, two months of testimony in the case have provided a fresh
picture of the assault by state forces. Jurors have heard of officers randomly
shooting inmates at close range, of a lack of medical preparation that might
have added to the death toll and of what the inmates call a rampage of revenge
after the uprising.

Some prisoners who were inside Attica's D Yard that morning say the case gives
them the chance at a verdict for history. A victory "would mean we have finally
gotten our message across to the world that the state is responsible for what
happened," said Akil Al-Jundi, a former inmate whose face and hand still bear
the scars of the bullets he took that morning. The class-action suit was filed
in Mr. Al-Jundi's name on behalf of the inmates involved.

By mid-December, the defense lawyers are expected to go on the offensive,
attacking the rebellious inmates as vicious killers who were not on the
"benevolent Sunday school picnic" that one of the officials' lawyers, Richard
Moot, said his opponents have tried to portray.

The lawyers for the four former state officials who have been sued told the
jurors that their clients did not want the tragedy, could not control it and did
not know about much of the violence.

But the lawyers for the inmates have chronicled what they say is brutality so
extensive it could not have escaped the notice of the commanders, and they have
presented evidence that the violence and what they say were efforts to cover it
up continued long after the rebelling inmates had been subdued.

Many witness have testified that naked inmates were run through a glass-strewn
gantlet with corrections officers on both sides who beat them with batons. The
officials' lawyers call it a cordon of officers that was necessary to maintain
control.

One who said he went through it was Frank Smith. He also testified that after
the prison was back in the control of the authorities, officers placed him naked
on a table in the yard for three to five hours with a football under his chin.
If he dropped the ball, he testified that he was told, he would be killed.

This treatment, he said, was to repay him for a rumor that swept police officers
and guards after the rebellion was quelled that he had castrated a young
corrections officer who had been a hostage.

Hot Shells on Bare Skin

As he lay on the table in the yard, Mr. Smith told the jurors, officers struck
his testicles with their nightsticks and dropped lighted cigarettes and hot
shell casings on his chest. They repeatedly told him that they would soon
castrate him. Later, he said, he was beaten until both wrists were broken and
prison officers played one-man Russian roulette with him.

The rumor that Frank Smith had castrated anyone, like many of the stories that
swept Attica that day, was false. There had been a young correction officer
wounded in the groin, and he testified here, describing the injury that started
the rumor. But the former officer, Michael S. Smith, told the six-person jury in
Federal court that he had been wounded by exploding bullets used by troopers as
they stormed the prison.

In a typical day in court recently, the jurors heard testimony from two men
whose quite different paths led them to the events at Attica that day. One was
John W. Cudmore, a surgeon for the New York Army National Guard, who was there
as part of the Guard's rescue operation. The other was Alfred Mancuso, who has
been in jail for murder so long that he said he no longer remembers his original
home address in Queens.

Dr. Cudmore, now a major general in the Guard, described a chaotic scene in the
hours after officials had restored control over the prison yard, with people
everywhere bleeding from bullet wounds and armed corrections officers blocking
his path as he tried to attend injured prisoners.

'Cut Down Like Wheat'

Mr. Mancuso told the jurors that he had watched from his cell as the gray and
blue uniforms of the state police and corrections officers advanced along a
prison catwalk toward the rebelling inmates while a cloud of tear gas fell from
a helicopter overhead at 9:45 that morning. The officers, he said, fired
directly at the inmates and hostages. "They were cut down like wheat," he told
the jurors. "They were wiped out."

Although there was no one left standing among the inmates and hostages, Mr.
Mancuso testified, the shooting continued. Under questioning by one of the
inmates' lawyers, Joseph J. Heath, Mr. Mancuso said he watched as an officer
with his handgun drawn walked up to a man lying on the catwalk.

Did the officer fire? Yes, Mr. Mancuso said. How many times? "Several," Mr.
Mancuso said. And then he could not go on for a moment as a wave of memory
seemed to wash over him.

When he did continue, it was to tell of how he was beaten by officers with a
wooden chair, a beating that he said paralyzed his right side. Then, he said, he
was thrown face down in a pool of water in his cell, where he remained without
treatment or food for a day and a half. The only attention he received, he said,
was when an officer opened the cell door and urinated on his head.

The twin themes of deliberate retaliation and inadequate medical preparation
have been major parts of the plaintiffs' case, which is nearing its end.

One outside surgeon, Worthington G. Schenk, testified that at about 10 A.M. that
day Warden Mancusi called him to the prison. Instead of saying that there were
many deaths and scores of injuries, the warden, according to the doctor, said,
"We're having a little trouble out here."

An hour later, when Dr. Schenk arrived, he saw men on stretchers, men bleeding
from head wounds and no treatment being provided. When he realized the extent of
the casualties, he summoned help from the Erie County hospital where he worked.
But by then, he said, it was long past what doctors call the golden hour of
resuscitation, during which seriously injured patients have the best chance of
survival.

'Deliberate Indifference?'

The lawyers for the inmates have dwelled on the most gruesome accounts because
their task under the law is a difficult one. As state officials, the four
defendants have "qualified immunity," which means there is no liability unless
they acted "wantonly" during the emergency of the retaking of the prison and
with "deliberate indifference" during the calmer period afterward.

The Federal judge in the trial, John T. Elfvin, has repeatedly reminded the
jurors that they cannot find liability against the four former officials unless
they are convinced that whatever happened at Attica after the inmates initially
took over part of the prison happened as a result of the planning of the
officials or that they knew about it.

The lawyers for the state officials have worked to point out weaknesses in the
inmates' case. A frequently used strategy has been to try to diminish the
credibility of witnesses. Some of the lawyers have suggested, for example, that
some Guardsmen who have testified for the inmates were only in the Guard to
avoid service in Vietnam.

The chief lawyer for Commissioner Oswald's estate, John Stenger, used that
approach with Brian Kevin Burke, a National Guard medic.

Mr. Stenger noted that Mr. Burke had told the jury he had been trained as a
combat medic. "But you've never seen any combat, right?" Mr. Stenger asked.

"I beg your pardon?" answered the witness.

"Have you ever seen any combat?" the lawyer persisted.

"I think," Mr. Burke said, "I saw combat that day, sir."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

In East German City, the Future Stays Murky

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 659 words

DATELINE: BITTERFELD, Germany


For many Germans, this city used to be a paradigm of hell, a place where huge
chemical industries that had run amok under Communist management destroyed an
entire landscape and many of the people who inhabited it.

Two years after East Germany's Communist Government toppled, the picture has
changed. The air is clearer, the water is better and plans are afoot for urban
and industrial renewal.

But like many cities in eastern Germany these days, this urban district of
126,000 is still a fragile place. The improvement in the air came from closing
down most of the chemical and coal mining activity here, and more shutdowns are
to come.

Unemployment figures are guarded like state secrets. Chemie A.G., the successor
corporation to the big Communist-run combine, puts the jobless rate at 20
percent or slightly higher, but some economists believe the figure to be about
35 percent. Many idled workers are still collecting pay and therefore are not
counted among the unemployed, the economists point out. Others are involved in
public projects.

Germany is struggling to prevent poverty in its eastern lands through big
transfers of federal money for programs like the make-work projects. But the
burden is already straining the federal budget.

Unemployment checks continue for a year after a worker loses his job and then
fade into smaller welfare payments. At the end of this year, unemployment lists
will swell as companies around Bitterfeld lay off hordes of people now working
shortened hours.

But the problems of Bitterfeld and other eastern German cities pose a broader
question, and it is one being asked throughout much of central Europe: Will
unemployment lay the seeds for a renewal of political extremism?

Hans Zimmermann, an environmentalist in the old East Germany who is still
politically active, thinks the answer is no. "We don't even have soccer
hooligans," he said.

Crime Is on the Rise

Bitterfeld has seen none of the dramatic attacks on foreigners witnessed
elsewhere in Germany. But in the big tenement settlements of Wolfen, north of
Bitterfeld, crime is on the rise. And while many of the Polish and Vietnamese
workers employed here under Communist rule to remedy chronic labor shortages
have departed, the life of those who remain is not always comfortable.

A woman who came from Hanoi six years ago opened a food stand after the textile
mill where she worked near the Czechoslovak border shut down. Asked how people
treated her, she cast a sidelong glance and replied, "Some people are nice,
others less nice."

In the Bitterfeld district, the unemployment problem is linked to the
disintegration of the chemical industry.  "Bitterfeld was the cow milked dry,"
said Wolfgang Baronius, the administrative director of Chemie A.G. "We never had
a general manager in the Central Committee, so the investments went elsewhere."

Of the 100,000 or so workers once employed by the region's industries, only
about 37,500 will be on the payroll at year's end. The remaining companies, for
manufacturing photographic film and bulk chemicals, are precarious.

Bitterfeld offers abundant examples of how the fabric of life has been torn in
the former East Germany.

Changes in Claudia Vogel's life are a case in point. Under the old system she
was an administrator of the regional day care centers for children of working
parents; now she runs the city's welfare office.

The day care centers are closing as women are laid off. In the old economy, more
than 90 percent of East German women worked, often at heavy manual labor. By
1992, laws originating in western Germany will banish women in the east from
night shifts and heavy labor, and many women who still have jobs will have to
cede them to men.

Blanka Weinrich, a 34-year-old married woman with children who operates a huge
power shovel in Bitterfeld's shrinking coalfields, told the daily Express
newspaper, "Leaving the shovel is going to hurt."

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Man Seized After 4 Are Slain by Sniper

BYLINE: BY DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words

DATELINE: CALIFORNIA, Mo., Dec. 10


A National Guard mechanic apparently stalked and killed four people -- a
sheriff, two sheriff's deputies and a sheriff's wife -- overnight, setting off a
daylong house-by-house, business-by-business manhunt here that dragged into the
evening hours before he surrendered, the authorities said.

The shootings, which also injured another sheriff's deputy, began at the
suspect's home Monday night and then took place at three other places. Two
victims were shot at their homes and two were shot outside the Moniteau County
Jail.

Officers using an armored vehicle, police dogs and helicopters blocked off this
town of 3,300 as assault teams and more than 150 officers from several nearby
counties and departments searched the streets looking for the suspect. He was
identified by the police as James R. Johnson, 42 years old.

About 7:30 P.M. there was a flurry of activity at a command post established by
local, state and Federal agencies in the Municipal Building as helicopters
circled overhead with search lights cutting across the dark sky. A half-hour
later, 24 hours after the shooting began, word came that the man had surrendered
at an elderly woman's home not far from the command post.

Call Leads to Disaster

Sgt. Terry Moore of the Missouri Highway Patrol said the woman told him that she
had received a telephone call from a neighbor this morning urging her to lock
her doors. When she went to her back porch to lock up, Mr. Johnson was there.

Sergeant Moore said the man told her that he was not going to hurt her but that
he needed a place to stay. After Mr. Johnson allowed the woman to leave, she was
picked up in front of her house by a friend, a retired highway patrolman, Dick
Burnett . She told Mr. Burnett that Mr. Johnson was inside and he then drove her
to the command center.

The authorities then surrounded the house and negotiated Mr. Johson's surrender
over the telephone. He walked out of the house, put down his guns and
surrendered at 7:43 P.M.

The authorities say the killing spree began shortly after 7:30 P.M. Monday with
the death of a Moniteau County Deputy Sheriff who answered a call at the home of
Mr. Johnson, a Vietnam veteran who repaired helicopters for the Missouri
National Guard.

A family dispute may have triggered the shootings, John Weed, the former husband
of Mr. Johnson's wife, Jerri, was quoted by The Associated Press as saying. He
said his daughter, Dawn Becker, 17, who lived with her mother and Mr. Johnson,
told him that Mr. Johnson became upset because the mother and daughter could not
attend a church service.

It had been about 45 years since a law enforcement officer was killed in the
line of duty in this area, said California's Police Chief, Jerry McCarty.

The town lies about 120 miles east of Kansas City and is surrounded by rolling
hills, cow pastures and farmland. Many of its people work in the state capital,
Jefferson City, 20 miles to the east, Chief McCarty said. Most others, he said,
are employed at a local turkey processing plant or a garment manufacturing
plant, or are farmers.

At the height of the search, 10 roadblocks were set up and officers searched
vehicles leaving California.  Officers from about 15 police departments had
converged on this small town, said Lieut. Ernest McCutchen, a spokesman for the
Missouri Highway Patrol.

Lieutenant McCutchen outlined the events surrounding the shootings:

At 7:30 P.M. Monday, the Moniteau County Sheriff's Department received a report
of a domestic disturbance at Mr. Johnson's home on Highway 87, south of
Jamestown and directly north of California.

The deputy who responded to the call, Les Roark, knew the suspect, Lieutenant
McCutchen said, and spoke to him for several minutes on the porch of the house.
Mr. Johnson then pulled a pistol and shot Mr. Roark several times, fatally
wounding him. He said the deputy had been shot in the head.

Mr. Johnson then left his house with two pistols, a rifle and a shotgun.

The next shooting occurred about an hour later in Clarksburg, Mo., about five
miles west of California. In that incident, Mr. Johnson approached the home of
Kenneth Jones, the Moniteau County Sheriff, and shot the sheriff's wife, Pam
Jones, a schoolteacher, through a window. She died at 11:35 P.M. Monday.

One in Critical Condition

Shots were heard next at 1:20 A.M. Tuesday at the home of a Moniteau County
Deputy Sheriff, Russell Borts, in downtown California. Shortly after Deputy
Borts had returned home from work, turned on a light and started speaking on the
telephone, a shot was fired through a window of his home and struck him in the
head. He is in critical but stable condition at a hospital in nearby Columbia.

The next victims were Sheriff Charles Smith, 54, of Cooper County, and Deputy
Sheriff Sandra Wilson, 42, of Miller County. They were killed as they walked out
of the Moniteau County Sheriff's Office to their patrol cars to investigate
reports of shots being fired at the Borts residence.

Sergeant Moore of the Highway Patrol was walking right behind the sheriff and
the deputy.

"I saw Sheriff Smith go down when the shots started ringing out," he said. He
said he saw Deputy Wilson jump into her patrol car and slide across the front
seat and out the door onto the ground. He said he saw her crawl near the car and
then get hit by a bullet.

Officials said the gunman apparently had been hiding near the jail, and stepped
out and opened fire.

One officer hid behind his squad car during the shootings.

"That was the last known time of any activity by the suspect," Lieutenant
McCutchen said. Law enforcement officials immediately put up roadblocks around
town, and as dawn broke, began sweeping the downtown area looking for Mr.
Johnson.

Sergeant Moore said Mr. Johnson spent the day in the elderly woman's house and
she even prepared lunch for him. As the day wore on, she told the suspect that
she had a party to go to and that if she did not appear people would become
suspicious.

She told him she would not inform on him, the officer said. He then let her
leave, allowing her to tell Mr. Burnett of his presence.

When the manhunt began Monday night, schools were ordered closed for the day in
the town and in nearby communities. Virtually all businesses locked their doors,
and residents stayed inside their homes.

Lonnie Branch, a 46-year-old resident of Jefferson City who delivers newspapers
to homes in California, said: "This is normally a quiet little community."

Referring to radio reports that noted Mr. Johnson's background in Vietnam, Mr.
Branch said he objected to that characterization. "As a Vietnam vet myself, it
really burns me up that people blame this craziness on the fact that this guy is
a vet," he said. "It just burns me up. Just because somebody goes off on his
head, doesn't mean being a Vietnam vet caused it."

Chief McCarty said he had known Mr. Johnson "almost all his life. He said Mr.
Johnson grew up on a farm north of Clever, Mo.

"He was a nice guy to talk to, though he could be a little hot-headed at times,"
Chief McCarty said. "He tends to get a little irate at bad calls at the
ballgames and things like that, and I guess he's had a few marital problems."

Chief McCarty said that Mr. Johnson had been married but that he was not certain
whether it had been two or three times.

One of the few businesses that remained open in this town was Bud's Deli, owned
and operated by Bud Parry, 60 years old.

One of his customers was Henry Gensler, 42, who said, "There ain't no reason to
be scared unless you're a cop; he's either shooting at cops or cops' families."

Mr. Gensler said that he had attended school with Mr. Johnson from first through
10th grades in California, but that they lost track after Mr. Johnson went to
Vietnam.

"He was just as normal as anybody," he said. "He was just as friendly as can be.
But everybody has a breaking point."

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Law-enforcement officials in California, Mo., arrested a suspect
identified as James R. Johnson in the killing of three police officers and a
local sheriff's wife, and the wounding of another officer. The body of one of
the slain officers lay covered yesterday outside the Moniteau County Jail in
California. (Associated Press)

Map of Missouri highlighting California

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 11, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

HONG KONG OUSTS MORE BOAT PEOPLE

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, Dec. 10


Hong Kong sent 28 Vietnamese back home today in the second forced repatriation
under an agreement with Hanoi for the return of tens of thousands of boat people
held in detention camps here. The operation proceeded largely without incident.

The 28 boat people included 13 "double-backers" and their families who had fled
to this British colony, volunteered to return to Vietnam and accepted assistance
money, and then came back again.

The group also included 12 Vietnamese who arrived here after the Oct. 29
agreement was signed. All had been screened and found not to be genuine refugees
fleeing persecution.

When they learned that they were to be repatriated, the 12 all "volunteered" to
return home, and so technically they were not deported.

The colony has been struggling for the last few years to feed and house
thousands of Vietnamese who have fled the repression and poverty of their
homeland, many of whom will never qualify as genuine refugees.

Sad but Resigned

The first repatriation to take place after the October agreement with Hanoi came
on Nov. 9 and involved 59 double-backers and their families. It was a wrenching
exercise, with men battling their guards and women screaming and weeping as they
were carried aboard the waiting plane.

Today's group, though, appeared sad but resigned. A few wept and several were
closely escorted by the unarmed guards. But they walked without resisting onto
the chartered plane.

"A deportation practice is evolving here and that is very disturbing," said
Arthur C. Helton, a lawyer with the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human
Rights. "The screening process for these people is still flawed and there is the
risk that true refugees will be returned to Vietnam."

Before the two recent repatriations, the last time Vietnamese were forced home
was in December 1989, when the police bundled 51 screaming Vietnamese onto a
plane in the dead of night. International criticism from Washington and
elsewhere prompted Hong Kong to forgo mandatory repatriation for almost two
years. But the United States has apparently muted its opposition, in part
because of its own controversial policy of forcing back Haitian boat people.

                             --------------------


U.S. Expresses Regret

WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 (Special to The New York Times) -- The State Department said
today that it regretted that the 12 described as voluntary returnees had not
been allowed to apply for a voluntary return program run by the United Nations.

Asked why the United States opposes forced returns to Vietnam but not those to
Haiti, a department spokesman, Daniel Rochman, said, "The two situations are
different."

"The United States believes that country conditions in Haiti are such that the
persons who are returned will not face persecution," he said. "Regarding
Vietnam, the United States opposes forcible repatriation under present conditons
in that country."


LOAD-DATE: December 11, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Missouri Town Is Shaken by Shooting Spree

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: CALIFORNIA, Mo., Dec. 11


Slowly this shaken town in the hills of central Missouri began to come out from
behind its barred doors and shuttered windows and live free again today as James
R. Johnson was led into the red-brick county courthouse.

Mr. Johnson, a crack shot who honed his eye in Vietnam and later in the National
Guard, was arraigned today on four counts of murder and one count of assault in
a journey of violence that began Monday night and ended here Tuesday evening,
when, trapped and tired, he surrendered.

The authorities say he stalked, shot and killed a county sheriff, two deputy
sheriffs and a sheriff's wife in a still inexplicable shooting spree that also
left one deputy seriously wounded and California badly jarred.

So far, the authorities say, there is little in Mr. Johnson's known past to
point to what happened here over the last two days. Despite the choice of
victims, deputies who knew Mr. Johnson, a longtime resident, said they knew of
no particular animosity toward law-enforcement figures. Pamela Jones, the
sheriff's wife who was killed, was a high school English teacher of Mr.
Johnson's stepdaughter, but the authorities said they believed the connection
was incidental.

Will Graham, who was getting his hair cut at Simpson's barber shop across the
street from the courthouse, said he had known Mr. Johnson, 42 years old, since
Mr. Johnson was a teen-ager in his Sunday school class here at the Main Street
Baptist Church.

"He was a well-liked kid," Mr. Graham said. "The biggest question around here
is: why?"

One neighbor, LaVera Seifert, said Mr. Johnson "was always the life of the
party."

"He was the fun one," she said, "laughing, cutting up."

The shootings began minutes after a sheriff's deputy arrived at the Johnson
house to investigate a domestic disturbance complaint. Mr. Johnson had been
married to his current wife, Jerri, for about a year, said the Rev. Loren Belt,
who presided over the couple's wedding.

Mr. Belt said Mr. Johnson had been married at least twice before.

'Regular Churchgoers'

"They were both very regular churchgoers," Mr. Belt said. "I would never suspect
that from him."

Mr. Johnson graduated from California High School and according to military
records, he was drafted into the Army in April 1969 at age 20.

He served in the infantry in Vietnam and received the Combat Infantry Badge and
became an expert marksman, an Army spokeswoman, Joyce Wiesner, said.

Before Mr. Johnson's arrest, this town of 3,300 shut down, leaving the streets
empty except for the dozens of heavily armed officers on the manhunt.

But today life began to return to normal. The schools and shops that were closed
on Tuesday reopened.

But the shootings may have gravely wounded California's sense of small-town
safety, a feeling that allowed people here to go to sleep at night with their
doors unlocked.

"That's before all this," said Mr. Graham, a 55-year-old resident of the area.
"Every day, we hear more and more about this violence thing all over America. I
think what happened here will wake this community up that it's come home to
California, Mo., and that it can happen anywhere."

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James R. Johnson after his arraignment yesterday. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 12, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Smith Acquitted of Rape Charge After Brief Deliberation by Jury

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2125 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., Dec. 11


After deliberating for 77 minutes, a jury acquitted William K. Smith today of
charges that he raped a woman at the Kennedy family's Palm Beach estate one
moonlit night last Easter weekend.

The jury returned its verdict at 5:10 P.M., giving startlingly short shrift to
the pleas they heard from the prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch, in her final argument
barely two hours before. Waiting to hear the jurors' decision, Mr. Smith clasped
his hands and bowed his head, as if in prayer, as Judge Mary E. Lupo warned that
she wanted no histrionics or any "public expression" from anyone upon the
reading of the verdict.

Grinning Broadly

The judge meant what she said. When the court clerk, Deborah Allen, announced
that the jury had cleared Mr. Smith on both counts, of sexual battery and
battery, the defendant smiled, jumped up, and hugged his chief defense lawyer,
Roy E. Black of Miami, and the judge cried: "Excuse me, Mr. Black! Excuse me!"

The two sat down, and Mr. Smith, who had faced a maximum sentence of up to 15
years, grinned broadly and looked around the courtroom while the judge delivered
a 15-minute oration thanking all who had taken part in the trial and remarking
on the surprising ease with which a jury had been found to hear the sensational
case.

To Mr. Smith, the judge said, "You are released from all responsibilities
concerning this case, and your cash bond is discharged."

Forty-five minutes later, after accepting congratulations from court buffs and
dashing down corridors to elude reporters, Mr. Smith ambled up for the last time
to the bank of microphones stationed in front of the Palm Beach County
courthouse.

'An Enormous Debt'

His face bathed in television lights and bleached by the strobes of flash
cameras, his voice cracking at times, he thanked his mother, his family, his
lawyers, his jury consultants, and the jurors themselves.

"My life was in their hands and I'm so grateful for the job they did and the
seriousness with which they took it," he said, as his mother, Jean Kennedy
Smith, a sister to Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, stood at his
side, looking still stunned and stressed. "I have an enormous debt to the system
and to God and I have a terrific faith in both of them. And I'm just really,
really happy. So we'll see you guys later."

Taking their cue from the judge, who once referred to reporters as "barracudas,"
most of the members of the four-woman, two-man jury refused to talk to reporters
tonight.

But Lea Haller, a 37-year-old cosmetics executive, was quoted by The Associated
Press as saying that the condition of the dress the woman wore the night of the
incident, lacking tears or stains, was an important factor in her decision.

"The dress was an issue for me, no evidence on the dress," she said. Mr. Black
had argued that the dress showed Mr. Smith's accuser was not raped.

Emotions of Jurors

After the verdict was read, several jurors reacted with emotion. The foreman,
Thomas Stearns Jr., who collected seven Purple Hearts in Vietnam, wiped his
eyes, as did at least two other jurors. Judge Mary E. Lupo's law secretary and
the court reporter beamed.

The prosecutor, Moira K. Lasch, remained expressionless, writing intently on a
yellow legal pad as she had almost from the moment court reconvened just after 5
P.M. She left the courthouse without comment.

A family spokesman said that Mr. Smith would begin his medical residency next
month at the University of New Mexico hospital in Albuquerque.

Mr. Smith's 30-year-old accuser was not available for comment. Her lawyer, David
Roth of West Palm Beach, read a statement from her in which she, too, offered
thanks to her supporters.

'I Have Contributed'

"Despite the enormous personal price, I do not for one moment regret the course
of action I have pursued," the statement said. "I pray that my decision to
proceed was not in vain, and that in some small way I have contributed to a
reasoned consideration of the critical issues this case has raised."

Afterward, Mr. Roth read a statement of his own. "The jury has spoken, and we,
as well as our client, respect its labors and enormously difficult decision.
However, a not guilty verdict does not equate to innocence."

The rape counselor who helped the accuser the day of the incident told the A.P.,
"I believed her then, and I believe her today."

The counselor, Denny Abbott, said the woman had watched Mr. Smith's testimony
Tuesday. "She didn't expect him to tell the same story she did," he told the
A.P., "but she was a little taken aback at the story he told."

He said the woman was "tough." "She's strong," he said. "She'll take care of
herself."

Stunning Rebuke

The jury's decision was a stunning rebuke to Mrs. Lasch and the Palm Beach
County State Attorney's office, which spent eight months and hundreds of
thousands of dollars prosecuting Mr. Smith, the 31-year-old nephew of a
President and two Senators and the cousin of a congressman.

Offering an amalgam of sex, the dynamics of date rape, Palm Beach society and
the personal foibles of America's most famous family, the case attracted
international interest and gavel-to-gavel television coverage.  The trial's
graphic testimony reached millions of homes.

The verdict came with the lightning speed that characterized the trial. Judge
Lupo, in setting a trial date of Dec. 2, had pledged to get jurors finished and
home by Dec. 20. She easily beat that goal by running a Saturday and Sunday
court session, paring each side's witness lists and ruling instantly on motions.

One evening last week, after a full day of testimony by the accuser ended at 10
minutes to 6, the courtroom filled with the expectant sounds of people preparing
to leave -- until the judge declared that 10 more minutes remained, so 10
minutes of work would be done. The next witness was called.

The deliberations may also have been speeded by Florida's practice of seating 6
jurors, rather than 12, for felony cases.

The verdict came so swiftly today that Mr. Smith and his legal team had to
backtrack from the Kennedy estate almost as soon as they arrived. It marked an
almost instantaneous end to the prolonged ordeal that began in the early morning
hours of March 30, shortly after Mr. Smith met the woman at a Palm Beach night
club called Au Bar.

The woman asserted that Mr. Smith used his charm and even the knowledge he had
picked up in medical school to lure her to his family's estate before tackling
her on the lawn and raping her.

In 10 days of testimony, the two sides called 45 witnesses. There was testimony
on grains of sand and blades of grass, as well as experts on meteorology,
clothing analysis, and penile penetration.

There were the obscure, like bartenders and parking valets, and famous, like
Senator Kennedy, whose desire to go out after what he described as a somber
evening of family reminiscences set the whole odyssey in motion. And there were
the two antagonists.

Affecting Testimony

Both to the handful of people sitting in Judge Lupo's courtroom and the millions
who saw her only as a figure behind an gray electronic circle, the testimony of
the woman, the single mother of a 2-year-old, was deeply affecting. But there
were numerous inconsistencies and gaps in her account, which she had described
and redescribed to rape counselors, policemen, lawyers and, most recently,
jurors.

Very much in contrast was Mr. Smith's immaculately airtight version of events,
which he gave for the first time on Tuesday. He depicted the woman as sexually
aggressive, hysterical and, ultimately, unreliable. Both he and his lawyer
acknowledged that Mr. Smith had intercourse with the woman, and that he had
treated her caddishly and callously afterwards.

But the outcome of the case hinged on more than the testimony of the main
players.

Mr. Smith won an important victory before the first witness was called, when
Judge Lupo barred prosecutors from introducing testimony of three women -- two
graduate students and a doctor -- who came forward after the Florida woman
surfaced to say that Mr. Smith had either assaulted them or attempted to do so.

In general, testimony about a defendant's prior criminal behavior or allegations
like those made by the three women may not be heard by a jury.

Different Techniques

Then there were the lawyers themselves. To some extent, there was a disparity of
resources: two civil servants versus four respected private practitioners headed
by Mr. Black, the man many regard as the finest criminal defense lawyer on the
fertile legal territory of southern Florida. Mr. Smith retained Cathy Bennett,
the nation's premier jury consultant, and spent tens of thousands of dollars on
experts and exhibits.

Looming even larger than that, however, was the disparity in technique and, some
said, talent. Mrs. Lasch tried her case in precisely the way she composed and
delivered her closing statement Tuesday: long on detail, short on indignation.

Still, in the eyes of many, the prosecutor's closing argument represented one of
her more effective moments in this case. She tried to demonstrate that the
events of the evening could not have occurred at the leisurely pace described by
prosecution witnesses. There was not time enough for the gradual buildup to
consensual sex that Mr. Smith described, she said.

"She didn't know this man," Mrs. Lasch said. "She didn't even have an
opportunity to know him."

And of the defendant's central assertion, the prosecutor said: "He tries to tell
you that this woman rubbed up against him and relentlessly pursued him in the
bar, only to find out she's not even using birth control. Is that really
believable? Is it?"

She added, "This woman's had a child. She's a high-risk pregnancy. If she was
going to have consensual sex on March 30, 1991, she would use birth control."

Not 'Preposterous'

Mr. Black, by comparison, burnished his reputation as a lawyer with a
sophisticated legal mind beneath a veneer of the Everyman.

In his closing statement, he called on jurors to draw on "general, human common
sense," in reaching their conclusions about the behavior of both Mr. Smith and
his accuser. Mrs. Lasch's vision of relations between the sexes, he suggested,
was limited and unrealistic.

"She keeps making the point that it's spring break in Florida, and it's
preposterous that a man and a woman would get together after knowing each other
for a couple of hours and have sex," he said. On the contrary, he said, it would
not be at all unusual for "two young people" to have sex, especially on a
moonlit night on a secluded beach and later with a large walled estate that
afforded them privacy.

He ridiculed the prosecutor's assertion that it was hard for her to accept Mr.
Smith's testimony that he would choose to have sex with a woman under Mrs.
Smith's bedroom window. "What's the other side of that coin?" he asked. "What
they want us to believe is that this young man goes up there and rapes a
screaming woman under the open windows not only of his mother, but his sister,
two prosecutors from New York, and the father of one of them, who is a former
special agent for the F.B.I.

"They want you to believe that he ran across that lawn, tackled that woman, who
was screaming at the top of her lungs under those open windows, and rapes her."

After the verdict, the two Kennedy men who accompanied Mr. Smith to the
nightclub on the night of the incident made statements. Both had been called by
the prosecution to testify, and both did so Friday.

In Rhode Island, where he is a state legislator, Mr. Smith's cousin Patrick
Kennedy said: "This has been a very difficult time for my family. I believed in
my cousin Willie's innocence all along. The jury's swift verdict will now allow
Willie and all of us to get on with our lives."

And Senator Kennedy, spoke to reporters briefly outside the John F. Kennedy
Federal Building in downtown Boston. Over the months, as his nephew was first
named as a suspect, then arrested, the brought to trial, Senator Kennedy had
been widely viewed as having suffered considerable political damage.

Aside from the question of Mr. Smith's guilt or innocence, the Senator was
criticized, even ridiculed, for waking the two young men and persuading them to
accompany him to the bar that evening.

Tonight the Senator said: "I'm gratified by the verdict. I'd always believed
that after all the facts were in, that Will would be found innocent."

And he added, "If there's anything good that has come out of this whole long
experience, it's the renewed closeness of our family and friends."

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: William K. Smith embracing Roy E. Black, his chief defense
lawyer, in the courtroom yesterday after being cleared of rape charges. (Pool
photo by Lannis Waters) (pg. A1); William K. Smith surrounded by his defense
team yesterday after a jury deliberated for 77 minutes and acquitted him on
charges of rape. (Pool photo/Lanis Waters); William K. Smith answering questions
outside the Palm Beach County courthouse after his trial. At left was his
mother, Jean Kennedy Smith. (Associated Press) (pg. B20)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 13, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Comrades in Arms

BYLINE: By Fred C. Ikle;  Fred C. Ikle was Under Secretary of Defense in the
Reagan Administration. A longer version of this article will appear in the
winter issue of The National Interest.

SECTION: Section A; Page 39; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


To start building a lasting peace, Washington should work with Moscow to create
an American-Russian Defense Community. This arrangement could take its
inspiration from the economic communities formed in Western Europe in the 1950's
that made French-German reconciliation irreversible.

The U.S. and Soviet defense establishments have grown unusually warm toward each
other; the Soviet military in particular is becoming more open as it undergoes
internal stress and upheaval. Military leaders in Russia and the other republics
seem eager to reduce nuclear weapons quickly, and they welcome American
assistance to make that possible. Many senior officers are showing keen interest
in the American principle of civilian control of the military, in U.S. help to
prevent nuclear proliferation and in a cooperative approach to creating defenses
against missiles from third world countries

Ending the adversarial relationship between both military establishments might
take years. The confrontation in Central Europe has ended, but other steps must
follow in three basic areas: each side's preparations for war, the training and
deployment of forces and the developing and testing of weapons.

So far, Americans are resisting changes needed to form a military community more
than the Soviets seem to be. Having recently visited Moscow, I have the
impression that the end of the cold war has been accepted more readily there
than in Washington. The hoary idea that NATO might have to use nuclear arms
against conventional attack lingers in U.S. doctrine. And many American nuclear
technicians believe that U.S. nuclear testing must continue whether or not
testing in the former Soviet Union resumes.

The Defense Community would have to carry out at least four missions to avoid
becoming a home for bureaucrats forever in search of a purpose yet always busy
with organizational charts.

It would have to eliminate the confrontation between nuclear forces, especially
the hair-trigger readiness. It would need to phase out the secrecy between the
two establishments. It would need to take steps against nuclear proliferation
without running roughshod over the sovereignty of nations with legitimate
nuclear programs. And, through efforts (including military maneuvers) in former
republics, it would have to strengthen the understanding of the principle of
civilian control of the military.

While abandoning the cold war approach to arms control, the community should not
seek merely to stabilize the military balance and reduce arms. We can learn from
the 1920's, when the major powers, using elaborate naval treaties, sought in
vain to stabilize the balance in strategic arms. Instead of keeping the peace by
overcoming the sense of military rivalry, they tried to keep the confrontation
peaceful. But the naval staffs continued to consider each other adversaries,
modernized their navies -- and planned the next war.

An American-Russian Defense Community can end the nuclear standoff. At the end
of the road, restructured nuclear forces would co-exist, much like the French
and British nuclear forces, without concern about the stability of mutual
deterrence. Do French generals worry if their nuclear forces can deter
perfidious Albion from launching a first strike against France?

Without the bonding of the defense communities, political forces might push the
military, at least in the Russian republic, into a new confrontation with the
U.S. There might be a new arms race between the two countries resulting from
efforts to defend themselves against other countries such as Iraq, Iran and
perhaps China.

Some U.S. defense planners seem too sanguine about our ability to again contain
such an expansionist Russia. The Pentagon properly has plans for reconstituting
the armed forces over two or three years. But a decision to rearm against a
fascist-imperialist Muscovite empire would create discord. We would return to
the Vietnam years, not the Truman years, when containment was so successfully
launched. Americans and our allies would ask how democracy's victory that ended
the cold war could have been foolishly squandered.

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Shipbuilding Withers as Japan's Thrives;
Remember the Mariners

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 253 words


To the Editor:

During the 1991-95 period, the United States will commemorate World War II, a
conflict that began and ended at sea. "The Imprint of Pearl Harbor" (editorial,
Dec. 1) should also have mentioned the American merchant mariners who shared the
dangers and losses of the war.

Seven hundred and fifty seven United States flag merchant ships were lost and
more than 6,000 merchant seamen gave their lives in service to their country.
Slow-moving merchant ships were attractive targets for the enemy's submarines
and planes, and the resultant casualties among United States merchant seamen
were greater by percentage than those suffered by any branch of our military
with the exception of the Marines.

In the wars in Korea, Vietnam and more recently in the Persian Gulf, the
importance of the merchant marine in transporting the military equipment and
supplies essential in carrying the fight to the enemy has repeatedly been
demonstrated.

Beginning with the War for Independence, and in all the conflicts that have
followed, American merchant mariners have served their country with distinction.
The anniversary of Pearl Harbor is a most appropriate occasion to remember the
contribution to victory made by these valiant Americans. We should also be
mindful that with skill and courage we will take our ships in harm's way in any
future conflict, for that is our tradition.

JOHN F. RING JR.
President, United States Merchant Marine Academy Alumni Association
Kings Point, L.I., Dec. 2, 1991

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Jack Bober, Investment Executive, 49

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 58; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Jack Bober, a former investment executive, died on Thursday at his home in New
Vernon, N.J. He was 49 years old.

He died of cancer, his family said.

Mr. Bober worked more than 20 years at Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette, an
investment firm in Manhattan. There, he founded Autranet, a subsidiary through
which investors could buy independent financial research from economists and
other experts. He retired in 1989.

Mr. Bober was born in Manhattan and was a graduate of Colby College and Harvard
Business School. He was in the Navy for four years, serving in Vietnam during
the war and reaching the rank of lieutenant.

He is survived by his wife, Pat Jennings; two daughters, Suzanne and Sara, both
of Summit, N.J.; his parents, Senta and Arnold Bober of Manhattan, and a
brother, Frank, of Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Does 'J.F.K.' Conspire Against Reason?

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER;  Tom Wicker, a columnist for The Times, covered the
assassination of John F. Kennedy for the newspaper.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2798 words


More than halfway into "J.F.K.," Oliver Stone's three-hour movie about the
assassination of President Kennedy, New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison
and his wife, Liz, are seen watching a television documentary about Mr.
Garrison's investigation of the events of Nov. 22, 1963, in Dallas.

The documentary's anchorman is heard charging that the District Attorney used
improper methods to get witnesses to support his case against the New Orleans
businessman Clay Shaw for his part in a supposed conspiracy surrounding the
murder of President Kennedy. Kevin Costner, portraying Mr. Garrison, suggests by
facial expression and dialogue that the charge is unfair and rigged to destroy
his credibility -- thus attacking the credibility of the documentary.

Frequently in "J.F.K.," the District Attorney alleges that the media are engaged
in a coverup of a monstrous conspiracy, which Mr. Stone confidently depicts as
having resulted in the assassination of a President, the war in Vietnam, the
later killing of Robert Kennedy, perhaps even the murder of the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr.

It is a measure of Mr. Stone's heavily weighted storytelling that he gives only
a fleeting glimpse of that one-hour documentary, which was broadcast by NBC on
June 19, 1967. Its evidence -- the script is available -- establishes without
doubt that Mr. Garrison and his aides threatened and bribed witnesses, who then
lied in court, and that they concealed the results of a polygraph test that
showed one witness, Vernon Bundy, to be lying.

So much for the advertising for the Stone film, which proclaims of Mr. Garrison:
"He will risk his life, the lives of his family, everything he holds dear for
the one thing he holds sacred -- the truth."

In fact, of all the numerous conspiracy theorists and zealous investigators who
for nearly 30 years have been peering at and probing the assassination of John
F. Kennedy, Mr. Garrison may be the most thoroughly discredited -- and not just
by the NBC documentary. His ballyhooed investigation ended ignominiously when
his chosen villain, Clay Shaw, was acquitted; and the whole Garrison affair is
now regarded, even by other conspiracy believers, as having been a travesty of
legal process.

Despite all this, Jim Garrison is clearly the film's hero. He is played by Mr.
Costner, one of Hollywood's hottest box-office attractions, fresh from his
triumph in "Dances With Wolves." Sissy Spacek plays his wife, and in an arrogant
bit of casting against type, the real-life Mr. Garrison makes a cameo appearance
as Chief Justice Earl Warren.

"J.F.K.," which opens on Friday, stirred controversy last summer when a draft of
Mr. Stone and Zachary Sklar's screenplay found its way to the press. Based
chiefly on Mr. Garrison's 1988 book, "On the Trail of the Assassins," it adopts
his argument that Lee Harvey Oswald -- the lone Presidential assassin, according
to the Warren Commission -- was merely a patsy put forward to shield the actions
of an immense body of conspirators involved in the murder and coverup.

The controversy arose over fears that the film would develop a web of
speculation and fiction around a tragic event of major historic significance.
And indeed, it does treat matters that are wholly speculative as fact and truth,
in effect rewriting history.

Mr. Stone built into his movie an all-encompassing defense. As in the scene of
the television documentary, the film's Jim Garrison repeatedly says that any
critics of his thesis are either part of the great conspiracy he has conceived
or are helping to cover it up. The only one of his assistants who argues and
disagrees with him is shown to have been coerced by the F.B.I., a primary
participant in Mr. Garrison's sprawling conspiracy.

Of course, any article critical of the movie -- this one included -- can be
dismissed in the same way, as part of the alleged conspiracy or its continuing
coverup. Mr. Stone has already called himself, in U.S.A. Today, a target for "a
thousand and one vultures out there, crouched on their rocks." These were not
just "the usual Hollywood vultures," he said, but "a lot of these paid-off
journalist hacks that are working on the East Coast with their recipied [sic]
political theories . . . ."

But there's a gaping hole in the movie's advance counterattack: If a conspiracy
as vast and consequential as the one claimed could have been carried out and
covered up for three decades, why did the conspirators or their heirs allow Mr.
Stone to make this movie? Why not murder him, as they supposedly murdered
others? Why, for that matter, didn't they knock off Mr. Garrison himself when --
as Mr. Stone tells it with so much assurance -- the New Orleans District
Attorney began so fearlessly to follow their trail?

Piecing Together A Great Conspiracy

"J.F.K." begins with real footage of President Eisenhower's farewell address, in
which he eloquently warned of the dangers of the "military-industrial complex."
This sets up Mr. Stone's contention -- borrowed, or swallowed whole, from Mr.
Garrison -- that generals, admirals and war profiteers so strongly wanted the
war in Vietnam to be fought and the United States to stand tall and tough
against the Soviets that when President Kennedy seemed to question these goals,
he had to be killed so Vice President Johnson could take office. Mr. Stone
clearly implies that this was done with Johnson's connivance.

"Who benefited?" asks Donald Sutherland in one of the film's frequent star turns
in minor parts. (Jack Lemmon, Walter Matthau and Ed Asner provide others.) Mr.
Sutherland, playing an unnamed former military officer who sounds like any of a
number of hawkish fanatics hanging around Washington, specifically names such
beneficiaries as Johnson and the Bell Corporation, which supplied helicopters
for Vietnam.

President Kennedy, historian Stone asserts, was considered "soft on Communism"
after the test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union and a conciliatory speech at
American University, both in 1963. No doubt some in the military and the John
Birch Society held that paranoid view; but to anyone active in Washington at
that time it's ridiculous to suggest that such an opinion was widely shared.

Mr. Stone's film nevertheless insists that Mr. Kennedy had so enraged the
nation's hawks that the military-industrial complex, with the help of the
Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation, actually
planned and carried out the assassination, then covered it up through the Warren
Commission (ostensibly set up to investigate the assassination and headed by
Chief Justice Warren), with the aid of the Dallas police and the nation's press
and television.

Mr. Stone may be on firmer ground when he claims that the assassination
prevented President Kennedy from carrying out a planned withdrawal from Vietnam.
That Kennedy might not have expanded the war as President Johnson did in 1964 is
a plausible, if not conclusive, argument; I made it myself in 1968, in a
speculative passage of my book "J.F.K. and L.B.J." It seems less likely that
Kennedy had already decided, at the time of his death, to extricate the nation
from the quagmire of Vietnam after his expected re-election. Still, it's
arguable that he had so decided, or soon would have.

Mr. Stone not only depicts these debatable possibilities as facts; his film
claims that, for these reasons, Mr. Kennedy was killed -- though I know of no
reputable historian who has documented Mr. Kennedy's intentions, much less found
them the motive for his murder. It's true that this motive, among numerous
others, has been speculated upon before, in more or less responsible terms,
depending on who was doing the speculating.

But this movie presents itself as more than speculation; it claims truth for
itself. And among the many Americans likely to see it, particularly those who
never accepted the Warren Commission's theory of a single assassin, even more
particularly those too young to remember Nov. 22, 1963, "J.F.K." is all too
likely to be taken as the final, unquestioned explanation.

Flashily put together under Mr. Stone's famous imprimatur and using much film
footage of actual events and real people, starring the Hollywood idol Kevin
Costner, and confident of its own rightness and righteousness, "J.F.K." may
prove persuasive to audiences with little knowledge of the events presented.
Asserting that the future of justice in America depends on the exposure of Mr.
Stone's nightmarish visions of conspiracy, as discovered through the depicted
heroism of Jim Garrison, the film is also presented -- especially in a long and
weepy courtroom summation by Jim Garrison -- as a call to courage and idealism,
which may appeal to a people apparently hungry for both.

But if "J.F.K." and its wild assertions are to be taken at face value, Americans
will have to accept the idea that most of the nation's major institutions,
private as well as governmental, along with one of its Presidents, conspired
together and carried out Kennedy's murder to pursue the war in Vietnam and the
Cold War, then covered up the conspiracy until Mr. Garrison and Mr. Stone
unearthed and exposed it.

Evidence Presented From a Stacked Deck

In an era when mistrust of government and loss of confidence in institutions
(the press not least) are widespread and virulent, such a suggestion seems a
dubious public service, particularly since these dark allegations are only
unproven speculations, and the "evidence" presented is often a stacked deck.

President Kennedy, for instance, is pictured in real footage, being interviewed
by Walter Cronkite on the first 30-minute broadcast of evening news by CBS, a
few weeks before the assassination. The President's remarks indicated that he
was becoming disillusioned with the war in Vietnam, thus seeming to support Mr.
Stone's insistent thesis.

But the film does not even mention Mr. Kennedy's interview with David Brinkley a
week later, when NBC began its 30-minute news program. Then, the President
confirmed his belief in the "domino theory" -- which suggested that the fall of
Vietnam to Communism would precipitate collapses in the surrounding countries in
Southeast Asia -- and added: "China is so large, looms so high . . . that if
South Vietnam went, it would not only give them an improved geographic position
for a guerrilla assault on Malaya but would also give the impression that the
wave of the future in Southeast Asia was China and the Communists."

There's no suggestion of withdrawal in that later interview; and even if Mr.
Kennedy may have been balancing his earlier remarks owing to protests from
Saigon and from American hawks, it is misleading for Mr. Stone to cite only one
of two equally verifiable texts, the one favorable to his case.

Again, when Jim Garrison watches the shooting of Robert Kennedy (in 1968) on
television, he tells his wife that now he's "really scared." Liz Garrison, who
has been doubtful of her husband's case, suddenly believes in him. This
turnaround leaves the extraordinary impression that Robert Kennedy's murder
somehow proved that Mr. Garrison was right about John Kennedy's murder and the
great conspiracy. Just what this "proof" consists of, the film does not attempt
to explain.

The depiction of the Robert Kennedy assassination, though using real news
footage, includes two bits of trickery. Adroit cutting makes it appear as though
he were shot while concluding his speech to an applauding audience on the night
of his victory in the California primary; actually, he had left the stage and
was departing through a hotel kitchen when he was cut down. Mr. Garrison not
only sees the shooting on television; he immediately tells his wife that Robert
Kennedy has been killed -- when, in fact, Kennedy lived until the following
night.

An alert listener also will pick up, in many of the speeches by Jim Garrison and
his dedicated aides, a number of phrases like "has something to do with," "what
if," "a possibility," "may well have been," "possibly." Such hedges make it
clear that even Mr. Stone cannot be sure that all the "facts" he throws out
relentlessly are facts.

The Warren Commission: Part of the Problem?

Through frequent, detailed discussions of their investigation by Jim Garrison
and his assistants, Mr. Stone is merciless in his assault on the Warren
Commission -- not merely the report's errors of omission and commission but the
group's alleged complicity in the conspiracy and the coverup.

At one point in the film, Jim Garrison refers to Arlen Specter, who as a member
of the commission staff had devised its controversial "single-bullet" theory, as
one of the "grossest liars" in the nation. Some who watched Mr. Specter, now a
Republican Senator from Pennsylvania, during the Clarence Thomas hearings may be
tempted to agree; but the reference is another attempt to picture the commission
report as a deliberate falsehood and part of a widespread coverup.

The Warren Commission was under time pressure; its report was hurried out, and
it contains errors, omissions and debatable interpretations. Its conclusion that
Oswald, acting alone, killed John Kennedy, is widely disbelieved. The commission
is a fair target for criticism of its procedures and findings; but you have to
be paranoid indeed to believe that the Chief Justice and his colleagues
deliberately framed Oswald for a crime he didn't commit, while covering the
tracks of the many who were actually responsible.

When the Warren Commission report began to be widely questioned, I discussed it
-- sometime in the late 60's -- with Edward Bennett Williams, the renowned
criminal lawyer. He defended the report in the following manner:

In every crime to which there are no credible eyewitnesses, the prosecution (in
this case the Warren Commission) examines available evidence and presents a
theory of what may have happened. The defense presents an opposing theory.
Neither theory is likely to be airtight, without flaws or questionable
assertions; even physical evidence, let alone circumstantial, is not likely to
be that indisputable. But in the end, a jury usually believes one theory or the
other, and convicts or acquits on that basis.

The commission report, Williams said, was a prosecution theory and, as such, did
have holes and deficiencies. But he believed a jury would accept it in
preference to any other theory that at that time had been presented. Considered
by itself, the commission report might be picked apart by its critics; but what,
Williams asked, did they present in its place? Was any other theory of what
happened in Dallas as plausible? Until a more believable theory was brought
forward, the commission report seemed to him the most reasonable explanation of
what had happened.

I agree with that, though my opinion is not held dogmatically. I'm willing to
believe that Oswald did not act alone, or that he was innocent of the killing,
or that there was a conspiracy, or that the mob did it in response to Robert
Kennedy's actions as Attorney General, or that Fidel Castro was or was not
involved as a result of the Bay of Pigs fiasco and the Cuban missile crisis, or
any combination of the above. I'm willing, but only if someone presents an
explanation of what happened that's believable and reasonable -- not paranoid
and fantastic.

After many years of consideration, I doubt that the truth about the Kennedy
assassination has yet been told. It may never be. So to question what happened,
to doubt the Warren Commission's or anybody's version, is legitimate, perhaps
even necessary, but in my opinion not conclusive.

My dissent from Mr. Stone's film is not that he believes that Oswald was a patsy
or there was a conspiracy or even that he depicts the conspiracy as fascist, a
corruption of Constitutional government so far-reaching as to threaten the end
of the democratic system in America. He has a right to believe those things,
even to believe against the evidence that Mr. Garrison's shabby investigation
was a noble and selfless search for truth.

But I and other Americans have an equal right not to believe such things, a
right to our own beliefs. Mr. Stone insists on one true faith about Nov. 22,
1963 -- as though only he and Mr. Garrison could discern the truth, among the
many theories of what happened that terrible day. Moreover, he implies that
anyone who doesn't share his one true faith is either an active part of a
coverup or passively acquiescent in it.

Finally, he uses the powerful instrument of a motion picture, and relies on
stars of the entertainment world, to propagate the one true faith -- even though
that faith, if widely accepted, would be contemptuous of the very Constitutional
government Mr. Stone's film purports to uphold.

NAME: Oliver Stone, Jim Garrison

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kevin Costner as District Attorney Jim Garrison -- a dark
visionary (pg. 1); Oliver Stone's film recreates the motorcade in Dallas on Nov.
22, 1963, when the President was assassinated--Has there been a massive coverup
ever since? (Warner Brothers); New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison at a
1967 news conference about impending arrests in the supposed conspiracy.
(Associated Press); Oliver Stone -- merciless in his assault on the Warren
Commission report (Warner Brothers)(pg. 18)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Snake Wine and Socialism

BYLINE: By Pico Iyer;  Pico Iyer's most recent book is "The Lady and the Monk:
Four Seasons in Kyoto."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 900 words



ROMANCING VIETNAM
Inside the Boat Country.
By Justin Wintle.
464 pp. New York: Pantheon Books. $25.

NECROMANCING Vietnam has been something of a growth industry around the world
for several years now, but romancing Vietnam, which is, among other things, one
of the softest and most lyrical lands in Asia, is something of a novelty. So
there is much to be said for Justin Wintle's decision to try to liberate Vietnam
from the associations of "Vietnam," and to see the postwar country clear, free
of the demonizing assumptions of Washington and the weary rhetoric of Hanoi. For
three months, toward the end of 1989, the English journalist and novelist
traveled around the land, seeking to disinter it from the rubble left by foreign
powers who "destroyed the country in order to save it" and a Communist
Government that had, in effect, saved the country in order to destroy it.

In "Romancing Vietnam," Mr. Wintle proves an amiable enough companion, as
open-minded as his mission requires, and able, it seems, to strike up a rapport
with most of the people he meets. He gets drunk with his guides, makes eyes at
the girls and gamely quaffs snake wine. He watches a soccer match between the
Laotian and Vietnamese Armies, quotes the rantings of a zany sculptor, even
drops in on the former Communist leader Le Duc Tho (who tells him, somewhat
chillingly, that socialism in Vietnam, "far from being under threat, has never
actually happened").

In every town he visits, Mr. Wintle pays a call on some "medium big potato,"
listens -- dutifully -- to a recitation of "hectares under cultivation" figures
and then -- less compassionately -- passes the hectoring figures on to us. His
tone, in the main, is jokey and unbuttoned, well suited to the cheery
surrealisms of the place. ("You see, in Vietnam, we have all the veterans we
want," explains an official. "We may not be very rich in anything else, but for
veterans, our supplies will last well into the next century.") At times,
however, the strains of a slapdash gonzo, English-schoolboy variety, are almost
too insistent: granted an interview with the Communist commander Gen. Vo Nguyen
Giap, our narrator gets drunk beforehand, and then reports of the country's most
legendary fighter that, "short of stature, he is full of beans."

The Vietnam that Mr. Wintle describes is very much the country that greets a
visitor today: the smiles, the rats, the delays, the pride, the offers of women
and the occasional heavy-handed lurches into propaganda will all be instantly
familiar to anyone who has been there recently -- the sense of charms entangled
in barbed wire. And inevitably, in the course of his 464 pages (an average of
roughly five for every day he spent in the country), he brings back a few
diverting curios ("Madame Thatcher is not our ideal girlfriend," reports a
professor) and a handful of bons mots ("Museums in Vietnam are like cinemas:
very often they're running the same film"). Perhaps his biggest coup comes in
stumbling upon the village of Binh Hoa, in Quang Ngai Province, where he is told
that South Korean soldiers killed 490 civilians in a massacre almost as brutal,
by Vietnamese account, as that of My Lai -- and 16 months before the
internationally publicized incident.

Indeed, Mr. Wintle grows increasingly sympathetic to the Vietnamese as he comes
to appreciate the almost unimaginable sufferings they endured, and endure: from
the families who split up during the war, so that some members at least would be
on the winning side, to the woman who suffocated her own baby lest its cries
attract the enemy. At the same time, he is not unaware of the sophistries
implicit in the pageant -- or shadow play -- that is an official guided tour
around the land of Ho Chi Minh. The truest parts of the book catch the sense
that a visitor never knows where he stands in Vietnam, or who is talking to him,
or why: the noodle seller may be a Government informant, the smiling waitress
may be a would-be emigre, the extremely engaging guide may sometimes speak in
his own voice, sometimes not. At once overwhelmed by the friendliness he meets,
and somewhat suspicious of the Government's repeated claims that Vietnam wants
"only to be friends with everyone," Mr. Wintle notes the constant, confounding
interplay of "tactics" and "heart." More revealing than his observations are his
zigzagging uncertainties.

The problem is, however, that in his rush, perhaps, to push his report of this
increasingly hot topic into print, Mr. Wintle has not taken the time to shape or
edit any of his scattered impressions, or to turn his journal jottings into a
book. Thus the effect of reading his account is not unlike that of watching
someone's 500 slides of his holiday along the Perfume River: the re-enactment
comes to seem as exhausting as the trip itself. Those who know Vietnam will be
unlikely to wade through a book that has less personal flavor than, say, Morley
Safer's account of his 10-day sentimental return, "Flashbacks"; those who do not
know Vietnam are unlikely to have the stamina to struggle through a volume that
takes 189 pages to get out of Hanoi. As the first full travel-narrative about
the modern country, Mr. Wintle's book does, perforce, fill a gap. But if
journalism is said to be the first rough draft of history, "Romancing Vietnam"
reads very much like the first rough draft of journalism.

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap with the author, Justin Wintle, in Vietnam
in late 1989.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Democrats Debate Over Taxes and '92 Funds

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2095 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 15


In the first nationally televised debate of the 1992 campaign, the six major
candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination squabbled fiercely among
themselves tonight over tax policy and the role of special interest money in the
Democratic Party.

The debate, held on NBC nine weeks before New Hampshire's primary on Feb. 18,
found the Democrats united in attacking President Bush's foreign policy and
economic stewardship. They asserted that Mr. Bush had presided over economic
decline at home and an uncertain, anachronistic foreign policy that had failed
to adjust to the end of the cold war.

But the Democratic attack on the opposition often gave way to even angrier
exchanges among themselves.  Former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California,
considered one of the longer shots in the race, often drove the debate with his
repeated assertions that special interests were "buying politicians" and the
American people "had lost control" of their political system to career
politicians.

At one point, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska turned to Mr. Brown and noted, with
a very tight jaw, that Mr. Kerrey had run for office for the first time in 1982,
when Mr. Brown was already a "a full-time politician." Mr. Kerrey added: "I
resent all this PAC and special interest stuff. Are you saying I'm bought and
paid for? I resent that."

In between the fighting, the candidates each tried to present both a little
personal history, a lot of message and some careful positioning. Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas, who seemed to be trying to present a cool, understatedimage
for the television audience, used the opportunity to talk about his concern for
the middle class. Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia delivered an impassioned
defense of affirmative action policies, while assailing the Republicans for
permitting a deterioration of race relations.

Former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts talked of his economic
expertise, and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa stuck with his pledge for a huge
public works program to put people back to work. Mr. Kerrey talked about the
need for fundamental rethinking of domestic and foreign policy in the aftermath
of the cold war.

The debate, moderated by Tom Brokaw, was the first of seven nationally televised
debates to be held among the major candidates for the Democratic nomination, a
critical chance at prime-time exposure for a field still struggling for money
and recognition.

National polls show that most of the candidates in this late-starting race have
barely penetrated the public's consciousness. And the potential candidate who
has probably made the strongest impression among Democrats, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
of New York, has muddied the field with two months of indecision. That may reach
a resolution by Friday, the filing deadline for the New Hampshire primary.

Specialized Audience

Beyond the voters at large, the candidates tonight were wooing another, more
specialized audience: the political professionals and financial contributors who
need to be persuaded of a candidate's viability.

The candidates disagreed sharply over tax cuts for the middle class, an idea
that got vocal backing from Mr. Kerrey, Mr. Wilder and Mr. Clinton.  Mr.
Tsongas, a critic of what he describes as traditional Democratic economics,
asserted that cutting taxes for the middle class was an idea straight out of
public opinion polls. Mr. Harkin scornfully brandished a dollar bill to
demonstrate his assertion that this was all the middle class family would get
each day from his opponents' tax cut.

"What the middle class needs is jobs," Mr. Harkin said.

One of the clearest image-building efforts under way tonight was Mr. Kerrey's
attempt to tell his personal story to a national audience. Mr. Kerrey, a Navy
commando who lost his leg and won the Medal of Honor for heroism in Vietnam,
repeatedly referred to his past as he talked of his views on both foreign and
domestic policy.

He said he would "take nothing away" from what American forces had accomplished
in the war in the Persian Gulf, but he rebuked Mr. Clinton for suggesting that
all Democrats should concede that Mr. Bush had acted wisely. Mr. Kerrey voted
against the use of force in the Persian Gulf and tonight criticized Mr. Bush for
never clearly explaining his actions, noting that Saddam Hussein was "still
alive and still running and still terrorizing the people of Iraq itself."

Position of Grim Prophet

At one point, Mr. Kerrey referred to remarks by Secretary of State James A.
Baker 3d that the action related to American jobs. "He said this is about 'jobs,
jobs, jobs,' and where are the jobs?" Mr. Kerrey asked.

The other clear attempt at image-building was Mr. Brown's repeated effort to
position himself as the grim prophet of political corruption. He rode over Mr.
Brokaw's injunction to avoid fund-raising appeals and twice gave his 800 number.

He jabbed at most of his fellow candidates and seemed to keep them off stride.
Sometimes they seemed amused, more often they did not.

One effect of this, perhaps, was Mr. Clinton's surprisingly muted performance
tonight, after a series of speeches in which he got good reviews from party
audiences.

Another was that the debate turned into a free-wheeling, angry clash on the
nature of the political system instead of the smooth and unified attack that
party leaders had hoped to launch against a President sagging in the public
opinion polls.

Reasons for Running

Mr. Brokaw asked each man why he sought the nomination. Senator Harkin, who has
urged a return to old-time Democratic values, said he was driven by his sense
that President Bush was out of touch with the suffering of the American people.

Mr. Tsongas, who campaigns as a pro-business liberal, said he decided to run
after concluding that the "old-style Democratic message" offered no hope of
economic growth.

Senator Kerrey said President Bush was too closely tied to the past and the cold
war.

Mr. Brown said Americans had lost control of their political system, losing
their voice, he said, as monied interests captured the electoral process.

Governor Clinton said he had the most comprehensive strategy for a struggling
middle class.

Governor Wilder cited his record in balancing the budget in Virginia without a
tax increase and said he could do the same for the nation.

While many of the candidates tried to distance themselves from Democratic
orthodoxy, they also suggested that Democrats should not be ashamed to embrace
some of the party's traditional causes.

Governor Clinton, for example, said he welcomed the opportunity to talk about
welfare. He said he agreed with Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New
York, that the nation should provide more education and training, health
insurance and adequate child care, so welfare recipients could obtain jobs.

Asked about the merits of affirmative-action progams for women and minorities,
Governor Wilder said there should be a clear distinction between quotas and
other forms of affirmative action that he finds essential."I wouldn't hire
anyone based on a quota," Mr. Wilder said. "The playing field has not been
level," Mr. Wilder said, referring to the United States' history of job
discrimination against blacks and women. "There has to be some affirmative
response to the years" of systematic denial of job opportunities for such
people, he said.

On military spending, Governor Clinton said, "the defense budget was based on
the existence of the Soviet Union," adding, "We spent billions of dollars to win
the cold war." He said the United States "should help them get through the
winter," but said that it also should spend money to dismantle Soviet nuclear
weapons.

Governor Wilder and Senator Harkin both said food aid to the former Soviet
republics should be conditioned on further reductions in their military,
especially reductions in nuclear weapons.

Senator Harkin said that as the Soviet Union disintegrated, President Bush had
missed an opportunity to negotiate cuts in tactical nuclear weapons. Reminded by
Mr. Brokaw that Mr. Bush and the Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, both
recently endorsed such reductions, he called these agreements "sort of fluff and
everything," and said that Soviet weapons should be put under control of
inspectors for the International Atomic Energy Agency.

Warning of Takeover

But Mr. Tsongas said that unless the United States sent aid quickly, a right
wing or military takeover might occur. He called for sending about $1 billion or
$2 billion now in the military budget to aid the collapsed Soviet empire.

The Democrats all criticized Mr. Bush on foreign policy, arguing that he had
failed to react properly and promptly to the rapid developments in the Soviet
Union and Eastern Europe.

Mr. Brown suggested that the United States "work with the Europeans" to end the
conflict in Yugoslavia. He did not directly answer the question of whether this
meant sending American troops or just aid.

Senator Kerrey said Mr. Bush was "getting cold feet at the wrong time," by
failing to come up with an economic plan of aid and cooperation with the
emerging commonwealth in the Soviet Union. He also called for a coordinated
response by the United States and the other industrialized nations to shore up
the economy of the commonwealth by stabilizing the ruble.

"The President is not moving boldly enough," Mr. Kerrey said.

The candidates also found fault with Mr. Bush's handling of Japan.

Mr. Tsongas said that when the President traveled to Japan next month he should
tell the Japanese that the cold war was over and that "the time for fair trade
is here." Mr. Tsongas said Mr. Bush should tell the Japanese, "It's time to open
up your trade doors to our products."

Governor Clinton said Japan was now at least as rich as the United States and
should bear a bigger share of responsibility for its own defense.

"We're going to insist on fair trade," Mr. Clinton vowed. But the Arkansas
Governor said also that "we ought to learn something from the Japanese," and
said the United States had stubbornly refused to develop the social policies and
human resources needed to compete effectively with Japan.

Aiming at Trade Deficit

Senator Harkin noted that although the United States was a creditor nation when
President Ronald Reagan was inaugurated the country now had a trade deficit. "I
would tell the Japanese that in my term as President we are going to reduce that
trade deficit to zero," he said.

Asked about a proposed free-trade agreement with Mexico, Governor Wilder said he
would strive to protect American jobs. Businesses "have moved out of Virginia to
Mexico, where labor is cheap," he said.

Senator Harkin asserted that the Bush Administration was "taking jobs from this
country, lowering our living standards and the living standards of people in
Latin America." He urged that the United States insist that Mexican workers have
health care, social security and other benefits enjoyed by American workers.

Mr. Clinton took issue with the President's decision to provide
most-favored-nation trading status to China.

"He let his friendships in China obscure what those kids did in Tiananmen
Square," the Governor said.

Mr. Brown accused the Republicans of repeatedly lying both about Administration
policies in the Middle East and arms shipments to Iran.

"We're not getting the truth," he said. Asked to elaborate, he said, "I'm
accusing them of not really talking straight to the American people."

Driven by Mr. Brown, much of the debate centered around the system of financing
political campaigns. Mr. Tsongas challenged the other candidates to make an
immediate vow: "Everybody pledge tonight, no more PAC money after tonight."

Mr. Harkin replied: "That is about the phoniest argument I ever heard.  You
received over $7,000 from eight executives" of an electronics company.

On the issue of abortion, the arguments were mainly about whether the candidates
would insist that judicial candidates embrace Roe v. Wade, the 1973 court
decision that made abortion a constitutional right.

Senator Harkin said he "would not appoint any Supreme Court nominee that wanted
to overturn Roe v. Wade, period." Governor Clinton said that the Roe precedent
was right and that if it was overturned there should be Federal legislation to
insure that women could choose to have an abortion. Senator Kerrey, saying he
expected the Court to overturn Roe v. Wade, promised to introduce legislation
that would preserve the legality of abortion.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Democrats meeting for debate last night, were, from left, Paul
E. Tsongas, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder, Senator Bob Kerrey, Edmund G. Brown Jr. and
Senator Tom Harkin. Gov. Bill Clinton arrived later. (pg. A1); Democratic
Presidential candidates who met in Washington last night for the first televised
debate of the 1992 campaign were, from the left, Gov. Bill Clinton, Senator Bob
Kerrey, Paul E. Tsongas, Senator Tom Harkin, Edmund G. Brown Jr. and Gov. L.
Douglas Wilder. (pg. B10)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
A Forum That All but Invites the Usual Responses

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


After years of critics' laments about the sound bites that dominate a political
campaign, last night's gathering of six Democrats who want to be President
turned out to be more of the same.

The format compelled it. Ninety minutes for six men to talk about all manner of
problems, one minute at a time, is not an invitation to reflection. What it does
invite are phrases that seem to have worked before.

Tom Brokaw, presiding for NBC, attempted to press a point now and then only to
find that the rules made evasion easy. He told Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa that
NBC had added up the cost of social programs he was proposing and found that it
came to several times more than the savings he was recommending. Figures were
bandied about but Mr. Brokaw had to turn to another candidate and another
subject. What was a viewer to make of it?

Seated at an oval table like blue-suited preppies at a seminar, the candidates
offered a chorus of concern for the middle-class. There were differences -- one
or two favored a tax cut, one or two did not -- but the main effort of each of
these non-household names was to establish a television persona.

So viewers heard more than once from Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska that he had
been wounded in Vietnam. Gov. Douglas L. Wilder called their attention to the
fact that he is black. Senator Harkin let it be known that his mother was an
immigrant. He also produced a $1 bill from an inside pocket to make a point
about the inadequacy of a tax cut. Somebody must have told him that would fly on
television.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas seemed to be positioning himself a bit to the
right of the group, but it was Paul E. Tsongas, a former senator from
Massachusetts, who seemed to have his mind most focused on the issues. The
camera played favorites, however, and Mr. Tsongas was not a natural.

In any gathering there has to be one group jester. Last night brought Edmund G.
Brown Jr., a former governor of California. He attacked the "context of
illusions," and charged that that his fellow Democrats were all in thrall to
wealthy contributors. "Are you saying I'm bought and paid for?" Senator Kerrey
demanded in the most dramatic encounter of the evening, which is a comment on
the general quality of the debate. Mr. Brown politely avoided saying yes. And
despite the injunction of Mr. Brokaw he twice announced the 800 number to which
viewers could call in their modest contributions.

With six more debates to come, there is hope for something more solid, but that
would mean more time on an issue. For example, Senator Kerrey alluded repeatedly
to his health plan. That is surely worth a third of a 90-minute program. And so
were most of the other issues raced through, from economic growth to relations
with the Soviet Union to affirmative action and even Mr. Brown's favorite
subject of campaign contributions.

Among the questions that can be skipped areones like why are you running and who
will your vice president be? And not allowing a final word would save time and
spare the viewer. Gov. Clinton said he wanted to be "an agent of change."
Senator Kerrey said "as one who fought in the war in Vietnam . . ." Gov. Wilder
told of being "huddled with my buddies in Korea."

The debates have begun. Maybe now they can get serious.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 16, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Jack Bober, Investment Executive, 49

SECTION: Section D; Page 11; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 136 words


Jack Bober, a former investment executive, died on Thursday at his home in New
Vernon, N.J. He was 49 years old.

He died of cancer, his family said.

Mr. Bober worked more than 20 years at Donaldson, Lufkin and Jenrette, an
investment firm in Manhattan. There, he founded Autranet, a subsidiary through
which investors could buy independent financial research from economists and
other experts. He retired in 1989.

Mr. Bober was born in Manhattan and was a graduate of Colby College and Harvard
Business School. He was in the Navy for four years, serving in Vietnam during
the war and reaching the rank of lieutenant.

He is survived by his wife, Pat Jennings; two daughters, Suzanne and Sara, both
of Summit, N.J.; his parents, Senta and Arnold Bober of Manhattan, and a
brother, Frank, of Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The News, Close to the Edge Again

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words


At The Daily News it is sinking in that Robert Maxwell, the man who promised to
save the newspaper that practically invented tabloid journalism in the United
States, has actually brought it to the brink of disaster -- again.

It is the "again" part that really hurts.

For years leading up to the fierce strike that ended when Mr. Maxwell bought The
News in March, the people who put out the newspaper had seen it lurch from one
crisis to another under previous owners. For many, the bizarre collapse of the
Maxwell empire in recent weeks mostly meant trouble for The News. And that felt
too familiar.

"After every lurch, you say, 'We've got it made,' " said David Oestreicher, a
20-year veteran reporter. "In March, with Maxwell, it was, 'We've got it made.'
Then it hits you again."

But if there was plenty of pessimism and fear in News offices, as people
adjusted to the peculiarities of putting out a newspaper that has been in
bankruptcy since Dec. 4, there was also a new bravado that came from excessive
experience with brinks of disaster.

The latest, and probably most dangerous, moment in the newspaper's 72-year
history was greeted with what seemed to be a faith by many News people that
theirs is the Cyborg Tabloid: the journalism equivalent of the mechanical
characters in the Arnold Schwarzenegger Terminator movies that can survive
smashing, crushing, bullets, bombs, fire or even, some News people appear to
have convinced themselves, an international financial scandal and the mysterious
death of a tycoon publisher.

'Been Through Too Much'

"Our attitude is: 'Try and kill us,' " said Lars-Erik Nelson, the newspaper's
Washington bureau chief. "We've just been through too much."

Louis Parajos, a 43-year-old deputy Sunday editor who has worked at the
newspaper for 24 years, described the new Daily News brand of optimism. "For
people like myself who have been here a long time," he said, "this is not the
first time we have been kicked in the groin and it probably won't be the last."

Previous crises at The News have provoked a lot of wistful talk about the place
that The News has always occupied in the city. It was not only, readers and
newspeople said, the "honest voice of New York," as it called itself for years,
it also captured the authentic sound of a sometimes unruly city that wanted to
be what the newspaper was: tough, bold, shrewd and honest, even if it was
sometimes snide and intolerant.

Nathan Detroit Read It

In its best years, The News was famous for who it hated, from Stalin to Castro
and on to Vietnam War protesters; and for who loved it, like the Guys 'n' Dolls
in the musical who bought The Daily News to read about people like them who did
things like they did "wid what uddawise woulda been" their union dues.

New York's workingman's newpaper became the biggest newspaper in America with a
circulation that reached 2.4 million daily in 1947 and a way of catching the
rhythm of New York that many readers said kept them loyal through the years.

But this crisis at The News has left little patience for the reminiscences.
Instead, News people are preoccupied with such things as a new battle in the New
York City tabloid wars that makes previous volleys seem like warm-ups.

And they are focusing on the petty, and not so petty, indignities of bankruptcy
that News managers have said they filed to try to protect the newspaper from
claims against Maxwell family holdings because of the widening financial
scandal.

The annoyances of bankruptcy have included a decision by the managers of Taste
Bud, a restaurant on Third Avenue near the News's 42d Street headquarters. They
will, they let the News managers know, be pleased to continue delivering lunches
for the editors on the seventh floor as they always have. From the date of the
bankruptcy on, however, corned beef on rye is to be delivered only if there is
cash on delivery.

Reporters who are still owed reimbursement for expense accounts before The News
filed its bankruptcy petition and freelance writers owed money from before that
date are now creditors of the paper, which means that they must wait to be paid
until the bankruptcy court says otherwise.

Employee pension contributions from November and other money in the process of
being transferred by the company have been frozen. Debts incurred by The News
after that date and regular salaries are being paid as usual.

Some Cutbacks

Swirling rumors of more serious immediate effects of the bankruptcy filing, are
false, said Matthew V. Storin, the newspaper's executive editor. Reporters are
traveling for stories including usual sports team coverage, the Palm Beach rape
trial and the London investigations into the Maxwell scandal.

But Mr. Storin said some cutbacks are being carried out, like limiting travel
for sports features and the probable elimination of some trips to college bowl
games. In the newsroom, it is widely believed that furloughs of reporters and
other belt-tightening steps are inevitable.

Mr. Storin has been in control of the newspaper's news operations more than
usual because The News's editor, James P. Willse, has been preoccupied, news
executives say, with running the News company, planning the bankruptcy and
working with other members of the News bankruptcy committee on setting the
ground rules for any possible sale.

The News is used to its tabloid adversaries, The New York Post and New York
Newsday, capitalizing on its troubles. But some in the News newsroom say the
other newspapers have crossed new boundaries. "The management people," at the
other newspapers, said a News reporter, Gerald Capeci, "are hoping we die."

Last week there was an exchange of articles that some News people said
represented an effort by the other papers to help bury The News. The two other
tabloids reported that the Manhattan District Attorney was investigating whether
The News had "fraudulently used millions of dollars of employee savings,
benefits and pension funds to fund its losses in the last several months," as
Newsday put it.

The News reported that no serious investigation was under way and that employee
money had been beyond Mr. Maxwell's reach. The News ran an article on Friday
reporting that The Post "has woes of its own" and "has issued several rubber
checks to its unions in recent months."

A special target of fury in the News newsroom has been the former News columnist
Mike McAlary, now featured in The Post. He has referred in print to his
"beleaguered" former newspaper in terms that News people say make it seem to be
already killed off by the kind of charges that typically bring prosecutions
under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.

"The New York Daily News," Mr. McAlary wrote, "is not so much a newspaper
anymore as it is an international RICO case."

In an interview, Mr. Willse, the News editor, called Mr. McAlary a "simpleton."
He added that he was not surprised at the treatment of The News's most recent
crisis in The Post and Newsday. "I don't know that we expected a lot of class
from the other tabloids," he said, "and they certainly have not disappointed
us."

Mixed with rising anger and the hope that The News has not yet used up its
Schwarzenegger-like lives, some News people said, old anxieties about the future
have also returned with a vengeance.

Some said the worries are especially painful because the newspaper had been
showing new signs of health. Circulation recovered to more than 800,000 from
what may have been 250,000 that it fell to during the strike. The News sold
about 1.1 million copies daily before the strike.

At the features desk in the 42d Street building last week a copy editor, John R.
Webb, who insists he does not really believe, laid out tarot cards. A group
gathered. The present, the cards said, would be turbulent. But in the future,
there would be rebirth.

Staff members, Mr. Willse said, wish their newspaper could just be a newspaper
again and not a crisis. "This is a pretty tough bunch here and they have been
through a lot," he said, "but I think everybody's saying 'enough already.' "

Mr. Willse did not take long to send out signals of what he thought of the man
who had caused the latest crisis. A News article in the Dec. 8 issue reviewed
much that was known to that point about Mr. Maxwell's financial dealings.

In a play on the former publisher's nickname of "Captain Bob," News editors sent
a proposed headline to Mr. Willse for approval before publication: "Captain
Crook?"

Mr. Willse, editors involved said, approved the headline with one change. "I
don't think," he said, "we need the question mark at this point."


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  A Daily News centerfold discussed the paper's financial "mess." The
Taste Bud restaurant says it will deliver to the paper only if it is paid in
cash. Matthew V. Storin, below right, executive editor, tried to play down
rumors of more serious bankruptcy effects. The editor, James P. Willse, is
focusing on the business operation. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)
Photo: "Coping With Another 'News' Crisis"

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Roll-Call On Zionism

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 329 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 16


Following is the 111-to-25 roll-call vote today by which the General Assembly
adopted a resolution revoking the 1975 resolution equating Zionism with racism:

IN FAVOR -- 111

Albania

Antigua &
 Barbuda

Argentina

Australia

Austria

Bahamas

Barbados

Belgium

Belize

Benin

Bhutan

Bolivia

Botswana

Brazil

Britain

Bulgaria

Burundi

Byelorussia

Cambodia

Cameroon

Canada

Cape Verde

Central African
 Republic

Chile

Colombia

Congo

Costa Rica

Cyprus

Czechoslovakia

Denmark

Dominica

Dominican Republic

Ecuador

El Salvador

Estonia

Fiji

Finland

France

Gabon

Gambia

Germany

Greece

Grenada

Guatemala

Guyana

Haiti

Honduras

Hungary

Iceland

India

Ireland

Israel

Italy

Ivory Coast

Jamaica

Japan

Kenya

Latvia

Lesotho

Liberia

Liechtenstein

Lithuania

Luxembourg

Madagascar

Malawi

Malta

Marshall Islands

Mexico

Micronesia

Mongolia

Mozambique

Namibia

Nepal

Netherlands

New Zealand

Nicaragua

Nigeria

Norway

Panama

Papua
 New Guinea

Paraguay

Peru

Philippines

Poland

Portugal

Romania

Rwanda

St. Kitts & Nevis

St. Lucia

St. Vincent
the Grenadines

Samoa

Sao Tome
 Principe

Seychelles

Sierra Leone

Singapore

Solomon Islands

Soviet Union

Spain

South Korea

Suriname

Swaziland

Sweden

Thailand

Togo

Ukraine

United States

Uruguay

Venezuela

Yugoslavia

Zaire

Zambia

AGAINST -- 25

Afghanistan

Algeria

Bangladesh

Brunei

Cuba

Indonesia

Iran

Iraq

Jordan

Lebanon

Libya

Malaysia

Mali

Mauritania

North Korea

Pakistan

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Somalia

Sri Lanka

Sudan

Syria

United Arab
 Emirates

Vietnam

Yemen

ABSTENTIONS -- 13

Angola

Burkina Faso

Ethiopia

Ghana

Laos

Maldives

Mauritius

Myanmar

Tanzania

Trinidad-Tobago

Turkey

Uganda

Zimbabwe

ABSENT OR NOT VOTING -- 17

Bahrain

Chad

China

Comoros

Djibouti

Egypt

Equatorial Guinea

Guinea

Guinea-Bissau

Kuwait

Morocco

Niger

Oman

Senegal

South Africa

Tunisia

Vanuatu


LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

6 in Search Of an Image;
Democrats Strain To Be Presidential

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 16


Republicans were chortling today over Sunday night's debate, asserting that the
six major Democratic Presidential contenders, as a class, seemed unpresidential.
When reporters asked President Bush who won the debate, he pointed to himself.

Republican smugness aside, the first major debate of the 1992 campaign showed
that the Democrats are still learning how to use a critical shot at prime time.
The group portrait was contentious at best, the individual performances varied
widely, and no one seemed to make a significant break from the pack, in the view
of many political professionals.

"When they write the 'Making of the President, 1992,' this debate won't get
mentioned much," said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker.

A Plus for Kerrey

Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, widely seen in Democratic circles as an
underachiever since he entered the race, was cited by many political
professionals today as the candidate who most helped himself. Former Gov. Edmund
G. Brown Jr. of California was probably most successful in getting his message
across, but some analysts suggested that the abrasive style of the messenger may
negate the message.

In general, each of the candidates had to struggle against the limitations of
the genre. "Multi-candidate debates are not a pretty sight," said Michael
McCurry, an adviser to Senator Kerrey. "When you're up there with six people,
trying to be distinctive and Presidential is not easy."

Kathleen Hall Jamieson, an expert on political communication at the University
of Pennyslvania, said it was impossible to look Presidential on a stage with
five other men, a 60-second cap on speech and a newscaster looming above the
candidate. Lorraine Voles, press secretary to Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, said
it "looked like a setup for the 'Newlywed Game.' "

Given that, each candidate entered the debate with his own strategic imperatives
---- some of which they achieved, some of which they did not.

Gov Bill Clinton of Arkansas was coming off a month of good reviews for speeches
to Democratic audiences around the country. On Sunday, a few hours before the
debate, Mr. Clinton had won a big victory in a straw poll at the Florida
Democratic convention -- an event of symbolic importance only, but the kind that
matters to political insiders and financial contributors.

Clinton Viewed as Low Key

But the Governor's performance at the debate Sunday night was subdued, low key.
His allies called it statesmanlike; his critics suggested he was trying too hard
to seem Presidential.

"Somebody must have told him that he had to act Presidential and avoid the
fray," said Bob Squier, a Democratic consultant. "if that's Presidential, he
should go back to gubernatorial."

Still, Samuel Popkin, a political scientist at the University of California at
San Diego, contended that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Harkin were much further along
than their rivals in telling the public, in understandable ways, what they would
do as President.

Sunday night's debate, which was sponsored by NBC News, was the first of seven
nationally televised debates to be held among the major candidates for the
Democratic candidates.

Mr. Kerrey has been widely viewed by political professionals as a charismatic
candidate who has yet to deliver the goods in his Presidential campaign.  In
Sunday's debate he tried to introduce himself, and his life story, to the
American public. Repeatedly, he cited his experiences as a Navy commando in
Vietnam, where he lost his leg and won the Medal of Honor for heroism.

Sharp Exchange With Brown

The Senator also engaged in perhaps the sharpest exchange of the night when he
angrily challenged Mr. Brown on his repeated charges that America's politicains
were in thrall to special interest money. "Are you saying I'm bought and paid
for?" Mr. Kerrey demanded, while Mr. Brown blanched.

Like other analysts, Mr. Popkin gave Mr. Kerrey the edge in that exchange,
contending that Mr. Brown "came across as a person who is lucky not to get
punched out by some of the others."

Mr. Brown certainly succeeded in grabbing the mantle of the anti-establishment
candidate out to rock the system, but some analysts suggested he did it a
considerable cost. "He was far too intensne throughout this debate for
television," Ms. Jamieson said.

Long plagued by a reputation that depicts him as "Governor Moonbeam," Mr. Brown
may have only fed the image of eccentrity in Sunday night's debate, some
analysts said.

Senator Harkin entered the debate with a reputation as a fire and brimstone
orator with a firm control on traditional Democratic economics. Political
professionals said he effectively stuck to his themes, which was not a small
accomplishment in the free-wheeling atmosphere of Sunday night's debate. Former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts came across as thoughtful to many
political professionals, but also non-telegenic.

Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia seemed to be making a concerted appeal for
black votes, delivering an unstinting defense of civil rights generally and
affirmative action in particular, and assailing the White House for fostering a
poor racial climate.

Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic national chairman, described the debate as "a
pretty good introduction to our candidates." By Friday, which isthe filing
deadline for the New Hampshire primary, Democrats should know whether the next
debate will include Gov. Mario M. Cuomo of New York.

With or without him, Democrats are moving into prime time. And with just nine
weeks before New Hampshire, they have little time to adjust.

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Edmund G. Brown Jr., former Governor of California, holding his
toll-free campaign number yesterday during a news conference in Washington. Some
analysts said that what Mr. Brown gained in persistence during the debate
between Democratic Presidential candidates, he lost in likability. (Associated
Press); Senator Tom Harkin mockingly held up a dollar bill during the debate,
saying it was what a typical family would get back daily from a tax cut.
(NBC-TV)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.N. Repeals Its '75 Resolution Equating Zionism With Racism

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 16


The United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to revoke the
bitterly contested statement it approved in 1975 that said "Zionism is a form of
racism and racial discrimination."

The official count found 111 nations in favor of repealing the statement and 25
nations, mostly Islamic and hard-line Communists, voting against. Thirteen
nations abstained. Seventeen other countries, including Egypt, which recognizes
Israel, and Kuwait and China, did not take part in the voting. [Roll-call, page
A12.]

For the United States, the heavy vote in favor of repeal was a demonstration of
its diplomatic power. After President Bush called for the repeal in September in
a speech to the General Assembly, United States embassies around the world were
instructed to put maximum pressure to secure the repeal. The 111 votes recorded
today were about 11 more than the United States mission to the United Nations
had predicted last week.

The vote reflected the shifting political currents of recent years, the Persian
Gulf war in particular, which split the Arab and Islamic worlds, and the changes
in the former Soviet bloc, fostered by the collapse of Communism.

In 1975, in an effort to curry favor with the Arabs and embarrass the United
States, Moscow took the lead in pushing through the statement on Zionism, which
was one line in a longer resolution.

With the end of Communism in Europe, countries there have by and large all
re-established diplomatic relations with Israel in the last year. The Soviet
Union and the rest of the former bloc, including newly independent Estonia,
Latvia and Lithuania, all voted for repeal today. The only Communist countries
voting against repeal were Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam.

Asians and Africans Back Vote

Many Asian and African nations, including India, Nigeria, Singapore and the
Philippines, which voted for the Zionism resolution in 1975, reversed themselves
today.

The vote divided the Islamic and former nonaligned movements. While no Arab
country voted for repeal, Bahrain, Egypt, Kuwait, Morocco, Oman and Tunisia all
were absent from the vote. Algeria, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya,
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen were among
those voting against repeal. But there was no indication that those Arabs voting
against repeal made much of an effort to persuade other states not to go along
with the United States initiative.

The one-line resolution repealing the Zionism statement declared that the
Assembly "decides to revoke the determination contained in its resolution 3379
of 10 November 1975." It did not use the words "Zionism" or "racism" in the
resolution.

Applause for Vote

The 1975 statement referred to in the repeal decision said that after reviewing
other international resolutions linking Zionism with South Africa's apartheid
system, the General Assembly "determines that Zionism is a form of racism and
racial discrimination."

Applause broke out in the General Assembly as the result flashed on the big
electronic voting board high on one side of the hall. And delegates leapt up
from their seats and rushed to congratulate Israel's Foreign Minister, David
Levy, who led his country's delegation at the session.

At a news conference later, Mr. Levy described the vote as "removing a terrible
blot" and said the world community was "sobering up," with many countries
"shifting their positions."

A total of 85 countries, or just more than half of the 166 members in the United
Nations, co-sponsored the repeal resolution, including the Soviet Union and all
its former communist allies in Eastern Europe that voted the other way in 1975.
The outcome was also at the high end of American expectations. On Friday, United
States officials were predicting a maximum of just more than 100 votes for
repeal but warning that there could be a 20 percent margin of error.

Enhancing the U.N.

Both the United States and the spokesmen for the Arab countries voting against
repeal saw the vote as important for both the credibility of the United Nations
and for the Middle East peace talks. And their addresses drew loud applause from
delegates.

Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger, who led the American
delegation at this afternoon's session, argued that repeal would bring the
United Nations better into line with the realities of the post-cold-war world.

Equating Zionism with racism, Mr. Eagleburger said, "demonstrated like nothing
else before or since, to what extent the cold war had distorted the United
Nation's vision of reality, marginalized its political utility and separated it
from its original moral purpose."

Repeal, he said, could "only help and not hinder efforts currently under way" to
bring peace to the Middle East, removing a 16-year-old obstacle to the United
Nations' playing a more significant role in the peace process.

The Arabs' Voice

Speaking against repeal on behalf of the Arabs, Lebanon's representative, Khalil
Makkawi, warned that it would hinder the peace process by whetting the appetite
of "Israeli extremists wishing to pursue their policy of creeping annexation."

It would also, he went on, "fuel the passions" of those Arabs "who believe the
whole peace process is an exercise in futility which gives Israel more time to
expand and achieve its revisionist Zionist project."

But he said the Arab group "will revise its assumptions" if the sponsors of
today's repeal motion can now persuade Israel to comply with the Security
Council's demands that it cede occupied Arab lands in return for peace.

In a further sign of the discomfort that the repeal has caused the Islamic
world, today's session was presided over by the United Nations representative
from Honduras, Roberto Flores Bermudez, rather than by the world organization's
president, Samir S. Shihabi of Saudi Arabia, who is of Palestinian origin and
who was present for the morning session today.

Furor in September

In September he caused a stir by leaving the podium when Israel's Foreign
Minister addressed the General Assembly.

The 1975 resolution on Zionism was approved in a smaller General Assembly, with
72 countries voting in favor, 35 against and 32 abstaining. Three countries did
not take part in the vote.

Apart from the Soviet Union and its former East European allies, countries that
switched their votes from support for that resolution to support for repeal
included Brazil, India, Mexico, Nigeria and Yugoslavia.

Those that have now voted twice in favor of equating Zionism and racism include
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Algeria, Bangladesh,
Indonesia, Iran and Iraq.

In seeking support for repeal, the United States and its Western allies have
used a variety of arguments to persuade wavering countries to join their camp,
diplomats say, many of them based on a belief that today's vote would increase
the pressure on Israel to compromise in the American-sponsored Middle East peace
talks.

All argued that Resolution 3379 was out of date because it was a product of the
cold war, pushed forward by the old Soviet Union and embraced by a militant
third-world nations that saw the United Nations as a forum for attacking
capitalism and propounding a new economic order that would redistribute wealth
from rich to poor.


LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 18, 1991, Wednesday

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the repeal of a United
Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism misstated the vote of the
Philippines and Singapore when the resolution was adopted in 1975. Both
countries abstained.

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Man Who Gathers the Means For Barry Levinson's Movies

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 23; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Dec. 17


Barry Levinson, the director, laughed and said his longtime partner, Mark
Johnson, hardly fit the classic portrait of the profane,
shirt-open-to-the-third-button, Armani-clothed Hollywood producer.

"Mark is certainly not flamboyant," said Mr. Levinson, the director of "Bugsy,"
the new, critically lauded film about the gangster Bugsy Siegel, as well as
"Rain Man," "Good Morning, Vietnam," "Diner" and other films produced by Mr.
Johnson. "There's no false bravado there."

At first glance the 45-year-old Mr. Johnson, who produces Mr. Levinson's films,
resembles a banker or member of a white-shoe Wall Street law firm.
Buttoned-down. Bespectacled. His dark blond hair neatly parted and combed.
Unfailingly courteous and untemperamental. Not your typical Hollywood mogul.

Yet he has emerged as a partner in one of the most successful director-producer
teams in Hollywood, whose production of "Bugsy," is, together with "The Silence
of the Lambs," the most acclaimed American film of the year.

Giving Credit to Others

Mr. Johnson attributes the critical success of "Bugsy" largely to Warren Beatty,
the actor who nurtured the project for years, as well as to Mr. Levinson and to
James Toback, the screenwriter.

"This is different from any movie I've produced for Barry," said Mr. Johnson,
seated in his office at 20th Century Fox studios, where he is now preparing
several projects. "Beatty is extremely skillful as a producer himself and I said
to him early on, 'I can see why you want Barry as a director but why do you
really need me?' And Warren said, 'In this movie, I want to succeed or fall on
my face as an actor.' "

Mr. Johnson said that during the filming of "Bugsy," which deals with the
gangster and quirky dreamer who invented Las Vegas, he was aware that "something
pretty incendiary was going on."

"It clicked because Toback wrote a very smart, clever, arch script," he said
today. "And Barry is incapable of being cynical. So he gave it a certain
humanity, a certain understanding, an emotional life. And it isn't by accident
that Beatty has been developing this for years and years. He knew the potential
of Bugsy Siegel for him."

The Levinson-Johnson team has an unusual dynamic, which probably explains its
success. Mr. Levinson takes care of the creative side, Mr. Johnson handles all
the details, and, unlike many another director-producer combination, they stay
out of each other's way.

"I don't want to say I'm better politically than Barry but I suspect I am," said
Mr. Johnson. "I've been the one who deals with the studio, the head of
production. I see myself as an organizer, a planner, a facilitator, a sounding
board. Barry claims he's not particularly comfortable in social situations, and
doesn't care to be. I enjoy that aspect of the business. I help him in terms of
the protocol so when he starts directing he can be completely focused on the
movie."

Mr. Levinson says simply: "I basically let him take care of the money and talk
to the studio people. I handle the other aspects: the script, casting and
editing. I've only worked with this one person my whole life. I don't know any
better."

Mr. Johnson has a reputation in Hollywood for keeping budgets down. Except for
last year's "Avalon," which went over budget by about $1 million, the
Levinson-Johnson team has never exceeded studio projections. The results have
been striking. "Rain Man," a road movie with Dustin Hoffman and Tom Cruise, was
made for $26 million, unusually low for a film with such stars, and has grossed
$175 million in the United States.

Both Kinds of Success

"We've had arguments about money, really, the traditional producer-director
arguments where Barry feels I've been unfair about what should be spent," Mr.
Johnson said. "But his films inevitably come in under budget because he's very
disciplined and sets up a tight shooting schedule and sticks with it. He has no
interest in being self-indulgent. He's one of the few film makers who is both
artistically and commercially successful. A lot of directors are in one or the
other camp. He's not."

Of their movies, it is "Avalon," the one that not only came in over budget, but
also failed to make money, that is Mr. Johnson's favorite. The commercial
failure of the film, which is about Mr. Levinson's immigrant family in
Baltimore, was especially painful to Mr. Johnson.

"It's a movie that I have real emotional ties to, and the fact that it didn't
really succeed is an enormous disappointment," he said. "I'm not from Baltimore.
I'm not Jewish. I come from a broken home. I never had any real sense of an
extended family, like the family in the film. And yet because of the family that
the movie posits I said to myself, what a great sense of comfort and support to
know that you have that kind of family to support you. And when the family comes
apart at the end it was heartbreaking."

Acting Didn't Work Out

Mr. Johnson was born in Washington and moved to Spain at the age of 7, living
abroad until he was 18. "My parents were divorced, and my mother is sort of an
Auntie Mame character who took these three young American kids, hopped on an
ocean liner and we got off at Gibraltar and moved to Torremolinos without
knowing a soul there or speaking a word of Spanish," he said. (His mother,
Dorothy King, now sells real estate in Great Barrington, Mass.; his father,
Emory Johnson, who owned an air cargo business, died in the 1970's.)

At the University of Virginia, he majored in Spanish "because they wouldn't let
me major in drama, and I figured I could spend all my time acting," he said.
"The problem was, I was a disaster as an actor so I got involved behind the
scenes." He earned a master's degree in film scholarship at the University of
Iowa, and, in 1974, moved to New York where he began as a production assistant
on television commercials.

This led to him working as a director trainee on Paul Mazursky's, "Next Stop,
Greenwich Village," and then advancing from production assistant to assistant
director on a number of films, including Mel Brooks's "High Anxiety." On that
1970 movie he met one of the writers, Mr. Levinson, and the two became friends.
Mr. Levinson later asked Mr. Johnson to serve as his producer.

"I was looking for someone outside the established list of producers and I
wanted someone to trust as opposed to a guy kicking around for a long time,"
said Mr. Levinson.

Their earlier films included "Diner," "Tin Men," "The Natural" and "Young
Sherlock Holmes." Together, the two also run Baltimore Pictures, which makes
films independently, including the newly released Steven Soderbergh movie,
"Kafka."

Mr. Johnson said he enjoyed Hollywood, up to a point. "You have to deal with
this community tongue in cheek," he said. "There are a lot of bright people, a
lot of creative people, but the neuroses abound. People give their hearts and
souls to making movies. It's very tough to go to a screening and have someone
with a glass of wine in their hand say afterward that the movie didn't work for
them, or it was pretentious or ill-conceived. We tend to be a little too glib
and flip about each other's work. You can't be."

NAME: Barry Levinson; Mark Johnson

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Johnson (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 18, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ON PRO BASKETBALL;
Anderson Needs Floor Time For Nets to Make Their Point

BYLINE: By Harvey Araton

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


When Patrick Ewing was beginning his second season with the Knicks in the fall
of 1986, Hubie Brown wanted him to play power forward. On the hot seat, the
coach needed a competitive start by his team to save his job. He decided his
best chance was to have the immobile Bill Cartwright play in the middle, with
the far more athletic Ewing chasing the smaller, quicker power forwards.

Tactically speaking, this wasn't really an illogical deployment, except that
Ewing wanted no part of it and Ewing, not Brown, was the future of the
franchise. Ewing had been raised to be a center. Critics hailed him as the
second coming of Bill Russell, not Ralph Sampson, and no self-respecting
7-footer could let himself be moved from his pedestal in the low post.

In this confrontation of egos, Brown pitted his basketball logic and coaching
principle against Ewing's 10-year, $33-million contract. The coach lost the
battle, Ewing's attention, too many games, and soon after, his job.

That brings us to the Nets's Bill Fitch, who last night sunk lower into the same
bunker that Brown fell into in 1986, as the Nets disintegrated again in the
fourth quarter and lost to the Knicks, 102-94, at Madison Square Garden. Fitch's
prize rookie, Kenny Anderson, played just 13 minutes and afterward appeared
ready to make a federal case out of it.

"That's just ridiculous," Anderson said. "They drafted me No. 2, I thought I'd
at least be out there. I thought at least 20, 25 minutes. I could see it if we
were winning and I wasn't playing."

Anderson, unfortunately for Fitch, has somehow convinced himself that all of his
problems in a difficult transition to the National Basketball Association are
about minutes. He missed all of training camp due to a contract dispute,
reported finally as the team's backup at the position to incumbent Mookie
Blaylock and, despite recent benchings, still has averaged a very respectable
22.4 minutes.

"I ain't getting the opportunity," he said.

While most players have a difficult time admitting their personal failures, no
crime in itself, Anderson's statements underscore the lack of maturity this
21-year-old has demonstrated in making his on-court choices. There has been
enough opportunity for him to launch 198 shots, more than two-thirds of the 282
shots Blaylock has taken in slightly more than half the minutes. In Anderson's
417 minutes, he has turned the ball over 42 times. In Blaylock's 797 minutes, he
has 53 turnovers.

On a small handful of nights, Anderson has been electric, a peek at what the
Nets hope will be their future. More often he has been a coach's nightmare, an
incessant dribbler into turnovers and poor-percentage shots. He is shooting 35.9
percent but has shown little desire in backing off, as Greg Anthony -- granted,
a lesser talent -- has done with the Knicks.

Anderson certainly has the ability to make the spectacular pass. But even here,
he seldom distinguishes between making a brilliant snap pass to the capable
Derrick Coleman from foolishly attempting a similar connection with the clumsy
Chris Dudley.

"We've got to realize that we're not going to get from Kenny this season what we
might've gotten had he been with us for training camp or if we'd drafted an
older player," said Willis Reed, the team's senior vice president.

So what's a coach, particularly one whose job clock is rigged with ticking
explosives, supposed to do? Judging from the most recent games, including last
night's 1-for-6 shooting, one-assist performance, the frustrated Fitch appears
to be more inclined to stick to his principle. A player, he reasons, can learn
by watching, too.

It is true that by playing Anderson consistent minutes, Fitch right now is
giving himself less of a chance to win. Yet an unhappy, unproductive Anderson,
earning close to $3 million per year for the next five years, isn't going to
help Fitch keep whatever support still remains for him within the organization.

No question, Fitch has been dealt a lousy hand. This war he finds himself in is
a coach's Vietnam. Needing to succeed now, he would have preferred to live with
Blaylock at the point and to have drafted a player who could offer the Nets
immediate help at small forward. When management cut reserve swing man Jud
Buechler out from under him, it was a clear signal to the students that the
teacher no longer had the support of the school board. Fitch could no longer
win.

He now appears to have two choices: be bitter as the clock winds down and stick
to his principle, or become the good corporate soldier and do what's right for
the team's future. The right thing, according to the payroll, is Kenny Anderson.

No matter how much Anderson plays, this bunch is not going anywhere but back to
the lottery. All they stand to gain from this season is valuable experience for
their young players, and none are more needy than Anderson. All that's gained by
having him sit is having him re-take the course a year from now.

Win or lose, layup or air ball, assist or turnover, night in, night out, the kid
just has to play.



LOAD-DATE: December 18, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

John A. Blatnik, 80, Congressman Who Promoted Public Works Bills

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


John A. Blatnik, who sponsored major environmental and public works laws and led
liberal causes in his 27-year career as a Democratic Congressman from Minnesota,
died yesterday at his home in Forest Heights, Md. He was 80 years old.

The cause of death was heart failure, his family said.

Mr. Blatnik led the Democratic Study Group, a prominent liberal caucus in the
House of Representatives, during some of its formative years in the 1960's. From
1971 to 1974, he was chairman of the House Public Works Committee.

Among his chief legislative achievements were Federal aid for sewage treatment
to reduce water pollution, the St. Lawrence Seaway that opened the Great Lakes
to international shipping, the Niagara River power project and money for the
interstate highway system.

Critic of Vietnam War

Among other causes that he strongly supported were opposition to the Vietnam
War, nuclear-weapons control, parks expansion, control of oil spills, a proposed
youth conservation corps, home rule for the District of Columbia and opposition
to the anti-Communist hunts of the cold war.

Although he was a smoker himself, he accused the tobacco industry in 1957 of
deceptive advertising for its new filtered cigarettes. As chairman of the
Government Operations Subcommittee, he also criticized the diet pill and
tranquilizer industries. Later, as a member of the Public Works Committee, he
investigated waste and corruption by several states in connection with Federal
highway aid.

Born in Chisholm, Minn., he grew up there and graduated from Winona State
Teachers College in 1935. He later taught high school chemistry and assisted a
rural school superintendent.

In 1940, at the age of 29, he became the youngest member ever elected to the
Minnesota State Senate. But he soon was off to take part in World War II,
serving in the Army Air Corps and Office of Special Services.

Because his parents were of Yugoslavian descent, he was familiar with the
Slovenian and Serbo-Croatian languages. So he parachuted behind German lines to
work with the Yugoslavian underground on intelligence and to set up a system
that helped rescue nearly 400 downed airmen. His efforts earned him the rank of
captain and numerous medals, including two Bronze stars. During the war he
became acquainted with the man who would lead Yugoslavia after war, Marshal
Tito.

Mr. Blatnik first ran for Congress in 1946, on Minnesota's newly merged
Democratic-Farmer-Labor ticket, and was the only Democrat elected that year in
the state. He was re-elected continually until he retired in 1974, regularly
winning by huge margins and sometimes without any opposing candidate.

A major disappointment came in 1964 when, as the dean of the state's
Congressional delegation, he failed in a bid to succeed Hubert H. Humphrey as a
United States Senator. The winner was Walter F. Mondale, he later became Vice
President and Presidential nominee.

Mr. Blatnik cited health concerns in announcing his decision to leave Congress.
He later became a consultant.

Some environmental critics said he was too quiet about damage done by some major
industries in his home district in northeastern Minnesota, a charge that he
denied. He did succeed in sponsoring legislation that created the water
pollution control program and that set aside billions of dollars for it.

Mr. Blatnik is survived by his second wife, the former Evelyn Castiglioni; a
brother, Frank, of Duluth, Minn., and three children from his first marriage:
Thomas H., Stephanie and Valerie Blatnik, all of Arlington, Va.

NAME: John A. Blatnik

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John A. Blatnik (Associated Press, 1971)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Eases Vietnam Embargo

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 78 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 18


The Bush Administration has lifted a ban on organized travel to Vietnam in a
slight easing of a decades-old trade embargo. The change, which took effect on
Tuesday, clears the way for travel agents in the United States to arrange
individual and group tours of Vietnam. Although travel agents were previously
barred from arranging such tours, United States citizens were able to arrange to
go to Vietnam by making arrangements in a third country, typically Thailand.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

DESIGN BOOKSHELF;
Bedroom and Kitchen Vie in War of the Coffee-Table Books

BYLINE: By PATRICIA LEIGH BROWN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1495 words


A THICK, heavy package under the tree is always a welcome sight for design
mavens, particularly these days, when fancy objects seem as distant as shooting
stars.

This season in the world of coffee-table books, there is a polite turf war
regarding which room is truly the soul of the house. With three books devoted to
beds and two to the kitchen, the bedroom seems to be winning. But who knows?
Next year could see the rise of the Gentlewoman's Basement or the Norwegian
Linen Closet.

Call it sublimation, but the presence of three books on beds does inspire
reflection. The most ambitious, THE BED (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, $45) by Alecia
Beldegreen, is a romantically photographed, intelligent book that expands the
definition of the genre. Full of lore, historical detail and philosophical
musings that are actually not trite, it transcends the pretty pictures by
providing ideas for the mind as well as the home.

Diane Von Furstenberg's BEDS (Bantam, $35), with photographs of "some of the
most exemplary and distinguished beds to be found throughout the world," is a
less ruminative variation on the theme. Here are celebrity beds: Kelly and
Calvin's, Marisa's and, of course, Ms. Von Furstenberg's.

There is some overlap. Both Ms. Beldegreen and Ms. Von Furstenberg include
Napoleon's room at Malmaison and the beds in the Paramount Hotel. (Quick: what
do Ian Schrager and Napoleon have in common?)

A different tack is taken by Mary-Sargent Ladd, who is described as a journalist
and international socialite in THE FRENCHWOMAN'S BEDROOM (Doubleday, $50). Her
rather titillating focus is "a generous peek into intimate chambers and the
fascinating women who created them." The book is rife with captions punctuated
by exclamation points ("Never Enough Pink!") and monied women with Jack Russell
terriers and quadruple-barreled names. Her prose is gushy: unlike the stylist
Maria Beltrami, who is one of her subjects, it is not "Inventive. Unpredictable.
Charming."

The kitchen cooks this season. THE COOK'S ROOM: A CELEBRATION OF THE HEART OF
THE HOME (Harper Collins, $35), edited by Alan Davidson, contains serious,
provocative essays by M. F. K. Fisher, Diana Southwood Kennedy and others.
Organized geographically, the essays, accompanied by handsome photographs, treat
kitchens as repositories of myth and social history while exploring cultural
differences -- for example, the pasty beam, where bread is stored in Alsatian
houses.

A complementary book is COUNTRY KITCHENS by Jocasta Innes (Rizzoli International
Publications, $35), a classy but practical how-to book that takes a look at
sinks, drains and other details.

Books written by the shopkeeper/decorator, particularly the Upper East Side
variety, now form a subgenre of publishing. Among this year's crop is DECORATING
WITH PICTURES by Stephanie Hoppen (Clarkson Potter, $40), who is described as a
collector, art dealer, framer and decorator as well as the owner of galleries in
New York and London. Ms. Hoppen's domain is pictures. (Don't call them
paintings.) She advocates lots of pictures and avoidance of "the
one-picture-one-wall syndrome." The book is most useful when comparing the same
room done two ways.

In A PASSION FOR DETAIL (Doubleday, $40), Charlotte Moss, who owns a furniture
and accessories shop in Manhattan, makes her bid to become the next life style
queen. She sounds like a born-again television evangelist: "Six years ago, I
spoke a different language -- one that included limited partnerships, options
and arbitrage. Now I speak a new language. It's the 'At Home' language of design
and decorating."

You can tell where all this is leading. A lot of prose is spent saying very
little. Personal reminiscences, presumably meant to make her a woman of the
people, do not always succeed ("When I was 13, I got my first pair of
Pappagallos"). Ms. Moss's recipe for a room includes comfort, passion and humor.
"With these,' she writes, "a room will sizzle and smile."

Ssssssss.

Among the new style books is SCANDINAVIAN COUNTRY (Clarkson Potter, $45) by
JoAnn Barwick and the editors of House Beautiful, and written by Norma Skurka.
Ms. Barwick, the former editor in chief of the magazine, does not break the
square style-book mold, but with a subject this rich she really doesn't have to.
"Scandinavians found the ways to take the stuffiness out of European formality
without compromising classic beauty," she writes.

This book is filled with breathtaking photographs, including the requisite blond
children scampering naked in the grass. The reader learns of ceramic-tile
stoves, picturesque chalet-style granaries and other regional design elements.

LIVING WITH FOLK ART: ETHNIC STYLES FROM AROUND THE WORLD by Nicholas Barnard
(Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown & Company, $40) is less successful. It tries too
hard. The dense, weighty text is clumped together, as are the photographs, many
of them bathed in medieval-like darkness. But this book could be the answer for
insatiable folk art collectors, who may be struck by how many of the interiors
rambunctiously embrace clutter.

Two architectural firms have books devoted to their work this year.
ARQUITECTONICA (AIA Press, $40), written by Beth Dunlop, the architecture critic
for The Miami Herald, is a collection of projects by the Miami firm and contains
a number of memorable houses.

THE AMERICAN HOUSES OF ROBERT A. M. STERN (Rizzoli, $75), with an introduction
by Clive Aslet, an editor at the British magazine Country Life, turns out to be
a fascinating social document. It begins with a telling preface by Mr. Stern in
which he writes of his old-new architecture: "I try to make my houses eddies of
calm in a surging sea of continuous self-doubt."

Whose?

The book is full of the kind of picturesque, homey details -- eyebrow dormers,
inglenooks and the like -- that make Mr. Stern a favorite among commercial
builders, who love to rip him off. But it also contains rather pretentious manor
houses with entrance gates that aggressively dominate their lots. The kitchens
tend to be ample, a necessary feature for families in which "the husband cooks,
the wife cooks, and the cook cooks."

Upscale is upscale. The Royals are something else. ROYAL STYLE: FIVE CENTURIES
OF INFLUENCE AND FASHION (Little, Brown, $40) by Stephen Calloway and Stephen
Jones is a deliciously opinionated look at the trappings of the royal life. Talk
about a job with perks. Ostentation is the stated theme of Mr. Calloway, a
curator at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, and Mr. Jones, the director
of Spencer House, the London palace of the family of you-know-who.

Of Louis XIV's famous pile they write, "The monument to Bourbon absolutism which
was Versailles lived on to feed the pretensions of his successors." And so it
goes, from Phillip II to Wallis Simpson's jewel-encrusted flamingo brooch,
losing nerve only when they finally reach Charles and Diana.

The nit-picking side of Englishness is in full flower in MALLET'S ENGLISH
FURNITURE by Lanton Synge (Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown, $50), a detailed look
at 300 examples of classic furniture. For those who are not interested -- not
really interested -- the book is a little bit like sitting through an art
history lecture. This is a piece-by-piece look, from keyhole escutcheons to
early-18th-century cock-fighting chairs.

Finally, a couple of quirky, personal favorites. THE BIRDHOUSE BOOK: HOW TO
BUILD FANCIFUL BIRDHOUSES AND FEEDERS, FROM THE PURELY PRACTICAL TO THE
ABSOLUTELY OUTRAGEOUS (Sterling Publishing Company, $19.95), by Bruce Woods and
David Schoonmaker, is sure to please the Roger Tory Peterson in your life, if
not always the bird. Here is the low-down on how to build a plywood Parthenon or
even a bird motel (with a phosphorescent strip tacked to the eaves for a "neon
effect").

Those who doubt the limits of the human imagination -- and the relationship
between design and social trends -- would do well to consult TEXTILE DESIGNS:
TWO HUNDRED YEARS OF EUROPEAN AND AMERICAN PATTERNS FOR PRINTED FABRICS
ORGANIZED BY MOTIF, STYLE, COLOR, LAYOUT AND PERIOD (Abrams, $65), by Susan
Meller and Joost Elffers. This wonderful book -- an encyclopedia, really -- is a
little bit like being let loose unsupervised in the archives of the Victoria and
Albert Museum.

As if 12 pages devoted to nothing but plaid were not enough, the book unearths
many wonderful forgotten patterns -- with shapes inspired by coffee beans, screw
tops, dividing cells and even commas. Among them are itty-bitty designs called
"dumb-dumbs," so named, the authors write, because "the motifs are so
inoffensive as to make no statements at all."

The book moves from 18th-century France through Desert Storm, in which the post-
Vietnam abhorrence of camouflage patterns suddenly did an about-face.

Now all we need are reissues of the fabrics. In these days of holiday excess,
one could live very well with "dumb dumbs."

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 19, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In the Nation;
After The Storm

BYLINE: By TOM WICKER;  William Safire is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


Can anyone recall a disappearance more precipitous than that of the national
celebration of Desert Storm, last winter's great victory in the Persian Gulf --
the war whose fighting men and women, unlike those of Vietnam, were to be
honored and remembered?

The honors, like yellow ribbons, quickly came and went. The remembrance of the
war, as evidenced by polls and public statements, has been equally short-lived,
and soured by the survival of Saddam Hussein in Iraq.

President Bush's popularity, meanwhile, has gone south just as swiftly.  The
astronomical approval ratings he registered during and after the war -- around
90 percent in some cases -- have slipped to as low as 47 percent in a recent ABC
News/Washington Post Poll. He's back to roughly the level of approval he had in
1989, in the midst of that year's "budget crisis," before the war made him look
briefly Churchillian.

The best evidence of Mr. Bush's decline in public esteem may be his plaintive
remarks the other day about the "filth and indecent material coming in through
the airwaves and through these trials into people's homes." The obvious
reference to the Palm Beach rape case might have been taken as merely a
political slap at the Kennedy family, had the President not also criticized New
York City's program to counter AIDS with free condoms for young people and clean
needles for drug addicts.

AIDS, Mr. Bush chirped, "is a disease that for the most part can be controlled
by individual behavior."

That's the Bushspeak equivalent of Nancy Reagan's "just say no" campaign, which
didn't work either. Mr. Bush seemed to be turning to a tried-and-true, if
threadbare, political remedy -- attacking a straw man, in this case indecency,
to deflect attention from his lack of a coherent economic program and from
foreign policies that look less effective every day.

Social concerns -- flag-burning, the Pledge of Allegiance, "family values," the
fear of crime -- have been highly effective for him and for other Republicans in
the past; remember the Mapplethorpe flap? Maybe this time preaching against
"smut and filth" can do the trick for Mr. Bush.

Or maybe not. The economy is in bad shape and Republicans, as well as too many
Democrats, have locked themselves into the nearly theological position that
nothing can be done if it increases the budget deficit -- though the likelihood
is that nothing effective can be done if it doesn't increase the budget deficit.
More than at any time in the past quarter-century, the so-called "pocketbook
issue" may be helping the Democrats -- assuming they find a presentable
candidate for President.

But the economy alone is not responsible for Mr. Bush's tumble from grace. His
response to political and economic chaos in the former Soviet Union may be
properly restrained, but to much of the public it looks like indecisive
hand-wringing about one of the signal developments of the 20th century. Nor does
the Administration appear to know how to be helpful on the economic and other
problems of Eastern Europe -- for instance, street crime, the redheaded
stepchild of capitalism. It's up fivefold in Prague since Communism's collapse.

Japan and Western Europe go their ways, Washington notwithstanding.  The nasty
war in Yugoslavia is a bad advertisement for the "new world order" Mr. Bush
proclaimed last winter; but there's little he can do about it, since the use of
U.S. military power there would be unpopular among Americans. In all these
cases, in fact, the power at Mr. Bush's disposal is mostly military; but in none
would that power be appropriate or feasible.

Force might be both in Iraq, where Saddam Hussein's nuclear designs seem clear
and his brutal control appears unaffected by what the world thought was
catastrophic defeat. But it would be an admission of an early and mistaken end
to the war, hence a smudge on his most acclaimed achievement, were Mr. Bush to
order troops back to the gulf to finish the job. Nor is it clear that this time
he'd have worldwide support.

Both at home and abroad, therefore, challenge and change are demanding more of
George Bush -- vision, bold leadership, intuitive understanding -- than he seems
able to give. Nearly a year after Desert Storm, his moment of glory seems far in
the past, and irrelevant to a future in which standing tall will rarely be
sufficient.

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
One Man's Approach To Sexual Obsession

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 27; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 662 words


"Ted and Venus" tells of a sadly dissipated drifter who lives in Venice, Calif.,
and becomes obsessed with a beautiful young woman he first glimpses on the
beach. Since Ted (Bud Cort), an ex-mental patient who is an aspiring and
supposedly talented poet, expresses his longing for Linda (Kim Adams) largely by
means of surprise visits and obscene phone calls, it's not surprising that their
relations never get past the tenuous stage until the film reaches its bleak
finale.

Directed by Mr. Cort and based on a Southern Californian newspaper story, "Ted
and Venus" seems to regard Ted as a good-hearted innocent. The audience isn't
likely to share that view. Mr. Cort, still best remembered for his role as Ruth
Gordon's young suitor in "Harold and Maude," directs other actors with some
assurance but seems to have little idea of how he himself comes across on the
screen. Alternating between wide-eyed naivete, dopey humor (in his stridently
awful poetry readings) and boozy exaggeration, he turns Ted into an
unsympathetic pest and makes Linda's attempts to avoid him understandable.
Indeed, when Ted first expresses his yearning for Linda, he affects a kind of
dog-paddle and seems to be experiencing apoplexy rather than love.

One of the film's particularly unfortunate touches, after Linda takes legal
measures to keep Ted from tackling her, is a courtroom scene in which Ted's
lawyer (Martin Mull) cavalierly concocts a story of how Linda invited Ted for a
walk on the beach and attempted to seduce him. The audience knows this to be a
lie, and not a terribly original one at that.

Among the film's would-be appealing aspects are Ted's lecherous come-ons to
almost any woman he meets. ("That's not a leer, honey -- he always looks like
that," says Jim Brolin, as Ted's unaccountably loyal friend, to Carol Kane as a
giddy prostitute). Also memorable for the wrong reasons is a scene in which Ted
steals a chainsaw from another lunatic, who is juggling with it, and takes the
device over to Linda's apartment. There, he threatens to cut off his fingers to
win her love. Mr. Cort's performance actually improves when Ted ceases to be
this cute and begins looking suicidally depressed.

"Ted and Venus" has to its credit a vivid sense of the numerology, yoga classes
and dulcimer lessons that color California beach life, circa 1974, when the
story takes place, and an interesting cast. In addition to Mr. Brolin, who's
surprisingly plausible as a jaunty, hard-drinking hipster, and Ms. Adams, gently
alluring in what once would have been the Leigh Taylor-Young nubile hippie role,
the film also features Gena Rowlands, who plays Linda's mother and flatly
advises her daughter to get a restraining order against the obnoxious Ted. Also
in the film are Woody Harrelson, obscured inside a cardboard box for his role as
a homeless Vietnam veteran, Dr. Timothy Leary as a judge and Pamella D'Pella as
another bad poet who is featured prominently in the locker-room shots Mr. Cort
favors. It's hard to know whether these are meant to affirm Ted's lust for life
or bolster his image as a creep.

"Ted and Venus" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian). It includes sexually explicit language and partial nudity.

Ted and Venus

Directed by Bud Cort; screenplay by Paul Ciotti and Mr. Cort, story by Mr.
Ciotti; director of photography, Dietrich Lohmann; edited by Katina Zinner;
music by David Robbins; production designer, Lynn Christopher; produced by
Randolf Turrow and William Talmadge; released by Double Helix. Running time: 100
minutes. This film is rated R.

Ted Whitley . . . Bud Cort
Max Waters . . . Jim Brolin
Linda Turner . . . Kim Adams
Colette . . . Carol Kane
Gloria . . . Pamella D'Pella
Herb . . . Brian Thompson
Grace . . . Rhea Perlman
Mrs. Turner . . . Gena Rowlands
Ted's lawyer . . . Martin Mull
Judge H. Converse . . . Dr. Timothy Leary
Homeless Vietnam veteran . . . Woody Harrelson

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film: J.F.K.;
When Everything Amounts to Nothing

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words


IN one of the dizzying barrage of images with which Oliver Stone begins "J. F.
K.," President Dwight D. Eisenhower is seen on television not long before he
left office in 1961. It is one of Ike's finer moments.

There he is, the former five-star general, the man who salvaged the Presidency
for the Republican Party, warning the American people to beware of the
military-industrial complex, a vested interest that, one might reasonably
suppose, was oriented more toward the Republicans than the Democrats.

"J. F. K." goes on for another three hours or so. Yet as busy and as full of
exposition as it is, it never becomes much more specific than Ike.  The
conspiracy that, "J. F. K." says, led to the assassination of Eisenhower's
successor, John F. Kennedy, in Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, remains far more vague
than the movie pretends.

According to "J. F. K.," the conspiracy includes just about everybody up to what
are called the Government's highest levels, but nobody in particular can be
identified except some members of the scroungy New Orleans-Dallas-Galveston
demimonde.

That the subject is hot is apparent from all the criticism the movie received
even before it was completed. The ferocity of that outrage should now subside,
in part because "J. F. K.," for all its sweeping innuendos and splintery
music-video editing, winds up breathlessly but running in place.

The movie will continue to infuriate people who possibly know as much about the
assassination as Mr. Stone does, but it also shortchanges the audience and at
the end plays like a bait-and-switch scam.

"J. F. K." builds to a climactic courtroom drama, the details of which it
largely avoids, to allow Kevin Costner, the film's four-square star, to deliver
a sermon about America's future with an emotionalism that is completely
unearned.

What the film does do effectively is to present the case for the idea that there
actually was a conspiracy, rather than the lone gunman, Lee Harvey Oswald,
specified by the Warren Commission report. Beyond that "J. F. K." cannot go with
any assurance. This is no "All the President's Men." The only payoff is the
sight of Mr. Costner with tears in his eyes.

The film's insurmountable problem is the vast amount of material it fails to
make coherent sense of. Mr. Stone and Zachary Sklar, who collaborated on the
screenplay, take as their starting point Jim Garrison's book, "On the Trail of
the Assassins."

Mr. Garrison, played in the film by Mr. Costner, is the former New Orleans
District Attorney who, five years after the assassination, unsuccessfully
prosecuted Clay Shaw, a New Orleans businessman, in connection with the Kennedy
murder.

To give the film something resembling conventional shape, Mr. Stone has turned
Mr. Garrison into what he describes as "a Frank Capra character," that is, a
plain, dedicated down-home fellow called Jim, someone who represents "the best
American traditions."

Like millions of Americans, the movie's Jim admires President Kennedy and mourns
him when he is murdered. But Jim also comes to see Kennedy as the 20th century's
great fearless dove, whose death might be traced, if only the facts were allowed
to come out, to everyone who benefited from his death. These would include
corporations profiting from the Vietnam War, members of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Secret Service and, by
clever indirection, even President Lyndon B. Johnson, Kennedy's Vice President.

Acting in concert with them or at their behest, though in ways that remain
undetermined, are ultra-right-wing fanatics represented in the movie by Clay
Shaw (Tommy Lee Jones), some unidentified Cuban exiles and a former F.B.I. man
named Guy Bannister (Ed Asner). Also involved are various fringe types like
David Ferrie (Joe Pesci), a pilot for hire; the small-time mobster Jack Ruby
(Brian Doyle Murray), and Oswald (Gary Oldman), whose place in the conspiracy
has become utterly mysterious by the time the movie ends.

"J. F. K." begins with a promise of intrigue and revelation, though it soon
becomes clear that Mr. Stone is Fibber McGee opening the door to an overstuffed
closet. He is buried under all the facts, contradictory testimony, hearsay and
conjecture that he would pack into the movie.

What is fact and what isn't is not always easy to tell. Though one character is
officially listed as having committed suicide, the movie allows us to see him
being forced to take lethal pills. This is not speculation. Anything shown in a
movie tends to be taken as truth.

The movie sees everything through the bespectacled eyes of the tireless Jim. "J.
F. K." suffers with him when the Donna Reed character, Jim's wife, Liz (Sissy
Spacek), says, "Honestly, I think sometimes you care more about John Kennedy
than you do your own family!"

Jim has missed a luncheon at Antoine's with Liz and the children. Some things,
such as Presidential assassinations, require terrible sacrifices from those who
would investigate them.

"J. F. K." is suitably aghast when Jim goes to the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington to meet a man who identifies himself only as X (Donald Sutherland)
but who is obviously high in the military-industrial complex. X is the one who,
in a very long omnibus sort of monologue accompanied by images that jump all
over the world, suggests that Jim check into the participation in the conspiracy
of everyone who stood to gain from Kennedy's death.

Says Jim in his golly-gee-whiz manner, "I never realized that Kennedy was so
dangerous to the Establishment!"

The movie rushes frantically on, its unsubstantiated data accumulating while Jim
becomes a victim of a caustic press and a vicious, self-serving Establishment.
Little by little Mr. Stone seems to identify Jim with John Kennedy. When X says
of the conspiracy, "It's as old as the Crucifixion," it suddenly appears that
the film maker would elevate Jim and John to an even higher pantheon.

By the time "J. F. K." reaches the Clay Shaw trial, most uninformed members of
the movie audience will be exhausted and bored. The movie, which is
simultaneously arrogant and timorous, has been unable to separate the important
material from the merely colorful. After a certain point, audience interest
tunes out. It's a jumble.

"J. F. K." rivets in the manner that was intended in two sequences: its
presentation of the evidence about the number of bullets fired at the Kennedy
motorcade and its presentation of the so-called Zapruder film, the record of the
assassination itself. But even in these latter sequences, the movie remains an
undifferentiated mix of real and staged material.

Mr. Stone's hyperbolic style of film making is familiar: lots of short, often
hysterical scenes tumbling one after another, backed by a soundtrack that is
layered, strudel-like, with noises, dialogue, music, more noises, more dialogue.
It works better in "Born on the Fourth of July" and "The Doors" than it does
here, in a movie that means to be a sober reflection on history suppressed.

Some of the performances are good, all by actors who get on and off fairly fast:
Mr. Jones, Mr. Pesci, Mr. Asner, Jack Lemmon (as a feckless crony of one of the
New Orleans suspects) and Kevin Bacon, who plays a male hustler.

When Walter Matthau turns up for a brief, not especially rewarding turn as
Senator Russell B. Long, "J. F. K." looks less as if it had been cast in the
accepted way than subscribed to, like a worthy cause. The cause may well be
worthy; the film fails it.

"J. F. K." is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).
It has some scenes of violence and bloodshed and a good deal of vulgar language.


J. F. K.

Directed by Oliver Stone; screenplay by Mr. Stone and Zachary Sklar, based on
the books "On the Trail of the Assassins" by Jim Garrison and "Crossfire: The
Plot That Killed Kennedy" by Jim Marrs; director of photography, Robert
Richardson; edited by Joe Hutshing and Pietro Scalia; production designer,
Victor Kempster; music by John Williams; produced by A. Kitman Ho and Mr. Stone.
Running time: 188 minutes. This film is rated R.

Jim Garrison . . . Kevin Costner
Liz Garrison . . . Sissy Spacek
David Ferrie . . . Joe Pesci
Clay Shaw . . . Tommy Lee Jones
Lee Harvey Oswald . . . Gary Oldman
Lou Ivon . . . Jay O. Sanders
Bill Broussard . . . Michael Rooker
Jack Martin . . . Jack Lemmon
Senator Russell B. Long . . . Walter Matthau
Colonel X . . . Donald Sutherland
Willie O'Keefe . . . Kevin Bacon
Guy Bannister . . . Edward Asner
Jack Ruby . . . Brian Doyle Murray

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The case for conspiracy -- Kevin Costner as Jim Garrison faces
the press in "J. F. K." (Warner Brothers) (pg. C1); Sissy Spacek (Warner
Brothers) (pg. C12)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 20, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Who Is Rewriting History?

BYLINE: By Oliver Stone;  Oliver Stone directed and co-wrote the screenplay for
'J.F.K.'

SECTION: Section A; Page 35; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words


Members of the media establishment get upset when art gets political, especially
when they disagree with the politics and fear the viewpoint. When this
priesthood is challenged as the sole or privileged interpreters of our history,
they bludgeon newcomers, wielding heavy clubs like "objectivity" and charging
high crimes like "rewriting history."

The leading detractors of my film "J.F.K." have been political journalists like
Tom Wicker of The New York Times, George Lardner of The Washington Post, Dan
Rather of CBS News and Kenneth Auchincloss at Newsweek, all of whom covered
events of that period.

I think what is clear from their efforts to destroy my film's credibility is
that history may be too important to leave to newsmen. And that artists
certainly have the right -- and possibly the obligation -- to step in and
reinterpret the history of our times. Was it not Dan Rather who, upon viewing
Abraham Zapruder's film of the assassination, reported that the fatal shot to
the head drove President Kennedy "violently forward." Years later, when the film
was finally shown to the American people, it was clear that Kennedy's head was
going backward.

My critics are outraged that I pose the view that Kennedy's desire to wind down
the cold war and the Vietnam War is a possible motive for the murder. When a
leader of any country is assassinated, the media normally ask: "What political
forces were opposed to this leader and would benefit from his assassination?"

It seems a little strange to me, 28 years later, that such a question was rarely
asked once it was established that Lee Harvey Oswald was not simply mentally
ill. And that in its stead, the dramatic cover story, with Lee Harvey Oswald as
sole assassin and Jack Ruby as earnest vigilante, was immediately substituted
and accepted by almost the entire American media (in sharp contrast to the
foreign media). A great John Wayne movie, but why? Why was the possibility of a
political motive rarely discussed (or only vaguely attributed to diversionary
theories involving pro-Castro forces or the Mafia) after it was clear that there
was evidence that undercut the Warren Report?

Whether or not there was a fundamental difference between Kennedy's and
Johnson's Vietnam policies deserves more debate. For years most historians
assumed there was no basic difference. But people like John Newman, an Army
major in intelligence who has written a book on the subject, Fletcher Prouty, a
former Air Force colonel who served as director of special operations at the
Pentagon in the early 60's, and Peter Dale Scott, a professor at the University
of California at Berkeley, should have their day in court.

A basic chronology underlies their view. In June 1963 in a speech at American
University, Kennedy envisions a world without the cold war and arms race. He
sets the stage for detente, defying the "military-industrial complex," a phrase
coined by Eisenhower. Kennedy and Khrushchev have already negotiated the first
step: a modus vivendi on the Cuban problem (no Soviet missiles, no U.S.
invasion). In July 1963 they install the nuclear hotline and in August sign the
first-ever nuclear test-ban treaty.

Later in August, Gen. Charles de Gaulle of France proposes a reunited, neutral
Vietnam and plans to visit Kennedy in February to talk about it.  In September,
Kennedy states that the war is Vietnam's, not ours, to decide and then he
approves secret negotiations with Fidel Castro outside State Department-C.I.A.
channels. In October, the White House forecasts that 1,000 men would be
withdrawn from Vietnam by the end of 1963 and that the U.S. military mission
would be over by the end of 1965. That same month, Kennedy authorizes the
pullout in a national security action memo -- NSAM 263. The Government projects
major Pentagon cuts.

Kennedy is killed on Nov. 22. Two days later, Lyndon Johnson meets with Henry
Cabot Lodge and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the Vietnam "crisis." Four days
after the assassination, Johnson overrides NSAM 263 with NSAM 273 -- step one in
reversing Kennedy's direction. A "withdrawal" occurs on paper -- 1,000 men are
rotated home -- but more are sent back to Vietnam by February. Johnson's NSAM
273 opens the way for air attacks on North Vietnam and increased covert warfare.
Finally, in August 1964, Johnson uses the bogus Tonkin Gulf incident to start
the air war and win a Congressional mandate to do as he sees fit in Vietnam.

By March 1965, 15 months after Kennedy's death, the first combat troops are
sent, something Kennedy refused to do. No difference between Kennedy and Johnson
on Vietnam? With the nexus of interest -- military, business, political --
standing to profit from the hundred-billion-dollar war, there's ample reason to
believe that therein lies the motive.

Jim Garrison, though some have tried to discredit him, sought that motive and in
suggesting the possibility of a nightmare unacceptable to our official
historians, he has been vilified through time. The failure of his case against
Clay Shaw cannot be equated with a full vindication of the Warren Report. To
bring a case against the covert apparatus of this country was nigh impossible
then, as it is now with Lawrence Walsh's failure to find the light of day
against Oliver North and the Iran-contra plotters.

The issue of our times -- as the media keep repeating -- is democracy. Real
democracy is not some illusion and must be based on truth told to the people. We
applauded the Soviets when, in the name of democracy, they finally told their
people the horrible truth of Stalin's murders, yet we ignore the murder of our
President. Do our people deserve any less? If Kennedy was killed by a political
conspiracy of his opponents and it has been covered up, then our so-called
democratic system has betrayed us.

The real issue is trusting the people with their real history. The real issue is
opening all the files of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, embargoed
until 2029, today. The real issue is opening all C.I.A., F.B.I. and military
intelligence files, held for all eternity, on Oswald, Ruby, Kennedy and Dallas
1963. All of them -- without the crucial parts blacked out. Only then can we
start to have a real democracy. "J.F.K." strikes a blow for that open debate.

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FED CUTS KEY RATE IT CHARGES BANKS TO A 27-YEAR LOW

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1367 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


In a bold move to revive the slumping economy, the Federal Reserve chopped its
bedrock discount rate today by a full point, to 3 1/2 percent, the lowest level
since 1964.

The surprisingly big cut was seen as part of a broad effort to stimulate
borrowing and perk up an economy whose signs of recovery from recession have all
but vanished. The discount rate is what the Federal Reserve charges on loans to
banks but its significance is in the message it carries to the financial markets
and businesses and consumers.

In addition to cutting the discount rate, the Federal Reserve also signaled
today that it had cut a second key interest rate, the Federal funds rate, which
banks charge each other on overnight loans. That rate also fell more than
expected, by one-half percentage point, to 4 percent, instead of an anticipated
one-quarter point.

Taking the cue, the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company quickly slashed its prime
lending rate to 6 1/2 percent from 7 1/2 percent, and many other big banks
followed, including Citicorp, Chase Manhattan, Chemical, Manufacturers Hanover
and First National Bank of Chicago.

Because the prime rate is used as a benchmark for many kinds of borrowing,
including home-equity loans and other adjustable rate mortgages, such cuts
benefit both consumers and businesses, which widely hailed today's moves.

Cheaper Mortgage Expected

The rate cut is also expected to put some downward pressure on rates for
conventional mortgages. If mortgage rates were to drop a quarter point, for
example, this would mean the monthly payment on a $200,000 loan would fall by
$36. Since January 1991, rates for fixed-rate mortgages have fallen from 10
percent to what John Tuccillo, chief economist for the National Association of
Realtors, predicts will be 8 percent by next month, a saving of $288 a month.
For an adjustable-rate mortgage, which he expects will fall to 6 percent from 8
1/2 percent over the same period, a borrower would save $338 a month.

Savers, however, will be hurt by today's cut in rates, as banks within days
further shrink the interest rates they pay on new certificates of deposit, and
yields fall similarly for money market funds.

The bond and stock markets surged today, but the dollar fell in world currency
markets as lower interest rates made American investments relatively less
attractive.

Describing the discount rate cut, the Fed stated: "The reduction was made on the
basis of cumulating evidence, notably monetary and credit conditions, as well as
current economic conditions, that point to a receding of inflationary
pressures." It said this move, "together with the cumulative effects already in
train from previous actions, should provide the basis for a resumption of
sustained economic expansion."

The White House has repeatedly urged the Fed to relax monetary policy, and
President Bush, whose standing in public opinions has been plummeting over his
handling of the economy, called the discount-rate cut "a significant step" that
will help to create jobs. "I commend this latest Federal Reserve Board action,
which will significantly help our efforts to turn the economy around and get
America back to work," he said in a statement.

Democrats in Congress generally welcomed the moves, but several chided the Fed
for moving too slowly. "He should have done a point two months ago, three months
ago," said Richard A. Gephardt, the House majority leader, referring to the
Fed's chairman, Alan Greenspan. Senator Donald W. Riegle Jr. of Michigan, head
of the Banking Committee, said the action "reflects their anxiety."

A Federal Reserve spokesman said the decision, approved by a 6-to-1 vote, was
made at a meeting of the board of governors called on short notice for Thursday
evening. One Wall Street specialist said that such sessions were highly unusual
and that this one was particularly remarkable in that it came only two days
after a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed's chief
policy-making body.

The discount rate cut was the biggest since December 1981, when the rate dropped
to 12 percent from 13 percent. The move carried the rate to a level exactly half
that of the 7 percent at which it stood as recently as mid-December 1990.

Time and again over the last year the Fed has cut both its administered discount
rate and the overnight private market rate over which it exerts substantial
control. But its gradual approach has not succeeded in pulling the economy out
of the recession that began in July 1990. Activity did pick up during the summer
and early fall -- resulting in modest growth of gross domestic product for the
second and third quarters.

The Commerce Department today published its second revision of American gross
domestic product for the third quarter -- the total output within the nation's
borders -- putting it at a negligibly higher 1.8 percent annual rate instead of
the 1.7 percent announced Dec. 4.

But the fragile rebound seems to have crumbled in the last several weeks. Among
other things, confidence has eroded, the job market has worsened and retail
sales have stagnated.

While there had been talk earlier this month that the Fed might do something
emphatic to jolt the economy to life, Mr. Greenspan left the impression in an
appearance before the House Ways and Means Committee on Wednesday that he would
continue a policy of gradualism.

Signaling the Fed's Intentions

It was not entirely clear today whether the Fed made its decision to ease more
aggressively at Tuesday's Open Market Committee meeting or whether the move was
prompted by subsequent events, like the report on Thursday morning of a big jump
in first-time claims for unemployment insurance and the unexpectedly sharp
increases that German authorities posted for their discount and Lombard rates.
The German anti-inflation move, which is expected to slow economic growth in
that country, could lead to reduced demand for American exports, one of the few
sources of strength.

The Fed governor Wayne D. Angell dissented from the discount-rate decision,
which the Fed said was instigated by the regional banks in New York and Chicago.
Mr. Angell's office said he would not comment on his rationale.

But a summary of policy actions of the Nov. 5 Open Market Committee meeting
published today showed Mr. Angell to have been one of two members voting against
an easier policy adopted at that time and confirmed in a discount rate cut the
next day.

Dissent Among Fed Governors

"Mr. Angell dissented because he was concerned about the impact of further
easing on inflation expectations and consequently on long-term interest rates,"
the record for that meeting showed. "In his view, the prospect for a robust and
long-lasting recovery is dependent on the completion of adjustments in business
pricing practices, household savings and balance sheets more generally. Monetary
policy actions that are perceived as a shift from a focus on price-level
stability to one on short-term economic growth may well abort the needed
adjustments."

The other dissenter on Nov. 5 was Edward W. Kelley Jr., who cited the still
unseen effects of earlier stimulus and the "considerable risks" that further
easing would fuel fears of higher inflation. Since then, however, inflation has
continued at a subdued 3 to 3.5 percent pace and the economy has deteriorated
further.

Today's action means various real short-term interest rates -- actual rate less
inflation rate -- are barely positive. Analysts have noted that, while interest
rates have come down across the entire spectrum this year, long-term yields in
particular have remained fairly high in real terms. That is, 8 percent mortgages
at a time of 3 percent to 3.5 percent inflation means real rates of 4.5 to 5
percent.

The discount rate cut, announced at 8:30 A.M. today and effective immediately,
was the sixth in the past year. At 3 1/2 percent, the rate is the lowest since
November 1964, when it was raised to 4 percent from 3 percent during the
military buildup in Vietnam. No official records are kept of the Federal funds
rate, but one Wall Street specialist said he believed it had not been as low as
4 percent since 1963.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: Graph showing the discount rate from 1960 to 1990. (pg. 1);
"Prime Drops to 1977 Level" shows the prime rate from 1975 to 1991. (pg.
43)(Source: Federal Reserve)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

End to Cambodian Embargo Seems Near

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


The Bush Administration appears to be on the verge of lifting a United States
embargo on Cambodia that has been in effect since 1975, when Americans fled the
advancing Khmer Rouge and their brutal restructuring of the nation.

Members of Congress, who have been urging the Administration to end the embargo
since a Cambodian peace accord was signed in Paris on Oct. 23, say an
announcement may be made to coincide with President Bush's trip to Asia
beginning Dec. 30. The State Department says only that action is expected "in
the near future."

With the decision this week by the Treasury Department to relax a ban and allow
American travel agents to arrange tours to Vietnam, lifting the embargo on trade
with Cambodia would open the way for American business to return to Indochina
for the first time since the end of the Vietnam War.

Trade restrictions against Vietnam, whose Government Washington does not yet
formally recognize, are being discussed in a working group of United States and
Vietnamese representatives. The United States has maintained diplomatic
relations with Laos, but trade has been minimal.

Unease About Khmer Rouge

In the House and Senate, there is disquiet among both Democrats and Republicans
over what is described as an overly passive American policy on Cambodia. The
Khmer Rouge, backed by China, remains the strongest of four Cambodian factions
now linked in an interim governing council, and elections for a new government
are not expected until 1993 at the earliest.

No efforts have yet been made to disarm the factions. A United Nations
coordinator for all programs in Cambodia, including disarmament of the groups
and resettlement of their civilian followers, has not been named.

Representative Chester G. Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts, says the United
States will bear great responsibility if the Khmer Rouge becomes a renewed
threat, since Washington and the Chinese have insisted on a role for the faction
in the peace process.

Mr. Atkins, who serves on the House Appropriations Committee, says that when
Administration officials approach Congress in the new year with requests for
millions of dollars to pay for American commitments to the rebuilding of
Cambodia, they will be pressed for an unambiguous policy opposing a role for the
Khmer Rouge under the faction's current leadership.

Lawmakers Write to Bush

"One single clear and continuing theme in United States policy to Cambodia has
been our insistence on the inclusion of the Khmer Rouge in the interim
Government," Mr. Atkins said in an interview today. "That is really quite
astonishing. It sent an enormous signal to the Cambodian people that the killing
fields could very easily happen again."

Early this month, Mr. Atkins persuaded 56 Senators and 247 Representatives to
sign a letter to President Bush asking that the Administration lend its weight
to actions insuring that the Khmer Rouge cannot return to power in any part of
Cambodia.

The letter also asks President Bush to support an international tribunal to try
the Khmer Rouge leadership for genocide. More than one million Cambodians died
during a reign of terror by the radical Communist movement from 1975 to late
1978.

"Every day's delay by President Bush in lifting the trade embargo on Cambodia
benefits the Khmer Rouge," Senator Alan Cranston said in a statement issued
today.

Vietnam and Cambodia, two of the world's poorest and least developed nations,
say an end to American economic sanctions would be critical to their economic
growth.

John Gunther Dean, the last American Ambassador to Cambodia before the Khmer
Rouge takeover, said this week in an interview that the United States had a
special responsibility to help the Cambodians rebuild in safety.

"A lot of people look at us and say, 'What's the U.S. going to do?' " he said.
Mr. Dean was lobbying as an envoy of Unesco, which is seeking aid for
educational and cultural projects and establishing Cambodia's's first free
press.

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Debate on Health Care: Long on Posturing, Short on Details

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 47; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: NASHUA, N.H., Dec. 20


Seizing on what is expected to be a powerful campaign issue, the various
Democratic candidates sought to portray themselves at a debate Thursday night as
the most committed to improving health care.

The debate, which was sponsored by the New Hampshire Democratic Party and took
health care as its theme, was marked largely by sloganeering and posturing as
some of the candidates were hard pressed to explain their proposals in detail.

But the moderator, Senator John D. Rockefeller 4th, a health care authority on
Capitol Hill, said it was significant that the candidates viewed health as an
important campaign issue. They are mindful, he said, that Harris Wofford, who
upset former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh in a Senate race in Pennsylvania
last month, made health care a centerpiece of his campaign.

"Health care is the issue which touches everyone in this country," Mr.
Rockefeller, a West Virginia Democrat, said in an interview after the debate.
"It has become emblematic of domestic needs."

Mr. Rockefeller said several candidates still "have to work through the process
of learning" about the nation's health care difficulties. But those at the
debate were not hesitant to attack President Bush on the issue.

"George Bush was born with a silver stethoscope around his neck," said Senator
Tom Harkin of Iowa. "He doesn't understand. I say health care is not a
privilege, but a right."

Offering Details

Two candidates, Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and former Senator Paul E.
Tsongas of Massachusetts, offered more details than the others. They also put
forth the most personal accounts, saying that they were alive because of the
nation's health care system and that all Americans should have such access to
it. Mr. Kerrey lost part of his leg in Vietnam and Mr. Tsongas cut short his
Senate career in the mid-1980's after he was found to be suffering from
lymphatic cancer.

"I learned to be scared, really scared," asserted Mr. Tsongas, who said he was
now cured. "For me, this is not just another issue."

Mr. Tsongas said he would require employers who do not provide health insurance
for their workers to begin doing so. He also called for greater competition
among health insurers, which he said would control costs. And he renewed his
challenge to the other candidates to "put your plan on the table" and give it to
an independent expert who would weigh its merits against Mr. Tsongas's own
proposals.

Perhaps the most detailed plan was advanced by Mr. Kerrey, who has introduced
legislation that would provide universal health care financed by a 5 percent
payroll tax, a 2 percent tax on nonwage income and increased income taxes on the
wealthy.

Mr. Kerrey vowed to push such a plan through Congress in his first 100 days as
President. From then on, he said, patients will be asked, "Where does it hurt?"
not "How are you going to pay for it?"

Universal Coverage

Mr. Harkin said his plan would emphasize universal coverage without raising
taxes, but he did not make clear how it would be financed. He said it would also
stress preventive care and more money for medical research.

Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of Virginia said that he would lay out a detailed plan in
coming weeks and that it would include elements of a proposal he has advanced in
his own state to expand health care for children. It is "a national tragedy"
that so many Americans are now uninsured, he said.

Another candidate with few details was former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California. He sounded his recurrent theme against special interests, berating
the health care industry as "greedy people who are ripping off the system." He
said he favored a system of universal health care financed with public money.

The other major candidate, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, skipped the debate to
attend a campaign fund raiser in Atlanta. He has said he supported universal
coverage paid for by savings derived from Government-imposed cost controls and
efforts to reduce billing fraud.

Extra Candidates

In addition to the major candidates' lack of details, the forum did not get much
beyond generalities because two uninvited candidates were allowed to take part
after their supporters noisily objected to their exclusion. The addition of
these two candidates left little time for follow-up questions.

First Larry Agran, former Mayor of Irvine, Calif., was given a seat after he
rose from the audience to protest his lack of an invitation. Then Lenora B.
Fulani, an independent Presidential candidate in 1988 who is seeking the
Democratic nomination next year, was allowed to join after her supporters began
chanting her name.

One invited Democrat, former Senator Eugene J. McCarthy of Minnesota, who
earlier in the day filed to run in the New Hampshire primary, mostly cracked
jokes. "I find I have to come up here and prove that I'm alive," said Mr.
McCarthy, who has run for President four times before.

Health care professionals made up the bulk of the audience for the debate, held
in a crowded hotel ballroom here. Several people in the audience said they were
heartened by the attention to health issues but distressed by the candidates'
lack of preparation.

Dr. Irwin Redlener, a pediatrician from Manhattan, described aspects of the
debate as "vaudevillian," saying a number of candidates were still learning the
issue.

"I found myself cringing to see that a serious candidate would offer one piece
of paper to solve this problem," he said, apparently referring to Mr. Tsongas,
who during the debate held up a single page, which bore the highlights of his
proposal. "On the positive side, at least we have one of the major political
parties focused on this as a political issue."

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1145 words


"On the Sunshine Coast that year, summertime was long and hot and dusty, and the
world smelled of raspberries and roses," writes L. R. Wright in FALL FROM GRACE
(Viking, $18.95), the fourth mystery in her atmospheric series set in western
Canada. Give it a chance, because the author takes her sweet time getting to the
action; but eventually this luscious world will also smell of blood.

The coastal village of Sechelt is all agog when Bobby Ransome returns home after
10 years, most of them spent in jail. Beaming charisma, Bobby unsettles his
eccentric aunt and drives his former sweethearts to distraction. "I tell you,"
one neglected husband complains, "the man's an infestation." No wonder people
barely notice Steven Grayson -- who has also come home after a long absence --
until his body tumbles off a cliff and onto a beach.

While the mystery elements of her plot are not particularly mysterious, Ms.
Wright's characters have depths that both puzzle and amaze. "He's never known
what to do about me," says a discontented wife whose husband can feel but not
fathom the passion behind her reserve. "So he hits me." There is also something
to be said for the author's evocation of the eroticism of summer that rises in
steamy waves off the gardens and beaches of Sechelt. Although she has written
well of her country in the cold and damp of the year, summer does seem to be her
best literary season.

Mae West, Eleanor Roosevelt, Howard Hughes, the Marx Brothers -- the private eye
Toby Peters has hauled all of these notables out of terrible jams in more than a
dozen period capers by Stuart M. Kaminsky. Now, in THE MELTING CLOCK (Mysterious
Press/Warner, $17.95), the intrepid Hollywood detective finds himself performing
a similar service for Salvador Dali. The case begins as something of a lark,
with Toby tossing wisecracks over his shoulder as he chases the thief who made
off with three of Dali's paintings and three antique clocks belonging to his
Russian-born wife. But when two corpses show up, along with two mutilated
canvases, Dali admits that an elaborate joke, his little chiste, has taken a
dark and dangerous turn.

Unlike some of Toby's previous clients, the flamboyant prankster-artist holds
his own among the hero's circle of zany friends in Mr. Kaminsky's Technicolor
fantasy of 1940's Hollywood. "Very few people know who I am. And I am not one of
them," declares Dali, who maintains his dignity while wearing clown suits and
bunny costumes. In the glow of the author's nostalgia -- for an era when
Americans were eating their Wheaties, puffing Old Golds and praying for their
boys on bombing missions over Wake Island -- Dali's surreal visions actually
make a lot more sense than they probably did at the time.

Dave Garrett, a disbarred Philadelphia lawyer turned private eye, has three days
to mop up an insurance case in Neil Albert's tantalizingly twisted first novel,
THE JANUARY CORPSE (Walker, $18.95). Here's how it goes: Seven years ago, a
sharp young lawyer ("a litigator, a gunslinger, as they say") with a shady
clientele disappeared without a trace. If Dave can present evidence at a
presumption-of-death court hearing that the man did not deliberately skip town,
his family can collect the insurance. Time is short, but even the (presumed)
deceased's mother thinks the job's a snap. "His car was found empty, shot full
of holes, and full of blood," she tells Dave. "Don't take a lawyer to figure
that one out."

Actually, it takes a disbarred Philadelphia lawyer turned private eye to dig out
the truth in this convoluted case, which involves extensive fieldwork in the
Pennsylvania coal regions ("sad, worn-out country, full of dead hopes") and a
fevered car chase through Amish country. The plot is wrapped up with a
preposterous flourish of noir romanticism that surprisingly fails to jar the
solid impression made by Mr. Albert, a practicing attorney with a sturdy handle
on investigative legal work, and by his novice detective, who carries a
briefcase in one hand and a gun in the other -- and who can do considerable
damage with both.

Woe and lackaday. Even the local constabulary are down in the dumps in Dorothy
Simpson's 10th Luke Thanet mystery, DOOMED TO DIE (Scribners, $19.95). Inspector
Thanet's mother-in-law has had a heart attack; Sergeant Lineham's wife is
clinically depressed; and Superintendent Draco has just learned that his beloved
wife, Angharad, has leukemia. Among the civilian populace of this suddenly
blighted Kentish town, a young nanny is stricken with a ruptured appendix, and
the woman who takes her place, a tormented artist with an abusive husband and a
dying mother, is found murdered. "Bit of an avalanche of doom and despair this
morning," observes Thanet, who doesn't yet know the half of it. Before long,
it's standing room only at the local hospital.

Ms. Simpson makes skillful, if lugubrious, use of the genre's conventions to
examine issues common to most people's domestic lives. Responding to Thanet's
shrewd interview techniques, spouses confess to obsessive feelings for their
marital partners, parents and children reveal their preoccupations with one
another's health, and everyone develops a dread of hospitals. Given the author's
overamplification of her theme, we can sympathize with that one.

Tom Bethany is some guy. Jerome Doolittle's private eye, who made his debut in
"Body Scissors" and now returns in STRANGLE HOLD (Pocket Books, $20), works out
of Cambridge, Mass. This paragon jogs along the Charles River, coaches the
Harvard wrestling team, swaps brittle banter with his brainy married lover,
knows his way around university libraries and keeps up with politically correct
causes. Besides being a former Olympic wrestler who can still do 400 sit-ups
without turning blue, he fought in Vietnam, worked as a bodyguard and as a pilot
and has a tough guy's fair tolerance of the arts. Gee, do you think the author
might have read a Robert B. Parker novel or two?

Bethany takes on the sort of case that would also appeal to Spenser when he
agrees to "research" the death, apparently by accidental autoerotic asphyxia, of
a young millionaire who supported an iconoclastic comedy troupe. If he can prove
the death wasn't suicide, the American Civil Liberties Union will inherit a
bundle. Bethany is a much more boyishly brutal version of Mr. Parker's hero,
however, and he's too intent on giving a flashy performance to spot the obvious
killer.

Despite the literary poaching, Mr. Doolittle, a speechwriter in the Carter
Administration, is a slick stylist. His characters have heft as well as
high-definition color, and except for some cartoon villains, they talk like the
people they're supposed to be. It's only Bethany who needs a leash; or better
yet, a plot with enough substance to keep the muscle-bound hero from crushing
its bones.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Portraits Capture the Memories of Jewish Immigrant Families

BYLINE: By ROBERTA HERSHENSON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 19; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 999 words

DATELINE: MOUNT KISCO


HISTORIANS may ponder how memory alters the truth. For artists like Marilyn
Cohen, memory is truth. Remembrance is her raw material and time is her medium
-- reworked with a playful hand in her collage portraits of families.

Two 4-year-old boys pose with their violins, but one boy in the painting is the
father as a child and the other is his son. The son wears the soldier's medals
he won later as a man -- before he died in a German prison camp at the end of
World War II.

Two girls in Victorian dresses play with a toy horse and wagon; the wagon is a
miniature version of the peddler's cart their father drove through Stonington,
Me., in the late 19th century.

One Thread Unites the Subjects

Ms. Cohen's multilayered collages, created from soft-hued, hand-dyed papers, are
based on photographs and the oral histories of her subjects. The people in her
portraits -- old and young, rural and urban -- have folk-art faces with round
cheeks and eyes that engage the viewer. One significant thread of experience
unites them: all belong to Jewish immigrant families who left Europe earlier in
this century and scattered throughout the United States.

"Where Did They Go When They Came to America?" is Ms. Cohen's two-year work in
progress, a series of 16 large portraits accompanied by short histories that
will be on view in the Joseph Gallery of the Hebrew Union College-Institute of
Religion in Manhattan through the end of the month. Each family represents a
different American state; the artist says the project will be complete when she
has painted families from every state.

The portraits Ms. Cohen creates in her studio show railroad hands in Nebraska,
tailors in Iowa, haberdashers in the Florida Keys and frontiersmen in New
Mexico. "Ruby Slippers," her latest, as yet unexhibited painting, depicts
farmers in Kansas.

Ms. Cohen has firsthand knowledge that not all Jewish immigrants settled on
Manhattan's Lower East Side; her own father was born and raised in Memphis. A
Southern Jew seemed exotic to her friends as she grew up in New York, she said,
but her father's roots instilled in her a curiosity about Jews in other parts of
the nation.

Two years ago, when Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion invited
her to create an exhibition for its gallery, she said she decided to build a
show around old family photographs -- her own and those of others -- that had
interested her. At first, she said, she was struck by the "huge regional
differences" between her father's Memphis pictures and those of her mother's
family in New York. As she continued to study photographs from many states,
however, Ms. Cohen said, she developed a different view.

"The regional differences dissolved and the collections became almost generic,"
the artist said.

The college had sought her out as a Jewish artist; Jewish families, therefore,
became her subjects. But according to the artist, they might just as easily have
been Irish or Italian. She is documenting America's history, Ms. Cohen said,
seen through Jewish eyes.

Families have found their way to her through word of mouth. Ms. Cohen said she
is not interested in famous clans but in "ordinary people we could all relate
to." When she spoke with Ruth Eisling, whose grandfather was Willi Speigelberg,
the Mayor of Santa Fe in 1884, it was not his prominence that interested the
artist but his habit of taking his 5-year-old granddaughter fishing.

All her portraits, including those not part of the project, which she does on
commission, emerge from interviews in which Ms. Cohen said she tries to get
recollections rolling. Looking at old pictures with someone from the family, she
asks questions like, "Where did your family come from? Why did they go to
wherever they went? What did they do to earn a living? How many children were
born here?"

"I have no idea whether anything they say is true, and I don't care," Ms. Cohen
said. "If that is what is remembered, that's what is true."

The paintings show success and good times because "when people tell me their
history, they remember what's positive," the artist said. Sadness and death are
there, too; by reading the history of "Primer: Wilmington, Del., 1938," for
example, viewers learn that the blond boy in the swing grew up to die as a
photojournalist in Vietnam. "Briefly . . .  a boy called Bubba: Houston, Texas
1930" shows a 4-year-old in a pony cart who died of polio seven years later. The
portrait reminds us that polio was "part of our history -- children died of it,"
Ms. Cohen said.

10 States to Go

Images in black-and-white photographs sent to her from all over the nation line
her studio walls: a woman standing with a horse in Louisville, Ky., in 1900; a
smiling girl wearing a smock dress and high-button shoes in Norfolk, Va., in
1919; a child on a pony in Denver, in 1930; two men in suits and bowler hats in
a wagon in Cheyenne, Wyo., in 1912.

A map on the wall also shows the states in which Ms. Cohen still hopes to find
families: Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, Utah, Arizona, West Virginia, Minnesota,
Maryland, Alaska and Hawaii. She knows there are Jewish families there, the
artist said -- it is just a matter of finding them.

When the project is completed in about two years, Ms. Cohen said she planned a
major exhibition that will travel nationwide. She said she also hoped to publish
a book of the portraits and oral histories.

Only two of the portraits show her own family -- her father and uncles on a
baseball team in 1923 and her mother and pet cat in 1938, with a pale image of
the artist as a child "before I had any recollections."

"So many times, people didn't know who someone in a photo was," Ms. Cohen said.
"I had such a need for these people not to be forgotten. If no one remembers
what you did or who you were, it's as though you never existed. It's the reason
Jews name children for people who have died, to perpetuate the memory," she
said. "Remembrance is very important to me."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marilyn Cohen in Mount Kisco studio and two of her collages,
"Ruby Slippers," left, and "Yankee Westward, Ho." (Photographs by Roberta
Hershenson)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'J.F.K.';
Via the Director's Viewfinder

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


To the Editor:

I am sorry that Tom Wicker, whom I respect as a journalist -- and who wrote so
insightfully on President John F. Kennedy and so movingly about his death --
chose to attack my film "J.F.K." ["Does 'J.F.K.' Conspire Against Reason?" Dec.
15].

I only wish that Mr. Wicker and other journalists who have so strongly
criticized my film would have applied over the years the same passionate
intensity of effort into trying to find out who really killed President Kennedy
and why.

In endorsing the vitriolic NBC documentary "discrediting" Jim Garrison, he fails
to note the program was so one-sided that Mr. Garrison successfully petitioned
the Federal Communications Commission for rebuttal time.

A declassified C.I.A. memo dated June 1, 1967, says that then NBC correspondent
Walter Sheridan was "coaching [witness] Gordon Novel to get maximum publicity
before picturing him on a TV program intended to destroy Garrison's act." The
show did not air until several weeks later -- how did the C.I.A. know its point
of view? So much for Mr. Wicker's "truth."

In casting me as "paranoid" regarding the media, Mr. Wicker is cynical when he
must know a first draft of the script of "J.F.K." was stolen and criticized in
such publications as The Washington Post and Time magazine. Never has an
unfinished movie been so prejudged and precensored. Even paranoids have enemies.
But on Mr. Wicker's playing field, the press is allowed to dish it out, but woe
if the victim tries to defend himself.

Let me further suggest that the media itself is part of the problem and seems to
resent it when an artist tries to interpret a history that newsmen have failed
to explain. From day 1, the American media (in contrast to most foreign media)
never looked for an honest motive in President Kennedy's killing and accepted
the cover story of Lee Harvey Oswald as lone assassin put out by Government
officials and reinforced by the appointed Warren Commission, which allowed the
intelligence agencies to disclose files and investigate leads at their
discretion.

In dismissing my rationale of President Kennedy's being "soft on Communism" as a
possible motive, Mr. Wicker is disingenuous when he denies that the military and
intelligence communities were apoplectic about J.F.K.'s policies, from the Bay
of Pigs (where he refused to supply air support) to the Cuban missile crisis,
where he refused to bomb Cuba and where he made a deal with Premier Nikita
Khrushchev), from the nuclear test-ban treaty to his October 1963 National
Security memorandum ordering the withdrawal of the first 1,000 troops from
Vietnam by Christmas. Several participants in books and oral histories have
attested to a high degree of tension between Kennedy and the military.

Nor does Mr. Wicker pay attention to the size and illegitimacy of Operation
Mongoose, or the back-channel negotiations with Fidel Castro because of C.I.A.
opposition, the impending closure of military bases at home and abroad and major
defense cuts. He ignores the fractious history of conflict with the Joint Chiefs
over Laos and Vietnam (as far back as 1961), which is described in a new book by
Maj. John Newman, "J.F.K. and Vietnam," and which was sent by my associates to
Mr. Wicker in the hopes he would accept a fresh perspective.

But, of course, artists are not allowed to invade the territory of "experts"
like Mr. Wicker, who in this case seems to be part of the problem, not the
solution. That is why, in my opinion, the best work on the Kennedy assassination
has come wholly from concerned private citizens.

Mr. Wicker accuses me of brainwashing the public with "the powerful instrument
of a motion picture." If nothing else, people's capacity to resist brainwashing
is shown by the fact that after 28 years of being pounded by the
Oswald-did-it-alone mantra, the majority still do not believe it, and that after
years of Kennedy-bashing, John F. Kennedy is still a figure of hope and idealism
to the American People.

In accusing me of subverting the Constitution and rewriting history in some sort
of artistic fascist takeover, I can only answer that I see it as a troubled
history in desperate need of full disclosure. If "J.F.K." is a small first step
in making that happen, then I know I've succeeded. There is absolutely no excuse
whatsoever for the American public to wait until 2029 for the House Select
Committee on Assassinations records to be released, nor to have the C.I.A.,
F.B.I. and military intelligence files withheld for all eternity.

Has Mr. Wicker in his cynicism totally given up on what de Tocqueville most
admired about America: its capacity for self-correction? If I am subverting
faith in our institutions at a critical time, I must wonder along with Jim
Garrison: "Is a government worth preserving when it lies to the people, when it
is no longer accountable to the people? It has become a dangerous country, sir.
I say, let justice be done though the heavens fall!"

OLIVER STONE
Santa Monica, Calif.

Mr. Wicker replies: The director of "J.F.K." is not, as he claims, an artist. He
is a polemicist.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPUS LIFE: Yale;
Exploring How Literary Gaps Express Trauma

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 45; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


"I have precisely begun with the impossibility of telling this story," wrote
Claude Lanzman, the director of "Shoah," a film about the Holocaust. "I have
made this impossibility my point of departure. Blindness was for me the vital
condition of creation."

Cathy Caruth, an assistant professor of English at Yale University, uses this
quotation to illustrate the premise of a course she teaches called "Literature,
Trauma and Culture." The course explores how gaps and ambiguity in literary
narratives and film express "truth" about traumatic experiences that concrete,
everyday language cannot.

To "begin with impossibility," Professor Caruth said, is to challenge students'
expectations of what it means to tell, to listen and to understand the past.

In the wake of the Vietnam war, terms such as "post-traumatic stress disorder"
have become common among psychologists seeking to explain why veterans are often
plagued by flashbacks and nightmares that wield the full force of their original
wartime horror. But more recently, the study of trauma and its effects has
crossed into other disciplines, including literature, history, sociology and
neurobiology. "All these fields are linked around the enigma of trauma,"
Professor Caruth said.

Outside Normal Memory

Her course defines trauma as an overwhelming experience that is inaccessible to
normal memory. Survivors of trauma often experience involuntary flashbacks that
seem as real and powerful as the actual event, but they cannot describe their
memories to others.

"We don't have a language to describe what these people experienced, because
violence done to people in concentration camps was also done to the language
itself," said Melissa Pozsgay, a comparative literature major from St. Louis
whose senior essay concerns poetry written by Holocaust survivors. "There is no
language of death in life."

Literature, Professor Caruth says, opens a window on traumatic experience
because it teaches readers to listen to what can be told only through metaphors
and ambiguous language. "In trauma, the history of an event returns in a way
that is not immediately recognized as the truth," she said.

An event is understood not only through the straightforward acquisition of
facts, but through a process of discovering where and why understanding and
memory fail. Students must "learn how to listen, to recognize gaps, breaks,
interruptions, repetitions, and not to see those just as a sign of fictionality,
but as a kind of truth telling," Professor Caruth said.

Tortured Music

Peter Gallanis, a literature major who writes a column about alternative music
for The Yale Herald, said the course has changed the way he thinks about meaning
and the expression of trauma in rock music. Mr. Gallanis, a senior from Mount
Prospect, Ill., said: "I listen to a lot of music that is tortured. When the
lyrics disintegrate, the sound of the voice becomes noise, or something that
cannot be read."

The study of trauma in language is especially relevant to the testimony of
abused children and to disciplines such as history and journalism, which depend
on witnesses to construct a narrative.

"By looking for where there are leaps and inconsistencies in statements you get
an understanding of what a person is really trying to say," said Ms. Pozsgay,
who says she plans to become a journalist.

The stakes are very high when an entire culture fails to assimilate a historical
trauma, said Professor Caruth, who has just edited two special issues of
American Imago, a psychoanalytic quarterly; the issues were called
"Psychoanalysis, Culture and Trauma." Just as alcoholism tends to recur in
families where it is not acknowledged, trauma may be passed between generations
in a culture, causing painful history to repeat itself.

"One consequence of the failure to assimilate a traumatic experience would be
that things get repeated," Professor Caruth said. "You act out, or repeat
through aggression and violence what isn't assimilated and remains unconscious."

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Peace Process Comes to Halt as Demonstrations Sweep Capital

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 21


Cambodia's fragile peace process came to a halt today when the Government told
leaders of the Khmer Rouge to stay out of the country as major protest
demonstrations -- the first since before the Khmer Rouge reign of terror here in
the 1970's that took a million lives -- swept through Phnom Penh's streets.

While the demonstrations were occasioned by the expected return of two of the
Khmer Rouge's most hated leaders, they seemed more directed today at the Vietnam
-backed Government. By the end of the day, Prime Minister Hun Sen was making
broadcasts demanding an end to the demonstrations, and the protesters -- mostly
students and some workers -- were ignoring him. There were occasional skirmishes
with the police and sporadic gunfire in the center of the city.

There were reports that one or two demonstrators were killed tonight in a clash
with the police, but the accounts could not be immediately confirmed.

Today's events seemed to underscore the fragility of the peace plan, which many
fear could still collapse into a resumption of the civil war.

U.N. Aides Arrive

It was unclear whether the demonstrations had been orchestrated. Demonstrations
had been virtually unheard of in Cambodia for more than 16 years of rule by the
Khmer Rouge and by the Vietnamese-installed Government that came in after the
Khmer Rouge was overthrown in 1979. But with a United Nations-sponsored peace
treaty now in the works, and the arrival of a small advance team of civilian and
military United Nations representatives, many people now feel safe for the first
time in openly challenging the Government.

There was conflicting opinion about who is helped more by the demonstrations and
the delay in carrying out the peace accord. One theory holds that the Khmer
Rouge is waiting for the Hun Sen Goverment to collapse and pave the way for its
return. There is already some support for the Khmer Rouge in the countryside,
though it is hated in cities like Phnom Penh, which was emptied at gunpoint in
1975.

The other theory holds that Mr. Hun Sen is capitalizing on the disturbances,
using them to keep the Khmer Rouge out of the capital. But such a strategy
hinges on not letting the protests gather steam and end in violence.

"People are getting emboldened by their success and the international
attention," a Western diplomat here said today. "We are just hoping that it does
not turn into a disaster."

Evidence of the changing mood was the Nov. 27 attack on Khieu Samphan, a Khmer
Rouge leader who had just returned to Phnom Penh to head his group's delegation
to talks on setting up an interim government as prescribed by the United Nations
plan. Mr. Khieu Samphan was a central architect of the policies that resulted in
hundreds of thousands of executions and the deaths of hundreds of thousands more
from starvation and disease. The Government villa where he was to live was
overrun by a revenge-seeking mob, and he barely escaped the country with his
life.

Under the October peace treaty, leaders of all three guerilla factions and the
Government are supposed to take part in running the country until free elections
are held in 1993. But the absence of the Khmer Rouge leaders postponed the
organizational meetings of the Supreme National Council.

Khieu Samphan Cancels Return

Mr. Khieu Samphan announced this week that he would return to Cambodia today.
But the trip was canceled at the last minute, and diplomats here said Mr. Hun
Sen had sent a message to the Khmer Rouge leaders on Friday night though Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, the country's recently returned head of state, saying the
Government still could not assure their safety.

In recent days the Government has been able to control very little. Street
protests, besides objecting to the reappearence in the city of the Khmer Rouge
leaders, have turned to the rampant corruption and economic troubles the country
faces.

On Friday, for instance, an angry crowd destroyed the house of the Transport and
Communications Minister, Ros Chhun, charging that the house had been stolen by
the Government. By the end of the day, the minister was dismissed along with
several others rumored to be profiting greatly from their positions. Today,
small children played in the remnants of the house in downtown Phnom Penh,
throwing rocks at the walls.

Demonstrations Grow

Meanwhile, students massed outside a medical school and shouted at the police
and waved banners, some calling for a restoration of human rights. When several
of them were arrested and at least one was beaten, the demonstrations grew even
bigger, with thousands of people snaking through the city, demanding the release
of those detained. At one point in mid-morning, the police, apparently nervous
that their downtown headquarters might be overrun, fired weapons into the air to
disperse the crowd.

"This demonstration could destabilize the capital," Mr. Hun Sen said in a radio
and television address this morning. "As long as there is no stability in Phnom
Penh, we cannot institute the peace agreement."

He insisted that demonstrators first get permission and warned that the
Government "will not allow any more violence."

By the afternoon, the streets were filled with riot policemen in green helmets
and carrying truncheons and some rifles. But the protesters kept marching, and
the police largely stayed out of their way. Western diplomats say they fear that
the police may soon intervene and fire on demonstrators.

No one here today would predict when the Supreme National Council will be able
to meet. More demonstrations are planned.

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Cambodian police officer taking a protester into custody
during violent demonstrations which swept the streets of Phnom Penh to protest
the expected return of two of the Khmer Rouge's most hated leaders. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For God and Richard Nixon

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker;  Tom Wicker is a columnist for The New York Times and the
author of "One of Us: Richard Nixon and the American Dream."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1407 words



A PROPHET WITH HONOR
The Billy Graham Story.
By William Martin.
Illustrated. 735 pp. New York:
William Morrow & Company. $25.

WILLIAM MARTIN takes several pages of his foreword to assure readers of his
huge, painstaking biography of the Rev. Billy Graham that he paid his own way
while writing "A Prophet With Honor" and made his own judgments, and that
neither Mr. Graham nor his associates exercised "any right of approval or
editorial control." Once a preacher himself, Mr. Martin now teaches the
sociology of religion at Rice University; he clearly wants readers to know that
"Prophet" is a critical and not an authorized biography.

Thus, Mr. Martin does not shrink from pointing out numerous stains on the
shining face Billy Graham turns to the world -- most prominently, what has often
seemed his political flackery, particularly for Richard Nixon. But on the first
page of the first chapter, in describing the evangelist's physical appearance,
Mr. Martin makes clear why he felt it necessary to assure readers of his
authorial independence:

"Only the large expressive hands seem suited to a titan. But crowning this
spindly frame is that most distinctive of heads, with the profile for which God
created granite, the perpetual glowing tan, the flowing hair, the towering
forehead, the square jaw, the eagle's brow and eyes, and the warm smile that has
melted hearts, tamed opposition, and subdued skeptics on six continents."

A titan? An eagle's brow? In the margin beside this passage, I noted: "not going
to be a skeptical book."

Why would the subject of a biography need editorial control over a biographer
who approaches him with such an attitude? Mr. Martin indeed has written a
critical book, but he does not give us Billy Graham warts and all so much as
Billy Graham, titan with an eagle's brow, who unfortunately has here and there a
blemish that -- we are given to understand -- detracts but little from his
overall greatness.

This generally reverent approach to the evangelist is too bad, for in other ways
"Prophet With Honor" is a knowledgeable and informative book. The accounts of
Mr. Graham's friendships with Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower, Lyndon B. Johnson
and Richard Nixon are candid and mostly unsparing. Mr. Martin quotes, for
instance, The Christian Century magazine's characterization of Billy Graham's
prayer at the Nixon inaugural in 1969 as a "raucous harangue" -- in which he
thanked God that "thou hast permitted Richard Nixon to lead us at this momentous
hour of history." I heard that harangue and, at the time, thought it ominously
authoritarian.

Mr. Graham went on, as is well known, to be one of Mr. Nixon's strongest
defenders, even during Watergate; no doubt as a consequence of his close
relations with both Presidents Johnson and Nixon, the evangelist also was
usually to be counted on in support of the war in Vietnam. He was an early,
frequent and vigorous opponent of Communism and a fervent cold war spokesman,
but he was not active in support of perhaps the major social development of his
time, the civil rights movement. In mild reproof, Mr. Martin quotes his "muted
tribute" after Martin Luther King was murdered: "Many people who have not agreed
with Dr. King can admire him for his non-violent policies and in the eyes of the
world he has become one of the greatest Americans."

The evangelist, a devoted political climber from the start of his career, failed
signally to make an ally of President Harry S. Truman. When he finally got a
long-sought interview with Truman in 1950, Mr. Graham asked if they might "have
a word of prayer." The President replied laconically, "I don't suppose it could
do any harm" -- and then watched with what a witness called "bemused detachment"
while his earnest visitor called down blessings.

Mr. Graham then earned Truman's unyielding hostility by kneeling in prayer for
photographers on the White House lawn. Mr. Martin finds this behavior
unfortunate but amusing naivete. Others may see in it an early sign of Billy
Graham's lifelong pursuit of the high and the mighty.

Due tribute is paid to his financial integrity, the undoubted sincerity of his
faith (true distinctions in the era of Jimmy Swaggart and Jim Bakker) and the
remarkable power of his evangelism. Discussing the latter, however, Mr. Martin
may occasionally be unduly impressed by numbers (for one 1986 crusade in
Washington, Mr. Graham's workers issued 500,000 personal invitations, 400,000
packets of promotional material and arranged for 4,000 counselors for those who
"come forward"). He lingers over the details and results of Graham "crusades"
with the fascination of a gourmet for haute cuisine.

The evangelist's life is followed in sometimes excruciating but well-researched
detail. Mr. Martin's eye is on the sparrow; he notes, for example, that it was
on the night in 1935 when Billy Sunday -- the former big-league ballplayer who
got religion from a street preacher outside a saloon -- died, that "the boy who
would become the most famous preacher of all time had just given his life to
Jesus Christ."

Far more valuable than much of this detail is Mr. Martin's fascinating history
of evangelical religion in America, with its various Great Awakenings, the first
big camp meeting (in Logan County, Kentucky) in 1800, millennialism,
premillennialism, the powerful appeal and historical importance of preachers
like Jonathan Edwards and George Whitefield ("the Grand Itinerant") in the 18th
century and Charles Grandison Finney in the 19th (Finney's sermons were said to
have the effect of "cannonballs through a basket of eggs"). The careers of
Dwight L. Moody and the colorful Billy Sunday also are detailed.

Perhaps most revealing is Mr. Martin's account of a powerful religious struggle
between Billy Graham and Charles Templeton, when they were colleagues and
friendly rivals in Youth for Christ International, an enthusiastic evangelical
group formed in 1945. Mr. Templeton -- "darkly handsome, intelligent, and
intellectually curious" and "generally acknowledged to be the most versatile of
the YFC evangelists" -- is remembered by contemporaries as one who "could just
preach fantastically."

His trouble was that intellectual curiosity. Losing confidence in Youth for
Christ evangelism (which he described to Mr. Graham as "animal magnetism and
youthful enthusiasm and natural talent"), Mr. Templeton resigned and enrolled at
Princeton Theological Seminary in 1948. He asked Billy Graham to do the same
but, as he remembered years later, "Billy was not interested in the scholarly
side of things. He was not interested in reaching for conceptual or intellectual
horizons."

AT Princeton, Mr. Templeton developed further doubt that the Bible, in Mr.
Martin's words, was "God's inspired revelation, his literal Word, directly
transmitted to the human agents who committed it to writing and trustworthy in
every respect." But when he stated his doubts to his old friend, Billy Graham
replied:

"Chuck, look, I haven't a good enough mind to settle these questions. . . . I
don't have the time, the inclination, or the set of mind to pursue them. I have
found that if I say, 'The Bible says' and 'God says,' I get results."

Mr. Templeton persisted: "Not to think is to sin against your Creator. You can't
stop thinking. That's intellectual suicide."

Mr. Graham was "stung," Mr. Martin observes, but "undoubtedly valued the
immediate satisfactions of packed auditoriums and crowded aisles . . . more than
the less tangible pleasures of the life of the mind." The author believes,
however, that the young evangelist was in genuine torment over Mr. Templeton's
questions.

Finally, at a retreat center at Forest Home in California, Billy Graham took a
solitary walk, sat on a rock, spread a Bible before him on a tree trunk, thought
it all over and "finally made the pragmatic decision to abandon doubt and cling
to commitment," saying in prayer: "I accept this Book by faith as the Word of
God."

Since no one else was present, Billy Graham himself must have given Mr. Martin
his exact words. Today "a bronze tablet identifies the Stone of Witness where
Billy Graham accepted, once and for all, the absolute authority of the
Scriptures." William Martin does not seem to wonder if Charles Templeton might
have been right -- that Billy Graham's "pragmatic decision" was a form of
intellectual suicide as well as the foundation of a career.

NAME: Billy Graham

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Billy Graham preaching in Madison Square Garden in 1969. (Don
Holway/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Unrest Prompts Curfew in Cambodian Capital

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 22


The Government imposed a nighttime curfew in Phnom Penh today to prevent further
unrest after violent street protests swept the capital on Saturday night.

At least 3 people were killed and more than 25 injured in the clashes here
Saturday evening, culminating a week of demonstrations -- the first in more than
16 years -- that seemed chiefly directed at widespread Government corruption.
The Government, however, charged that the Khmer Rouge guerrilla group had
provoked the actions as part of an "armed insurrection with political aims."

The military sealed off most of the city center until late this afternoon, and
throughout the day and tonight bursts of automatic weapons fire could be heard
downtown. But no more injuries were reported and evidently there was a lull in
the demonstrations.

By this afternoon, much of the city was back to normal, apart from the presence
of troops at major intersections.

At a briefing for foreign reporters here this morning, Cambodia's Foreign
Minister, Hor Namhong, charged that the demonstrators "wanted to create
instability for the Government" and sought to "prevent the implementation of the
Paris peace accord" signed in October. But he offered no evidence, and diplomats
and others in the city suggested that the Vietnam-backed Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen was attempting to lay the blame on the Khmer Rouge as the
various factions that have battled in the Cambodian civil war maneuver for
advantage.

Under the United Nations accord, representatives from the Government and the
three guerrilla groups that oppose it, including the Khmer Rouge, are creating a
Supreme National Council meant to represent Cambodian sovereignty until
elections in 1993. The United Nations is to send a 10,000-member peacekeeping
mission here next year, to begin to disarm the factions and maintain order.

But so far the Supreme National Council has been unable to meet on Cambodian
soil. Last month, when the first meeting was supposed to take place, a mob
attacked Khieu Samphan and Son Sen, two leaders of the Khmer Rouge. Mr. Khieu
Samphan is considered one of the architects of the Khmer Rouge's brutal policies
of the 1970's.

Mr. Khieu Samphan was supposed to return to the city on Saturday for the first
meeting of the council, but the chaos in the streets led the Government to call
off the meeting. It seems unlikely that the council will meet until after the
New Year.

If the attack on Mr. Khieu Samphan last month touched off the demonstrations
that have shaken this city, the subsequent protests have not been directed
primarily at the return of the Khmer Rouge representatives. Instead, they have
focused on the failings of Mr. Hun Sen's own Government, chiefly rampant
corruption.

The unrest reached a peak of intensity Saturday night, when groups of students,
angry about the arrest of one of their colleagues earlier in the day, confronted
the police.

Mr. Hor Namhong said today that three people had died in the overnight fighting,
including one policeman. But hospital reports suggested the figure could be
higher. The Foreign Minister denied that the police had killed any of the
protesters. Students said they would organize other protests on Monday.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Israel Agrees to New Talks in U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 403 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Dec. 22


Israel has agreed that Middle East peace talks due to resume on Jan. 7 may take
place in Washington, Transport Minister Moshe Katzav said today.

He said Israel hoped that subsequent talks would take place closer to home,
preferably in the Middle East.

"Unfortunately the Arab side rejects our proposals in this matter, and we hope
that during the second meeting in Washington we'll be able to convince the Arab
side that to be more efficient, it's better to negotiate here around the Middle
East and even in Europe," Mr. Katzav told reporters after a weekly Cabinet
meeting.

Israel's talks with a joint Jordanian-Palestinian team, with Lebanon and with
Syria have been plagued by disputes over dates and sites. They adjourned in
Washington last week and are to resume there on Jan. 7.

The peace talks were begun by a conference sponsored by the United States and
the Soviet Union in Madrid on Oct. 30.

Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir said today that the mission of Israel's
negotiators was to achieve peace without giving up land.

In an impassioned speech to about 3,000 members of his Likud Party's central
committee, he congratulated the negotiators who returned from Washington last
week.

                             --------------------


Arafat Seeks China Role

HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 22 (Reuters) -- Yasir Arafat, the leader of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, today accused the United States of double standards
over Middle East peace efforts and said he was looking to China to play an
active role in future talks.

A multilateral round of talks about regional issues in the Middle East is
expected to take place in Moscow at the end of January. It is to be in addition
to the negotiations that have already begun between Israel and individual Arab
countries and Palestinian representatives.

"We are insisting that China has to take part in the multilateral talks, and
this has been accepted that they will play this role," Mr. Arafat said in an
interview here, he was winding up an official visit after a one-day stop in
Beijing on Friday.

During Mr. Aarfat's visit to Beijing, China's President, Yang Shangkun, said
China was ready to attend the next round of Middle East peace talks if invited.

Up to now, Beijing, which has long backed the Palestinian cause and recognizes
Mr. Arafat as president of Palestine, has played a relatively passive role in
Middle Eastern affairs.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Explosive Imagery of 'J.F.K.' Igniting Debate in Audiences

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words


In Dallas, they never doubted the conspiracy. From Harvard Square and Berkeley
to the frozen streets of Minneapolis there have always been the buffs, people
with models of Dealey Plaza and leatherbound copies of the Warren Commission
Report parked in their basements, certain that the full story of who killed
President Kennedy has never been -- and maybe never will be -- told.

But for some members of a generation far more likely to connect the words
"Single-Bullet Theory" to a mediocre rock band than to the distant death of a
President, Oliver Stone's polemical new film "J.F.K." seems to have unleashed a
surprising rage about that November day and all the investigations that
followed.

"I guess that hippie guy was right," said Sarah Borenstein, a 29-year-old lawyer
from Hartford as she left the film on Saturday, the day after it opened. "Never
trust anybody over 30. To me Kennedy was just a drinker and a fraud. I never
even knew what he might have done, what they stopped. Why has this been
ignored?"

The Grand Theory

After hundreds of books, dozens of documentaries and thousands of pages of
Congressional testimony, it would be hard to argue that what many people
consider the defining event of mid-20th-century America has been ignored. But to
many of the millions raised after Watergate, whose verities have largely been
cinematic, the idea that Lee Harvey Oswald could have acted alone seems too
shocking to accept.

Instead, many appear to have succumbed to Mr. Stone's Grand Unified Conspiracy
Theory, a gaudy, frenetic fiction about a man who was prevented from delivering
peace to the world by a bloodthirsty military-industrial complex that could not
stand to yield power. The C.I.A., the F.B.I., Army intelligence, the Mafia, the
Dallas police, Laos, Cambodia, Burma, Vietnam, Cuba -- all the images linked
neatly in a dark celluloid chain. Whatever the merits of "J.F.K." as a film, it
seems to have clearly hit a mark with an audience too young to remember where it
was on Nov. 22, 1963.

Mr. Stone hoped it would. A great believer in the political power of the cinema,
he dedicated "J.F.K." to "the young in whose spirit the search for truth moves
on." In discussions this weekend about the movie and the world view that
underlies it, dozens who saw it throughout the country called it "courageous"
and "disturbing." Many eagerly embraced the enduring myth that if only Kennedy
had lived -- and Camelot had been extended -- we could have somehow avoided the
worst horrors that followed for America.

Mr. Stone presents the glorious mystique of the early 60's in rich colors. There
is Jackie with the kids. And Jack at Hyannis. Camelot never looked better.

"My mother has pictures with her hair looking like Jackie," said Richard A.
Konigsberg, a 25-year-old actor from Los Angeles. "They were American royalty.
My mother still has the Life magazines of the wedding and the assassination."

And whether they regarded John F. Kennedy as the last American nobleman, or an
overrated icon from a faltering dynasty, many of those under 40 who sat through
the three-hour film agreed that it portrayed a crucial moment in American
history in a way few had considered.

"He was the only shining star that ever crossed the American political sky,"
said Joe Savino, 36, a Los Angeles screenwriter who was a Catholic school third
grader in Queens the day Kennedy was shot. "I think his assassination robbed us
of a political opportunity. I was taught that it was Lee Harvey Oswald that did
it. Then a lot of people in my generation began to ask questions, first with the
Vietnam war, then with Watergate.

"My own common sense tells me something was wrong," he continued, expressing a
sentiment shared widely among those who saw the film. "And we know after
Watergate and after the past 20 years that our Government lies."

Polls have long shown that few Americans -- of any age -- readily accept the
idea that Oswald, acting alone, killed Kennedy. The film portrays the New
Orleans District Attorney, Jim Garrison, whose bizarre investigation of the
assassination has been widely discredited, as a modern-day Mr. Smith, battling
against all odds for a truth that dare not be told.

But the film's vocal critics say that even if a conspiracy existed, Mr. Stone's
suggestion that the murder was a coup d'etat conducted by generals and perhaps
even by Vice President Lyndon Johnson, is ridiculous. They fault Mr. Stone most
for his greatest achievement: cleverly bending the images of life on film until
only those truly schooled in Kennedy assassination theory could properly parse
the truth from the invention.

"I don't rule out a conspiracy but not on that level," said Michael Fleming, a
24-year-old graduate student at Harvard University who was disturbed by Mr.
Stone's cinematic techniques, which weave often imperceptibly between fact,
documentary, fiction and the large gray vistas in the middle.

Many who saw the movie, and acknowledged that they accepted some notion of a
conspiracy, said they felt uncomfortable with the scope portrayed.

"How could something so vast and disabling be covered up so completely and for
so long?" said Susan Kreuger, a 29-year-old lawyer, as she emerged from a
Manhattan theater. "I really think he captured the politics of the time. I feel
certain we don't know the full story. But I just don't know how much of his
story we can possibly believe."

Part of the problem the film creates for its younger audience is that by
presenting fact and fiction as if they were one, it becomes impossible to tell
the difference between the two. Takes from the Zapruder film of the
assassination, which has probably become the most widely viewed home movie in
history, cannot readily be distinguished from a dramatic portrayal of an autopsy
scene that never occurred.

"I don't like Oliver Stone," said Kenneth Levine, a 21-year-old Columbia
student. "He's too sugary. He makes things too black and white. Good and justice
versus bad and evil. I find that evoking patriotism so much feels very stale,
very old."

The film asserts that President Kennedy was "soft on Communism," that he would
certainly have cut short America's escalating involvement in Vietnam, and it
implies that he was killed -- at least in part -- for that.

In an important scene near the end of the film, President Johnson is shown
signing a National Security Action Memorandum only a few days after Kennedy
died. The film asserts that the directive "essentially reversed" Kennedy's
unseen policy to withdraw troops from Vietnam, and suggests it provoked the Gulf
of Tonkin incident and caused the war to accelerate.

But the memo Mr. Stone cites continued Kennedy's policies, and, historians have
shown, was drafted the day before he journeyed to Dallas.

The visual sleight of hand caused more problems for older viewers than it did
for those who were young. Many were prepared to accept conspiracies, but few
were able to adopt the film as a route to understanding them.

Jack Scapparo, a 57-year-old New Yorker, considers himself an assassination buff
and said he has long believed that more than one man acted to end Kennedy's
life. Like most Americans his age, he can remember with precision the events of
the day Kennedy died. He was preparing to take his driver's exam when he heard
the news. He was so shaken, he failed.

"I think his death has had an effect on who I am," he said. "I guess the
skepticism that was born in me the day Oswald was shot in the basement has
colored every political thought I've had ever since. I felt Oswald was being
killed for a reason other than that he was the lone assassin and that it did
involve the complicity of the government in some sort of cover-up."

But that is where Mr. Scapparo gets off Mr. Stone's express.

"It falls in the category of yellow journalism," he said. "It doesn't adhere to
the facts. It invents." He found Mr. Garrison's closing argument in the
conspiracy trial of the New Orleans businessman Clay Shaw particularly hard to
take. "It would turn every jury into Jell-O, but it had no place in the trial,"
Mr. Scapparo said. "What was Clay Shaw on trial for? I'm not sure. I lived
through it, and I'm still not sure."

But even among older Americans there can hardly be a final consensus on the film
-- or one suspects on the events it portrays.

One elderly woman in Rockville, Md., could not help but jump into the discussion
after she finished seeing the movie at a local theater.

"He should get a medal," she said, to nobody in particular.

"Who," somebody in the crowd replied, "Kennedy?"

"No," the woman replied. "Oliver Stone."

NAME: John F. Kennedy

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "They were American royalty," said Richard A. Konigsberg after
seeing Oliver Stone's new film, "J.F.K.," in Los Angeles. (Michael Tweed for The
New York Times); "I don't like Oliver Stone," said Kenneth Levine, a Columbia
student, after seeing the film with Vetia Searcy in Manhattan. "I find that
evoking patriotism so much feels very stale, very old," he added. (Steve Hart
for The New York Times) (pg. A14)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 23, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Golf Is a Game, but That Doesn't Mean It Isn't Real Life

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 906 words


Memoirs of a Caddy
By David Noonan
173 pages. Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

You don't have to understand the first thing about the game of golf to
appreciate David Noonan's accomplished first novel, "Memoirs of a Caddy." All
you have to understand about golf is that it is a highly ritualized form of
play. Jim Mooney, the novel's 17-year-old narrator, makes light of this when he
observes, "One of the appeals of golf is that you can do all the things you
would normally do in a bar while engaging in an actual sport -- you can eat,
drink, talk and smoke cigarettes."

But as a regular caddy for the Colonial Valley Country Club, about an hour's
drive from New York City in western New Jersey, Jim can also sum up a member's
character in the light of his golf game. Of one Sean Butterworth he reports:
"Sean was a good golfer with a bad temper that kept him from being a great
golfer.  Great golfers expect to make bad shots now and then and when they do
they learn from them and then let them go. Not Sean. He hated bad shots and when
he made one he got mad at himself and the world and cursed and threw clubs and
talked to himself and got all worked up and then, very often, followed the first
bad shot with another just as bad or even worse. The energized calm that golf
required, the relaxed tension of it, eluded him. He wanted to kill the ball."

When you read this you get the ominous feeling that more than just a game is
going wrong. You are reminded of the catastrophe in John O'Hara's first novel,
"Appointment in Samarra," that began with Julian English's throwing a drink in
another club member's face. David Noonan's characters play and drink with the
same ritualistic seriousness that John O'Hara's people do.

Of course Mr. Noonan, being young, is writing of a later time in the history of
Irish Catholic Americans than O'Hara did. It is the summer of 1968 when the main
action of "Memoirs of a Caddy" takes place. Vietnam is threatening young men
without student deferments. Robert F. Kennedy has been assassinated, ending a
dream for Jim Mooney's father, a local politician who was proud to have shaken
hands with J. F. K. in 1960 and had his picture taken doing so.

Jim Mooney himself is detached from death and disappointment as the novel
begins. He can open his narrative with a half-comic account of how "old man
Woods dropped dead right in front of me on Easter Sunday morning." He goes on:
"He was lining up a putt he wouldn't have made anyway when he slipped to his
knees with a grunt and pitched forward. I'd never seen a dead person before,
except for people in their coffins, but I knew Woods was dead from the way his
face bounced on the grass."

Jim's mind is too much on sex to be deeply affected by this sort of thing.
"People who had sex as a regular part of their lives fascinated me," he reports.
"I couldn't understand why, if they could have sex whenever they wanted, they
bothered doing anything else."

What changes the world for Jim is the return home of his eldest brother, Matt,
who has once again been thrown out of a college. Matt is smarter than Jim, one
of those people who knows that the world has "nothing to do with school or
grades or being elected president of the student body."

Matt is a better golfer too, good enough to teach Mary Butterworth, Sean's
attractive young wife, a connection that will have significant consequences. Jim
remembers introducing them one June morning, in the shade of a big oak hanging
over the green. "The tree is probably still there, but we're gone, that moment
is gone, and try as I may, I can't find the tragedy in it, I can't find the
loss, though I know they are there, somewhere, in that moment."

A great deal happens in the 173 pages of Mr. Noonan's novel, both funny and sad,
reflecting both the reverence for life and the reckless disregard that one
somehow associates with the Kennedys and the 1960's. This ambivalence is
captured by a telling vignette that occurs when Jim and Matt are hitchhiking to
a party.

One of the rides they get is with Bob Hill, a weekend caddy who is driving "a
worn-out Ford station wagon full of scrawny kids with dirty faces." Hill is so
eager to drive Jim and Matt to their destination that he decides to skip the
purpose of the drive, over which one of his daughters protests: " 'Oh, no.
There's the Dairy Queen.  Stop, Daddy. Stop!'

"Quick as a lizard's tongue, Bob Hill's right arm lashed out and he cracked the
girl across the face with the back of his hand. Her head jerked sideways with
the force of the blow; I could see the red welt forming on her cheek as her eyes
filled with tears.  She was in shock. Even worse, she was too frightened to cry.
She put one hand to her cheek, the other over her mouth, and held her breath.

" 'That's it,' said Bob, 'no ice cream tonight.' His children received this
heartless pronouncement in grim silence; they obviously knew better than to
protest. There was nauseating fear in the car; I could feel it. I was afraid
myself. I think even Bob was afraid."

After Hill has dropped them off, Jim and Matt express anger and wonder at the
incident. " 'He works hard, though,' I said. 'I mean, it doesn't make sense. Why
would a guy knock himself out to feed his kids, then turn around and beat them?'

" 'Nothing makes sense,' said Matt, 'except that nothing makes sense.' "

Yet somehow such things do make sense in David Noonan's impressive first novel.

LOAD-DATE: December 23, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Noonan (Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

2 Aides of Alaska Governor Quit but Rule Out Tie to Ethics Furor

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 467 words

DATELINE: JUNEAU, Alaska, Dec. 23


Two of Gov. Walter J. Hickel's closest advisers announced their resignations
today, saying they were leaving to start a trading company in Vietnam. They said
their decision was not related to an ethics case involving the Governor's
ownership of stock in a pipeline company.

The two, Eric Rehmann, 27 years old, the Governor's press secretary, and James
Rockwell, 30, his special assistant, were Mr. Hickel's youngest top-level
advisers. Before joining Mr. Hickel's staff, Mr. Rehmann was a spokesman for
Manuel Lujan Jr., the Federal Interior Secretary.

Mr. Rockwell led a small group that persuaded Mr. Hickel to run for governor
again in late 1990, 21 years after Mr. Hickel left office to serve as Interior
Secretary under President Richard M. Nixon.

"We're certainly not abandoning ship," Mr. Rockwell said. "There's a time for
everything. It's time right now to do this."

Governor Wishes Them Well

Mr. Hickel issued a statement today indicating that he had no hard feelings
about the resignations. "They were two energetic young men who both added a lot
to our office," he said in the statement. "Filling the void will be very
difficult to do, but I wish them both well in their adventure in Southeast
Asia."

The announcement came just beforea settlement was concluded of state
conflict-of-interest charges concerning Mr. Hickel's stock holding. The state
Personnel Board today approved a proposal to end the case.

Mr. Hickel was accused of violating state ethics law by keeping stock in the
Yukon Pacific Corporation, which he founded 10 years ago to build a pipeline to
carry natural gas across Alaska. An independent counsel for the state said that
Mr. Hickel, as Governor, had been promoting the pipeline and that the stock's
value could be greatly increased if the proposed $11 billion project were
completed.

As part of the settlement proposal, made public on Dec. 12, Mr. Hickel will not
contest the accusations and he has agreed to set up a charitable foundation to
which he would donate his 12 percent share of the company.

Yukon Pacific stock is not publicly traded. A largely arbitrary price of $250 a
share was set in 1988 for a stock split. At that price, Mr. Hickel's stock would
be valued at nearly $10 million.

Mr. Rockwell and Mr. Rehmann said that after a 10-day trip to Vietnam last
month, they decided to form a trading company, even though that country has been
under a United States trade embargo since the Vietnam War ended in 1975.

"We hope to pave the way so when the embargo comes down, we'll be able to go
right away," Mr. Rehmann said. "We hope to do a lot of the groundwork."

Among the opportunities they said they are considering is a joint venture to buy
and upgrade three waterfront hotels that would cater to former American
soldiers.

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Walter J. Hickel (Mark Kelley)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 24, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Enterprise of Being Homeless

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words


Wood was as scarce in midtown as on the winter prairie, so the group of men in
the vacant lot warmed themselves by burning strip after strip of cardboard, the
same material they use for their homes. But in the box where Ronald Donaldson
lives, against the wall of the Port Authority Bus Terminal, two candles burned.
Mr. Donaldson, 41 years old, who says he is a Vietnam veteran, was neither cold
nor ready for sleep.

He had invited Michelle, a woman who used to sleep in the terminal, to eat and
hear him brag about his box on 40th Street: four mail carts, six pieces of
plywood, seven blankets and seven layers of plastic cocooned around two
queen-sized mattresses, decorated with a bowling ball and a blue stuffed chimp.

"Now we had some chicken for dinner, a baloney sandwich and Thunderbird," he
said grandly, making Michelle laugh. "And we had dinner by candlelight."

To the many commuters who have long resented homeless people's presence, and the
Port Authority officials who recently instituted a get-tough policy, the issue
is simple: the homeless should not be inside the terminal. To advocates for the
homeless, including the 250 who marched to the 42d Street terminal on Sunday to
protest the crackdown there and in subways, parks and vacant buildings around
the city, the issue seems similarly stark: sending people outside could mean
sending them to their deaths.

Routine of Resourcefulness

But a 24-hour visit with Mr. Donaldson and other homeless people showed a more
complex interaction. Inside and outside are not hard-and-fast opposites: Chased
from the terminal's corridors and platforms, they have not gone away. Instead,
the terminal has emerged as one stop among many in a daily routine of
resourcefulness that takes in soup kitchens, drop-in centers, petty scams and
drugs. On the cold and trash-strewn streets has grown a surprisingly resilient
floating community, with a core of a dozen or so souls, that finds ways around
rules and looks out for the many others like them who drift past and resist
offers of shelter and help from government and charity.

"It's survival," said Mr. Donaldson, as the candles flickered in the box's
darkness. "They say they will run the people out. But there are people living
down there they don't even know about."

Morning

The homeless here do not necessarily get up early. Thursday began at 10 A.M.
with a mystery: Where was Joyce?

A homeless man named Carlos, 37, walked down a stretch of 41st Street behind the
Port Authority, past a shantytown of cardboard boxes, blankets and canvas carts
between Ninth and Dyer Avenues near the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel. He
stopped at a tall metal box, the sturdiest of perhaps 15 ramshackle structures,
and began pounding.

"Scooter! Scooter, boy!" he yelled. "Wake up! I got to talk to you!"

A pair of bare feet poked from the box. Out came the rest of Scooter, a thin,
33-year-old man who used to work as a computer operator. He lost his apartment
last March: the reasons were complicated but involved his mother, Joyce, who now
lives in the box next door.

"Damn, it's cold," Scooter said.

A Kind of Mother

If this group has a central figure, it is Joyce. Carlos owed her money and was
anxious to pay for at least two reasons. One is that she is a kind of mother to
many homeless people and they hate to cross her. The other is that she is a
bootlegger.

She does not make booze, but every night sets up a small-time wine shop at the
lot across 40th Street from Mr. Donaldson's box. She buys a case or two of wine,
selling each bottle for $2, about double what she pays. If she likes you, maybe
less.

That morning, no one knew where she was. Scooter and Carlos searched the
Greyhound terminal, her usual spot before the crackdown, and then the rest of
the building.

Carlos got impatient and wanted Scooter to give her the money. But Scooter shook
his head. "Give it to me and I'll spend it," he said. "I'm just being honest."

Not much later, Mr. Donaldson woke up in a good mood, despite having grown up in
the much warmer climate in Charleston, S.C. His box kept out the wind. The
police had not harassed him. And most important, it had not snowed.

"Let me get my coat on and see what's shaking for the day," he said.

Rule No. 1: Never Rob

First on the agenda was food. Mr. Donaldson, who has been homeless since 1984,
walked to the Volunteers of America center at the Port Authority and came out
with a bagged lunch of a baloney sandwich, an orange and a blue-colored drink.

Then it was over to the Open Door, a drop-in center on 41st Street. There he got
a ham sandwich and a pear.

As it inevitably would, his next thought turned to money. Some people prey on
tourists and distracted commuters, but he said rule No. 1 was never to rob.

"I'm too good at panhandling," he said. (Later that night he showed his skill on
40th Street, saluting at car windows and incanting the almost-rhyme: "Merry
Christmas. Nickel, dime to give us?" With a few dollars in his cup, he smiled.
"The Bible says: 'The meek shall inherit the Earth.' I am the meek.")

A little after 1 P.M., he settled on what he called "my first hustle of the
day," watching parked cabs on 41st Street and panhandling to the passing cars.
But after earning $8.40 in two hours, he had enough.

"I'm going to get me a drink -- I haven't had my morning medicine yet," he said.
He looked around before vanishing: "I wonder where Joyce is at."

Afternoon
Charity: Taken and Scorned

At the chill end of an idle afternoon, Scooter was asking the same question as
he tended a fire in a trash can near his box. Tony, a jittery man who was
warming his hands, hadn't seen her either.

As the flames rose from the can, a well-dressed woman in a warm parka passed out
tuna sandwiches. When she left, Tony exploded.

"Charity!" he yelled. "I love it but it's a cover-up. It's guilt for what they
did to us. 'We'll feed them. We'll give them boxes to lay on.'

"I have seen black folks and white folks get along so good back in the 60's. Now
they don't care about us anymore. When you get down to it, it's the black man in
a white man's country."

Daylight faded. The mystery over Joyce was cleared up just before dark when she
came back to 41st Street hauling her rickety grocery cart. She is a short woman
who wears a fur coat, a black pleated dress, pinstripe pants and a wiry brown
wig she hopes to replace by Christmas.

Meeting by Firelight

"I took a train ride today," she announced, explaining that she did not want to
be bothered by the Port Authority police.

She spent the next half hour building a new home from cardboard, string and
pieces of wood. Satisfied, she turned to the fire and opened the evening's first
bottle of wine.

For the next few hours, people stopped to talk in the light of the fire. James,
36, an ornery former boxer, complained that no one wants to work any more.
Alfonso (Shorty) Padilla, a 16-year-old crack dealer from New Haven, said in a
soft voice that he gets turned down every time he shows up for a job interview.
James didn't buy it.

"You're stupid," said James, who also smokes crack. "You just got to know how to
stop the crack and go down with a clean face."

Night
A Wine Shop For Nomads

Just after 8, it was time to pack up for the parking lot, where Joyce would set
up shop. Scooter gathered up cardboard. Joyce got her cart. They and two other
homeless men formed a caravan moving slowly through the shadow of the Port
Authority.

The parking lot is an asphalt canyon nestled between brick walls that mercifully
block the wind. As Joyce and Scooter built another shack, the others started a
fire and waited for her to begin selling wine.

In no time, someone showed up with a tray of chicken someone had given out at
the terminal. Someone else got a box of doughnuts. Two polite people from a
charity offered plates of chili and rice.

Fed and rested by 11, Scooter took the subway to 125th Street, returning an hour
later with two cases of Thunderbird, the sweet 36-proof wine favored on the
street. People lined up for bottles as Joyce sat in her tent, warming herself
over a pan of burning charcoal.

At midnight, Mr. Donaldson returned and said he wanted to go for a walk. He
prowled the streets around the Port Authority, pausing by the nooks in the
terminal where people sleep and the apartments that throw away the best trash.
Much of what he finds, like furniture or shoes, he cleans and resells on the
street.

Before turning back, he talked about his three years in Vietnam, which ended on
Aug. 13, 1971, when he was shot in the stomach. His most distinct memory,
however, was his first day of fighting in 1968.

"I was shooting at people I didn't know," he said. "That was the first time I
was ever scared of anything. I cried for three days."

Back in the parking lot, Mr. Donaldson excused himself to meet Michelle in his
box. A dozen people talked loudly and downed bottle after bottle of wine. Many
left the fire's warmth to smoke crack against the brick walls.

Lucid and Profane

By 4:25 A.M., nearly everyone had gone, most to sleep in boxes or to find other
shelter until the terminal opened about 6 A.M. Scooter and Joyce slept in their
tent, Mr. Donaldson and Michelle in the box.

The handful left listened to Wilhelmae White, a 61-year-old woman nicknamed
Grandma, deliver a lucid and profane speech about how whites ruined life for
blacks in America.

Waving a cigarette and glaring through glasses as thick as a wine bottle, she
talked about Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Rev. Al Sharpton, the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, Lincoln, the Kennedys, Frank Perdue and an unspecified former Miss
America. And she preached about the angry God of Revelation.

"He created it all," she said. "This is your heaven or this is your hell."

Morning
Folding Up Life's Traces

A few minutes after 6, Scooter, groggy and wobbly, got up, burned a few of the
house's walls and folded up the rest for Friday night. Joyce supervised as
another man scooped up bottles and heaved a dozen milk crates to the roof of the
lot's shack.

Within half an hour, there were only traces of the night: ashes, crack vials and
broken glass.

By 7:15, the house that had been a shop the night before was safely back at 41st
Street and Scooter began thinking about his morning nap. But first he had to
meet Joyce on Eighth Avenue, making sure this time that he knew exactly where to
find her.

He cut through the Port Authority, where the day was already well under way. He
saw a handful of homeless men and women drinking coffee in the Ninth Avenue
lobby. Grandma was slumped against a wall, oblivious to the chance of being
thrown out into the cold.

At Au Bon Pain, Scooter zeroed in on a man in a bunny suit passing out chunks of
a carrot-cake muffin. He grabbed a bite. The bunny shook his paw at Scooter.

"Mmmnn, that's good," Scooter said.

Meanwhile on 40th Street, Mr. Donaldson slept. At 9:30 A.M. Friday, he was too
tired to think about the day ahead.

"I'll probably just stay in here and chill till about six," he said. "Just take
the day off and relax."

LOAD-DATE: December 24, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Even as the Port Authority has tried to keep the homeless out
of the midtown bus terminal, a surprisingly resilient floating community, with a
core of a dozen or so people, has sprung up in a nearby vacant lot. Joyce, left,
a woman who acts as mother to many of the others, joined a group burning
cardboard for warmth.; Ronald Donaldson, who lives in a cardboard hut in a
vacant lot outside the bus terminal, panhandling at West 41st Street and Ninth
Avenue. (pg. B1); An empty lot on West 40th Street between Eighth and Ninth
Avenues, where a group of homeless men burned cardboard to keep warm.
(Photographs by Angel Franco/The New York Times) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Personal Health

BYLINE: By Jane E. Brody

SECTION: Section 1; Page 64; Column 4; National Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1190 words


In its campaign against birth defects, the March of Dimes has focused its
energies on mothers-to-be. Now it is taking a hard look at the other factor in
the baby equation. "Men have babies, too" is the slogan of a new campaign to
help men realize that their living habits and occupational and recreational
exposures could harm their children.

Men are now being urged to consider how substances they deliberately or
inadvertently take into their bodies may affect their sperm and alter the
outcome of their partner's pregnancies.

Medical science is still a long way from a full understanding of how important
the father factor may be in precipitating miscarriages and stillbirths or in
causing premature birth, birth defects, cancer and neurological problems in
their biological children. But there are enough hints to warrant close attention
to the possibilities.

Until more is known, the March of Dimes says, men concerned about the well-being
of their children should take greater precautions to avoid exposure to agents
with known or suspected reproductive risks.

Troublemakers

There has been nothing as dramatic as thalidomide, the sedative that caused
severe limb deformities in children whose mothers took it early in pregnancy.
But worry about possible reproductive effects of Agent Orange, the herbicide
widely used in the Vietnam War, has raised fears about how various environmental
factors may affect a man's ability to father healthy children.

Scientists have long known that certain industrial chemicals, drugs and
radiation can damage sperm, leading to infertility or sterility. The male
reproductive tract contains some of the most metabolically active cells in the
body, which means that they are also among the most vulnerable to poisons that
can kill or maim them and mutagens that can damage their genes.

Among known sperm-damaging substances are lead, industrial solvents like
benzene, toluene, paint thinner mixes and carbon disulphide, pesticides like
DBCP (dibromochloropropane) and Kepone, marijuana smoke, large amounts of
alcohol and ionizing radiation.

There is also some evidence that a father's exposure to toxic substances can
increase the mother's risk of miscarriage and stillbirth, which commonly results
from abnormal fetal development. For example, an unusually high rate of
miscarriage or stillbirth has been noted among the wives of dentists who use the
anesthetic gas nitrous oxide and those of men who smoke heavily, as well as men
whose work exposes them to radiation, lead, arsenic, vinyl chloride or DBCP.

Links have also been made between certain occupational exposures of fathers and
subsequent birth defects or other damage in their children. For instance, in one
study, the children of male anesthesiologists were 25 percent more likely than
the children of male surgeons to have major malformations like spina bifida,
heart defects and cleft palate.

One of the clearest links, according to Dr. David A. Savitz, epidemiologist at
the University of North Carolina School of Public Health, is between a man's
exposure to ionizing radiation and an increased risk of leukemia in the children
they subsequently father. Childhood leukemia has also been associated with
fathers who are exposed to hydrocarbons, solvents, petroleum products and spray
paints.

Dr. Savitz and an associate, Dr. Jianhua Chen, have gathered evidence that
children may face an increased risk of brain cancer if their fathers are
chemical workers, auto mechanics, machine repairmen, metal processors,
electronics workers or have jobs that exposure them to higher than average
levels of radiation.

Dr. Marvin Legator, director of environmental toxicology at the University of
Texas Medical Branch in Galveston, has conducted extensive studies of sperm
damage in laboratory animals exposed to toxic chemicals, including solvents,
drugs used for chemotherapy , formaldehyde, pesticides, cigarettes and illegal
drugs as well as Agent Orange. Such research has indicated that high levels of
exposure to toxins that can damage sperm are associated with birth defects,
fetal deaths, low birth weight and, later, learning and behavioral abnormalities
in the animals.

For example, male rats exposed to lead for two months before mating produced
offspring that had trouble learning how to swim. And male mice exposed to
nitrous oxide the week before mating had offspring that experienced delays in
development.

Still, Dr. Savitz said he was most concerned about exposures that were directly
under the control of men who may later become fathers: tobacco smoke and
alcohol. Babies whose fathers smoke half a pack of cigarettes a day or more are
more likely to die at birth than babies with nonsmoking fathers.

But cigarette smoking by fathers may have even more subtle and delayed effects
on a child's brain development. In a study published early this year by Dr. Judy
Makin and colleagues at Carleton University in Ottawa, boys and girls whose
mothers were exposed to someone else's smoke during pregnancy had lower scores
in speech and language development, motor skills, mathematics, intelligence and
behavior during the early school years.

Alcohol, too, is a major concern. In laboratory experiments with rats, animals
sired by "alcoholic" fathers showed basic flaws in their ability to learn simple
tasks.

Precautionsotective Steps

In some cases, such as undue exposure at work to substances that can damage
sperm, proper precautions may involve cleaning up the work environment or
temporarily switching to another work area within the company. In most
industries, Federal regulations exist to prevent undue exposure to toxic
substances, but these rules may not be well enough enforced. Labor unions or
regional representatives of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
should be contacted by workers concerned about monitoring their levels of
exposure and instituting protective measures on the job.

Outside of work, there may be a need to rally responsible authorities for
control of environmental pollutants like lead and pesticides. Many of these
substances are stored in body fat or bones where they can remain for years,
although chelation and other treatments can sometimes be used to reduce the
body's burden of such long-lasting toxins.

For personal pollutants like tobacco, alcohol and illegal drugs, the matter
rests in individual hands. At the very least, men seeking to become fathers
should avoid exposure to potential toxins for at least three months before
trying to conceive. This is how long it takes for sperm to form and mature to
the point of ejaculation and ability to fertilize an egg.

Experts like Dr. Savitz and Dr. Legator emphasize that most chemicals have not
yet been tested for the possibility that exposure of fathers may be
reproductively hazardous. The March of Dimes said it was financing at least
eight studies to seek further data on paternal effects on pregnancy and
children's health. Until more is known, future fathers would be wise to pay as
close attention to possibly hazardous substances as mothers-to-be are now
encouraged to do.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Make Room for the Cambodians

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


Inclusiveness, the world was told only two months ago, was the key to peace in
Cambodia.

The Khmer Rouge, murderers of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, had
to be included in the U.N. transition formula, because otherwise they could
destabilize arrangements from the outside. Likewise, Prime Minister Hun Sen's
Vietnamese-sponsored faction had to be included to appease Vietnam and protect
fragile institutional gains since the 1979 eviction of Pol Pot.

Not much attention was paid to including independent representatives of the
Cambodian public. After all, how could there be any robust independent thinking?
During two terrifying decades of war, genocide and foreign occupation,
Cambodians had focused their energies solely on physical and cultural survival.

Or so it seemed. But no sooner did an initial U.N. team arrive in Phnom Penh,
along with the news media, than Cambodians took to the streets by the thousands.
Their first targets were representatives of the hated Khmer Rouge. Those
demonstrations, some felt, might have been choreographed by the Hun Sen regime.
Then last weekend fresh protests broke out, this time against corrupt officials
and police repression of dissent.

Something important is going on here. Cambodians are demanding a greater role in
their own political future.

Their protests will complicate the U.N.'s already daunting assignment of
monitoring a transition to democratic elections. But those elections can't be
considered democratic or legitimate if they merely allocate political spoils
between guerrilla leaders and a foreign-imposed regime. A durable peace requires
open elections in which any group able to demonstrate popular support can
organize and run candidates.

For too long, Cambodia's fate has been a sideshow for the power struggles of
outsiders. The United Nations can earn great credit by assuring this time that
Cambodians get to speak for themselves and fairly choose the government under
which they want to live.


LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 25, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Hollywood: History by Default

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 536 words


John F. Kennedy's assassination was the most traumatic spectacle of the
television age, and because many still doubt that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone,
it remains an open-ended trauma. But even that doubt cannot account for all the
criticism of the movie "JFK," Oliver Stone's unpersuasive attempt to prove that
Government conspirators arranged the assassination.

The criticism began while the movie was still being filmed. Political
journalists have since tried to blow it off the screen. The critics even include
former President Gerald R. Ford, a member of the Warren Commission.

This is more than a simple conflict between two versions of a historical event.
The rancor over "JFK" arises from the realization that historical lies are
nearly impossible to correct once movies and television have given them
credibility.

The critics have two complaints: that the movie suppresses information well
known to students of recent history, and that "JFK" is fiction so cunningly
disguised that audiences will accept it as fact. The first speaks to simple
misrepresentation. But the second describes a process -- the fictionalization of
fact -- that took a quantum leap with television docudramas.

Mr. Stone does deserve a rhetorical thrashing for the film. His evidence for a
Government conspiracy contains one factual misstatement after another. Perhaps
the most notable misrepresentation is the movie's view of Jim Garrison, the New
Orleans District Attorney in 1967 who dreamed up conspiracy charges against a
retired businessman, Clay Shaw. Mr. Garrison was a malevolent force, not the
Frank Capra good guy he's made out to be.

But Mr. Stone is just one of many who practice spurious history. Another is Alan
Parker, whose film "Mississippi Burning," based on the Ku Klux Klan's murder of
three civil rights workers, was as falsified as "JFK." In fact, the murders were
solved thanks to a $30,000 bribe; in the film, a townswoman informs on her
husband after an attack of conscience. In life, J. Edgar Hoover's F.B.I. was
hostile to the civil rights movement; the film makes F.B.I. agents its heroes.

Mr. Stone is the most skilled player of this game. His films "Born on the Fourth
of July" (about Vietnam), "The Doors" (the early rock era), and now "JFK" treat
subjects that have strong emotions and much documentary film attached to them.
His movies resemble wax museums in the way they strive to replicate their
characters physically. Charged images lend power to his version of the story;
bias is easily masked as history.

Not long ago, a film maker who took this kind of latitude would have changed
names or added some kind of disclaimer. Today that kind of truthfulness seems
quaint. Film makers no longer feel obliged even to acknowledge what they are
doing.

The children of the video age get their information more from images than from
words. They tend to believe uncritically what they see. They'll swallow "JFK"
whole. Society cannot police art for inaccuracies; film makers are free to take
whatever liberties they wish. But society can denounce bogus history -- and
study honest history. That means reading, critically. Otherwise Hollywood
becomes the culture's historian by default.

LOAD-DATE: December 25, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 26, 1991, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Richard G. Stilwell, 74, Is Dead; Commanded U.N. Forces in Korea

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section D; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 335 words


Gen. Richard G. Stilwell, retired, former commander of United Nations forces in
Korea, died Wednesday at Fairfax County Hospital in Falls Church, Va. He was 74
years old.

The cause of death was cardiac arrest, the Army said.

General Stilwell, who was not directly related to Gen. Joseph W. Stilwell, the
commander of United States forces in China, Burma and India during World War II,
was born in Buffalo in 1917. A graduate of the United States Military Academy
whose career in the Army spanned 39 years, he served in World War II, the Korean
War and the Vietnam War, earning several decorations, including the
Distinguished Service Medal.

He had two tours of duty in Vietnam. The first, from 1963 to 1965, included a
year as chief of staff to Gen. William C. Westmoreland, commander of American
forces there. During the second, from 1968 to 1969, he was commander of the XXIV
Army Corps, a three-division force concentrated in the northern two provinces of
South Vietnam.

In 1972, he took command of the Sixth Army, based in San Francisco. He was
promoted to four-star general on Aug. 1, 1973, and appointed head of the United
Nations Command in South Korea.

In that capacity, he had operational command of 600,000 members of the South
Korean armed forces as well American forces there. He was in command in August
1976, during a crisis brought on by the killing of two American officers by
North Korean guards in the demilitarized zone between the two Koreas.

He served in Korea until his retirement, on Nov. 1, 1976.

In 1981, General Stilwell was appointed Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for
Policy, a position he held until 1985.

At the time of his death, he was president of Stilwell Associates, a consulting
firm in Arlington, Va. He was chairman of the Korean War Veterans Memorial
advisory board and had recently worked as a consultant to the Secretary of
Defense and to the Central Intelligence Agency.

Neither the Army nor the hospital released names of survivors yesterday.

NAME: Richard G. Stilwell

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Richard G. Stilwell (Stan Barouh, 1985)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 27, 1991, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Slow Year In Drilling For U.S. Oil

BYLINE: By THOMAS C. HAYES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1212 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Dec. 26


When the final weekly figures for the year are released on Friday, oil-drilling
activity for the United States in 1991 is certain to rank as the slowest of any
year since the Government restricted drilling for military reasons in 1942.

The energy industry clamped down on domestic drilling as it confronted low
prices for crude and natural gas, the recession and environmental laws that
forbid the industry to drill in prime areas of potentially big reserves in
Alaska and near the California coastline.

Even in the months before the allied bombardment of Baghdad began last January,
as prices for domestic crude surged to $40 a barrel, the nation's oil giants
kept a steady hand on drilling budgets.

Controls to Tighten

And now, with prices for domestic reserves at their lowest level in 10 months,
$18.50 a barrel, and natural gas prices depressed anew, analysts and oil
executives say the energy industry will keep an even tighter rein on domestic
drilling budgets into next year. That is expected to put thousands more oilfield
employees out of work and accelerate a new round of mergers and asset sales that
recently began in drilling services.

The average number of rigs active weekly in 1991, as monitored by Baker Hughes
Inc., the drilling services company, will be about 860, down by nearly 15
percent from 1,010 last year and below the postwar low of 869 set in 1989. The
average for the week that ended last Friday was 797, down almost 31 percent from
the 1,151 rigs in operation the comparable week a year ago.

More Imports Expected

As the volume of oil pumped from domestic fields declines, the nation seems
likely to import nearly half of its daily consumption of more than 16 million
barrels, the oil executives and analysts said. Imports contributed an average of
45.7 percent of total supplies through November of this year, according to the
American Petroleum Institute, the industry trade group based in Washington.

"The reality is that the economics for drilling in the United States are not
attractive," said James L. Carroll, an analyst at Paine Webber Inc. in New York.
"I certainly don't expect it to turn around anytime soon. Most companies are
planning for a U.S. rig count between 700 and 750 rigs in 1992."

The nation's lowest level of drilling activity since records were begun in 1940
was an average of 761 active rigs in 1942, when the Government temporarily
diverted steel output from drilling-pipe production just before the nation
entered World War II.

Ike Kerridge, the chief economist at Baker Hughes, said drilling for natural gas
could also decline further next year. The tax credits that stimulated some
drilling for natural gas this year in unconventional areas like tight rock
formations and underground coal seams probably would not be extended by
Congress, he said.

James W. Kinnear, the president and chief executive of Texaco Inc., the nation's
third-largest oil company, said today that spending on exploration projects in
the United States by his company had fallen to 55 percent of Texaco's global
exploration budget, from 75 percent 10 years ago.

'Pretty Marked Change'

"It's a pretty marked change," he said. "The promising areas in Alaska, offshore
California and otherwise are simply not available to us. But areas outside the
United States are really quite attractive."

Texaco expects, for instance, to recover three billion barrels in the coming
years in Indonesia by flooding aging fields with steam to loosen the crude. And,
among other projects, it has allocated $500 million in the British North Sea on
a field that will yield the company more than 100 million barrels.

"We have to put our stockholders' money out there where we can make money on
it," Mr. Kinnear said. "In the United States, environmental laws are soaking up
a lot of capital," he added. "It is clearly the taxpayers and citizens who will
pay the bill at the end of the day. Obviously, U.S. production is going to
continue to drop."

Creating Jobs Abroad

Allen E. Murray, the chairman and chief executive of the Mobil Corporation and
outgoing head of the American Petroleum Institute, said in a speech last month
that by discouraging drilling at home and importing higher amounts of oil, the
nation was sending jobs to oil-exporting nations.

The number of oilfield workers in the United States declined to 382,000 in
November, from 402,300 in the same month a year ago, and from the yearly peak of
708,300 in 1982, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

Most large oil companies have accelerated spending on foreign projects in recent
years. Since 1989, the oil industry has invested more money in the hunt for oil
outside the United States than within the nation's borders, according to Arthur
Andersen, the accounting firm.

The Chevron Corporation spent more money abroad than in the United States this
year for the first time -- an estimated $486 million, or more than 50 percent
for foreign drilling from a total exploration budget of $944 million. In 1987,
Chevron's foreign spending totaled $187 million, or 27 percent, of a total
exploration budget of $685 million.

Earlier this month, the Pennzoil Company said its future exploration efforts
would mainly be abroad. The retreat from current projects, mostly in the United
States, reflects "a major business opportunity" to broaden the company's limited
activities abroad, said James L. Pate, the president and chief executive.

Slumping oil prices have also put a damper on global drilling activity since the
Persian Gulf war ended in March, but the decline has been less severe outside
the United States. The average weekly drilling rate for 1991 outside the nation
was 1,040 rigs, a slight decline from the levels of 1989 and 1990, according to
Baker Hughes, which is based in Houston.

Dozens of countries that once shunned American oil giants are now wooing them to
help raise oil output.  They include Albania, Bulgaria and Vietnam and several
republics of the former Soviet Union, said Mr. Carroll, the Paine Webber
analyst. "The United States is the only country that has not improved fiscal
terms or concessions since the war ended," he said.

The decline in the nation's search for oil and natural gas has some bright
spots. It partly reflects greater productivity based on improved seismic studies
to locate reserves and on better drilling equipment that together have reduced
the number of dry holes. And one effect of the reduced drilling is that the
nation will better conserve what remains of its fossil-fuel resources for future
generations.

Mr. Kinnear of Texaco, who is not an alarmist about falling domestic drilling
rates, said the best policy for the nation would include a combination of
imports from many foreign producers, as well as conservation and economically
prudent oil production at home.

Yet the decline in drilling will inevitably weaken smaller oilfield service
companies, whose customers drilled mainly in the United States.

"We are in the early stages of another round of consolidation in the oilfield
services that will be similar to what we saw in 1986" after oil prices fell to
$12, from $27 early in the year, Mr. Carroll said. "Earnings this year have been
nothing short of disaster."

LOAD-DATE: December 27, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "A Slowdown in Drilling" shows average number of active drilling
rigs from '51-'91. (Source: Baker Hughes Inc.) (pg. D3)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Remains of C.I.A. Official Are Flown to U.S. for Rites

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 27


Human remains identified as those of William Buckley, chief officer for the
Central Intelligence Agency in Lebanon when he was taken hostage in March 1984,
were flown to the United States this evening for funeral services. He died in
captivity, apparently after torture, the next year.

A spokesman for the C.I.A., which seldom acknowledges the identity of its
clandestine operatives, dead or alive, said Mr. Buckley "was the senior agency
representative in Beirut" when he was kidnapped by an organization calling
itself Islamic Holy War. The agency also issued a brief biographical profile of
Mr. Buckley, again an usual step for the C.I.A. in dealing with members of its
clandestine service, but also reflecting the agony felt in the highest ranks of
the intelligence service over the loss of one of their own.

The C.I.A. acknowledged the death of Mr. Buckley in an agency memorial service
in August 1987, nearly two years after Islamic Holy War boasted of having killed
him. The spokesman also noted that the agency honored him with a star carved in
the marble memorial wall of the C.I.A.'s main building in Langley, Va., where
officers killed on duty are commemorated. "It is star 51 of 54 stars," he said.

Further Confirmation

"We are waiting for final positive identification by U.S. authorities" at Dover
Air Force Base in Delaware on Saturday, the spokesman said, noting that
preliminary identification was made early today by Lebanon's chief pathologist
on the basis of medical charts supplied by the United States. The pathologist,
Dr. Ahmed Harati, issued his finding after examining a skull and some bones that
were found wrapped in blankets early today on a roadside near Beirut's
international airport.

It is routine practice for American military forensic specialists at Dover to
conduct their own examinations of remains of American officials killed in
foreign lands, the spokesman said. The same was done for Lieut. Col. William R.
Higgins of the Marines, another Beirut hostage slain by Islamic militants, whose
body was returned to this country this week.

Joint Service Scheduled

Unlike Mr. Buckley, who arrived in Beirut in 1983 under the cover of a State
Department posting as political officer of the American Embassy, Colonel Higgins
was serving openly as chief of the United Nations observer team in Lebanon when
he was seized.

The C.I.A. official and a Pentagon spokesman said plans were under way for a
joint funeral service for Mr. Buckley and Colonel Higgins at Andrews Air Force
Base, just outside of the capital, on Monday. The remains of Colonel Higgins
will then be buried at the Marine base in Quantico, Va.

There is already a gravesite and a tombstone for Mr. Buckley at Arlington
National Cemetery, where many of the nation's heroes are buried. Mr. Buckley,
who was a lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserve, won a Silver Star for
gallantry while serving in Vietnam.

A public memorial service was held with full military honors at Arlington on May
13, 1988, just short of three years after his presumed death. At the service,
attended by more than 100 colleagues and friends, the Director of Central
Intelligence, William H. Webster, eulogized Mr. Buckley saying, "Bill's success
in collecting information in situations of incredible danger was exceptional,
even remarkable."

Among the mourners was Mr. Buckley's longtime companion, Candace Hammond of
Farmer, N.C., whom he had left behind when he moved to Beirut.

Linked to Reagan Efforts

By the time of that service, some details of Mr. Buckley's previous life had
become public: that he had served in clandestine C.I.A. assignments in Syria and
Pakistan and that his fate had become intertwined with President Ronald Reagan's
impassioned efforts to gain the release of other Americans held hostage in
Lebanon.

Well before American policy makers were certain that Mr. Buckley was dead at the
age of 57, the Director of Central Intelligence, William J. Casey, began efforts
aimed at finding -- and possibly rescuing -- Mr. Buckley. At one point, a
Federal Bureau of Investigation team specializing in kidnapping cases was
brought in.

When the Reagan Administration accepted the fact of Mr. Buckley's death, hostage
takers in Lebanon were believed to be holding five other Americans.

In late 1985, President Reagan made the release of these Americans a principal
policy objective of his Administration, leading him and a handful of aides into
a series of covert operations involving the sale of sophisticated weapons to
Iran by way of Israel and other incentives intended to ransom the captives.
These operations culminated in what became known as the Iran-contra affair in
1986.

According to the biographical information distributed by fax today by the
C.I.A., Mr. Buckley was "an avid reader of politics and history" and "a
collector and builder of miniature soldiers." The latter hobby enabled him to
become a principal artisan in the creation of a panorama at the Lexington
Battlefield Tourist Center near his native Medford, Mass.

The press release also said Mr. Buckley owned an antique shop and was an amateur
artist and a collector of fine art. It called him "a very private and discreet
individual."

The C.I.A. awarded him an Intelligence Star, an Exceptional Service Medallion
and a Distinguished Intelligence Cross, but did not say whether any of these
were issued posthumously.

Mr. Buckley, who was a bachelor, is survived by two sisters, Maureen Moroney of
Salem, Mass., and Joyce Wing of Saugus, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kerrey's Companies Provide Few With Medical Coverage

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, Dec. 27


When Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska introduced a bill last summer calling for
the Government to provide comprehensive health insurance for all Americans, he
said the runaway costs of health care were severely hampering the nation's
businesses, forcing them to choose between providing jobs and providing medical
coverage for their employees.

Senator Kerrey, a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, knows
firsthand the predicament he described. He and his brother-in-law own a chain of
nine restaurants and three health clubs here in Omaha and in Lincoln, Neb., and
most of the employees cannot get health insurance through the Kerrey companies.

The companies do offer health coverage to full-time employees. But full-timers
account for a small proportion of the companies' total work force.

Senator Kerrey's brother-in-law, Dean F. Rasmussen, president of the restaurant
company, Grandmother's Inc., estimates that only 75 to 100 of the company's 700
to 800 restaurant employees get health insurance through the company.

David K. Putensen, general manager of operations at the three health clubs, says
only 25 to 30 of the 300 employees have employer-provided health insurance.

"Most of our employees are vulnerable to the high cost of health care, and they
are just as unshielded as a turtle without its shell," said Mr. Putensen. "We're
doing the best we can, and it's none too good."

Many Part-Time Workers

Mr. Kerrey has emphasized health care as the central issue of his Presidential
campaign, and he often cites his business experience as evidence of his
leadership ability. "Investment in the right of every American to quality health
care" is a cornerstone of his political platform. But his own businesses have
not made a major investment in health care for their workers.

Mr. Kerrey and his brother-in-law founded the restaurant chain in 1973 with the
help of two other men. The Senator is chairman of the company, and now owns 35
percent of it. The restaurants make heavy use of part-time workers, including
many high school and college students. But the restaurants do not offer health
insurance coverage to such part-time employees, who work as waiters, hostesses,
cashiers and food preparers.

"It would be exorbitantly expensive," Mr. Rasmussen said in an interview at his
office here.

Local union leaders say Mr. Kerrey is being hypocritical, or at least
inconsistent, when he advocates a national health insurance plan, including
coverage of doctors' services, hospital care and nursing home care.

"When he's campaigning he gives the impression that he is for the blue-collar
worker, but he doesn't even treat his own employees right," said Jenny Brown,
vice president of the local Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union.

Mr. Rasmussen said he would prefer that his employees not be interviewed, and
the employees generally declined to discuss their health insurance arrangements.
A woman in her 20's who works at a waitress at one of the restaurants, insisting
on anonymity, said she was applying for jobs at other restaurants where she
could get higher wages and health insurance coverage.

But Thomas C. Nielsen, an 18-year-old cook, said he enjoyed working 20 to 30
hours a week at a Grandmother's restaurant in Lincoln. Mr. Nielsen, a freshman
at the University of Nebraska. said he was in "perfect health" and was covered
under his parents' health insurance policy.

Business Experience Cited

Mr. Kerrey says his experience as a businessman demonstrates why he wants to
"uncouple health care coverage from employment" and why he wants to establish
the Federal Government as the principal payer of all medical bills. "I don't
think it's hypocritical at all," the Senator said in an interview today. "As a
small-business man, I know from experience how difficult it is to get health
care on an affordable basis for employees."

What would be hypocritical, he said, is if he opposed national health insurance
after receiving free medical care from the Government as a disabled Vietnam
veteran and subsidized care as a United States Senator.

Nationwide, 34 million people have no health insurance. Of this number, 19
million are working adults, and 10 million more live in families headed by
workers.

Labor Law Violations

As a candidate, Mr. Kerrey has often complained of government inertia,
asserting, for example, that the Labor Department "fails to protect workers."

But on Dec. 17, the Labor Department said the Senator's restaurants had violated
child labor laws by flouting limits on the hours that could be worked by
employees 14 or 15 years of age. The Government said the violations involved
seven of Mr. Kerrey's restaurants and 116 employees, or about 15 percent of the
restaurants' work force. The Labor Department assessed civil penalties of
$64,650 against the restaurants.

Mr. Rasmussen acknowledged that "we were in violation in numerous instances." He
said most of the violations had occurred on Friday evenings, when the
restaurants were busy and 15-year-old employees continued working beyond 7 P.M.
Under Federal regulations, children under 16 are not supposed to work before 7
A.M. or after 7 P.M. on Fridays or other school days.

Mr. Rasmussen said the restaurant chain offered health insurance coverage to
full-time employees who have worked at least 30 days for the company. He
declined to disclose how much workers had to pay for such coverage, saying,
"It's very difficult to explain."

The Health Insurance Association of America, a trade group, says the average
monthly premium for a family rose sharply, to $318 last year from $210 in 1987.
Over all, employers pay more than 70 percent of such premiums, the association
said.

High Turnover Cited

Because of the high turnover of part-time employees, Mr. Rasmussen said, "it
would not be financially feasible" to offer them health insurance. He estimated
that part-time employees worked in the restaurants, on the average, for only a
year.

"With the health-care system structured as it is today, small business really
cannot afford to provide health insurance," said Mr. Rasmussen, a director of
the National Restaurant Association.

Jeffrey R. Prince, a spokesman for the restaurant association, said he did not
know how many of the nine million workers in the food service industry had
health insurance coverage. Surveys by the association have found that larger
food service companies are more likely to provide health insurance. In 1989, for
example, 87 percent of the food service companies with annual sales of $10
million or more offered such coverage to both hourly and salaried employees.

Senator Kerrey speaks of his restaurants as a small business, but they would
appear to have outgrown that description. Mr. Rasmussen said the nine
restaurants had annual sales totaling more than $10 million a year.

Employees of Mr. Kerrey's health clubs can enroll in a health maintenance
organization if they work at least 30 hours a week. Mr. Putensen said the
employees must pay 70 percent of the monthly premium, while the clubs pay 30
percent. He estimated that the monthly premium for a family was $250 to $300.

Senator Kerrey's proposals for national health insurance are in the mainstream
of liberal Democratic thinking. Bush Administration officials have not offered
any comprehensive proposals of their own, but have denounced proposals like Mr.
Kerrey's on the ground that they assign too big a role to the Federal
Government.

Under Mr. Kerrey's bill, introduced in July after more than two years of
consultations with his Nebraska constituents, consumers would still use private
doctors and hospitals, but most spending for health care would be channeled
through the Federal Government.

The Government would set an overall budget for total health spending and would
pay a fixed amount for each person enrolled in a health insurance plan. All
private and public insurance plans would have to cover doctors' services,
hospital care, preventive care, diagnostic tests, prescription drugs and nursing
home care.

No family would have to pay more than $2,000 a year for medical care. Each state
would negotiate fee schedules with doctors and hospitals. Senator Kerrey would
finance his proposal through tax increases totaling $236 billion a year. He
proposes to increase payroll taxes, corporate income taxes and excise taxes on
cigarettes and liquor, among other levies.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "It would be exorbitantly expensive" to provide health
insurance for all employees, said Dean F. Rasmussen, president of a restaurant
chain he owns with his brother-in-law, Senator Bob Kerrey. Only 75 to 100 of
their 700 to 800 employees have company health insurance. Mr. Rasmussen stood
with a 1973 photo of the founders, from left, Dion Bennett, Mr. Kerrey, Dennis
Sullivan and himself. (Robert Pear/The New York Times); Thomas C. Neilsen, a
cook at one of the restaurants in Lincoln, said he was covered by his parents'
health insurance policy. (Ian Doremus for The New York Times)(pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1991, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Philippines Orders U.S. to Leave Strategic Navy Base at Subic Bay

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1460 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 27


The Philippines told the United States today that it must withdraw from the
Subic Bay naval base by the end of 1992, ending a vast American military
presence that began with the capture of the islands from Spain in 1898.

The decision, which resulted from an impasse in negotiations, follows a year of
intense talks between the countries on the fate of American bases in the
Philippines. The announcement also comes just three days before President Bush
begins a 12-day Asian tour.

The shutdown of the sprawling Subic Bay base, together with the closing of Clark
Air Base after a volcanic eruption this year, amounts to the biggest reduction
to date in the United States military presence in the western Pacific. The
60,000-acre Subic base is the Navy's principal supply and ship-repair
installation in the region.

U.S. to Look for New Sites

Although it is theoretically possible that a new agreement could be hammered
out, Administration officials in Washington said that they considered this
unlikely, and that they would accelerate the pullout and the search for
alternative sites in the Pacific.

American and Philippine officials reached tentative agreement last summer on a
treaty that would have extended the lease on the naval base for at least another
decade in exchange for $203 million in annual aid. But the Philippine Senate
rejected the treaty in September after an impassioned debate in which the
American military presence was assailed as a vestige of colonialism and an
affront to Philippine sovereignty.

The United States never increased its offer, but opened negotiations on a
three-year phased withdrawal in the hope that the lease could be extended after
a new government is elected in the Philippines in May.

The negotiations stumbled, officials said, over the United States' reluctance to
commit itself to a firm schedule for removing troops and equipment and to
guarantee that no nuclear weapons would pass through the base. Though President
Bush has said that tactical nuclear weapons will be removed from surface
warships, it is assumed that many of the ships that pass through the port are
armed with them now.

But over the past month it has become clear in any case that the American
military was reconciled to losing the base, and saw little use in dragging out
the process. By the middle of 1993, most of the American personnel and much of
the movable equipment would have been moved elsewhere, at a cost of billions of
dollars, and sending them back would have probably proved prohibitively
expensive.

"Once it begins, it is an irreversible process," a senior American official said
today. "The bottom line is that we are gone."

President Corazon C. Aquino had vowed to find a way to keep the United States in
place, even proposing a referendum on the issue after the Senate rejected the
bases treaty. But Mrs. Aquino, who has indicated that she does not plan to seek
re-election next year, eventually backed down in the face of adamant political
opposition.

Money was not an issue in the impasse. In recent years, Washington has pledged a
certain amount in economic, military and housing assistance instead of paying
yearly rent for American bases. In the fiscal year that ended in September, the
Philippines received $408 million in connection with the bases, and the Subic
Bay base has pumped more than $344 million a year into the country's economy.

As the prospects of remaining in the Philippines have faded in recent months,
Defense Department officials have scrambled to find alternatives. None of the
proposed sites, including Singapore and Japan, two scheduled stops on the
President's trip, seem to match Subic's advantages, which include huge
deep-water facilities and access to the strategic waters of the South China Sea.

Subic, 50 miles west of Manila, is the last of six American bases that until
recently housed 40,000 troops, dependents and civilian employees. Four others
were returned to the Philippine Government this year. Clark Air Base, the other
major American installation in the Philippines, was abandoned in June and
eventually closed after it was buried in volcanic ash from the eruption of
nearby Mount Pinatubo.

Threat and Interest Wane

Both American and Philippine officials said today that the United States'
willingness to retain the Subic base had waned in recent months, especially
after the disintegration of the Soviet Union. "Global events overtook Subic and
undermined its value," said Alan Ortiz, assistant director of the Philippine
Government's National Security Council.

Franklin Drilon, one of Mrs. Aquino's top aides, said at a news conference in
Manila that "the friendly and cordial relations between the United States and
the Philippines will continue."

The closing of the base will mean relocating 5,800 officers and enlisted men and
women, 600 civilians working for the Department of Defense and 5,000 to 6,000
military dependents. It will also be a major economic loss for the impoverished
Philippines, which will lose the aid it receives annually for use of the base
and the hundreds of millions of dollars in business generated by its presence.

About 20,000 Filipino workers are employed there, and the honky-tonk bars of
Olongapo and Subic, the two cities that border the installation, are legendary
among generations of sailors whose ships have pulled in to Subic's docks. Many
predict that the cities will become neon ghost towns.

Commitment to Asia Questioned

The withdrawal may also raise questions about the Bush Administration's
assertion that the United States remains fully committed to Asia, a theme the
President is expected to voice throughout his trip.

"Without the bases in the Philippines, I don't think there is any question that
U.S. influence in Asia will decline," Masashi Nishihara, a professor at Japan's
top military institute and an analyst of security policy in the Pacific, said
today in a telephone interview from Tokyo.

"If events occur in the South China Sea -- a conflict between China and Taiwan,
for example, or Hong Kong -- the United States may have very little ability to
change events," he said. "As we learned in the Persian Gulf war, effective
diplomacy has the backup of an effective military."

Singapore has already offered the United States access to ship-repair sites and
says the United States can base some forces there. But the tiny island nation is
too small to be of more than token use. The commander of the Pacific fleet, Adm.
Charles R. Larson, said recently that he was talking with Malaysia and other
nations, but that no site could match the advantages of Subic Bay, which
included a plentiful and inexpensive work force.

"A lot of functions will be dispersed, and a lot will be returned to the United
States," a senior American official in the Philippines said today. "And some
will just disappear."

Negotiators Exasperated

American officials seemed somewhat relieved that the long and often angry
negotiations with the Philippines were over, and that the United States could
quickly withdraw from its former military empire there. Negotiators have
expressed exasperation with what they view as Mrs. Aquino's confused signals and
ultimately ineffective leadership on the issue.

In the Philippine Senate, the move to eject United States forces seemed less a
debate over the bases' value than a demonstration of sovereignty and national
pride. The Philippines was essentially an American colony from 1898, when George
Dewey sailed into Manila Bay to defeat the Spanish fleet, until 1946, when it
became an independent republic.

Subic Bay, which began as a Spanish military garrison in the late 1860's, has
always been a critical part of America's military operations in the Pacific. It
is the main repair site for ships operating everywhere from Japan to the Indian
Ocean, and marines have long been trained in jungle warfare in the wooded
mountains near the base. It was the site of fierce battles with the Japanese
during World War II, a staging area for naval operations during the Korean and
Vietnam wars and a strategic counterpoint to Soviet forces in Cam Ranh Bay,
Vietnam.

But the vast American military presence has long been an irritant in the
Philippines' uneasy relations with the United States. Resentment flared this
year when Mrs. Aquino's Government finally negotiated the 10-year extension of
the Subic Bay lease. Opposition was fierce in the Senate, where lawmakers
asserted that the deal would perpetuate the country's image as an American
lackey, though polls suggested that the Philippine people largely supported the
treaty.

It is unclear whether nuclear weapons are stored at Subic. The United States,
following its usual policy, will not say.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Philippines told the United States that it must withdraw
from the Subic Bay naval base next year. A United States Navy ship docked at the
base in July after the eruption of the Mount Pinatubo volcano. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. 2)

Map of the Phillipines showing location of Subic Bay Naval Base. (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Postcards From World Of Sports '91

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section 8; Page 1; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words


THE airlines keep folding. Soon there will be one huge American carrier, with
every flight stopping in Atlanta. Nevertheless, a wandering writer will continue
to collect exotic luggage tags as a reminder that sports are universal.
NEW YORK, JAN. 2 Miami, Colorado and Georgia Tech all claim the unofficial
national collegiate football title after bowl victories. Tri-champions. Isn't
anarchy wonderful?


BA VI, VIETNAM, JAN. 17 Accompanying my wife on a private child-care expedition
outside Hanoi, I get along in the true language. Wearing a 1990 World Cup cap, I
am greeted by friendly Vietnamese orphanage workers who try words like
"Maradona" and "Italy" and "football" on me.
BOMBAY, INDIA, JAN. 30 Still visiting child-care centers, I have no idea what
happened back in Tampa. I pick up the International Herald Tribune and see
photographs of Bill Parcells and O. J. Anderson and I say, "Whoa, I think the
Giants won the Super Bowl."
SYRACUSE, MARCH 14 In town for N.C.A.A. basketball, I turn on the tube to catch
Dick Tarrant, the wily coach of Richmond, engineer another of his March upsets,
this time over bumbling Syracuse. Outside, you can feel gloomy winter settling
in for another month in this one-team town.
PORT ST. LUCIE, FLA., APRIL 1 Welcome to the new age. The Mets sign Doc Gooden
for $15.45 million for three years. One of the inducements? "Doc, the Video,"
starring you-know-who.
DETROIT, APRIL 8 A quiet Broadway producer named Robert Nederlander comes home
to Michigan as the caretaker executive of the Yankees, filling in for the
banished-but-never-disgraced George Steinbrenner. Tigers win, 6-4, setting omen
for Nederlander's one-year regime.
LOUISVILLE, KY., MAY 4 Friendly conversation on the backstretch: "How much horse
you got, Poppy?" asks Angel Cordero. "I got a good bit of horse," says Chris
Antley, who rides off into the sunset atop Strike the Gold to win the Derby.
BALTIMORE, MAY 18 Dreams die fast, coming out of the gate at the short, short
Preakness. Hansel insures there will be no Triple Crown winner for the 13th
straight year.
BLOOMINGTON, MINN., MAY 20 Fans gape at the most famous sports trophy in North
America, as it sits proudly on display in a hotel lobby. Pittsburgh will beat
Minnesota for the Stanley Cup, four games to two, but the Penguins' respected
coach, Badger Bob Johnson, will die of brain cancer six months later.
DEER LAKE, PA., JUNE 4 Promoting his biography, Muhammad Ali makes a nostalgic
visit to his old camp to show he can still get around, but his slow speech and
slow movement sadden most people on the bus.
ELMONT, N.Y., JUNE 9 One day after Hansel wins the Belmont Stakes, there is a
friendly bet between Carl Icahn, who owns TWA, and M. C. Hammer, who indulges in
a more secure occupation: rap music. In a big filly race, Icahn's Meadow Star
beats Hammer's Lite Light, and Icahn wins the purse and the $35,000 bet, which
oddly enough does not bring joy to beleaguered TWA employees.
NEW YORK, JUNE 15 Carl Lewis takes a deep breath, then makes thrilling last leap
to maintain his 10-year undefeated streak in the long jump. Mike Powell will do
better in August, breaking Bob Beamon's record at world meet in Tokyo.
WIMBLEDON, ENGLAND, JUNE 30 For the first time in 114 years, they play tennis on
the first Sunday of the tournament, because of a backup from rain. A different
crowd comes up with tickets, and performs the wave, chants for its favorites,
and lugs in brown bags of lunch. Even the directors admit they love the mood,
but do it again next year? Nevah!
BRECON, WALES, JULY 15 Imagine Doc Gooden and HoJo dropping by the park to play
the county baseball champs. Even the sheep on the adjacent hill gaze in
admiration as the greatest cricket players in the world, Viv Richards and the
West Indian national team, play a friendly match against Welsh amateurs on the
lawn at 450-year-old Christ College.
HAVANA, AUG. 3 A tiny runner with the symbolic name of Alberto Cuba wins the
marathon to open the Pan American Games, setting off two-week nationalistic
celebration including Fidel Castro performing the wave. Cubans do not want to
hear that U.S. has sent many second-stringers.
HAVANA, AUG. 15 The U.S. basketball team committed the faux pas of flying home
to Miami for cheeseburgers and air-conditioning between games, an insult to
athletes sharing the modest dorms and food here. Few people are unhappy when the
haughty Yanks lose to motivated Puerto Rico, 73-68, in the semifinals.
HAVANA, AUG. 16 Puerto Rico does even better the next day. Players who could not
get offers from minor leagues stun elite American college all-stars, 7-1, in
baseball semifinals.
HAVANA, AUG. 19 On the morning after an extravagant closing ceremony, people
wake up to fuel and food shortages, and ponder the cost of bowling lanes and
equestrian centers for Pan Am Games.
FLUSHING MEADOWS, N.Y., SEPT. 8 Monica Seles and Stefan Edberg win the U.S.
Open, but the star is 39-year-old Jimmy Connors, who snarls and dives, bullies
and charms, his way to the semifinals.
NEW YORK, OCT. 3 Two gracious gents named Branca and Thomson shake hands on the
exact 40th anniversary of their duel in the Polo Grounds.
PITTSBURGH, OCT. 17 Atlanta Braves and Georgia Bulldogs colors all over town, as
visiting fans gobble up unsold tickets. Do Pirates sense the community doesn't
care all that much? Braves win pennant.
MINNEAPOLIS, OCT. 20 Metrodome noise clouds the minds of the umpires, who fail
to notice that burly Kent Hrbek rassles Ronnie Gant off first base for a crucial
out.
SOUTH THROUGH THE CAROLINAS, OCT. 27 Baseball was made for long car rides. I
wish they would keep playing the seventh game all night, but Twins finally
prevail in epic World Series, 1-0, in 10th inning, and I can now make overdue
pit stop.
MIAMI, NOV. 2 In this show-biz age, you cannot open the N.B.A. season without
dancing girls and bright lights and colored smoke and booming audio. Knicks lose
openers in Orlando and Miami, and I am convinced they are in for a boring
season, but I do not count on Pat Riley's bringing out the latent talent.
TALLAHASSEE, FLA., NOV. 17 Most coaches would go into seclusion the morning
after an undefeated season sails away on a missed field goal. But Bobby Bowden
of Florida State shows up for press conference in his Sunday best en route to
preach at church. "Y'all invited," Bowden says. A class act.
TAMPA, FLA., NOV. 24 Frightening tableau as Jeff Hostetler lies immobile for 10
minutes, but injury is minor broken bones in his back. Phil Simms engineers
winning drive in final two minutes that gives Giants false hope.
NEW YORK, DEC. 8 World Cup stages draw leading to 1994 finals in the U.S. I feel
envy over games that will be played in Ghana and Brazil and Lithuania.
NEW YORK, DEC. 11 Magic Johnson, stricken with AIDS virus, works out at the
Garden, a touching mix of defiance and denial. May we all be that courageous and
also face the realities in 1992. Happy New Year.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE YEAR IN THE ARTS: THEATER/1991;
A Dog at the End of Its Rope (No, Not That One)

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 385 words


Best Performance by an Animal -- Rusty -- part spitz, pure daredevil -- stands
on his hind paws on a rope in "The Will Rogers Follies."

Anticlimax of the Year -- Three years after it was first announced for Broadway,
61 days after it began previews, "Nick and Nora," having canceled its
out-of-town tryout and delayed its opening night twice, finally opened and then
closed after nine performances.

Mark My Words -- "Even if my play is successful, I will never win the Pulitzer,"
declared Neil Simon, whose "Lost in Yonkers" proved a huge success and won him
the 1991 Pulitzer Prize for drama.

Major Misfires -- "The Road to Nirvana," Arthur Kopit's satire of Hollywood
mores, which took scatology to a new low; "La Bete," faux Moliere by David
Hirson, written entirely in rhymed couplets; "States of Shock," Sam Shepard in a
nonelectric mode.

Most Ecstatic Dance in a Broadway Show (Not Choreographed by Tommy Tune) -- The
frenzied jig that suddenly seizes five Irish spinsters and sends them reeling
about the kitchen in "Dancing at Lughnasa," Brian Friel's lovely memory play.

Most Enthralling Performance -- Eileen Atkins, as Virginia Woolf, subtly
expounding upon a woman's need to have "A Room of One's Own," if she ever hopes
to be a writer.

Worst Off-Broadway Pun -- "Beware the ids that march," from "Return to the
Forbidden Planet." (Runner-up: "Two beeps or not two beeps. That is the
question," also from "Return to the Forbidden Planet.")

A Love Song Like No Other -- In "Assassins," Stephen Sondheim's most daring
musical yet, John Hinckley and Lynette (Squeaky) Fromme sang "Unworthy of Your
Love," directing their unrequited affections to Jodie Foster and Charles Manson.

Mea Culpa, Mea Culpa -- "Miss Saigon" offered an opportunity to repent the
Vietnam War at $100 a seat.

The Year's Most Affecting Plays, Although You'd Never Know It From the Titles --
Terrence McNally's "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" and Scott McPherson's "Marvin's
Room."

Emptiest Shoes -- Joseph Papp's.

Hollowest Promise -- Despite reassurances that it would never come to that, the
Nederlander Organization sold the Mark Hellinger Theater to the Times Square
Church, which conducts Pentecostal services from the stage where Rex Harrison
once taught Julie Andrews proper diction in "My Fair Lady."

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Rusty, en pointe, in the Broadway musical "The Will Rogers
Follies" (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times); Tom McGowan in David Hirson's
comedy "La Bete," written in rhymed couplets (Joan Marcus/"La Bete")

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 1991, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Bad Time for Men

BYLINE: By Judith Dunford;  Judith Dunford is working on her second novel.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 5; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 705 words



MEN WHO WOULD BE GOOD
A Novella and Six Stories.
By Gordon Weaver.
246 pp. Chicago:
TriQuarterly Books.
Cloth, $18.95. Paper, $9.95.

"DO you ever get philosophical about what's the point of it all?" asks one of
the characters in Gordon Weaver's latest collection of short fiction. "I keep
thinking I should be asking and answering some important questions, but the
trouble is in the end I can't even come up with questions. It's like I can't see
over a blank wall I run into."

Existential problems drive all the men in the novella and six stories making up
"Men Who Would Be Good" into choosing the only response they feel is open to
them. These are men who expected to live a modest, steady version of the
American dream. They are without malice; they thought they were forever
progressing. But somehow, instead, they find themselves in a mysterious downward
spiral. Their children have grown into sullen, self-absorbed teen-agers, their
wives into strident nags or shopping-mall clones. Life, job, ordinary effort
have come to seem pointless, unreal, as though viewed upside down in a cracked
mirror. One character has fits of dreaming, another has fits of weeping, a few
lapse into an alcoholic buzz. One becomes his town's mad prophet, announcing
that a spell of erratic severe weather and other natural events -- toads,
locusts, murrain -- are biblical, a judgment. But is he really mad? And what
will come next?

The most extreme reaction is that of Elroy Huff in the disturbing novella,
"Under the World." Huff is short and slight, a guy who is called Pee Wee and
presumed to like it, a little fellow who is taken more as a mascot than a buddy.
It is the time of Vietnam. Huff enlists in the Army; his cockiness somehow adds
enough height and weight for him to get in. But instead of being sent into
combat with the others after basic training, he is insulted with an assignment
to quartermaster work. Everything changes when he is recruited by Lieut. Francis
X. Finney into a special project he dreamed up: a corps of very small, very
feisty men who are just the right size to crawl into the underground tunnels and
bunkers the Vietcong have built, destroy the enemy, seize as many of his stored
supplies as possible, then blow up the tunnels. Suddenly Huff finds that he is a
genius, and more than a genius. He has a sixth sense in the tunnels, a
transcendental feeling for the order and placement of everything in the dark
underworld. In successive missions, the rest of the corps and Lieutenant Finney
are all killed. The mission is over, the war nearly over, and it is time to go
back to The World (to Huff, those words are always capitalized). But Huff's mind
has made a heaven of this hell. He has been reborn in the dark, sheltering womb
of the caves. And so he disappears (forever, he plans) into their privacy, their
silence, to his absolute dominion over them, emerging only occasionally in the
dark of the night to spook the villagers and eat the fresh food they have left
out to appease what they think are evil spirits.

"Whiskey, Whiskey, Gin, Gin, Gin," the heartbreaking story that opens the book,
finds a man in his psychiatrist's office, trying to make sense of a life that
has imperceptibly fluttered downward into alcoholism. At the end he is alone.
His father and mother are long dead, his wife and children have fled his
drinking. "My only drink now is vodka," he tells his psychiatrist. "Talking
about this is confusing. I am beginning to feel confused."

Mr. Weaver, who has previously published four novels and five books of short
stories, combines powerful inventiveness with a gift for exact observation. He
gets the gritty details right. His mills and malls, bars and insurance men's
cubicles at Sears in their chilling verisimilitude make all the more menacing
his sense that life is a thin membrane stretched to its limit over an unending
maelstrom. He has a very fine ear for ordinary speech and comradely jargon,
which he twists brilliantly to reflect the deep unreality that pervades these
lives. ("If and when the close-order knuckle drill goes down, I will not
hesitate to mix in," says one of Huff's comrades.) Mr. Weaver has written a sad,
sharp, unnerving book.

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 30, 1991, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Michener Memoir, 'World Is My Home'

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1018 words


The World Is My Home A Memoir By James A. Michener Illustrated. 520 pages.
Random House. $25.

In James A. Michener's captivating new memoir, "The World Is My Home," which
could be described as a craftsman's autobiography, is this highly revealing
statement:

I have been damaged, in some ways, by my fixation on opera, for it has helped to
delude me into seeing human experience in a more dramatic form than facts would
warrant; it has edged me always closer to romanticism and away from reality; it
has made me a confirmed liberal when saner men, pondering the objective record,
tend to be pessimistic conservatives; and it has encouraged me toward artistic
conventions that I might have done well to avoid. For example, my love of the
operatic aria has encouraged me to allow my characters to declaim at length when
a brief speech might be more effective, and my enormous respect for the great
duets tempts me to have two characters speaking to each other just a bit longer
than the literary scene would warrant. In almost every respect my dalliance with
opera has influenced my understanding of the problems of art."

This thoughtful self-analysis is a better explanation of Mr. Michener's fiction
than anything written by the critical brotherhood. It also offers clues to why
his novels appeal to millions of readers all over the world, yet have been
ignored or denigrated by some literary critics: The statement helps to sketch
(albeit too modestly) the style of his books of place: "Tales of the South
Pacific," "Hawaii," "Caravans," "The Source," "Iberia," "Centennial,"
"Chesapeake," "The Covenant," "Poland," "Texas," "Alaska," "Caribbean." That
adds up to an even dozen, and omits even more works of fact and fiction bearing
his name. No other American writer has made the world the subject of his writing
with such sympathy for the universal nature of people everywhere.

"The World Is My Home" is more than a retelling of Mr. Michener's wanderings and
achievements. Although the book bypasses intimate aspects of his private life,
it includes the roots of some of his most appealing novels and it is filled with
wonderful stories. In his mid-80's, it's too late for Mr. Michener to change:
he's a great storyteller and keen educator.

Michener fans who consider "Tales of the South Pacific" one of the best books to
come out of World War II will be pleased to go island-hopping with him again.
Now it can be told and he tells it: A fellow lieutenant typed out fake orders
and signed his own name as an Admiral, giving Lieutenant Michener freedom to
travel anywhere in the South Pacific on "tours of inspection." Later, the
imaginary orders became more or less official and Mr. Michener wrote reports and
served as a trouble-shooter for Adm. William (Bull) Halsey. Part of his memoir
can be read as a factual sequel to "Tales," on which the brilliant Rodgers and
Hammerstein musical "South Pacific" was based.

On a lonely island called Mono, in the Treasury Islands, Mr. Michener passed
through a village with a name so musical to his ear -- Bali-ha'i -- that he
jotted it down in his soggy notebook against the day when he might want to use
it for some purpose he could not then envisage. When his transport dropped
anchor on Espiritu Santo, an island southeast of Guadalcanal, Mr. Michener met
the French owner of a copra plantation. Among the planter's Tonkinese workers
was a tough, conniving woman who bore an improbable name, Bloody Mary. Mr.
Michener notes, "it was a spiritual meeting that would bear wondrous fruit."

What makes the encounter with the real Bloody Mary, his future character, an
even better story -- and adds to this book's astute air -- is Mr. Michener's
editorializing:

"She said that when the war ended, she would go to Tonkin, the area that would
later be known as North Vietnam, and I got the strong impression that when she
got there she intended to oppose French colonialism. . . . I would often think
of her in later years when American troops were fighting their fruitless battles
in Vietnam and I wondered if our leaders realized that the enemy they were
fighting consisted of millions of determined people like Bloody Mary."

He recalls that, beginning at age 7 with the birthday gift of a Victrola,
listening to grand opera became his "vice." In later years, he realized that
opera stories were preposterous, part of a make-believe world, yet filled with
moral lessons about the ways of the real world. The reader shares the thrilling
moment when Mr. Michener bonds with Ezio Pinza, the star of "South Pacific," by
singing an operatic duet with him in Italian.

In the travel section of "The World Is My Home," Mr. Michener makes the reader
want to get on the first flight to Bora Bora, "a magical island" about 150 miles
northwest of Tahiti, with a coral reef, inviting bays and an ancient volcano in
harmonious relation. "To put it quite simply, Bora Bora is the most beautiful
island in the world," he writes. "To come back to Bora Bora at the close of the
day after a long trip in a small boat and to see the setting sun illuminate the
volcanic tower, massive and brooding in gold, is to see the South Pacific at its
unforgettable best."

I've emphasized Mr. Michener's South Pacific in war and peace because his
stories from that corner of the world remain eternally youthful in "The World Is
My Home," his most readable nonfiction book in years.

He also covers politics; the writing profession (his respect for the late John
Horne Burns, author of "The Gallery," ought to revive interest in that forgotten
gem of a novel); the charitable use of his wealth; his Quaker background and
antiwar instincts; his nonstop writing despite health problems. Speaking of
health, Mr. Michener gets the last, lighthearted word:

"I have given strict instructions: 'I am in favor of allowing totally helpless
and lost persons, including me, to seek the help of friends in ending their
meaningless misery. But I do not want on my board of review any book critics,
people to whom I owe debts, or conservative Republicans.' "

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James A. Michener (Steven Pumphrey/Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 975 words



INTERNATIONAL A2-10

SEPARATE ARMIES FOR REPUBLICS

Eleven former Soviet republics agreed that individual members of their new
commonwealth could form separate armies, though strategic nuclear weapons would
remain under a single command.  A1

Rebels continued to battle troops loyal to Georgia's President.  A6

BIRTHS DIP IN EX-COMMUNIST LANDS

Across the former Communist empire of Eastern Europe and the defunct Soviet
Union, increasing numbers of women are choosing not to have children now,
sending birth rates plummeting.  A3

SAUDIS CRITICIZE MUSLIM MILITANTS

Saudi Arabia's chief religious official and a senior member of the royal family
have made scathing attacks on militant religious fundamentalists who have been
criticizing Government policies.  A1

CAR BOMB KILLS 20 IN BEIRUT

A car bomb ripped through a densely populated quarter of Beirut, killing 20
people and wounding 82 in the most devastating attack since Lebanon began peace
efforts a year ago after 16 years of civil war.  A10

Two slain American hostages were buried with military honors.  A10

ALGERIAN PARTY'S PROGRAM

Algeria's Islamic Salvation Front has based its program on vague outlines of
economic and social austerity but a firm determination that Islamic law will
have an immediate effect on daily life.  A10

CAMBODIAN FACTIONS MEET

After weeks of delays marked by violence and threats, the factions that have
fought a 12-year-old civil war met for the first time in Cambodia and called for
a United Nations peacekeeping force.  A2

VIOLENCE ON SOUTH AFRICAN TRAINS

Soweto Journal: Commuters who travel by train to and from the segregated black
townships near Johannesburg have been victims of violent attacks in the last 16
months.  A4

NATIONAL A12-16

RIGHTS LAW NOT RETROACTIVE

The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ruled that the new civil rights law
does not apply to thousands of cases filed by people who say they suffered job
discrimination before the measure was signed by the President.  A1

BIAS IN ALABAMA COLLEGES

A Federal judge has found that vestiges of discrimination remain in Alabama's
state university system, and he ordered extensive remedies to bring the
historically black universities more on a par with predominantly white
institutions.  A12

DRINKING AND DYING ON CAMPUS

Drinking alcohol is becoming less common on college campuses, but abusing
alcohol in binges is on the rise, officials say. They say the practice,
sometimes fatal, is encouraged by peer pressure, social worries and even the
increase in the legal drinking age.  A1

KERREY SELLS HIS WAR STORY

Bob Kerrey recounts his journey from cocky Navy commando to wounded Vietnam
veteran to show voters he understands pain, struggle and what it takes to
improve the plight of the people. But he's encountering the pitfalls of running
a charisma-based race for President.  A16

PERSISTENCE PAYS OFF

When Lenora Fulani captured a major share of Federal matching money she also
garnered attention for her New Alliance Party, a highly unusual political
movement.  A16

FINES IN CHICKEN-PLANT FIRE

After a fire that killed 25 people, North Carolina fined owners of a
chicken-processing plant $808,150 for "willful" safety violations. Survivors
called the amount a slap on the wrist.  A12

ACCUSATIONS ABOUT IMPLANTS

The leading maker of silicone breast implants has been making false statements
on its consumer hotline, Federal officials said.  A12

Working men don ostrich feathers and march.  A12

METROPOLITAN Digest, B1

DISPUTE OVER PLASTICS BAN

As Suffolk County begins its ban on the use of plastic plates, cups and take-out
containers by food stores and restaurants, the landmark law is causing
self-doubt among some environmentalists.  A1

AFTERMATH OF FATAL CRUSH

As many as 5,000 tickets may have been sold for the celebrity basketball game at
City College at which eight people died, city officials say.  A1

LIMITING FARE INCREASE

Republican State Senators have offered to help limit an increase in the New York
City transit fare to $1.25, several officials say.  A1

Neediest Cases B3

BUSINESS DIGEST D1

Science Times C1-8
Research on high blood pressure challenges role of salt.  C1
For clues to Antarctica's health, ask a penguin.  C1
In a publishing coup, books in 'unwritten' languages.  C1
Studies of cell death trace a complex dance.  C3
Peripherals C2
Q&A C4
Personal Computers C5
Science Watch C6

Arts/Entertainment C9-21
Distilling a play's essence for Lincoln Center theater posters.  C9
Music: "Ghosts of Versailles" as anti-opera.  C9
Classical Music in Review C12
Photography: Work from Walker Evans.  C9
Word and Image: "Wise Children," a novel of tall tales by Angela Carter.  C16

Fashion Page A19
In 1991, a mixture of caution and elan.
Patterns
By Design

Obituaries A18
Larry Josephs, writer

Sports B7-13
Baseball: Yankees' hour of power draws near.  B9
Basketball: Nets top Magic.  B7
Arizona beats Rutgers.  B8
Bulls beat Pacers.  B8
Tarkanian sues.  B13
Columns: Berkow on 1991.  B7
On Pro Football B9
On Baseball B9
TV Sports B11
Football: Coslet packs up.  B7
Miami on its best behavior.  B7
Health is issue for Parcells.  B9
Florida free and clear.  B10
Bowl preview.  B10
Huskies happy with depth at quarterback.  B11
B.Y.U. and Iowa tie in Holiday Bowl.  B11
Sports People.  B11

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21
Editorials A20
Wrong diplomacy on Japan.
No way to raise the fare.
The carnage at City College.
Topics: Better than bubbly.
Letters A20
A. M. Rosenthal: The age of contempt.  A21
Russell Baker: A hunger for enemies.  A21
Allan Gurganus: Relax, it's almost over.  A21

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Car bomb leaves 20 dead and 82 wounded in Beirut.  A10 (Reuters)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

2 Hostages, Slain in Beirut, Are Buried in U.S.

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


William Buckley, an officer with the Central Intelligence Agency, and Lieut.
Col. William R. Higgins of the Marines, two hostages slain by their captors in
Beirut, were buried today with elaborate military honors.

Senior officials who paid tribute to the two men said the arrival of their
coffins at their final resting places marked the end of a painful era of hostage
taking in Beirut. It was shortly after Mr. Buckley's killing in 1985 that
President Ronald Reagan made the release of five other American hostages then
being held in Lebanon a top national priority, a decision that led to a series
of covert operations that culminated in the Iran-contra affair.

Mr. Buckley, a decorated veteran of the Korean and Vietnam Wars who was
stationed in Beirut under cover as an embassy political officer, was the C.I.A.
station chief in Lebanon when he was abducted in March 1984. Colonel Higgins was
leading the United Nations observer team in Lebanon when he was seized in early
1988 by a pro-Iranian Shiite Muslim group.

Quayle Speaks at Service

"These two great men sacrificed their lives for the country they loved and for
the pursuit of peace and freedom," Vice President Dan Quayle said at a joint
memorial service at Andrews Air Force Base. "On behalf of President Bush and all
Americans, I salute their sacrifice and their bravery."

Mr. Bush, who demanded the return of the remains after the last American
hostages were released, was unable to attend the ceremonies because he was en
route to Australia and Asia.

Although it is highly unusual for the intelligence agency to identify one of its
clandestine operatives, Mr. Buckley's remains were met at the air base by Mr.
Quayle, the Director of Central Intelligence, Robert M. Gates, and Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney in a nationally televised ceremony. The Government first
acknowledged the slaying of Mr. Buckley in 1987, two years after the pro-Iranian
Shiite Muslim group Islamic Holy War publicized his killing, apparently after
torture.

Mr. Buckley's captors said they had executed him on Oct. 1, 1985, in retaliation
for an Israeli air raid on Palestine Liberation Organization offices in Tunisia.
His remains were found on Friday outside the Beirut airport by the Lebanese
police, who acted on an anonymous telephone tip.

"Bill Buckley was an American classic," said Mr. Gates, who took note of Mr.
Buckley's quiet and discreet nature and his love for antiques and the arts.
"Born in Medford, Massachusetts, near where our Revolutionary War began, he
loved New England. His home overlooked that of Ralph Waldo Emerson and he grew
up steeped in our country's history and values."

Mr. Gates added: "He served in the front lines in the war against terrorism."

Colonel Higgins disappeared in February 1988. His captors said they had killed
him in July 1989 in retaliation for Israel's adbuction of Sheik Abdel Karim
Obeid, a Lebanese Shiite Muslim cleric with the Pro-Iranian Party of God. The
marine officer's body was returned to American custody this month.

"Colonel Higgins was serving the cause of peace, leading the United Nations'
peacekeeping forces in southern Lebanon when he was kidnapped in 1988," Mr.
Cheney said. "He was still a captive, later that year, when these U.N. forces
were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their work around the world. No one
earned that honor more than Rich."

Mr. Buckley was buried at Arlington National Cemetery. After a solemn
procession, complete with a horse-drawn caisson, Army honor guard and 21-gun
salute, his coffin was lowered in a grave in the same section of the cemetery
where 22 servicemen killed in Beirut in 1983 are buried. After taps was sounded,
American flags were presented to the three principal mourners, Beverly A.
Surette, a longtime companion of Mr. Buckley, and his two sisters, Maureen
Moroney and Joyce Wing.

Colonel Higgins, a career marine born in Danville, Ky., and also a decorated
Vietnam War veteran, was buried at the Quantico National Cemetery in Triangle,
Va. His widow, Robin, a marine major based in New Orleans, knelt before his
coffin and bowed her head to say her farewell.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The coffins of William Buckley, left, an officer with the
Central Intelligence Agency, and Lieut. Col. William R. Higgins of the Marines
during a joint memorial service yesterday at Andrews Air Force Base. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Factions Meeting in Phnom Penh Appeal to U.N. for Peacekeepers

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 854 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Dec. 30


After weeks of delays marked by violence and threats, the factions that have
fought a 12-year-old civil war met today for the first time in Cambodia.  They
appealed to the United Nations to speed the deployment of a large peacekeeping
force here before fighting resumes.

The meeting of the Supreme National Council included Khieu Samphan, a senior
official of the Khmer Rouge, who was attacked by a mob of Cambodians last month.
Mr. Khieu Samphan was an architect of the policies that killed more than one
million Cambodians in the 1970's, and there were widespread fears that
revenge-seekers would again track him down upon his return to the city that the
Khmer Rouge terrorized for four years.

But the day was peaceful, with heavy security insuring that there were no
demonstrations against his return. By the end of the day, officials of the
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen said they expected Mr. Khieu Samphan to
remain in Phnom Penh for some time, at a heavily fortified building that was
once the headquarters of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge's leader.

The council that met today is made up of representives of the
Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government and three rebel groups, including the
Khmer Rouge, that have sought the overthrow of the Government in 12 years of
virtually continuous civil war. The council, which is headed by the recently
restored head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, was created under the United
Nations plan to guide the country to elections in 1993.

U.N. Forces Asked

The parties agreed on a communique and a letter to the United Nations, seeking
an immediate deployment of the forces that are supposed to disarm the factions
and take over much of the Government. The text of the communique has not yet
been made public. There was no immediate public response at the United Nations
today.

The urgency of the appeal, diplomats here said, seems rooted in Prince
Sihanouk's fear that the current Government may be losing its grip on the the
country, and that Cambodia could again be plunged into chaos before the
peacekeepers arrive. Although a small survey team is already here, the main
United Nations force is not expected to arrive in any significant numbers until
the middle of next year.

Anti-Government rioting racked the capital this month for the first time in two
decades, mostly to protest corruption. Each of the factions is demanding some
role in the administration of the country -- something they do not have under
the United Nations structure -- and there is still widespread fear about
allowing the Khmer Rouge to play a role in the peace process.

Khmer Rouge officials seemed pleased with the outcome of the meeting, in part
because it legitimizes their involvement in negotiating a future for the
country.

'Very, Very Good Spirit'

"Very, very good spirit," Chan Youran, the Khmer Rouge envoy to Beijing, said of
the session. He said there was "mutual comprehension" of the need to insert the
peacekeeping force quickly. Mr. Khieu Samphan said nothing publicly.

The meetings have placed other countries that are involved in the peace accord,
including the United States, in an awkward position: They do not recognize the
Hun Sen Government, although they must work with it, and they refuse to
acknowledge members of the Khmer Rouge, though they say the group's involvement
is crucial if the plan is to succeed.

There had been widespread concerns that the first meeting could produce raucous
disagreement. But "it was very calm, very businesslike," said a Western diplomat
who observed the meeting at the royal palace today.

"I think the most important thing is that they met at all," the diplomat added.
"They have been stumbling toward this for months, and it was critical to show
that the process could get going."

In recent days the United States has called for a stepped-up deployment of the
United Nations force, which many believe could number 10,000 or more. But the
plan still appears to be mired in financial and organizational problems.

All Look to U.N. Force

Now, apparently driven by different calculations about how the United Nations
force will change the Cambodian political landscape, each of the differing
factions also says it wants the peacekeepers to arrive quickly.

Diplomats say they suspect that Mr. Hun Sen sees the United Nations force as the
best hope of holding his country together, at a time when Vietnam and other
countries have cut off virtually all of its aid. If the economy improves, Mr.
Hun Sen could be the leading candidate in the elections in 1993.

At the same time, the Khmer Rouge, many suspect, see a chance to destabilize the
Hun Sen Government by turning much of its power over to United Nations force. So
do other rebel groups.

The meeting came at a time of continued crackdown on the streets here, and an
end to Cambodia's brief experiment in free expression. Workers who speak English
have told of a new Government directive ordering them not to speak to
foreigners. The universities, which were the breeding ground of the most recent
protests, are to be closed until Jan. 8.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khieu Samphan, a senior official of the Khmer Rouge, arriving
yesterday in Phnom Penh for the first meeting in Cambodia of the Supreme
National Council, which is to rule the war-ravaged country. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kerrey Retells War Story in Effort to Connect With the Voters

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 30


His audience could be the jobless, the elderly, high school students or business
executives, but Senator Bob Kerrey always stops midway through his basic
Presidential campaign speech, lowers his voice, and confides the central selling
point of his campaign.

This is his journey from being a Navy commando during the Vietnam War, sure of
his enormous physical capacity, feeling indestructable and even "a bit
obnoxious," to lying helpless at the Philadelphia Naval Hospital. Mr. Kerrey
recalls March 14, 1969, as if it were yesterday: he led a pre-dawn assault
against an island held by the Vietcong and walked into a firefight, only to have
a grenade shatter his right leg.

"The United States of America saved my life," the Nebraska Democrat repeats to
anyone who will listen. "The American people reached out to me and gave me
health care, gave me educational opportunity. This campaign is a life-and-death
issue to me. Make no mistake about it: we can save lives as a people."

That is the essence of how Mr. Kerrey is marketing himself as the best Democrat
to send to the White House. By telling and retelling the compelling story of
Vietnam, with no trace of bitterness, Mr. Kerrey hopes he will strike voters as
a candidate who understands pain, understands struggle and understands what it
takes to improve the plight of the people.

A Rough Entry
Candidate Has Yet To Be Specific

While Mr. Kerrey's supporters remain convinced that he is the most marketable
political comer in America, he has had a rough entry onto the national stage. He
is in the anomalous position of being viewed as a candidate who could go all the
way and yet during the autumn warm-up, he came be to be regarded as the
underachiever of the field.

The signs of early trouble are all there: He had to apologize for an unseemly
joke, endure bad publicity about his restaurant business and last week he
overhauled his senior campaign staff.

These could be the pitfalls of running a campaign for President based on
charisma.

Strip away the war record, many Democrats say, and Mr. Kerrey presents a
hodgepodge of ideas with no coherent theme and few specifics. He is polished,
looks good and has a war-hero record that is the envy of any politician, yet he
has faced a struggle this fall to make a convincing case that he should be
President. Two months after his formal announcement, the 48-year-old Medal of
Honor winner still faces the task of demonstrating that he is not just another
pretty face with an uplifting story.

Not Big on Details

His challenge is all the more onerous because, by his own admission, Mr. Kerrey
is more comfortable with sweeping generalizations than being pinned on details
about making the Government work.

"One of my least favorite things is clarifying something I said," he said in an
interview. Yet Mr. Kerrey seems aware that filling in the details is essential
to a successful candidacy. "The real burden of running as a candidate is that
when you're not well known, people can paint a picture with a fragment of
information."

Setting himself apart from candidates like former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, who tend to
dwell on details, Mr. Kerrey stubbornly clings to the notion that he cannot
whittle down his ideas into clever phrases suitable for television "sound
bites." Yet he concedes that his ideas do not always connect.

"I'm conscious that I've got a fairly complicated message and the more
complicated it gets the more vague it sounds," he said. "When you're talking
about fundamental change, rather than reel out 10 or 12 snappy programs, then it
gets more difficult. I realize I've got to work so the audience understands who
I am."

In a remarkable concession for a candidate who is basing his campaign on
character, Mr. Kerrey was hard-pressed to say what should lead people to support
him. "I don't assert that there is any special quality about me, in and of
itself, that qualifies me to be President," he said. "What matters is the ideas,
the values, the willingness to persevere toward the objective."

As Mr. Kerrey seeks to clarify his message, he is paying a price on the trail,
sometimes disappointing would-be supporters.

"He's a good speaker," Danny Prats, a political science major at the University
of New Hampshire, said after hearing Mr. Kerrey at a forum in Durham. "But
there's little that distinguishes him from the other candidates per se, except
for health care, and they're all talking about health care." Clutching his cap
and gown, he went on: "I'm graduating in five days and I want someone who gives
me more than ambiguity when they talk about a better job market."

High Expectations

After addressing a group of unemployed people at a church in Concord, N.H., Mr.
Kerrey chased down Wayne Cochran, an unemployed purchasing agent in the audience
who voiced skepticism that the Senator's proposals would create jobs. But once
he was face-to-face with Mr. Cochran, the candidate was reduced to Bush-speak:
"Don't underestimate the importance of this restructuring thing I'm talking
about."

Explaining how he would go about this, Mr. Kerrey offers the big picture:
"First, we must reduce the size and cost of the Federal Government," he said.
"And second, we must renew a productive investment strategy. And finally, we
must establish new structures for a global marketplace which will allow the
power and integrity of free markets to create a new global prosperity."

His advisers suggested that he is the victim of overblown expectations. "He came
into the race as the golden boy with a sense that he was something special,"
said Sue Casey, who resigned last week as campaign manager after a staff
shakeup. "As happens in every campaign and candidate, you have to come down with
some reasonable expectations. In December, that's what happened."

Mr. Kerrey has also been held back by his own missteps. In November, unaware he
was being recorded by a television microphone, he told an explicit joke about
lesbians to another candidate at a political event in New Hampshire. He
apologized after being attacked by homosexual and women's groups.

Another jolt late this month threatens to undermine Mr. Kerrey's efforts to
portray himself as the only candidate with hands-on business experience. The
Labor Department fined the restaurant chain in which he owns 35 percent for
violations of labor law restrictions. Mr. Kerrey, who is chairman of the
business, insisted that he has not been actively involved in its operations
since he was elected Governor in 1982 and that the violations have been
corrected.

A Compelling Record
War Record Gives A Special Status

It Mr. Kerrey's war record, not his business, that has afforded him a special
status in the political world. It is a story he seldom told before the current
campaign (to be sure, it was always touted by his advisers). But adjusting to
big league politics often leads candidates to newfound candor about personal
tragedies, and Mr. Kerrey has been forced to sacrifice his timidity.

Michael McCurry, a senior adviser to Mr. Kerrey, said the Senator's aides
prodded him to talk about a war experience that now forms the spine of his
campaign. "It's delicate because you cannot run for President solely on a war
record," he said. "Kerrey was trying to run on a basket of ideas that are
important, but people did not see the connection between the strength of his
character and the power of his ideas -- and they are connected."

Therein is the core psychology of Mr. Kerrey's campaign: he wants people to
believe he is on a quest for change, a quest that is above bald political
calculations. This element of his campaign has echoes of the most famous
casualty of recent campaigns, Gary Hart.

The former Colorado Senator ran for President in 1984 as a candidate with "fresh
ideas" but his 1988 campaign collapsed amid disclosures about his personal life.
Some of Mr. Hart's former aides now work for Mr. Kerrey, and Mr. Hart said they
may be because of similiarities in their messages.

"They do not see him as a traditional politician, or someone who plays the
political game for his own advantage," Mr. Hart said. "He gives the impression
that politics comes and goes and he can stand with or without it."

While Mr. Kerrey has taken on the Hart mantle, the policy centerpiece of his
campaign is not particularly original: a universal health-care plan, including
long-term care, that would be paid for largely through a payroll tax and higher
levies on the wealthy. Ask him about the economy, about education, and he
hammers away on his health-care theme, saying cutting the cost of private health
care would allow businesses to compete more vigorously in international markets
and generate more jobs at home.

Trouble With Business

But Mr. Kerrey may run into trouble with his credentials on this issue.
Officials with his restaurant chain, Grandmother's, say 75 to 100 of its 700 to
800 employees do not have health coverage. The company is within the law, since
small businesses are not required to provide such insurance. But wage earners
might well take Mr. Kerrey's call for payroll taxes as a stingy businessman's
effort to avoid costs. And there is the appearance problem: Can an employer who
does not insure his own employees be entrusted with creating a national health
plan?

Asked his view on the morality of having employees with no health insurance, he
curtly replied: "It's equally questionable if somebody sits in the United States
Senate with free health care and then does not express outrage when 12 million
children are living in poverty with no health care. To me, that's questionable
morality."

After resisting questions about why his business did not provide health
insurance for all its employees, Mr. Kerrey said: "I'm like every other small
business in America. The answer is, it's unaffordable."

The consensus among professionals is that both Mr. Kerrey's message and his
delivery need polishing. Some listeners detect Kennedyesque tones in his best
speeches, and he can have an engaging sense of humor. But Mr. Kerrey rarely
drives his audience to a rousing ovation.

An Unpredictable Man
Decision to Run Was a Quick One

Mr. Kerrey's troubles connecting on a regular basis are particularly
exasperating to his aides because sometimes he has produced riveting moments. In
probably the most memorable exchange of the first debate of the Democratic
contenders, he effectively cut off Mr. Brown, who was railing at length about
special-interest donations to Congress.

In that same debate, though, Mr. Kerrey was clumsy in answering the first, most
basic, question: Why did he want to be President? "I first of all made the
decision with my family," he replied, "made the decision that I would like to be
President of the United States. And then the next question was why. What would I
do?"

Mr. Kerrey seemed to be saying that he made his decision on a whim, and figured
out his issue stands only as an afterthought.

That is not too far from the truth. He delivered his announcement on Sept. 30, a
month after shocking friends and advisers, who were sure he would not make the
run.

"In the 15 months that I was there I did not have one conversation with him or
as a group with senior staff with him, about running for President, not one,"
said Jeremy D. Rosner, the policy director on Mr. Kerrey's Senate staff who left
in October after helping draft the Senator's announcement speech. So when the
Senator told his advisers in late August that he would run, he said, "It sort of
knocked the wind out of all of us, how decisive he was and how quickly he
decided to get into it."

But Mr. Kerrey's snap decision is in some ways not surprising. He is an
impatient, often unpredictable man. A political novice in 1982, he ran against
Nebraska's Republican Governor and won in a state where most voters are
Republicans. Though he was a popular Governor, Mr. Kerrey unexpectedly left
office after one four-year term. He returned to politics in 1988 when he wrested
a Senate seat from David K. Karnes, a Republican appointee who filled out a term
after the death of Senator Edward J. Zorinsky.

Mr. Rosner and other advisers say the Senator's abrupt decision to run was
partly because he was angered by what he regarded as signals from the White
House this summer that Mr. Bush was willing to go along with the plotters of the
coup against Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

Mr. Kerrey denies this, but he often challenges the President in what is widely
viewed as Mr. Bush's strongest area, foreign policy.  But Mr. Kerrey is vague
about exactly what he would have done differently in dealing with, for example,
the collapse of the Soviet Union. What he is offering so far is a critique of
Mr. Bush without a concrete alternative.

"His foreign policy's grounded in something different from mine," Mr. Kerrey
said of Mr. Bush. "I just find myself being moved by the accomplishments of the
cold war to conclude that we have to continue to be strong advocates for
freedom. I don't get the sense that the President sees that world out there 10
years from now dramatically transformed."

Relying on Hart Aides

His late decision to run has forced him to assemble his organization on the fly,
and initially, Mr. Kerrey relied heavily on top advisers to Mr. Hart. But in a
move to give the campaign a lift, Mr. Kerrey last week announced a major staff
shakeup. Ms. Casey, a veteran aide to Mr. Hart, resigned as campaign manager and
Bill Hoppner, a close friend of the Senator's who was chief of staff under Mr.
Kerrey as Governor, will remain as chairman but play less of a day-to-day role
in the campaign. Another former Hart aide, Bill Shore, continues to be an
important adviser.

Though Mr. Kerrey denies it, advisers said he was seeking to remedy perceptions
that the campaign was floundering so he looked outside his staff and picked Tad
Devine, who held senior positions in the 1988 Presidential drive of former Gov.
Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts, to oversee his campaign.

The Kerrey campaign hopes to inherit from Mr. Hart the backing of the Hollywood
"glitter money." Mr. Kerrey has aggressively sought financial support in
California, where he is popular in part because of his on-again, off-again
romance with the actress Debra Winger. Mr. Kerrey has also turned to his
geographic base, counting on Nebraskans to donate heavily to his campaign.

The campaign will receive $570,000 in Federal matching subsidies in January,
about the same amount as Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas but exceeded among
Democrats only by Mr. Harkin, who will get $1.1 million. Ron Fried, Mr. Kerrey's
finance director, said the campaign has collected close to $2 million.

No matter how much money he raises, no matter how compelling his biography, Mr.
Kerrey must convince voters that he should be President. The man who hates to
explain facts now faces what could be months of intense questioning about his
proposals.

Maybe that is why he sounded almost fatalistic when he conceded something that
few politicians like to admit: "In the end," he said, "it's possible that I
don't catch on."

NAME: Bob Kerrey

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Table: "Joseph Robert Kerrey"

Born: Aug. 27, 1943, in Lincoln, Neb..

Education: Northeast High School, Lincoln; B.S., University of Nebraska, 1966.

Religion: Congregationalist.

Military Service: Navy, 1966-69.

Married: To Beverly Defnall in 1974; divorced in 1978.

Children: Benjamin, 17, and Lindsey, 15.

Government Positions: Governor of Nebraska, 1983-87. Senator, 1989 to present

Other Major Positions: 1972-82, Developer of chain of restaurants and fitness
centers, 1972-82.

Current Job: U.S. Senator.

Hobbies: Jogging, watercolor painting, reading, skiing.

PRESIDENTIAL PROSPECTS

Strengths: Compelling personal story, varied experience in business and
government.

Weaknesses: Policy views lack gripping message.

Strategy: Appeal as candidate of new ideas.

Drawing

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
A Hunger For Enemies

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Japan, be warned: America has an enemy habit. It has just spent a quarter of its
lifetime cultivating this habit and, with Soviet Communism dead, it is suddenly
like the cigarette fiend in need of smoke.

You know how desperate a smoker may be? You've seen those anti-smoking films
where he wakes in the night craving smoke, only to find his pack empty. What
does he do? Gets up, dresses, gets the car out -- and in history's worst
blizzard, too -- and goes hunting cigarettes.

It's really like that when bad Mr. Cigarette gets claws into you. He is your
friend, your comforter, the nasty fellow you can't live without.

He is part of the strength that sees you through life's hardest trials. In the
same way our hostility to bad Mr. Communism strengthened us to endure the Korean
War, the Vietnam War, the overthrow of the Mossadegh Government in Iran and the
Arbenz Government in Guatemala, the Grenada invasion, the Bay of Pigs fiasco,
the C.I.A.'s Nicaraguan war and all those other secret wars and coups we
sponsored and financed, as well as the rebuilding of Europe and Japan, the witch
hunts and assaults on our own traditions, the blacklists, the paranoia, the arms
race, the atomic flirtations with doomsday, the squalid political campaigns, the
squandering of national treasure, the spy fictions and comic strips and movies
and television sitcoms and melodramas that became our national cultural staples.

It has been hard giving up that familiar old Communist devil. Yes, it was
terrible, dangerous, awful -- that Communist enemy. The smoke addict feels the
same fear and loathing for his cigarette habit, yet it remains his friend, his
comforter who can make him rise in the howling blizzard and go heroically into
the night.

Giving up the Soviet enemy has been so hard for Americans that many simply
refused for the longest time to believe what Mikhail Gorbachev was telling the
world: that the old monster was on the ropes, knees buckling, in danger of never
getting up again.

Washington people awesomely credentialed in anti-Communist wisdom refused to be
fooled. Leave us not be lulled; Gorbachev was very likely up to those old Commie
tricks, they said. These were people who talked to people who had spent billions
and billions of once-good American dollars to learn everything knowable about
the old evil empire, yet their enemy habit was so powerful they refused to
believe what any tourist might have concluded after a weekend stay in Moscow:
the place was falling apart.

Even now, with Gorbachev fallen, you find Washington types reluctant to quit
whacking him for having been a Communist party operator throughout his career.
One might suppose that, having managed the liquidation of such a vast, heavily
armed and dangerous nation without bloodshed, he might deserve praise for
pulling off something like a miracle.

But no, he is the last Soviet Communist left to gratify our habit, and he gets
no mercy. For Americans who need their good old enemy fix, Gorbachev is the last
store still open at 3 A.M. selling cigarettes.

There are still a few Communists left, of course. There is Fidel Castro in Cuba,
a truly ruthless bunch in Beijing and the mysterious Kim Il Sung regime in North
Korea. None of these can fill the enemy bill for a superpower with a serious
habit.

Who is going to lose sleep over Castro after reflection that while we can hit
Havana with H-bombs, all he can do in retaliation is dump sugar on the American
market? North Korea will never do to satisfy an enemy habit. Most Americans
can't find it on a map, and those who can remember that we've already fought a
war there to defeat Communism, with results that make them eager to forget it.

China? Possibly, but it's governed by such old men, and Americans don't really
take old people seriously, with their inability to grasp the power of rock 'n'
roll.

Which leaves Japan. Poor Japan. It makes such a splendid enemy for a country in
need of a long-term fix. All that money the Japanese are making, and treating us
ungenerously too. After all we did for them, the ingrates! What's more, they are
starting to publish unflattering criticism of us. How is that for insolence?

Japan must watch its step. America needs an enemy fix.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 242 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 1991, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Relax, It's Almost Over

BYLINE: By Allan Gurganus;  Allan Gurganus is author, most recently, of "White
People."

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 2147 words

DATELINE: CHAPEL HILL, N.C.


"Whenever people talk about the weather," Oscar Wilde wrote in 1895, "I always
think they mean something else." Now that 1991 has almost left the room, may I
vary the form? "Whenever people talk about something else, I think they mean the
news."

So, Happy New Year! It's your Hit Parade: Who can ever forget 1991 (fast
enough)? The Persian Gulf war (at last an opponent with the grace to just sit
there and be targets so we could, as we were told, "feel good about ourselves
again"!). The Crown Heights race war. The Great Ozone Leak (White House denies
knowing, White Flower Farm does not). Who can block out the L.A.P.D.'s "They did
it their way" guest spot on the ultimate Candid Camera? David Duke's best shot
at the gubernatorial, Jeffrey Dahmer's idea of a date. The Russian coup and then
the Soviet Union's meltdown. Dan Quayle claiming, "All environmentalists are
extremists," as the Exxon oil spillers get a slap on the wrist? President Bush
fails for another year to seriously mention AIDS, except in barring from home
soil an international conference devoted to its cure (130,000 Americans dead so
far) -- plus, The Clarence Thomas Show . . . something for everybody's worst
fears.

And in place of noisy protest? The Silence of the Lambs.

Q.: Who has 1991 handpicked to be its own top character witness?

A.: Correct, and he's waiting right backstage, folks, yes, it's John Doggett!
John? Come on out here, guy!

Not even at the height of the Vietnam War was North America's dwindling
righteous remnant -- its thinking people -- more strictly attentive to the sway
and stats and sting of disaster. I've been squirreling away definitive
clippings, charts and notes. To show whom? Which Solomon? My rooms now look like
a hybrid of CNN headquarters and Merlin's workshop. My thinking's stalled there,
too -- between the actual and the magical -- between numbed disbelief and weird
persistent hope. Never have so many of us yelled so often at our TV's and
radios. Items were thrown, glass items. To what end, this study? What good, this
emotion operatic? Is it even ethical to devote so much energy to questions
concerning the end of ethics?

But, see, here's the news junkie's lament: the more dependent on the news I get,
the more likely I am to chatter half-boastfully of my lurid hard-won lore, the
less I feel in actual control. Now that 1991 is almost out of here forever,
let's just talk about her, O.K.? She'll never know, she couldn't help it and we
all need some therapy today.

No. 1: The World is not the News. Remember that, please. Constantly factor into
international events -- yourself, your friends, your work and love. The civic
valor of your life. Even, why not, your pets? Done that? Forget to do that
sometimes? Me, too. Like, daily. Feel some better? The News is not the World and
vice versa. Got it?

Look, I need to confess: this year I've filled 10 legal pads (the long ones, in
yellow and therefore un-recyclable, I fear). My confession is not this jotting
down of our moral and economic woes: it's that I don't know what I hope to
accomplish by such botched voodoo recipes for a return to order. My math is
weakish, so maybe it's just me, but: Merrill Lynch projects 2.1 percent national
growth for the entire 1990's, and growth in the whole 1930's was just 2.2
percent. Oh, dear.

Notice how President Bush, when asked if he really has a "Domestic Agenda"
frowns even more than usual -- like the husband on a 50's TV family comedy, a
guy peeved at his wife's requesting that he please take out the garbage? Isn't
that because he believes "Domestic" means woman's work is and therefore beneath
him? "International" is more guys' stuff -- hunter-gatherer, etc. Home is where
Dad's clean shirts are stored for travel to Important Conferences. "Domestic" is
just female; no news for bosses. America's financial well-being? Don't sweat it:
just Home-Ec.

When did the 18th century's "Yes" -- "The Pursuit of Happiness" -- become 1991's
line-item veto? Can a statesman create himself (much less a new world order)
with 24 vetoes? If F.D.R. had said only "no" to all conferences concerning the
cure for polio, would it have ended yet? But then, F.D.R. could afford to be
compassionate; he had the polls and he also had polio. Would President Bush
finally mention this epidemic if he or some family member were H.I.V. positive,
instead of S.& L. negative?

William Faulkner was forever asked if he felt threatened by Ernest Hemingway.
Hemingway was the first "serious" writer to do magazine whisky endorsements, but
not, alas, the last. Faulkner provided another sort of endorsement: he
contributed his 1950 Nobel Prize, $150,000, to found the PEN-Faulkner Prize for
encouraging young writers. Faulkner, in speaking of Hemingway, might have been
describing 1991 America itself: "I thought that he found out early what he could
do, and he stayed inside of that. What he did, he could do marvelously well,
first rate. [But] to try something you can't do, to try and fail, then try it
again. That to me is success. My generation will be judged by the splendor of
our failures."

April 1991: Saw my first Ninja Turtle yarmulke. No comment. Dwarf-tossing
becomes Australia's sport of choice. No further comment.

Cut to Joe Biden's on-off smile switcheroo, cut to Teddy Kennedy's features --
the portrait of Dorian Gray. Cut to Orrin Hatch's strangula-
tingly tight pinned collar of a face, Alan Simpson's forehead's smirk, Dennis
DeConcini's imitation of Anthony Hopkins's Hannibal Lecter, Arlen Specter doing
a late-Dickens hand-wringing sneak. Run screaming from the room. Is this any
world to bring children into?

The Girl Scouts of America now offer a "stress management" merit badge. Product
endorsements have been sold by the Boy Scouts of America. Famous brands like
Coca-Cola are shown stitched alongside beavers and woodland streams on those
precious merit badges that once indicated merely "Citizenship," "God and
Country." Smart move, corporate America!

O, who shall lead us? Where -- democrat or republican -- is the self-styled hero
of our time? Who will guard the guards, O and who will judge the judges, and who
will lead our Leaders past their one Religion: Re-election? Who will someday
lead them into leading us? And can a chain be pushed along the ground?

The most poignant opening of any Grimm fairy tale runs: "Once upon a time, when
wishing still helped . . . . " Once, I read just one paper daily; now it's up to
three. In 1991, I needed my first reading glasses; the front page had shrunk to
the want ads' scale. Now I reconcile editorial opinion: every regional and
ethnic conflict gets Rashomoned and squared. And why? What am I controlling? How
can I help by merely knowing, not doing? Isn't knowing a form of doing? God, I
hope so. It's what so many of us have just now. Alone in a room, complaining and
appalled, don't we know we're not Amnesty International? But we're on watch, a
job unsalaried yet often more important (to us) than our paying occupations.

I want to say I saw it. I want to say I looked it in the eye. I called in sick
during the Iraq war, I called in sick during the Thomas hearings . . . and,
watching, I soon found I was, in fact, quite sick. Can you catch, from proximity
to a televised ethical sewer, a case of actual flu?

Danny, a friend and fellow news co-dependent, decided, on his doctor's advice,
and with his pals' concerned second opinions, to retreat. It'd become medical;
this guy was so strung out on recent happenings. Whenever people talked about
anything else, Danny knew they meant The News.

Doc told him: Choose some B+ Caribbean resort without radios or papers (no
Spanish ones either), just cabanas on the beach, fresh fruit and sweet floral
smells drifting from the jungle. Danny, guilty, sunned there, uninformed, alone
on the hot white sand. He admitted to feeling phantom pains, especially during
the hours for "All Things Considered"; he hummed its valiant theme song.
Simplifying, face-up, he cooked there. Finally, Danny felt whole and brown,
reknitted into something like a soul. He felt less the communal scorekeeper, he
felt -- hey! -- almost autobiographical again. My bronzed pal rode a 10-seater
air-hop stateside.

The minute he plunged into the terminal (spooked at noticing how Miami
International Airport's luggage is abbreviated "MIA"), he sensed he'd wandered
onto the set of a disaster film. Something awful had happened, he just knew. And
it'd gone and happened without him. He saw strangers bunched around newspapers:
"TEL AVIV BOMBED AGAIN!"

"I've been punished." So ran his first egocentric paranoid-sounding and utterly
familiar thought. Was some joke being played on him? He buttonholed a stranger;
he admitted with a shame greater than any sexual shame, "I'm afraid I've been .
. . outta . . . touch."

So the guy told him: Iraqi missiles, containing germ, chemical or nuclear stuff,
are flying right now toward Israel. "No!" my pal said, "No?" "Yes, sorry," the
anonymous salesman nodded. And this pair looked at each other, joined briefly --
seeming united as nothing else on earth.

Laden with newspapers, Danny rushed to the airline counter. All he needed to
know: the gate number of his prepaid round-trip flight home. Then he saw how the
big blue letters that'd once spelled "Eastern" had been pulled off a wall's
wood-grained Formica. Gone, too, all personnel -- even their phones were
missing, just a tangle of cords left. It'd all been reduced to a single 3 x 5
notecard Scotch-taped to the fake monkey-pod wood counter: "Hi 'n Bye! Eastern
airlines Is Out of Business, folks. Try and see if other lines will honor your
tickets? Was real while it lasted. Have a nice whatever . . . thanks, Staff,
Eastern."

I want to tell you what I've done to help myself avoid this addiction, or soften
it some. (A) One day a week I quit infotainment, cold turkey. (B) When I see
people doing anything very, very well (from street-sweeping to brain surgery) I
tell them so at once. (C) I now subscribe to several newspapers so local they
can only be called papers because they are printed on that. I mean those smudged
bulletins that specialize in peddling used lawn mowers. They run photos of the
four local Girl Scouts who volunteered their whole summer's Saturdays picking up
trash along our highway. And none got tetanus or abducted, hooray!

Watching the sea-sickening motion of the Six o'Clock World Roundup might
simulate personal movement, but no action is achieved. Beyond heartburn and
eyestrain. What amnesia makes us forget that we ourselves belong to this Age? We
discount local knowledge. We underrate our own street's Love and Work.

Goethe, forever news, was the last great leader in both art and science. He was
brought up to believe in wishing, to believe that the world of physics can be
Toy as well as Weapon. He was taught that learning, combined with wishing, can
still help. His mother, late in her life, recalled spinning mythic news for him
in nightly fables.

"Air, fire, water and earth I presented to [my boy] as beautiful princesses, and
everything in all nature took on a deeper meaning. We invented roads between
stars, and what great minds we would encounter. He devoured me with his eyes;
and if the fate of one of his favorites did not go as he wished, this I could
see from the anger in his face. Occasionally he interfered by saying, 'Mother,
the princess will not marry the miserable tailor, even if he slays the giant,'
at which I stopped and postponed the catastrophe, and said, 'You guessed it,
that's how it came out.' And he was all excited and one could see his heart
beating."

Of course we study news in hopes of controlling it, right? We tell stories in
hope of giving our own baggy lives the illusion of a clean beginning, fruitful
middle, dignified ending -- life's logic, clarity, force, right?

So, for 1992? Factor your life into our Age. Tithe? Fight the TV trance.
Consider the kindness of strangers and the unaccountable strangeness of
kindness. Still, quantum: the human factor.

Eyes hurt? Sun seem brighter? (Well, it is. Science will tell you; any garden
catalogue shows the change.) But there's Good News; red wine cuts your
cholesterol. Caffeine can prolong a person's sex life (somehow, unscientific
with faith, I just knew it). They found an ice age man intact, and a new planet.
A fresh crack at getting it right.

Fellow news junkie and hope junkie? Happy New Year. And, for all your guarding
energy during 1991, thank you. Here at the barricade, I've felt your shoulder
against mine. Sometimes, it's seemed like a hostage situation, hasn't it? But I
will wish you a joyful and possible 1992 . . . if you will please tell me one
last time that wishing still helps. It does, doesn't it. Doesn't it?

News without end, Amen,

and here we go again.

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 1991

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
